XXV SELECT ALLUSIONS, TO Several places of Horace, Martial, Anacreon, and
Petron. Arbitr.

Part I.

Written by Mr. Dilke.

Nos Convivia, nos praelia Virginum,
Sectis in juvenes unguibus acrium
Cantamus vacui; sive quid urimur,
Non praeter solitum laeves.
Hor. LONDON, Printed for Peter Buck, at the sign of the Temple, near the Inner
Temple Gate in Fleetstreet; and sold by R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane. School.

THE PREFACE.
I Am not insensible that many Objections may he made against these following
Allusions; tho I shall not trouble my self to Answer 'em, lest by that means I
supply some sort of people with Weapons, that otherwise could not furnish
themselves.

All that I shall say by way of Preface is, That these Poems were never
designed for the morose ill-natured part of Mankind; but for the Men of
Pleasure and Generosity. And should such persons as these find any thing in
them that can contribute to their satisfaction, I know my faults will be easily
Pardoned.

I have, to the best of my power, familiarly adapted my Authors to our present
Circumstances of Time and Custom, so that their notions might be relished with
as little expense of Thought as possible. If they will bear the perusal with
the same ease, freedom and pleasure that I found in writing 'em, it is enough
for my purpose. It Is true I have taken a great deal of liberty both as to the
manner of Composure, and as to the Matter itself, and may sometimes seem to be
very foreign from the subject proposed. Indeed it is my Opinion that Allusions
do properly admit of this scope, as soon as the hint is received, I think the
Alluder may be allowed to follow the Thread of his own Fancy.

If any are Curious to know why I Publish 'em, I willingly confess, that it was
not either from the importunity of Friends, nor to Vindicate my self from
Errors of Surreptitious Copies, nor indeed to establish any great Reputation;
but for a Reason worth a hundred of 'em, and for the same Reason, if my
Bookseller finds encouragement by this first part, the World may expect to be
troubled with more; tho for her own sake, we are at present at such odds, that
I would not bestow a stroke gratis upon her, were it only to spit my Venom in
Railing. Whenever she proves more Indulgent to me, like a true Poet, I Will
grudge her no Adulation. In the mean time let her Rub on, and so will I as well
as I can.

Adieu.
Books printed for, and sold by Peter Buck, at the sign of the Temple, near the
Inner Temple Gate in Fleet Street.
1. REflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning, by Wm. Wotton, B D Chaplain
to the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham. The second Edition: with large
additions With dissertations upon the Epistles of Phalaris, Themistocles,
Socrates, Euripides, etc. and Esops Fables. By Dr. ^entley. 2. Incognita, a
Novel. 3. Pyrrhus King of Empire, a Tragedy by Mr. Charles Hopkins. 4. Love's a
Jest, a Comedy by Mr. Motteux. 5. Plot and no Plot, a Comedy by Mr. Dennis. 6.
The Provoked Wife, a Comedy by the Author of the Relapse or Virtue in Danger.
7. The Novelty, every Act a Play, by Mr. Motteux, etc.
Select Allusions.
I.
Mart. Epigr. 77. Lib. 8. Liber amicorum Dulcissima, etc.


STrephon, thou darling Favorite of the Age,
Your Looks alone can more than Love engage:
Where-e're you come, such Glory you display,
That none can less than Veneration pay.
Strephon it is you must to your self be just,
And spring fresh Joys to every varying Gust.
Let lusty Bowls foment a sprightly fire,
And swell each Vein with vigorous desire:
In melting Charms then steep your Amorous Heat;
Be Strephon still, in all your Actions Great:
Thus if you live but half your days designed,
Cast up the sum, you will more than total find.
II.
Hor. Ode 13. Lib. 4. Audivere, Lyce, Dii mea Vota, etc.


1.
WEll Peg, at length, the Gods I praise,
You're old and ugly grown;
And yet with painted haggard Face,
You brazen all the Town.
2.
With some raw Cull, you drink, and toy,
And Youthful smiles put on;
Yet faith you're but the snuff of joy,
All but the stench is gone.
3.
The God of Love your wrinckles scorns,
Your grisly Locks defys,
It Is Molly's Cheeks he now adorns,
And Wantons in her Eyes.
4.
Where are those Charms now gone astray?
Those former Graces fled?
That stole me from my self away,
And fixed me to your Bed?
5.
'Twas then the second place you bore
Of all the Harlot Tribe;
Seuky, it is true, was praised by more,
But not by more enjoyed.
6.
Seuky, alas! soon stoop't to Fate,
And died in her Vocation:
While Peg is left, and grown of late,
The sink of all the Nation.
III.
Hor. Ode 36. Lib. 1. Et Thure and Fidibus juvat, etc.


NOw Friends, let jov'al Mirth take place,
And sweetness smile on every Face;
See Bellardin is safe returned,
Whose Absence, we so long have mourned:
Once more the Noble Youth is come,
Richly adorned with Honors home.
Come then to Lockets let us steer,
And give our Joys their full Career;
The largest Draughts shall there declare
Which is the Friend that is most sincere.
There let us Drink, till all our Eyes
Into one spacious Optic rise;
Then gaze on all his lovely Charms,
Pierce him with sight, and crush him in our Arms.
IV.
Hor. Ode 23. Lib. 1. Vitas hinnuleo me similis Chloe!


WHen Miss was told that she was Man's meat grown,
She would not trust herself alone,
For fear of being eaten up by Men:
But when at length I Would forced the timorous Maid,
She gently sighed, and smiling said,
Pray Sir be pleased to eat me up again.
V.
Mart. Epigr. 47. Lib. 10. Vitam quae faciunt Beatiorem, etc.


WOuld you know what it is, that can make a man blessed?
It Is to have a rich Dad in good time go to Rest,
A good House well contrived, in the midst of that Ground,
That does with much Wood, and much Water abound.
A Mind free and easy, a Body robust,
A Table sufficient to please every Man's gust.
Books, and Friends that are choice, and a Cellar well stored;
A true satisfaction both in Bed, and at Board:
Not too fond of a Life, when his Fate is decreed:
This alone is the Man, that is happy indeed.
VI.
Hor. Ode 27. Lib. 1. Natis in usum laetitiae Scyphis, etc.


1.
WHat a Pox is the meaning of all this clutter?
Cannot you take off your Cups in quiet?
Let the barbarous Dutch Cods Sawcrawment mutter,
And of every Club make a Riot.
2.
Come, for shame let us no more in such Quarrels embark,
But every Man start a fresh Query,
Who met my Lady upon the Stairs in the dark?
And who tickled Doll in the Dairy?
3.
See how Jack hangs his Ears at such Questions as these,
What need'st thou be ashamed to hear on it?
Tho bonny black Bess had a Belly in the case,
And honest Churchwarden took care on it.
VII.
Mart. Epigr. 34 Lib. 6. Basia da nobis Diadumene, pressa, etc


PRithee, dear Youth, let me some kisses have:
D'y' ask how many would suffice?
Bid me account the numbers in the Grave,
Or tell the Stars that sparkle in the Skies;
Bid me as well repeat
Those many anxious Cares that wait
Upon the Rich and Great.
Ask me how many Wives there are
That love Gallants more than their Husbands far.
How many Females mount the Nupt'al Bed
Without one tittle of a Maidenhead.
If I might have, as I the Blessing prize,
Not Time itself should e're confine my Joys.
VIII.
Hor. Ode 9. Lib. 1. Vides ut alta stet Nive Candidum.


1.
SEe, how the Demons of the Northern Clime
Flutter along with Wings of dusky Rimo;
Extending wide their Hands,
To setter up the Floods in Crystal bands:
Dispencing as they go,
Their chilly gifts of unpolluted Snow.
2.
If then we are Wise, let us their Force defy,
With towering Flames let us pierce the curdled Sky.
Then shall large Bowls of Wine,
Together with the outward Heat combine:
It Is Fire may the Work begin;
But Godlike Wine will warm our Souls within.
3.
No torturing Cares shall then our Joys infest,
No thoughts of what to the wise Fates seems best;
Love shall alone take place;
And well turned Measures all our Actions grace.
Thus we'll in Circle move,
Love, Drink, and Dance, and then again we'll Love.
IX.
Mart. Epigr. 5. Lib. 4. Vir bonus, and Pauper, etc.


What Is this you say? You're Honest, Good and Just?
What then the Devil made you come to Town?
None here must Live, that cannot betray a Trust,
Or at a Great Man's Nod, cannot smile, or frown.
Those Sheep unpitty'd fall, and well they may,
Whose Choice it is, to herd with Beasts of Prey.
X.
Hor. Ode 8. Lib. 1. Lydia dic per omnes, etc.


1.
PRithee, Dear Cocky, let me know
The Witchcraft of thy Art:
At every step where-e're you go,
Down drops a Conquered Heart.
2.
Jasper, that stubborn Youth, that long
No Female Charms could brook,
Sings at your Feet a whining Song,
And dies at every Look.
3.
No more he bristles in the Pit,
No more the Scenes he scowrs,
No more he vents his pointed Wit
Against young Cupid's powers.
3.
Let then his frantic Zeal be fed
In this Effem'nate sotting;
Give him be sure good store of Thread,
And set the Fool a Knotting.
XI.
Mart. Epigr. 53. Lib. 2. Vis fieri Liber? Mentiris Maxim, etc.


1.
WHat makes you thus still Curse your Fate,
And Dam your wretched Stars?
'Twas you your self began the date
Of all your racking Cares.
2.
It Was you forsooth would be a Beau,
Nay more, a Treating ^ool:
Then ben't surpised, where-e're you go,
To hear your self called Fool.
3.
Had wholesome Landlady gone down,
When Hubby was in Bed,
You still had been a Spark of the Town,
And never have shrunk your Head.
4.
Henceforth for shame no more disburse
Amongst the Harlot train;
Some moldy Hag, with well stuffed Purse,
May set you right again.
XII.
Mart. Epigr. 64. Lib. 3. Quod spirat tenere Malum, etc.


SWeet as the Roses in their morning Dew,
Or full as sweet as new blown Jesmin is,
Sweet as the Wind whene're it gently blew
From fragrant boughs of Aromatic Trees.
Sweet as the Incense curling up in smoke,
Or as rich Ointment when the Urn is broke:
So are thy Joys, tho forced; What would they be,
Were thou so kind, to make the Offering free?
XIII.
Hor. Ode 25. Lib. 1. Parcius junctas quatiunt fenestras, etc.


1.
SLeep on, old Nibs, and nothing fear,
You Will unmolested snore;
No more will ever Coach or Chair
Come rapping at your Door.
2.
Faith Child you are old and fusty grown,
Then don't thy self defraud:
For you, there is nothing to be done,
Unless you will be a Bawd.
3.
If still some Sparks of Lust remains,
If still you would stand buff;
One third of all your Pimping gains,
Will purchase Brawn enough.
XIV.
Hor. Ode 11. Lib. 1. Tu ne quaesieris, Nefas, etc.


1.
COme Ned, what need it trouble thee, or I,
What end the Gods will give?
Alas! there is forty ways to die,
But one alone to live.
2.
He only lives that drinks good store of Wine,
And clarifies his Brain;
If we our Senses cannot refine,
Our Reason were in vain.
3.
While thus I speak, our Moments glide away,
And fleeting Time does pass:
Then Drink about, that so we may
Overtake it with the Glass.
XV.
Mart. Epigr. 71. Lib. 4. Quero diu totam, etc.


TO each new Face, I swear I am in Love,
Then pressing ask to enjoy,
And not an Oath, but does Compassion move,
Not one, but does Comply.
Then sure for Chastity there is no regard:
Yes, those are Chaste that never the Question heard.
XVI.
Hor. Ode 33. Lib. 1. Albi, ne doleas plus nimio, etc.


1.
WHat cursed Lovesick Devil can
Poor Strephon so bewitch?
Must he himself thus quite unman,
'Cause Phillis proves a Bitch?
2.
Look but abroad into the World,
The case you will find the same;
Where-e're the Boy his Darts has hurled,
It Is still a cross-grained Game.
3.
Lovebright with Daelia's Charms does burn,
And she for Jasper dies:
Jasper you hear at every turn,
Cries dam the Cockatrice.
4.
With me young Moll does Coo and Bill,
And vows I am her Dear:
And yet I cannot, with all my skill,
From brawling Bess get clear.
XVII.
Mart. Epigr. 46. Lib. 8. Quanta tua est Probitas, quanta est praestantia
formae, etc.


CHarming Alexis, is so sweet a Boy,
To look on him, is more than to enjoy.
No Blushes yet did ever grace,
A more bewitching modest Face.
Whene're I see the lively Red,
His tender Cheeks o'respread,
Methinks they do invite me to a Kiss:
Yet seem to say, that I must struggle for the Bliss.
The Youth that did the Mighty Thund'rer move,
Had never Eyes more fraught with Love.
He that with Lightning could the World destroy,
Stooped to the Flames of his dear lovely Boy.
How then can wretched I,
Whom all the pangs of Love do thus enrage,
Forbear to try
Whether Alexis will not my panting pains assuage?
XVIII.
Hor. Ode 19. Lib. 1. Matter saeva Cupidinum, etc.


1.
BE gone Chaste Icy thoughts, be gone,
Once more I feel the mighty God-like Guest,
Through every Vein come rushing on,
To Triumph in my Breast.
2.
From Glaura's Eyes there is no Reprieve,
Such killing Charms do every Look descry,
To stand their force I cannot live,
And if not seen, I die.
3.
Oh thou impetuous God of Love!
Why from your Transports should I thus delay?
When most you do a Ferment move,
Then least can I obey.
XIX.
Fragment. Petron. Arbitr. Faeda est in Coitu, and brevis Voluptas, etc.


TO do the Trick is but a nasty sport,
The tickling joy is momentary short:
How cursed foolish do our Looks appear,
When all our Courage dwindles to a sneer?
Let beastly Goats their nauseous Lusts pursue,
More generous Flames are to our Transports due:
From harmless Lips we'll suck Eternal Bliss,
And dwell an Age on every single Kiss.
No conscious Guilt will then our Cheeks invade,
No sordid fear that we shall be Betrayed:
But when from Units, Hundreds do ensue,
The last of Thousands still begins anew.
XX.
Hor. Ode 13. Lib 1. Quum tu Lydia Telephi, etc.


1.
FIe Lidy, fie, how can I longer bear
Such strange unheard of things,
While I sit by, you curl young Jocky's Hair,
And twirl about his Rings.
2.
Then I, poor Soul! into some corner sneak,
And there begin to melt:
What Heart of hardened Steel that would not break,
If it such Thumpings felt?
3.
Believe me Child, when once the thing is past
Jocky will leave you soon;
And this alone you will have to say at last,
Good faith he was a Loon.
4.
Thrice blessed are they, who to one point do tend,
Not vary as the weather;
But in each others Arms do make an end
Of Love and Life together.
XXI.
Mart. Epigr. 14. Lib. 10. Cedere de nostris nulli te dicis Amicis, etc.


WEll Sir, you say that you are still my Friend;
But when I want, the Devil a souse you will lend;
Every sly Rascal can partake your store;
But no relieving of a Friend that is Poor.
Full are your Barns, and richly stockt your Lands,
Yet never to me one Morsel slipped your hands.
In this alone your Friendship me adorns,
For your dear sake I wear a pair of Horns.
XXII.
Hor. Ode 7. Lib. 2. O soepe mecum Tempus in Vltimum, etc.


1.
WHat George! Art thou returned, old heart of Oak?
Then may the Gods be blessed:
How often have we escapt the fatal stroke,
That Thousands sent to Rest?
2.
Often have we felt the various chance of War,
Have often been full, and empty;
Sometimes course Highland Bonnack was our fare,
Sometimes all store of Plenty.
3.
I have not forgot that Cursed Landen bout,
How wet we went to Kennel;
And lay all night, like brace of pickled Trout,
Served up without their Fennel.
4.
You still pursued that rambling, restless Scene,
Yet nothing got by Fighting;
On that account I Have still your Comrade been,
And got as much by Writing.
5.
Come, let us the Soul of some kind Vintner try,
And make him pierce his Terces:
Him with your Camps and Sieges you shall ply,
And I Will repeat my Verses.
6.
With dint of Argument we'll drill him on
To trust on this occasion;
And make him know, that it is by Faith alone,
He must expect Salvation.
XXIII.
Anacreon Ode 25. (...).


1.
NO Rents have I, no well filled Barns,
Of Trading Stocks no share;
The mighty bulk of my concerns
Is Chalkt up at the Bar.
2.
And yet when Healths have long gone round,
And Drunkenness commences,
Strange Raptures in my soul abound,
Beyond the reach of senses.
3.
It Is then we sing, and dance by turns,
And kindly hug each other,
Each with Affection panting burns,
For his dear drunken Brother.
4.
No sorrow then my Thoughts infest,
My Stars I don't upbraid;
But with content, I reel to rest,
When once the Reckning's paid.
XXIV.
Anacreon Ode 2. (...).


WHen first Nature began to destribute her store,
In a flood of her Bounty, her Kindness run over:
Not a Creature but could of some Excellence boast,
But the Wisdom of Man was to rule all the Roast:
Tho Bulls had their Horns, and Lions their Claws,
Yet the fiercest should stoop to his Reasons great Laws.
Then to curb human Pride, in a frolicksome fit,
To puzzle Man's Reason, and confound all his Wit,
She ordained that he must to fost Beauty submit.
Thus in vain does Man boast all his Sovereign sway,
At each beck of a Lust he is obliged to obey.
XXV.
Hor. Ode 5. Lib. 1. Quis multa Gracilis, etc.


1.
WHat foolish Youth has Molly now drawn in
To be her Cully Mate?
He little thinks that he must purchase sin
At half so dear a rate.
2.
Alas! that tender soft bewitching Face
Will fiercest frowns put on:
That Oily Tongue will Rant and Curse apace,
When once his Cash is gone.
3.
Each Vein will then with downright Madness smart,
And rankle with the Guilt,
That he should prostrate both his Purse and Heart,
To such a Cursed Jilt.
4.
When once I found on what a sordid score
She did her Charms display,
I vowed I never would steer my Rudder more
In such a faithless Sea.
FINIS.

