A DIRECT ROAD, TO Peace and Happiness, IN Church and State.

ROMANS 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the higher Power, for there is no
Power but of God: The Powers that be are ordained of God.

JER. 7. Verse 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Amend your Ways,
and your Doings; if you thoroughly execute Judgment between a Man and his
Neighbor; if you oppress not the Stranger, the Fatherless, and the Widow, and
shed not innocent Blood in this Place, neither walk after other Gods to your
Hurt, I will cause you to dwell in this Place.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1696.

THE PREFACE.
I Will not trouble the Reader with the Arguments used, either for or against
my publishing the ensuing Treatise; for in truth I suspect too many Persons
resemble Apes (making use of the Gats feet to save their own) and as many more
rather inclined to Revenge Injuries, or Quarrelling with Persons for their
Offices; than to redress Crimes, or their Brethrens Grievances; and the
Judgment of Friends, or near Relations, may be suspected to be Partial: So that
I hold it best to advise with none, in matters of this nature, but such as are
of the Heathen Philosophers Opinion in this (viz.) That we are not born for our
selves, but partly for our Country. And the Character which King Henry IV. (in
his last Speech to his Son) gave of the People of England, holds true; That
they are Wise, Stout, and True-hearted, if Rich, and Justly dealt with, and
Religiously governed: But if Poor and Oppressed, they will Rebel. Their Wisdom
is shown by the Excellency of their Laws and Constitutions Stat. de Prerogativa
Regis 17 Edw. 1. 1 Hen. 4. Cap. 6. 1 Eliz. 1.
for securing the Royal Estate, and their own Liberties and Properties: Time
would fail me to show what Provision is made, that the Crown and People may be
well served; and how early after the Reformation the People restored 27 Hen. 8.
Cap. 24.
the Ancient Rights, Prerogative, and Authorities of Justice to the Crown,
which were severed from it in Times of Popish Heresy and Usurpation, that the
Administration might be free and undisturbed with Rivals for the future: And
what care is taken for the Election 31 Eliz. Cap. 6.
of Scholars, and to provide against Symony, 12 Rich. 2. Cap. 2.5 and 6 Edw.
6. Cap. 16. 2 Hen. 6. Cap. 10.
and against Buying and Selling Offices; that Benefices and Places of Trust may
be given to none but Persons Worthy and Meet, and not to any for Money,
Brocage, Favor or Affection: And how 1 Eliz. Cap. 1. 5 Eliz. Cap. 1. 3 Jac. 1.
Cap. 7. 7 Jac. 1. Cap. 6. 25 Car. 2. Cap. 2. and 7 and 8 Will. 3.
all in Military as well as Civil Employments, are obliged to take Oaths,
enjoining them to be true to their Trust; and that no Man shall be Judge or
Jury-man in any Matter where his own Interest may incline him to be Partial or
Unjust: And how 22 and 23 Car. 2. Cap. 22.4 and 5 Will. 3. Cont. 6 and 7 Will.
3.
Forfeitures being settled, are to be duly answered to for the Benefit of
Discoverers, and to Charitable Uses, also to be a Revenue to the Crown, for
doing it felf and People 13 Edw. 1. Cap. 50.
Justice: And what Liberty the Crown has to supply all Defects in the
Execution of the Laws, to make them answer their true end; Also to Reward and
Pardon whom it thinks fit; And how the King, and all in Authority under him,
are obliged to punish none, but as the Laws provide: The People well knowing,
That when the Crown suffers great Loss and Damage, by the Ignorance of the
Unskillful, or by the Neglects, or Frauds, or Perjuries of the most Knowing in
Office, it will occasion new Aids and Taxes to be laid on many: And that the
generality of Mankind love to be freed from Duties; And that nothing more
Discontents the People, than when they see, that it is not Persons with most
Right, but longest Purse, or powerful Friends prevail, or that even Right and
Justice is not done to Poor and Rich, without respect of Persons, as 20 Edw. 3.
Cap. 1.
the Laws provide: We all know, that wrong Doers will bandy to save themselves,
and Persons injured will seek redress; and if they fail of their Ends, the
first by Design, and the latter by Mistake, may impute their Grievanies to
wrong Persons and Causes, and overthrow the Government which would set us all
to Rights. It Is fresh in Memory, That the Abuses put upon Wards and others, by
the Court of Wards and Star Chamber, occasioned the never to be forgotten
Rebellion in 1641, which many thousand Persons* and whole Families, woefully
experienced, who were not Guilty of the said Abuses, unless in being Remiss or
Negligent to choose worthy Persons to serve in Parliament, or that the Persons
Chosen, did not timely Redress their Brethrens Grievances. And the People of
England, who ever had the Reputation of Stout, have in this Effeminate and
degenerated Age, signalized their Courage and Valor against the Common Enemy
of Christendom.

England never had a King more resigned to the Common Interest of his Crown and
People, than His Majesty upon all Occasions has declared himself to be; And we
never had more Pious and Learned Bishops, nor more Knowing Privy Counselors
and Judges; nor a Commonalty more freely left to their own Liberty to choose
their Representatives in Parliament to Redress their Grievances; Nor more
frequent Parliaments, nor longer Sessions; Yet Discontents and Divisions abound
unmeasurably: And from the Experience of a Grave and Learned Judge, who tells
us, Preface of Judge Davy's Reports.
That the Law sees no Enormities, but by the Watchful Eyes of Diligent
Officers: We may infer, That we may Wander and Perish in the Wilderness of our
Discontents, if our Spy-alls be Negligent, Ignorant, Unskillful, False and
Treacherous: One would think that the heavy Judgments which befell the false
Spies, and the Children of Israel, by their evil Reports; And the Reward of
Caleb's Integrity, should be a Warning to all now living, to be True to their
Trust.

I have been a Sorrowful Spectator for some Years, of the Miseries my Native
Country has languished under, by Divisions and Debaucheries in Opinion and
Practice, and the Hellish Contrivances of our Enemies. And being under the
Sacred Obligation of Oaths to serve His Majesty according to the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm; and taught, as all Christians are, That they best
express their Duty, when they be Serviceable Members as well of the State as of
the Church: And that they are not to put their Candle under a Bushel, nor to
hide their Talent in a Napkin, but to communicate their Knowledge and
Experience to their Brethren, remembering them that are in Bonds as bound with
them; and them that suffer Adversity, as being themselves also in Body; and
well knowing that it is with such who are entrusted with the Cure of a Sick
State, as it is with Physicians and their Patients, The most Skilful Physicians
cannot Cure Diseases before they know them: If they give Physic at random,
they may as soon Kill as Cure; and Physicians most visited with Patients, have
least time to inform themselves of the true State and Condition of their most
distempered Patients; and seeing most Diseases, when discovered, may easily be
cured, if Opportunities of taking proper Remedies be not slipped. I did upon
these Considerations, set my self at work to publish the ensuing Treatise; und
what I have omitted therein, I would willingly supply by this Preface: Every
Judicious Person knows, that most Feuds and Discontents are fomented by Suits
in Law, Elections of Members to serve in Parliament, and bestowing Benesices
and Places of Trust; and that when Disputes about any of them happen between
Popular and Powerful Antagonists; and the Decision be no other than Silencing
the Parties worsted for the present; it is but Healing the Wounds false; and
should the same Gangreen before discovered, it may occasion the Dissecting of
Members, or Loss of Lives: We have had two Miraculous Revolutions, viz. The
Restoration of King Charles the Second, and the Coronation of King William the
Third; let us (having abused the former) make good use of the latter.

Every Tree is known by its Fruit: May not such as obtain Benefices by Symony,
and their Benefactors, be suspected to be in Confederacy with such as Dispense
with the Laws against Buying and Selling Places of Trust; and may not all the
Confederates be suspected to be Supine and Negligent in all things, but what
makes for their own private Interest or Profit; and will not such wink at
Miscarriages, or highten our Discontents, and retard the Redress of their
Brethrens Grievances: If two or more be Competitors for a Benefice or an Office
void, and it be given to one least Deserving, or has least need, will not the
rest be disobliged, especially such as be Impoverished with Loyal and Dutiful
Services to the Public; and may not the Persons disobliged by Mistake, impute
the same to wrong Persons and Causes? Are not such as abuse Regalia's holden of
the Crown Petty Tyrants? Were not all Benefices and Offices in the sole Gift of
the Crown, before divested thereof by Grant or Usurpation? Do not such as abuse
that Trust, sell both Crown and People, and make Religion, Liberty and
Property, Stalking-horses for their Villainous Purposes? Is not the right and
due Administration of Justice, all we have to depend on, to preserve us from
the Oppression of Home-Tyrants? And what but the Propagation and Encouragement
of the Fisheries, will increase the numbers of fit Persons to be Seamen and
Mariners to Man our Ships, that guard us from Foreign Tyrants? And who
Obstructs the Administration of Justice, but such as Buy and Sell Benefices and
Offices? And who makes great Destruction of the young Fry and Brood of Fish,
and obstruct Navigation, and hinder the Increase of fit Persons to be Seamen
and Mariners, but such as under the Umbrage of Grants of Liberties, for them,
their Tenants and Farmers, to Fish in Royal and Navigable Rivers, erect Piles,
Stakes, Keddals, Locks, with strait Wires or Wands, Weres, Dams, and Let the
same; and little Cottages, and small parcels of Land by such River-sides, to
Farm at excessive Rent, and suffer their Tenants to Potch and Fish at
unseasonable times, and with unlawful Nets, Engines and Devices: And are not
Salmon (by their Destruction of Fish, full of Spawn, and feeding their Swine
with the young Brood and Fry) sold at 12 d. per Pound in some parts, where it
was sold for 1 d. and large Silver Eals at 6 d. or 8 d. per piece, where the
like was sold for 1 d. And will not a Lamprey-Pye now cost 3 l. or 3 l. 10 s.
where it might have been had for 12 or 13 s. to the great Dissatisfaction of
the Country-Gentlemen, and the Oppression of the Poor, to whom Fish plentiful
and cheap was great Relief: And are not some parts of Navigable Rivers, so
annoyed with Stakes, Locks, Dams, Weres, and the like, that Vessels of 30 Tun
cannot (where Vessels of 100 Tun used to) pass and repass: And have not such
Tenants and Farmers, for the Lucre of Wrecks, Murdered poor Seamen and
Mariners that were escaping to shore: And how many poor Fishermen, taken
Fishing in places within the compass or space where Pretenders to Royalties
claim any thing of Fishing, have been so ill treated by Farmers, Stewards, or
Agents to Vice-Admirals and Justices of Peace, that the Fishermen who took
several Apprentices, have been forced to betake themselves to other Employments
ever since their usage was so bad, by such who engrossed the most convenient
places of Fishing in Royal and Navigable Rivers, under the Umbrage of Grants of
Free-Fisheries as aforesaid. Certainly such Vice-Admirals and Justic^s of
Peace, as are Owners of Houses and Land near such Rivers, who pretend to such
Liberties, cannot but know, that all the Ground, Soil and Fishery, in
Navigable Rivers, Bant Case or the Case of Royal Rivers. Davis Rep. fol. 56.
are the Inheritance of the Crown, as well where the Water at usual
Spring-Tides cover the Ground, as where the Water runs and no Tides come; for
that reason the City of London enjoy the same in Thames, as far as
Stanes-bridge, by Grants from the Crown, and confirmed by Act of Parliament:
And do not private Rivers cease to be private when made Navigable at the
Counties Charge by Act of Parliament: And are not all Nusances in Private
Rivers, relating to the Public, and for preventing the Destruction of the
young Brood and Fry of Fish, to be redressed by the King, or such as His
Majesty intrusts, where Lords of Royalties and Franchises are Remiss or
Negligent. And do not such as have only Free Liberty or License to Fish in
Navigable Royal Rivers abuse their Liberty, in case they hinder others Lawfully
Authorized to Fish? Does not the Statute 21 Jacobi 1. Cap. 2. which limiteth
the Crown not to Sue for Lands or Hereditaments concealed by the space of sixty
years, save its Rights to recover Franchises and Liberties holden by Usurpation
or Wrong? If a Subject grant leave to Munj y and Brown's Case, Inst. fol. 165.
another to dig in his Ground, may he not dig himself, or appoint others to dig
also? And is not the Inheritance of the Crown, and its Royal Estate, as well
secured, as any private Subject can pretend his own Estate or Property to be
secured? Are not all Vice-Admirals prohibited to meddle 13 Rich. 2. Cap. 5.
with any thing done within the Realm, but what are done upon the Sea? So that
although Rivers be very broad and Salt near the Sea: Yet are not all Offenses
and Trespasses done or committed in such Rivers, properly determinable infra
Corpus Comitatus, where Vice-Admirals have nothing to do: And Justices of Peace
ought to know, That Acts of Parliament, wherein the King is not named, Inst.
fol. 43.
shall not take away the King's Right; And Dyer 225. ^o^ Rep. 146.
that Acts of Parliament, impowering Justices of Peace to do what the King has
Right to do, shall not bar or hinder the King to do it; such Acts being
intended to ease the King of Labor, not to debar or deprive him of his Rights,
Power or Prerogative, Inst. 1 part fol. 119.2 part fol. 4^6.
which is the most essential part of the Laws of England. And it is resolved,
Bans Case, or the Case of Royal Rivers. Davis Rep. fol. 56.
That the King may at this day appoint a Water-Bayliff of all or any his Royal
Rivers: And all Sages of the Law agree, That His Majesty may Erect and Grant a
Court of Record, to hold Plea of what His Majesty's other Courts hold Plea of;
and appoint reasonable Fees to support the same. Yet Vice-Admirals and Justices
of Peace near Severn, dispute the King's Prerogative, and the Water-Bayliffs
Jurisdiction in that River, which Office appears by Records in the Tower to be
very Ancient: But what may not some by Mistake, and others in point of
Interest, be guilty of? I have reason to believe, that had not His Majesty's
Predecessors granted the Inheritance of the Office of Water-Bayliff of Thames,
to the powerful City of London, Usurpations, Nusances and Trespasses had
swarmed in that River, as they do in other Royal Navigable Rivers. What
signify our Laws declaring, That 13 and 14 Car. 2. Cap. 28.
the Public Honor, Wealth and Safety of this Realm, as well in the
Maintenance and Support of Navigation, as in many other respects depend on the
Improvement and Encouragement of the Fishery: And the many Laws in force for
the Preservation of the young Brood, and Fry of Fish; And to hinder Royal and
Navigable Rivers to be choked up with Filth, or annoyed with ought that may
obstruct Navigation: Nay indeed what signify all our wholesome Laws to secure
our Liberties and Properties, if a stop be not put to such as recommend unfit
Persons to Places of Trust? I verily believe, that such as dispense with Oaths
and Laws, and magnify the Number and Power of their Parties, by Trading with
Benefices and Places of Trust, as the Pope and his Priests Traffic with
Pardons and Indulgences, are Conscious to themselves, That they are no true
Subjects to the King of Great Britain: And that they and their Parties, are but
a handful of Men, compared with the vast Numbers of good Subjects grieved with
their Frauds and Perjuries. If ought I propose for a Cure of our Discontents be
deficient, I submit the same to be supplied by the Wisdom of the Government;
and because every Subject, as a Member of the State, is bound to serve the
Head, and it is easier to add to an Invention, than to find out how or which way
to make the first Essay, I have communicated my Proposals in a plain and
familiar Language to my Countrymen, that the weakest Capacity may judge of
them, and propose his own, which he thinks better, having experienced what
unlikely Persons have done: Who would believe, did not Records witness, that a
Soldier should invent Printing, and a Monk Guns: And I know that the King, and
the Lords-Justices, being busily employed about weighty Affairs, want Leisure
to read my Treatise. However some Judicious Readers may happily agree with me,
and have opportunity to give His Majesty or the Lords-Justices to understand,
that a Registry of the Names of Persons doing Good Services, orderly kept, and
rewarding them duly, and the Reports or Recommendations of Societies for
supplying Vacancies of Benefices and Offices, where none in the Registry be fit
for the same, will make the Crown and People be well served: And that if the
same be not done, or some other ^ay found out, to avoid the Secret Intreagues
which pass all Understanding between Judges and Officers, and Obscure Persons,
who abuse Noble Persons and others, that have the Disposition of Benefices and
Places of Trust, the Avenues of Justice will be stopped. I had made Coin and
Bullion part of the subject Matter of my ensuing Treatise, but that the
Lords-Justices issued out their Proclamation to supply the Defects of the Laws
relating thereto, by promising a Reward of a Moiety to Discoverers; but it is
to be feared, there are so many secret ways of conveying Coin and Bullion out
of the Realm, in Packs of Cloth, and Casks, with Liquors, and the like, that
unless Coin and Bullion be made more valuable here, if but one Farthing in an
Ounce, than in any other part of the World, the Exportation will hardly be
prevented: However I am glad to see the Government sensible of the Necessity of
rewarding and encouraging Discoverers, because they run unspeakable Hazards, by
discovering the undue Practices of ill Men, who we know will both give and take
Bribes, and leave no Device or Trick untried, to take away the Lives, Estates
and Reputation of Discoverers, and to stifle their most true and faithful
Discoveries and Proposals; for that reason I had rather leave such
Self-interested Ill-principled Persons to guess at my Name, than know it by
Subscription: And seeing there is no Man living, but what is envied by some;
and that a Prejudice entertained against a Person, will hinder some Readers to
profit by his Works, upon that account also, and by what King Solomon saw or
experienced, Eccl. 9. v. 13 to the end.
I hold it best to subscribe no Name,

VALE.
A Direct Road, etc.
READER, I foresee, some will Object, 1^ Rich ^. Chap. ^. 5 and 6 E^^. 6. Chap.
^^
That it is impossible to supply the Defects of the Laws, for having Persons
Worthy and Meet, and none other, advanced to Offices; Therefore I determine
thus, That all things are to be held possible and performable, which may be
accomplished by some Persons, though not by every one: And which may be done by
the United Labors of many, tho not by one a part: And in brief, which may be
finished by the Care and Charge of the Public, tho not by the Abilities and
Industry of private Persons. If for all this there be any, would rather take to
himself, That of Solomon, Dicit piger Leo est in via, Than that of Virgil,
Possunt quia posse videntur: It is enough for me, if my Labors may be esteemed
Votes, or rather, the better sort of Wishes: For as it asks some Knowledge to
demand a Question, not impertinent; so it requires some Understanding to make a
Wish, not absurd.

I wish all Men were true Protestants; And that all His Majesty's Freeborn and
Naturalized Subjects understood the Law, which says, That their King is the
Father of their Country; The Fountain of Justice, and the Patron and Protector
of that Church, which is endowed with universal Charity: The very Bond of Peace
and all Virtues, without which, whosoever lives, is accounted dead before God:
None questions the Kings Legal Power, or who made him King; but such as are of
the Israelites kidney, that questioned Moses, who made him a Ruler and a Judge,
and caused him to fly his Country for doing a Brotherly Office.

The King is a wise Prince and a professed Protestant, had he time to read the
Case, and Petitions of his meanest Subjects, he would certainly do them speedy
and cheap Justice, It is his Misfortune, as well as thine: That he is busily
employed, Circa Ardua negotia regni.

The Heathen Philosopher, that could say, We are not born for our selves, but
partly for our Country, Condemns all Freeborn and Naturalized Subjects
(especially such as are under the obligation of Oaths and Associations to be
true to his Majesty and his Government) that are not as serviceable as they
may, or can be. Can any professed Protestant be ungrateful to His Majesty, that
calls to mind, the many eminent Dangers, both by Sea and Land, to which his
Majesty's Sacred Person has been so often exposed, to secure Protestants from
Arbitrary Power and Popery? and sees how freely His Majesty leaves all things
to be settled and done in Parliament for the common Interest of the Crown and
People: So that if we be not wanting to our selves, we may be as happy as we
can hope to be in this World and the next.

Therefore Reader, I will offer to thee such things, as I conceive necessary to
be Communicated for the Service of my King and Country: If any thing be
disliked, or not well approved on, let thy Charity pardon me, it being well
intended; and remember it was not the Widows Mite, but her willing Mind to
Contribute more, made her Present acceptable: Let not private Interest, Favor,
or Affection, sway thy Judgmeent; read diligently, and judge Impartially, and
give grains of Allowance to thy weak Brother, who exhorts thee in the Apostles
words; Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them, and them that
suffer Adversity, as being thy self also in the Body.

In private Families should the Husband Command unreasonable things, or the
Wife despute her Husbands reasonable Jurisdiction, or the Children their
Parents, or the Servants be Judges in their own Case, what distraction would
inevitably ensue, in case Law and Equity were not Umpire.

Art thou compelled to take Oaths, and Subscribe Associations, thou art bound
and thou must obey, or suffer what the Law Inflicts for thy disobedience; if
thou discharge thy Oath and Duty, and suffer any loss or damage for thy
Obedience, the Government is bound to make the repairation and to Protect thee:
If a Law be attended with Inconveniences which were not foreseen at the time of
making, and thou art prosecuted by force thereof, the King can stop
proceedings, until the Parliament meet to Annul it, or Amend what is therein
Amiss. Art thou Opressed by the neglect, or Non Execution of any wholesome Law,
the King can Command the due Execution of it? Have thou Consumed thy Estate,
and contracted great Debts in discharge of Oath and Duty, and do thou want
Subsistence for thy felf and Family, and will not thy Creditors forbear
troubling and restraining thee of thy Liberty, and will not the Government
relieve thee? Commit thy Cause to God, he is the relief of the Opressed, and
can make thy case known to the King, as he did Mordecais to King Ahasuerus,
Does any in Authority under His Majesty, upon any Acount whatsoever opress
thee; His Majesty's Propper Courts can Right thee? Are the Judges thereof
Parties concerned in point of Interest to favor thy Opressors and wrong thee,
or do the Judges, or such as the King intrusts to do thee Justice, deny or
neglect to do their duty; thou have a just and wise King to apply unto, whose
Power and Prerogative is the most essential part of the Law: It is, says a
Learned Judge, A Sanctuary for the opressed to fly unto, a Fortress to the weak
to retire unto, and a Curb to the insolent. So that thou may depend on
Justice at His Majesty's hands, because His Majesty can do no wrong; But the
wisdom of the Law knows, that His Majesty sees with others Eyes, and hears with
others Ears, and acts with others Hands; and that they may be gulty of abusing
and wronging thee: Therefore the Law inflicts severe Punishment on such in
Authority under His Majesty, as deceive His Majesty by ill Advice, or do, or
suffer any thing to be done against the Honor and Interest of His Majesty, and
his People; and His Majesty may, when he thinks sit, Sit in Person and see
Justice done to any of his opressed or injured Subjects, for His Majesty is
Supreme Chancellor of England, and none is to depart his Courts without relief:
And had His Majesty time and leisure to make one or two Presidents of Persons
exemplarily punished for breach of Oath and Duty, it would ease His Majesty of
much trouble, and make His Majesty's Reign Glorious. Does not the King
understand the Laws, and will not his Council advise him right; thou have thy
representatives in Parliament, to make thy Case and Condition known to the
King? Are thy Friends to Justice, out-voted by Parties intressed to favor thy
Opressors and wrong thee? Thou have frequent Parliaments to apply unto, Art
thou afraid the People will choose the same Members? Every body knows that old
Brooms being stumpy and stubborn, will scratch and leave Filth and Rubbish in
Holes and Crevises, where new Brooms, being bushy and pliant, will sweep clean:
However, thou may do well to give thy Fellow Electors to understand, That the
Law allows not Parties interested to be either Judges or Jurymen, and that
under Sherffs are not allowed by Law to be in Office above a Year at a time;
because the Law presumes, new Shereffs are not so Crafty as the old, nor will
be guilty of their Tricks and Fallacys: And it may be believed, that it is as
requisite for none but indifferent Persons to have Votes in the High Court of
Parliament, as to have indifferent Judges and Jurymen in the Inferior Courts,
and that new Members to represent the People, may be as necessary as new
Sherriffs in every County; let the People know the particulars of thy Case, and
how thou art Oppressed, and by whom, and for what, and thou may happily
prevail with them to choose such to represent them and thee as live among them,
and do all the Neighbourly good Offices they can. For the People of England are
naturally Stout, Generous, and lovers of Justice, and will do all things that
may suit with the Honor and Interest of their King and Country; and though
Inhumane Wars, Plots and Conspiraces, have depraved their natural Tempers and
Dispositions: Yet in process of time they will be reclaimed, and thou may be
successful: Thou know that the unjust Judge in the Parable, who neither
feared God nor reverenced Man, was wrought upon by the importunate Widow to do
her Justice, Gutta Cavit Lapidem nonvi sed sepe Gadendo.

For the supply of good Men to serve the King in Church and State, I humbly
propose;

Batchelour of Arts, in one of the two Universities of Oxford or Cambridge.

Chancellor or Vice Chancellor of the respective Universities of the Vacancy:
And the two Universities may in an Orderly and Regular way, as they choose
Members to represent them in Parliament, proceed to Elect, in each University,
a fit Person to supply the Vacancy: And the King or the Patron may divide by
Lots, which of the Persons so Elected and Recommended, shall be Instituted and
Induced, to avoid disobliging any body; because Lots causes Contention to
Cease, and parteth-between the Mighty, Prove. 8. ver. 8.



Tyths, as soon as Benefices be vacant, be sold to the best Advantage by fit
Persons to be appointed by His Majesty in the vacancy for that purpose; and
that all Sums of Money, raised by the Sale thereof, be laid out in Land that
the Incumbant may be free from looking after, and gathring in the Tyths,
whereby all occasion of differences and disputes between Parsons and
Parishioners upon Account of Tyths may be avoided.

or that the Augmentation be made by a general Tax, or that the first years
Profits of Temporal Offices when they become void, as well as the first Fruits
of Spiritual Livings, when vacant, be made a Revenue and applied to that use.









and if two or more be Competitors for it, his Majesty may for his own ease,
appoint indifferent Persons to be Tryers and Examiners of the Petitioners
Qualifications? and if such Tryers find two or more equally Qualified for it,
the Preference may be divided by Lotts, because it is morally impossible
otherwise to Gratify one of such Petitioners, without disobliging the rest:
And Persons disobliged are apt to be discontented and factious, and if
Partiality be not avoided in bestowing Offices, as well as Benefices, the
Administration will be Male and Partial Ad Infinitum*

Judge, Attorney, Soliciter General, or other of the Kings Council at Law, the
Inns of Court may in every of their Societies Elect one fit to succeed; and his
Majesty may order Lotts to determine who shall succed.

Inns of Court and Chancery may in every of their respective Societies, Elect a
fit Person to supply the vacancy; and Lotts may in like manner decide which of
the Persons so elected shall Succeed the Officer Deceased or Removed.

Judges may have certain and sufficient Salleries settled as the ^8 Edw. 3 St.
4.20 Edw. 3 Chap.
Laws intended to support the dignity of their Places, in Liew of all
Contingent Fees, Profits and Perquisites which now arise and increase, as Suits
and Proceedings multiply.

Fob Bills, Feigned Pleas, Writs of Error and the like, for delay, or to
Protract time, which be expensive and troublesome to Plaintiffs and Defendants;
the Judges may be empowered to allow such time for the ease and benefit of
Suitors, as may be obtained by expensive Shifts, Tricks, and Falacies.

Defendant is deteyned, do pay every week the Sum of (...) to and for the
Defendants Maintenance and Subsistence; because Prisons destroy Debtors
willing, but unable to Pay their whole Debts, and put them out of all Capacity
to be serviceable to themselves and others, whereby their Wives and Children
become Burdensome to the Parishes they Live in: As for the Debtors Real and
Personal Estates, they may be Subject and Liable to be Seized and Distributed
Equally among all the real Creditors; But if a Debtor has no Estate but what
is employed in his Calling, Trade, or in some Occupation or Lawful Course of
Living, and does out of the Product thereof pay to his Creditors what he can
reasonably spare (over and above his own Wife and Childrens Necessary and
Competent Subsistence) Then the Creditors to take their Debts in proportion as
the same can be raised: And the Debtors Estate, or Effects, so Employed, to be
exempted from all Seizures and Executions.

Attorney and Solliciter-General, and every other of the Kings Council at Law,
may be allowed certain and sufficient Sallarys to Plead and Maintain Actions,
populer Informations and Pleas of the Crown Gratis; and may be Prohibited to
Practice and take any Fee in Causes between Party and Party, and may be set at
work to Correct the Errors and Mistakes in our Law Books, and Explain doubtful
Points, and expunge such things as too often misguide young Students, to their
Clyents great loss and damage.

Grants, or Letters Pattents of Crown Lands, not already Confirmed by Act of
Parliament, may now be Confirmed, because the same are dispersed and gotten
into the hands of many Persons by mean Conveyances, Statutes, Judgments,
Extents, etc. and many of the Grantees and Venders are unable, in Case the same
be restored to the Crown to repay the Purchase-Money, or make or give any
Satisfaction to the Purchasers thereof: And the dread of Acts of Resumption
makes the Possessors of such Land against their own Inclinations, Choose such to
represent them in Parliament as be the Venders, or their Heirs, or interested,
to oppose Acts of Resumption. And their Fears and Jealousies, occasions
Factions and Disturbance.

Indians Worship the Devil) that they may not hurt them; and the fewds and
differences between Neighbors and near Relations upon account of Elections are
woefully experienced in many places.



because it is for the Honor and Interest of the Nation so to do.



William the Conqueror obliged his true and faithful Friends and Servants
therewith: And we read not of any privy Conspiracy or Rebellion against any of
his Successors until those Favors were bought and sold; and Purchasers so
abused both Crown and People, That most Dependants on the Crown, were under the
slavery of Ill Officers and Guardians, who Bought and Sold young Heirs being
Wards, and made few or none of them fit for the Service of their King or
Country.

Private Patrons, abusing their Trust, occasioned Laws to be made against
Simony, and such as abused their Trust by Selling Offices under the King,
occasioned the Laws against buying and selling Offices and Places of Trust; and
ill Officers and Guardians oppressing Wards, made Tenures and Services in
Capite be turned into free and common Soccage: And with humble submission, all
those Laws will be difficient until some way be found out, that it may not be
in the power of any in Authority under the King, or by a derivative Power, to
make ill Ministers or Officers in Church or State.

Private Patrons can make no manner of Benefit of their Presentations, without
dispencing with the Laws against SIMONY: And though such as influence their
younger Sons to be Parsons, and give or procure them Benifices in liew of their
Portions, may be winked at by such as are guilty of dispencing with the Laws
against Buying and Selling places of Trust: Yet the People of England who love
Justice, and the Laws that provide against any to be advanced; to Offices of
Trust, for Money, Brocage, Favor or Affection, certainly intended that the
Trust for the cure of Souls should not be Committed to Sismaticks, or such as
will either Buy or Sell their Trust.



M^gna Charta 5 Hen. 3. Chap. 29.
but the Law provides, That Justice shall not be Sold, Delayed, or Denied to
any; That, 2 Hen. 6. C. 10.12 Rich 2. Chap 2.
not any Person shall be advanced to Offices for Money, Brocage, Favor or
Affection, but upon Merit: That 5 and 6. Edw. 6. Chap 16.
he who sells an Office, shall Forfeit his Estate therein, and he that buys,
shall be disabled to hold it: And Peti ion of Rights; Car. 1
Every person is Sworn to serve the King, according to the Laws and Statutes of
the Realm.

18 Edw. 3 S. ^. 20 Edw. 3. Chap. 1.
It is also adjudged Bribery for any in Judicial place to take Money, Fee,
Gift, or ought of value of any private person: And Inst. 3 p^rt ^o. 145.148.
V^^ons Case Inst. 1 Part Fo. 134.
upon the Laws against one that sold an Office, to lose his Estate therein, and
the Purchaser was adjudged disabled to hold it, whereupon it was granted to a
third-Person for life.

1 H^n. 4 C 6. Inst 1 Part Fo. 1.
It is also provided, That such Persons as challenge any Office or other thing
of value by Grant, without express Mention of the name and value, shall he
punished for Deceit: And the Grants shall be void. And not any inferior Office
by express name, being mentioned in any Grant, Commissions, or Letters Patents
to any of the Judges, or great Officers, they have not any Right or Title
thereto.

Offices are Propper Rewards for good Services, 1 Hen. 4 Ca. Inst 4 Part Fo. 56.
It was therefore provided, That such as had been Serviceable to the Public
shall be rewarded with Offices of the Kings Gift: And Offices are incident to
the Administration, and Originally instituted to support it; and the
Administration is inseparably United and Anexed to the Crown: Consequently
Offices incident thereto, are the Inheritance of the Crown, and by force of the
Stat. 5 and 6. Edw. 6 Chap. 16. The King may make a Revenue thereof.

The many Presidents upon Record show, That either former Kings understood
their own Right to Grant Offices, Vide the Patents upon Reco d in the T^w^r,
and R^^^s Chapel.
or had knowing and honest Ministers for the Office of Prothonotary, Register,
Clark of the Crown, Incorporation of the Six Cleks, Cursiters, and others in
Chancery; The Custos Brevium, Clerk of the Crown, Chief Clerk or Prothonotary,
and others in the King's Bench: The Custos Breveum Chyrographer Clerk of the
Treasury, and others in the Common Pleas: The Treasurer, Remembrancer, Clerk of
the Pipe, and others in the Exchequer, were (and most of them are now) Granted
and Enjoyed by Letters Patents, Pari ratione, His Majesty may Grant all other
Offices of like nature and Tenure.

When any Minister under Color of his Office, Dyer 127.
Challenged the right of Granting some of the said Offices, and the dispute
between them and the King about the Right, came to be farely debated; It was
Adjudged for the Kng, Hob R^^. 46.
by reason such Acts of Parliament as Empowered the Ministers to do what the
King had right to do, shall not bar or take away the King's Right: But the
same remain full and perfect, because such Acts were intended to ease the King
of Labor, not to deprive him of his Power and Prerogative Inst. 1. Part Fo.
119. 2 part ^^. 436.
which is a most essential part of the Laws of England.

That Acts of Parliament, wherein the King is not named Inst. 1. Part Fo 43.
Cook 11 Rep. Mag. Coll. C^se.
shall not bart or take away the Kings right, and that General words in Acts of
Parliament Grants, Use, Custom, or Prescription, shall not divest the Crown of
any thing originally, and of right belonging to it.

That not any can prescribe to the Temperaltys of a Bishop, ^^st. 2. Part Fo.
15.
because they are incident to the Person of the King, as Patron and Protector
of the Church; and Ibid. 1^ Part Fo. 117.
all Courts of Justice are the Kings, as Administrator of Justice: And Offices
incident to his Administration, being inseparably United and Annexed to the
Imperial Crown, cannot be severed from it Hob. Rep. 261.
but by special Grant or Act of Parliament: Idem. 22^.342.
Because all the People of England have an Interest in the Rites of the Crown.

Ibid. 347.
Where the Crown has a Right it cannot loose it, and not any thing shall pass
out of the Crown but by special Grant; neither shall Officers Compact Defeat
the Crown: And not any inferior Office was ever granted by name to any
Minister or Judge, because I st. 4. Part Fo. ^00. Hob. R^p. ^55.
by the Ancient Rule in Law, not any is to enjoy two Offices and Rules in Law,
cannot be broken without doing abuse and deceit to the King; and 13. Edw. 1.
Chap. 44.
Judges are Charged upon Faith and Oath to Punish; but if they in their own
right grant Offices, they are Punishable when their Officers offend, and it is
against a Rule in Law, for any to be Judge and Party.

Henry the 8th. Granted the disposition of Fellons Goods to his Almoner, Cook
Rep. Alton woods Case.
and without reciting and revoking the same, did grant diverse Fellons Goods to
one Hales; and the Almoner disputed his right, because the Stat. 6 Hen. 8. Cap.
15. Says all after Grants not reciting and revoking the former, shall be void,
yet the latter grant to Hales was Adjuged good against the Almoner; because he
was only a Minister in Trust for the King: And great Officers are no other,
neither have they such express Grants of the disposition of Inferior Offices,
as the Almoner had of Fellons Goods.

King Edward 1st. Granted the Office of Master of the Rolls to one for life,
Inst 3. Part Fo. 95.96. 9 Edw. 4 Fo. 6, 7.18 Edw. 4. Fo. 7. Dyer 176 Hob. Rep.
153.
and settled the disposition to be ever after in the gift of the Chancellor or
Keeper of the Great Seal for the time being; yet it was adjudged when the
Office of the Master of the Rolls was void, to be still in the Kings gift,
notwithstanding the settlement: And many other Offices when their right of
Granting was disputed, were adjudged to be in the Kings Gift.

In Case the Judges had a right, as they pretend, it must necessarily terminate
upon their own Death or Removal; yet they presume to grant Estates in Offices
to others, for one, two, or more Lives, which Grants are Illegal, being against
a Rule in Law, that says, None shall transfer a greater Estate then he has.

The Law ever looked upon the Injurious Acts of Persons in Office, to be worse
then Robbing on the High way; Because a Theif can take but what thou carriest
about thee, but wresting the Law or executing it Partially, may destroy Men and
their Posterity. All Laws are to be Expounded most Beneficially to make them
answer their true End, Plow. Com. 563. Dyer 231.313. Brook 77. Inst. 1 Part
381. Co. Rep. Alton woods Case. Heydens Case.
for suppressing the Evils they intend to remedy; and the Construction which
the Judges make of the proviso in the Stat. 5 and 6 Edw. 6. Chap. 16. for them
to sell in repugnant to the Laws against Buying and Selling Offices; neither
does that proviso repeal the Stat. 12. Rich. 2. Cap. 2. So that the Judges can
but do as they might have done, that is to say, for the Kings Ease, or until
his Pleasure be signified to the contrary; they may supply Offices void, so
that there be no failer for want of a propper and sit Person in the Execution
of the Law: And the Kings of England had no reason to trouble themselves with
Offices upon the first Erection, by reason they were few and small, and of
little value, but now they are many and of great value, and would raise a great
Revenue without disobliging any body: For when an Office is void, and in the
Kings gift, any man will be glad of the Moity of the Profits to live on, and to
pay the other Moiety to the King for two Years, and to have the whole after the
Expiration thereof, without paying any thing out of his own Pocket, because
then the Officer will not be put upon shifts to raise his Purchase-Money, or
reimburse himself, as too many have been of Late years. And if Persons that do
good Service, be released from paying their first years Profits, the Obligation
or Indearment will be greater.



good Services, Qualified for the Office void, and that will make all his
Majesty's Subjects strive to Excel each other in Dutiful and Loyal Services,
and qualify themselves for good Offices and Employments; were Persons
Qualifications written in their Foreheads, there needed no Tryers or Examiners,
or any Report or Recommendation, who are fit, or unfit: But seeing his Majesty
desires nothing, but to be well served, and have his own and his Peoples
business well and carefully done. And Tryers, and Examiners, and Societies,
where Persons have not done any signal Service to recommend them, may
reasonably be believed to be more indifferent and impartial in their Reports
and Recommendations, than private Persons, who may be suspected to make it
their business, for Money, Brocage, Favor or Affection, to Procure Offices;
and seeing it is hard to distinguish Generous Noble Souls, from such as are
Mercinary, and Sell their Prince's Favors: It is, as I conceive, the Interest
of a Prince to prevent Evils which may be secretly Transacted, against the
Honor and Interest of His Majesty and His People: whose Interest being united,
cannot be severed; for that Reason, whenever a Private Interest comes in
Competition with a Public Benefit or Advantage, Judgment is to be given, Pro
Communi utilitate Regis and Populi.

Records show, that King James the 1st. had not Reigned above Three Years,
before the most Horrible Gun-Powder-Treason Plot was Ripe, and ready to be put
in Execution, at a time when the People were much Dissatisfied and Discontented
with Favorites, Monopolizing old, and Erecting new Offices of Profit; whereupon
his Majesty Issued out his Declaration, to put a stop to all further Suit to be
made to him for new Offices; and Judgment was given against some that had
Bought and Sold Offices, to Lose both Money and Office: And had the Disposition
of Offices been so Settled, that it had not been in the power of Favorites to
have over-ballanced the Administration with Ill Men, Wards and their Estates
had not been made a Prey to Ill Officers and Guardians, which occasioned the
Murder of his Son, and the Exile of his Grandchildren. And had not the
Favorites of King Charles the Second discontented the People, by neglecting
such as had Lost all by their Duty and Loyalty, and over-ballanced the
Administration with such as were glutted with the Spoil and Pillage of the
Crown and People: England might happily have Flourished in his Reign, but the
Jesuits you know are very Rich and Cunning, and they, the French King, and the
Devil their Master, ever took care to disoblige such most as had done their
King and Country the best Service; because their Complaints lie heavy upon the
Shoulders of the Government, and Friends disobliged, that will be Malcontents
and Disaffected, are the worst of Enemies. It would fill a Volume to
particularize how and which way they divided our Councils in the late Reigns,
and sowed Strife and Debate among their late Majesty's Household, Servants and
Favorites, and set up one Party or Faction, to pull down another, and made one
Party jealous of another, and both of the King, and the King of them; and what
Aid and Asistance was given to the Party or Faction that Debauched or
Discontented the People most, and Ripened them for Rebellion; and how the Crown
was Stripped of its Ancient Regalia's and Inheritance, and how the same were Sold
by the Grantees, and dispersed into many private hands, that when the Crown
stood most in need of Aids and Supplies, there might be Squabbling about Acts
of Resumption, misspending the Publick-Treasure, and what not.



Scholars and Presentation to Benefices; And you may remember His Majesty,
upon his acceptance of the Administtation, desired the Parliament to Name
Officers; because his Majesty had knowledge of few Persons, or their Services,
and his Majesty looked upon the Representatives of his People to be most
knowing and impartial: And undoubtedly had they Recommended, they would not
have neglected any that had done any Generous Service for the Crown and People.

You have seldom any Benefice or Office of Value becomes void, but several be
Competitors for it, and every one prevails with some to be his Intercessor; and
it is Morally impossible to gratify one, but the rest will be apt to
dis-rellish their disappointment.

Signal Service and Societies, Electing and Recommending Persons and Lots
deciding the Preferrence of the Persons Elected and Recomended, will disoblige
no body, but a few private Patrons, that would influence their younger Sons to
be Parsons, to give or procure them Benefices in Liew of their Portions; and
such as dispense with the Laws against Simony, and Buying and Selling Offic^s,
are but a handful of Men gratified, to the vast numbers of His Majesty's
Subjects will be indeared by a right disposition of Benefices and Offices.

This Method Proposed, will certainly ease the King of much Trouble, and leave
no room for his Majesty's Enemies to blame His Majesty; It Is not Ordaining,
Naming, or Making Officers, but their Rewards or Punishments well placed,
wherein the Staff of Government rests: And while His Majesty has Full and Sole
Power to Reward such Liberally as are found True and Trusty, and to Remove and
Punish such as are found False and Treacherous, His Majesty may keep the Hearts
of his People Firm and Fixed, which Commands their Hands and Purses: And such as
Mis-behave themselves, will then have no Parties or Factions of their own
Making, in Church or State, to ^ly unto.

You know the People upon His Majesty's Access to the Crown, were as Debauched
as the Devil, the Jesuits, and the French King, in the late Reigns, could make
them; yet being true to their Common Interest, and steadfastly believing His
Majesty would be so, they planted the Crown upon his Sacred Head, and his
Majesty has most entirely followed the Advice and Counsels of his Parliament,
to the great Joy and Satisfaction of all good Protestants; and never People
gave greater demonstration of Love and Duty to a Prince, than the People of
these his Majesty's Realms and Dominions have done to his Majesty; and long may
their Mutual Love and Affection continue and increase, are the hearty Desires
of all that truly wish the Peace and Safety of Great Britain and Ireland, and
other his Majesty's Dominions.

Lords of Manors, and Men of Power and Interest, to Influence Boroughs to
Elect them: And have not Burgesses equal Voices with Knights of Shires, then
how can these Proposals take effect?

England in Parliament assembled, are the Grand Inquest of the Nation, and that
their Laws express their Aversion to every thing that smells of Partiality or
Private Interest; and will any Man of Sense omit his Challenge of an Array or
Panel, or not take Exception to any returned upon a Jury, to give Verdict of a
thing in Question concerns him: And will Men of Understanding choose such to
represent them in Parliament; as be Parties Interested to oppose any thing that
is fit to be done for the Common Good and Benefit of the Crown and People.

You know the Advancement of such as signalize themselves by their Services,
will be, without all doubt, well liked by every body; and such as are not
signalized by Services, cannot be Advanced, but upon the Report of some body;
if of particular Persons, their Report or Recommendation may be suspected to be
Partial; so that you may believe private Patrons and Office-Jobbers will not be
able, by all their Artifices, to delude the generality of the People, who
heartily desire and wish that the Clergy were had in due Reverence and Esteem;
that none but Persons Worthy and Meet, may be Advanced to Dignities, Benefices,
and Offices; and that such as have good Estates, and Work enough to Husband and
Manage the same well, were not put into Offices of Profit, to keep younger Sons
of Parents, well descended, out of such Employments as they are fitly Qualified
for, and have Time and Leisure to be more Serviceable in: That all Loyal and
Dutiful Services were Liberally Rewarded; That all under any Oppression for
discharge of Oath and Duty, were Relieved, and due Care taken of the Poorest of
them in the First Place.



England are not so Ignorant and Illiterate, as they were when the Duke of
Cornwall multiplied Burgesses, nor when the Abby-Lands, and the Ancient Rights,
Prerogative and Authorities of Justice, 27 Hen. 8. Cap. 24.
were rescued out of the hands of the Pope and his Petty Tyrants.

Hen. the 8th. was not involved in War, and Espoused the Cause, and gave his
People to understand his and their Common Interest; but the Nation is so
Imbroyled with Wars Abroad, Factions, Plots and Conspiracies at Home, that his
Majesty wants Leisure to Consider the many Inconveniences that attend Him and
his People, by not having the Defects of the Laws against Simony (and Buying
and Selling Offices) supplied; and you know several in Authority under Hen. the
8th. were as Active as the King, to make the People sensible of their own
Interest.

Bread is Buttered on: It Is thy Duty and mine, in our Private and Public
Devotions, to Pray for the King, and all that are put in Authority under him,
that they may truly and indifferently Minister Justice and Maintain Truth; and
we best Express our Christian Duties, when we in our particular Callings,
Professions and Trades, be Serviceable Members of the State, as well as of the
Church.

It Is true, the King wants time to read, but His Majesty has many Honorable
and Worthy Persons in Authority under Him, that have Leisure enough, and what
they conceive fit to be done for His Majesty's Service, they will undoubtedly
Advise and Counsel His Majesty for the Best. All that Truly Love and Honor His
Majesty, and heartily Desire and Wish the Prosperity of Him and His People, are
for Extirpating such things as make Parties and Factions in Church and State.
And seeing it is usual to describe such Criminals as go by different Names, and
skulk to avoid Justice, I will according to the best of my Skill, discover a
Symoniacal Parson, and an Office-Jobber, that they may be known and apprehended.

The Character of a Parson guilty of Symony. He may be known by the
extraordinary Pains he takes a little before he is to be examined by the Bishop
or his Official; a poor Felon who has the Benefit of his Clergy, that can
neither Write nor Read, is not harder put to his Shifts to learn his Neck-verse
by Rote, than a Parson guilty of Symony is to fit himself for his Examination:
And as soon as instituted and inducted, his whole Study and Business is, how to
make most of his Benefice: And after that he is so taken up with Attending
Courts of Justice, in Suits between him and his Parishoners, that he has much
to do to escape the Penalties of the Law against Non-residency: When Overtures
of Peace are made, he says, Let the Law decide it, that his Successors may not
blame him: And never makes any Agreement upon his own Terms, without a Salvo
jure to his Successors, That they may place him in the List of their
Benefactors: When he sees Complaint will be made of him to the Ordinary or
Bishop at his Visitation, he has recourse to his Patron, and by Contrivance
between his Patron and him, the Matter is hushed up if possible; but in case it
be not, their business is, by their Parties and Factions, to represent the
Complaints, Schismatical Factions, and what not: His Flock are ever Bleeting
for another Sheepherd, as Lambs for want of their Dams; and if they are not to
be found in their Neighboring Sheepherd's Fold, they are strayed further and
lost.

The Character of an Office-Jobber. He is of a Religion uppermost, a most
accomplished Temporizer; his Ambition hates to see any of his poor and beggarly
Kindred, or to do any thing for them, until he has robed them with Honor,
Offices, and what not, at the Nations and Poor Petitioners Cost; or he is so
Covetous, that he cares not what he gets, or how he gets, so he can but get and
heap up Riches. He is always Poor, crying, Give, Give, but never satisfied with
what is given. He will not serve any but in Matters wherein he can serve or
gratify himself; as little Credit is to be given to his Oaths, as to Whores
Vows: He is true to no Government, yet Zealous in Appearance to serve every
Government; but Water-man-like, Looks one way and Rows another. He hates all
Loyal Services, which represent any worthy of a Liberal Reward; Especially such
as are Poor and cannot purchase it. He is never without a Jackhall to Forage
for him: When he meets a Man of Merit, he cries Shame no Provision is made for
him; and when his Back is turned, he redicules him for a Fool, that serves his
King and Country to the Prejudice of himself: For public Business he accounts
every bodies Work, and every bodies Business, to be no bodies in particular:
But the proper Work of such as can serve Turns, and themselves at every Turn:
His common Discourse is, Religion, Liberty and Property; But feeds so greedily
on Pippins and Pigg stuffed with Guinea's, that he is Sloathful and Unactive to
do his King and Country any manner of Service: His Complements are, I am but
one, and I will serve you if I can, or come again tomorrow and your Business
shall certainly be done: And when you come in Expectation thereof, it is still
tomorrow; And at last when he had gratified whom he thinks fit, he tells you,
He is Sorry he cannot Serve you: And if your Business happens to be done
against his Will, he tells you how Serviceable he has been to you: And that
there is no Fee established for his extraordinary Care, Pains, and Expedition,
but will take what you give him: In plain Terms, Nothing but weighty Presents,
are weighty Reasons, can work him into a Frame or Disposition to do you a Just
Favor, or Friendly Office; by virtue of Hocus Pocus Color Officii, he can
Drein your Purses, Afflict your Mind and Body; and do it so insensibly, that
you may accuse him, but cannot recover any Satisfaction for the Loss and Damage
you sustain. You may know him by the great number of Petitioners waiting at his
Gate for Recommendations or Reports of their Services; and when his Tricking is
found out, and he is likely to fall under His Majesty's Displeasure, he of
himself fairly acquits all Public Employments, and becomes a
Country-Gentleman, and there lives Great among his Neighbors, and treats them
with all imaginable Courtesy and Civility, until they forget what manner of
Man he was: And in process of Time sets up to be chosen a Member of Parliament:
And if the People Elect him, he Acts his part like a Mountebank, to Gull the
World with insipid Drugs and Medicines, of the Jesuits and French King's
Composing. And search the Books and Files of his Receipts and Prescriptions,
and his Coffers, and you will find who composed his Medicines and Lewis d'Ores
good Store.

Jesuits or French King's Money, will serve their Turns; and such as have
purchased with their own Money, will be upon the Spurs to re-imburse
themselves; and both will act all for their own private Gain and Profit; but as
little as may be for the true Honor and Interest of their King and Country:
And the Proposals aforesaid are only for the time to come. Now admit an Office
of Trust should become void, and a Worthy Good Man should succeed therein as
proposed, if the Majority of Men in Office be Good, he may do a great deal of
Good: But in case the Majority be such as came in by Money, Brocage, Favor or
Affection; the Good will be but like a piece of New Cloth set upon an Old
Garment, or New Wine put into Old Bottles; for the Bandittee of Office Jobbers
will make all honest Men very uneasy, who cannot wink at or dispense with such
things as the Bandittee allow to be Good and Practicable.

when the Gift or Disposition of Offices is settled as proposed, because they
cannot make Friends or Parties with Offices in their Gift or Recommendation as
they have done: And such as have done Good Service, are proposed to be taken
Care of; so that the future Settlement proposed, will work a present Cure. But
would the Lords-Justices, now in His Majesty's Absence, please to appoint
special Commissioners to Examine and Enquire into the Behavior and
Qualifications of such as be suspected to misbehave themselves, or to be
Ignorant of the Work and Business properly belonging to their Offices,
undoubtedly upon the Reports of indifferent Commissioners so appointed, many
and great Abuses would be discovered, which the Government might think fit and
necessary presently to redress.







ring least of Grievances; and the more Active Princes and Private Councils
are, to find out and redress Abuses in the Intervals of Parliament, the less
Work will Parliaments have when they meet, and their Councils will be more Free
and undisturbed: And if the Commissioners appointed be not True and Trusty, the
King and His Privy Council, or the Parliament, will find out their Roguery, for
the Blot will be Hit some time or other, and then Woe be to such, if any there
be, who like the Chief Priests and Elders, have abused the Ears of Government.

Now Reader, I beg of thee to be like the Be, that Sucks her Honey where the
Spider gathers her Poison: I know by woeful Experience, that the best things
said and done, may, by Mercinary and ill Men, be wrested to wrong Purposes. I
do assure thee, if any so wrest what I have done, or make ill Constructions
thereof, it is their own Fault not mine: For I declare to thee in the Presence
of Almighty God, unto whom all Hearts be open, all Desires known, and from whom
no Secrets are hid, that I have no other End in publishing this to the World,
but to Communicate such things to all that truly Love and Honor His Majesty,
that they may improve my Talent for the Service of their King and Country. Was
I under no Obligation of Oaths, Gratitude would oblige me to be as Serviceable
as I may or can be to His Majesty; But being under the Obligation of Old and
New Oaths, to do my King and Country the best Service I can in my Calling and
Profession, I hope none that reads this, but will pardon my Infirmities. Do
thou but read the Petition which the Lords and Commons of England in Parliament
Assembled, 3 Car. 1.
presented to King Charles the First, and thou will find their Prayer in the
Conclusion is, That His Majesty would be Graciously Pleased, for the further
Comfort and Safety of his People, to declare His Royal Will and Pleasure, That
all Officers and Ministers shall serve him according to the Laws and Statutes
of this Realm, as they tender the Honor of His Majesty, and the Prosperity of
this Kingdom. And were His now Majesty so served, there would be no
Malcontents, or Parties, or Factions, in Court or Country: Consequently Plots
and Conspiracies would be at an end; and in all Parts of His Majesty's Realms
and Dominions, the loud Acclamations of the People would be, O King, Live for
Ever.

POSTSCRIPT.
UPON the Rumor and Report of a General Peace abroad, I did add this, Dear
Countrymen, to let you see what will Unite and Settle us in Peace at Home, so
that every Man may sit and enjoy himself under his own Vine free and
undisturbed; unless the Generality of Freeholders and Freemen will not
consider their own Interest. It is certainly a great Disparagement to Virtue
and Learning it self, That those very things which only make Men useful in the
World, should incline them to leave it: This ought never to be allowed to Good
Men, unless the Bad had the same Moderation, and were willing to follow them
into the Wilderness: For if the Good Content to get out of Public Employments,
and live retiredly; and the Bad strive to get into Public Places of Trust, the
Affairs of Mankind are like to be in so ill a Posture, that even Good Men
themselves will hardly be able to enjoy their very Retreats in Security.

What (with humble Submission) is more Injurious to the Government, than such
in Commissions of Peace, as have the Fines and Forfeitures of Persons
Convicted? What hinders the Increase of Fishermen, and sit Persons to be
Seamen and Mariners, but Tenants and Farmers to Vice Admirals and Justices of
Peace, that under the Umbrage of Royalties of Fishing, Potch and Fish, and
hinder such to follow the Trade of Fishing in Times of Peace, as would be free
to go to Sea, and serve his Majesty, in Times of War? What puts Millers upon
Grinding the Face of the Poor, by extorting unreasonable Toll or Moulter of
them, But Lords of Royalties Letting their Mills to Farm at excessive Rent?
What makes Stewards of Leets remiss to remove Nusances, But to have the same
Presented over and over again? What makes Stewards of Liberties, and under
Sheriffs, Pack Juries, and be remiss in their Turns or Leets, or the chief
Duties of their Offices, But Dispensing with the Laws against Letting out their
Bailywicks to Farm? In short, 23 Hen. 6. Cap. 10.27 Hen. 8. Cap. 24.
What makes any in Office under the King, Guilty of undue Practices, But
Patrons, Parsons, Judges, and others by their Example, Dispensing with the Laws
against Symony, and Buying and Selling Places of Trust? Are not their
Traditions Destructive to the Government? Have Good Men ought but Good Laws,
and the due Execution thereof, to keep Ill Men within the Circle of Obedience?
Are not Rewards the Golden Spur to Glory and all Noble Actions? Do not Rewards
and Punishments misplaced, make a Weak and Tottering State? Did not King Edward
the Third, 15 Edw. 3.
as soon as he had opportunity, make void several Laws, to which his Consent
was not Free; but Dissembled, to eschew some Eminent Dangers he foresaw might
ensue, by his denying the same at that time: And was not the late Imposition of
Waterborne Coals taken off, when the Poor, for want of Firing, destroyed and
burned their Neighbors Pales and Hedges. And now having done my Duty, in
giving my Brethren to understand their Grievances, and making Proposals for
remedy hereof, I hope they will not be Lazy or Indiscreet, either in the Choice
of sit Persons to represent them, nor in soliciting them to have things done
for the Common Interest of the Crown and People; Remembering all Men are Mortal,
and nothing but their Works follow them to their Grave, and after Death comes
Judgment. Vale.

FINIS.

