A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING THE GROUNDS and CAUSES of this miserable civil war;
Wherein Ireland is exhausted, England wasted, and Scotland likely to be
imbroyled: and wherein not only Liberty, but Religion is endangered, etc.
KING CHARLES was within few late years, quietly possessed of three flourishing
Kingdoms; and for a while, as his subjects seerned to enjoy all the
blandishments of peace under his reign, to the envy of other Nations; so he
appeared eminently glorious in the inviolable loyalty and obedience of his
subjects; ^o the inciting of envy amongst other Princes.

But to that serene, delightful calm; a most dismal tempest has since
succeeded; and in so short a traverse of time a more woeful, desperate
Catastrophe (then this which now confounds: both King and subjects) was scarce
ever brought about in any other Country. All our gamesome Holidayes past, seem
now to us like the sleep of Jonah in the ship, the trance thereof only locked
up our senses for a while, that we might be betrayed to the greater horror and
amazement, when the incursion of unexpected ralamities should immediately seize
us under so dead and stupid a condition. Ireland already is become as sad a
spectacle as the ruthlesse hand of war ever made any since Vespasians days:
and England, though it sinkes a little more slowly, yet is in the posture of
sinking, and is not to be supported but by a divine hand more then ordinary:
and lastly, Scotland is but one degree only more removed from destruction. The
greater the Popish faction is in Scotland, and the more potent that Court-party
there is, which suggests to it self probable advantages out of the shipwreck
of broken England, the more inevitably is that Nation owned and destined to the
same ruin as England; let not dreams infatuate, she must expect the same line
to be stretched over her, as England has, if she prevent not her fate by some
sisterly assistance, whilst it is thus distant, she shall certainly unpitied
perish at its nearer approach.

But the Question is, Whence did these unnatural broils spring and arise;
Has the Kings misgovernment, or the Nations rebellious disposition, caused
these sudden distempers? has all this discord been stirred principally by
Ecclesiastical or Civil Persons? and have their ends been temporal or
spiritual? How does that commotion which was in Scotland differ in cause from
ours in England; or this in England from that in Ireland? Has it been the same
design carried on for many years together, from whose maturity at length all
our troubles in all the three Nations have been derived? Or have the Scots
occasionally aimed at one thing, the Irish at another, and the English at
another? If the Rebels in Ireland, and the Parliament in England have purposes
diametrically opposite, how is it that the King protests against both? how
comes it, that he wages a war upon the Parliament, that is as favorable to the
Irish, as destructive to the English? And if the Scots and the English propose
the same thing, how is it that the English are thus implacably Prosecured,
whilst the Scots are friendly entreated? How is it, that Papists are so far
united, yea, even in Ireland where they pretend for the King, contrary to the
acknowledgement of our Court, yet all of them move undevided, and in England,
where they fight for the King, and are accordingly entertained and allowed so
to do; yet still they are unanimous, whereas Protestants hold no perfect
correspondence any where, in Ireland they join against Papists, yet favor the
Papists cause in England; and in England they fight under Popish Banners, and
by consequence maintain the Romish faith, both in England and Ireland? And if
these miseries have been not mere late accidental events, but the studied
and prepared accomplishments and productions of diverse former years, then
whether is it more probable, that the Parliament, has been this long time
busy in plotting against the Court, or the Court against the Parliament?

To give satisfaction to all men in all these Queeries, will be difficult; but
to give satisfaction to all honest Protestants, and to convince all our most
subtle enemies, be they Protestants or Papists, will not be impossible; and
therefore my utmost skill shall endeavor it. And if this age will not give me
credit therein, I am certain the next will; I will commandingly say, That it
shall without dissent and denial receive and acknowledge these truths which I
now deliver.

The sons of the Jews erected Trophyes, and built Monuments of honor for
those Prophets which had been stoned in the ages before, and yet at the same
time, perhaps they maliciously murdered the true successors of the same
Prophets; such difference is there betwixt the evidence of present and past
truth; nevertheless, I shall for the present lie the less obnoxious to
contradiction or distrust, because I shall not so much insist upon conjectures
or nude averments of my own, as the censures of strangers and Papists; and the
judgments of other Statesmen, whose partiality herein is the less to be
suspected.

The great tyranie and usurpation of Roman Prelates, who (to purchase to
themselves an Ecclesiastical Empire, more large and uncontroleable then any
temporal Monarch ever challenged) had perverted Religion and innovated the
whole frame of Christianity; began to be discovered to many in England about
120 years since: Henry the eighth also, so far as his own Crown was
concerned therein, was willing to countenance the discovery; but as for a
total reformation of Religion, or redemption of his subjects liberty from
popish thraldom, no such thought ever entered into his breast. 'Twas
indifferent to him on the same day, and in the same place, to hang a Papist
maintaining the Popes supremacy, and to burn a Protestant denying those
corruptions of Religion whereupon that supemacy was founded: so indigested and
rude a Chaos of Doctrine was that which he sought to authorize and to daub over
with his untempered mortar. Edward the sixth, by a more blessed illumination,
set himself to pull down the whole fabric, and to raze the very foundation
of Hierarchy; and had it not been a work of more years, then it pleased God
to add to his life, he surely had not left one stone upon another. Queen Mary
set her self as entirely to repair the Popes Empire, as her brother did to
ruin it; yea, even to the effusion of much blood, with a more fierce zeal she
labored in it, and had not death overtaken her, and the hand of God otherwise
crossed her, perhaps no hopes had been left for a new restoration under her
successor. Queen Elizabeth, with as perfect an integrity as either her brothers
was in maintenance of truth, or her sisters in maintenance of superstition,
applied her self and her utmost power to restore Religion again in full
conformity to her brother, and opposition to her sister.

Two admirable Counselors she had, Cecyll and Bacon, both cordial and totally
addicted to the Protestant Religion: the honor of whom leaves her honor
unquestionable; for as much as to choose good instruments is the noblest
testimony of goodness: and the influence of Princes upon servants, is greater
then that of servants upon Princes. I have heard that the then Earl of
Pembrooke being solicited by other Court Grandees, to erter into a
confederacy with them about some alteration in Church and State, he told them
plainly, he durst not venture his manner of Wilton in the business, unless
Cecyll and Bacon were first hanged at the Court gate; and to hang them would be
a matter not to be compassed, till they with their Rhetoric in Cheapside
should avert the Citizens hearts from them, and that he left as a fond conceit.
Nevertheless, in censure of Queen Elizabeth, some have said that she swept the
room clean, but yet left all the dust heaped up behind the door, and did not
carry it forth as she ought to have done. Their meaning, I conceive, is, that
though she much awed and restrained both Prelates and Papists, so as they durst
not attempt any thing against the constitution of this State, during her
reign; yet she left them not in so desperate a condition, but that they did
recover strength, and reunite again after her death. This censure seems to me
too harsh: for Prelates without the copulation of Papists to gender a filthy
spawne upon them, are not of any considerable danger; and Papists by her long
and prosperous reign, were as much quelled and disabled, as possible they
could be. If any dust was left behind the door, 'twas because her lifetime
was not extensive enough for the carrying it forth; forth reduction of Ireland
was very late, she scarce survived it, and yet to make the Irish Protestants,
was of far more difficulty, and would consume longer time then to make them
subjects.

The propogation of the true Faith therefore in Ireland, was a task which
Queen Elizabeth was of necessity to leave to her successors; and it is very
probable, had they begun where she desisted, and not deviated from her
resolution, that Kingdom had long ere this, afforded as many Protestants as
subjects; whereas now it denies both: for doubtless Q. Elizabeth at her
decease, left Ireland in better disposition to conform to England, then she
found England in at her sisters decease to revolt from Rome, and therefore with
the same industry her successors might have done the same in Ireland as she had
done in England. But alas, no such course was taken there, we have reason to
think rather that Popery was cherished and preserved in Ireland, to make way
for these tragical divisions, then that there was any design or undertaking
to plant Protestantisme in it, for the establishing further union between the
nations: The example of Q. Elizabeth, to whom the protection of God was as
constant in saving her from the bloody Emissaries of Rome, did not work so
strongly to animate King James: as the Apostacy of Henry the French King, whom
God deserted for his desertion, did serve to intimidate him. The revolt of
Henry the fourth, who gained the Title of Great by his warlike achievements,
and the horrible conjuration of the Powder Traitors here in England made so
strong impression upon the soft and mild temper of King James; that to
temporise a little with Rome, for better security of his Person, appeared at
that time very seasonable; wherefore to dally with Antichrist a little, letters
were written to Cardinal Perrone, and answers received about a reconciliation
of Religions, and in order thereunto, the rigor of penal laws was rebated;
nay, countenance was showed to Papists, the grandour of Prelates and pomp of
Ceremonies in the Church began to be affected. The nearer also that King James
his end approached, the more it resembled Salomons, and grew tainted with the
foul symptoms of a declination; in so much that scarce any but Papists were
admitted to govern his Councels, and then the whole Kingdom began to be
exposed as a prey, to Spanish, French, Italian pensioners. It was well observed
by the Duke of Roan that no Prince in Europe so much opposed his own
interests, both in civil and religious affairs as King James; for, doubtless
the Pope by his agents in all Church matters, was more potent then the King
himself; and so was Gundamore in matters of State, had not the French and
Duch, and some other Nations interfered with the Pope and Spantard, and given
gold for some part in us rather to save us, then that we should be lost to
their enemies; doubtless we had been disposed of quickly; our happiness was,
that France was liberal enough to buy us from Spain, and Spain liberal enough
to buy us from France, etc. though our misery was, that both sides pulled away
more from us, then they parted withal from themselves. And now when three
Kingdoms are under the subjection of one Prince, who is under the subjection
of one lustful, rash, young Favorite, and that Favorite solely at the
devotion of his vicious, opprobrious, mischievous mother, and that mother a
mere Votaresse to Rome, utterly forfeited, resigned, and sold to the commands
of Jesuits: When our miserable Nations are in this ridiculous, preposterous
posture of government, who can wonder that a Spanish or French Match for our
Prince should be designed? As great a mass of treasure might have been
received with a German Lady, and that with less expense (for the portion of
Spain or France can scarce equal the charge of fetching it) all that can be
said is, Pistols and Patachoons are more valuable than Dollars, in our
judgment. Alliance also amongst Princes, if it be of any, it is of dangerous
consequence, it is certain to produce real enmity and emulation: but it is
uncertain to produce so much as a shadow of amity and union, especially
amongst Princes of the Romish Religion. If we negotiate concerning a marriage
with the Spanish Infanta, it is necessary that we keep fair intelligence with
France, and capitulate strongly with the German Princes: and if we break off
with Spain, and treat with the French Lady, it is necessary that we enter
into a new confederacy with Spain, and prepare a Fleet for the Isle of Rhees.
So much weaker than cobwebs are the bonds of matrimony amongst ambitious
Monarchs.

Something also may be said against the incestuous extractions of the House of
Austria, and the Florentine mixtures of the House of Burbon; whereas the
nobility, chastity, and beauty of the German Dames, has ever been not only
beyond all exception, but also beyond all comparison. Nothing then but Popery
(unless we will add also the manifold mifchiefes of Popery) could be aimed
at in a Popish Alliance by those devilish Engineers, which were the insolent
Lords of our Lords, or rather of our Lords, Lords, Lords.

And if we desire further satisfaction therein, let us consider the substance
of the Popes letter written the 20 of April, 1623. to our Prince in Spain, and
our Princes Answer thereunto, as they are faithfully translated, and registered
by Du Chesne the French Geographer, in his Book, fol. 1162.

The Popes Rhetoric in brief flows thus:

MOst noble Prince: the former Kings of Britain have been very famous for their
devotion to the Popes Chair, and now though the state of the English Church be
altered, yet the Court is adorned with such moral virtues, as may support our
charity; and the more the glory of your most clement Father, and the
resentment of your royal nature (or inclination) delights us, the more ardour
there is in us, to open the gates of Heaven to you. We commend your design,
which has directed you to take a journey into Spain, to allye your self to
the House of Austria, it elevates us to the hope of extraordinary advantage;
our open testimony is in this present affair, that you are he which has the
principal care and regard of our Prelacie: for since you desire to take in
marriage a daughter of Spain, we easily conjecture that your Progenitors
Zeal may again revive in your soul; and its not credible, that he that
loves such alliance should hate the Catholic Religion, or take delight in
oppressing the holy Seat. Therefore public intercession is made continually by
our command, that you may be put into possession of that most noble heritage,
which your Ancestors have purchased for you, to defend the authority of the
Sovereign Bishop, and to combat against the monsters of heresy. The most
sacred Kings of England came formerly from England to Rome accompanied with
Angels, to honor and do homage to the Prince of the Apostles in his Chair
Apostolical: let their actions be as so many voices of God, to exhort you to
the same, and to bring you back again into the lap of the Roman Church. Their
sighs and groans are ancessant for your salvation, and you cannot give greater
consolation to Christendom, than to put the Prince of the Apostles into
possession of your most noble Isle, holding his authority as the defense of
your Kengdomes, and as a Divine Oracle. Our great charity makes us desire,
that you and your royal Father may be enobled with the names of Deliverers and
Restauratours of the ancient paternall Religion of Britain: and the care of
our charity in this is no other, than to procure your happiness.


The Answer in short is thus couched.

Most holy Father: I received your Sanctities dispatch with grand contentment,
and with a respect beseeming the piety and benevolence thereof. I have read
the Elogies of my Royal Progenitors, who have exposed their estates and lives
for the exaltation of the holy Chair, (set before mine eyes by your Holiness
for imitation) with pleasure unexpressible, and as justly deserved by them.
Neither was their courage against the enemies of the Cross less, than the
thought and care which I have to unite all Christian Princes: nor do I esteem
it a greater honor to be descended of so great Princes, than to represent them
in the Zeal of their piety. The knowledge which I have of my most honored
Fathers mind, and the concurrence of his Catholic Majesty, to whom the
present divisions of Christian Princes is so grievous; and the foresight of
your Holiness, who judged this marriage with the Infanta of Spain necessary
for procuring of public union, and therefore designed it, are great
encouragements to me. Wherefore it is most certain, I shall never be so
extremely affectionate to any thing in the world, as to seek alliance with a
Prince that has the same sense of true Religion with my self. I have been
always very far from encouraging novelties, or being a party in any faction
against the Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Religion: but have sought all
occasions to remove such suspicions from resting on me. And for the future,
since we all believe in one Jesus Christ, I will strain all my power to have
but one religion and one faith; and I am resolved to spare nothing in the
world, but to suffer all manner of discommodities, even to the hazard of life
and estate, for the effecting hereof. It rests only, that I thank your
Holiness for your permission and accord herein; and I pray God to bless you,
for the great travail which your Holiness has sustained in his Church.


If this was Court-dissimulation, Gods name was too far used in it, and the
dissimulation has extended further than to language; the maine affairs of our
Court and Church, for many years together, have been conformable to the same
expressions. And if here was plain meaning without dissimulation, no words of
man can more fully and clearly justify Popery, and protest against the
novelties and heresies of the Reformed Churches than these do. And the Pope, it
seems, suspected no dissimulation herein, nor his Councillors, and principal
Ministers, (and yet they are not usually gulled, or blinded, or outdone in
that kind of Craft) and for proof hereof, I will instance in Father John de
Monte-Major of the Society of Jesus, and I will be very brief herein, and
confine my self only to him. This Jesuit was a subtle Statesman (^s we may
perceive by his arguments now in print) and in the Iunto at Madrid, when the
marriage of the Infanta with our Prince was upon debate, for answer to such
difficulties and objections as some other of the Iunto had offered to oppose
the marriage, he diverse times insisted upon such points as these: Since the
Prince is a man settled in his manners, and makes great account of our holy
Law, it may with sufficient probability be heped, that by the good example of
the most illustrious Infanta, and all her Attendants, both men and women, and
by the holiness and doctrine of her Confessor, he will be easily brought to
our holy faith. fol. 6. a. And therefore as we have seen that the Prince and
his father have kept their agreement made at the Treaty of peace, for the well
using of Catholics; and we are informed out of England, that this year in the
holy week within London, there have been at the Communion 4000 Catholics in
the Ambassadors house, and that they have made 40 monuments, no body speaking
one word to control them: fol. 7. a. Both the Prince and his father do
extremely desire the friendship of his Holiness, and of Spain, which Henry
the eighth little did care for: and that is the reason which moves the Prince
and his father to procure this marriage, is to establish the said friedship
with the Apostolic See, and the Crown of Spain, fol. 7. b. Another
principal thing to be observed is, that the Prince (at all other English and
French Heretics do) believe that we are saved, keeping the religion of the
Church of Rome. fol. 8. b. There are sufficient signs showing that the King of
England is well affected to our Religion, since it appears he with such care
and pains endeavors to match his son with a spouse so much Catholic, daughter
to so Catholic Parents, and he being the only Heir of his Kingdom, against
the advice of all the Heretics, and all his Councillors, and all the enemies
of this Crown, has sent him with great danger of his health and life, etc.
All which is a great sign, that he being moved with some great light from
Heaven, desires to forsake the new Religion he professes, and to return to
the old one professed by his Predecessors, for so many ages. The Prince gives
clear testimony to be well affected to our holy Law, since he believes, and
has spoken it to diverse persons, that those that follow the same are saved in
it, etc. being Grandchild to a Grandmother that dyed a Martyr. fol. 9. a.
Thus great hope may be, that the whole Kingdom shall be reduced to the
Catholic Faith. fol. 9. b. It is to be noted how earnestly this match has
been pursued and treated for, both with his Holiness and other persons,
debated in many Junto's by most learned men. fol. 10. b. There shall be kept a
public Church in London for the Catholics, a Bishop of that City, liberty
of conscience, the children shall be brought up by their mother ( the Infanta)
till they be fourteen years of age, etc.

Where such great Agents of the Hierarchy have not only delivered their
judgments so plainly, but also set forth the reasons whereupon their
judgments are grounded so clearly, I shall forbear any further to deliver
mine. These things are public enough in the Spanish tongue. But let us stay no
more upon times so long ago elapsed, let us for brevitie sake omit all
discourse concerning the wars in Bohemia, the Palatinate, Rochell, and other
countries, where our false promises of supplies and aids, purposely (as is
thought) destroyed the Protestant cause; let us now lightly pass over the
former part of these last twenty years, and chiefly fix our discourse upon
the alterations and innovations of the latter part thereof. Whilst the Queen
was very young, and the plot of our Hierarchists not fully ripe, the
Babylonish Mysteries were not fit to be revealed: and yet even in those times,
the work went on darkly and insensibly, and some use was made of the very
loosnesse and excess of those times, to help on the perfection thereof.

This violent sharp malady, of which we labor so distressedly at this present,
began to seize the vitals of this State, long before its violence appeared, and
the venom thereof, as if it were of affinity with that of the Tarantula,
whilst it was in its slow growth, caused rather fits of jollitie, than pangs of
dolor in us. That which is now murder, rapine, lamentation, was within these
twenty years masking, triumphing, revelling; so that he that writes the
story of our overthrow, must say that we drunk, and danced, and sported our
selves to death: some mortal and noxious potions may yet be delicate to the
palate, and others of medicinal and salubrious virtue may offend the taste
very much: so it is with times, some abounding in dissolute merriment, may yet
conduce to a Nations overthrow, whilst others more sad and uncouth may be
helpful toward a recoverie. It Is not just therefore in the enemies of
Parliaments, to ascribe the cause of our present miseries to the Parliament, or
to exclaim against these times for being as yet miserable: neither ought they
so much to boast of that false betraying jollitie, which we seemed heretofore
to enjoy. It Is now about ten years since a Nuntio came over from the Pope, the
business before was transacted by Sir Toby Mathewes, and some other more
privy Instruments; for we must not think that a Nuntio was sent, till his way
was before made, and entertainment agreed upon, and that agreement also (we
must needs think) had its preparations, and previous considerations: but to
limit our discourse to these last ten years, and to give a very brief
account of them, from the mouth of such as are not partial, let us in the
first place make use of that Censure and Narrative which has been lately
published in Print, and is entitled, The Popes Nuntio, etc. The Author of
that Discourse, was a Venetian, and seems a man equally ingenuous and
observing, and because he was a Papist, we may not think he did utter any
untruth to the disadvantage of his own religion; and because he was employed in
statematters at Court, we may guess that what he communicated was for the most
part of things within his own knowledge and privity; the piece also is
faithfully translated out of the Italian and French, and was valued and
preferred as a thing not fit for vulgar eyes by great Statesmen of other
Nations; and there are few of our own Nation and Religion that had any sight
into Court affairs, but they know well, much more might have been said, and is
likely yet to be discovered. However by the light of that Pamphlet, we shall be
informed, that the word Popery is of various ambiguous signification; so that
he which abjures the Romish Religion, may yet like well of a reconciliation
with Rome. And Reconciliation in the next place, is a thing that may admit of
such and such degrees and steps both of one side and the other, and such fraud
may be used in a Treaty of reconciliation, that one side may condescend to more
then is intended, and the other gain more then is pretended; and in all these
points, our Venetian, if he be rightly and thoroughly understood, will satisfy
our doubts, and clear our ambiguities; I shall desire therefore all impartial
dis-ingaged men, to review our Venetians discourse with me, and to give me
leave to descant thereupon a little, whilst I fetch my considerations no
higher nor further than the method and guidance of that Pamphlet directs me:
our Venetian tells us, that King Charles once was heard to say, that He could
at that time reconcile himself to the Church of Rome with much advantage: for
our better information therein, and that we may neither mistake the Kings
intention, nor conceal our own danger, let us make use of our Venetians
discourse in these five particulars:

1 Let us from hence learn to understand what the reconciliation was; and how
far each side should comply and submit according to the capitulation. 2 Who
were the parties to be reconciled. 3 What were the expedients and means of
effecting or speeding this reconciliation. 4 What that profit and great
advantage was, which the King promised to himself by this reconciliation. 5
What the difficulties and obstacles were which did retard this reconciliation.
1 We shall do well, first to take into our consideration the articles and
capitulation betwixt both parties, whereby it was agreed how far the Papists
should meet the Protestants, and how far the Protestants should advance
toward the Papists; the Pope was to move toward us but very slowly, in a pace
exceeding majesticall; his Holiness was pleased, not without much difficulty
to dispense with four things: First, that marriage might be permitted to
Priests: Secondly, that the oath of allegiance and supremacy, so far as it
concerned the Kings temporal power, with some mild interpretations or
alterations might be tolerated for his Majesty's security: Thirdly, that the
Communion might be administered sub utraque specie: Fourthly, that the Lyturgie
might be officiated in the English tongue. These two last articles were for the
satisfaction of the people. 'Twas the great zeal of Canterbury to capitulate
for these things, to make the entrance of Popery the more smooth at first; and
this was about the latter end of August, or the beginning of September, 1636.
during the residence of Seignior Con; and though our Venetian help us not
herein, yet this is known sufficiently, and can be averred otherwise;
nevertheless, we may probably conjecture, that what did concern the King
herein, should have been really performed, so far forth as other Catholic
Princes usually enjoy, and expect as their due; and so far as the Bishops were
to be independent both from King and Pope (which was the maine scope and
purpose of the agreement, though not mentioned at all in the articles) there
was no fear of breach on the Popes part, but so far as the inferior Clergy,
and the people were concerned, the after performance (it is to be suspected)
was to be left to the Popes discretion, the conditions being only of temporal
advantage, rather fit to induce than to confirm Popery. This seems the more
likely to be true, because of the great facility which was in our Divines to
comply with the Papists of their own accord without any allurements, or
follicitation at all; the Papists were not so backward in walking toward
Calvin, as the Protestants were hasty in running toward the Pope; for even
before any Treaty at all, or before any Nuntio sent from Rome, we had
condescended to many popish innovations, and alterations, both in doctrine and
discipline; and 'twas at our entreaty, that any Nuntio was dispatched at all.
It is not worth while to reckon up here, what novelties had been patronized,
and by whom, how far Sparrow had paved the way for auricular confession, Watts
for penance, Heylin for altar-worship, Mountague for Saint-worship, Laud for
the Mass, and many others; it is not worth while to recite, how far the
sanctity of the Sabbath was depraved, and all strictness of life under the
scandal of Puritanisme disparaged, or how far Arminianisme, Socinianisme,
Atheism it self was countenanced, the easier to debosh the Clergy, and
people, and to prepare them for alterations of any kind, it having been
observed; that to some men irreligion it self seemed less offensive than the
Popish Religion: our Venetians own words are; The Universities, Bishops and
Divines of this Realm, do daily embrace Catholic opinions, though they
profess it not with open mouth, for fear of the Puritanes: for example, they
hold that the Church of Rome is a true Church; that the Pope is superior to
all Bishops; that to him it appertains to call general Councels; that it is
lawful to pray for the souls departeds; that Altars ought to be erected; in
sum, they believe all that is taught by the Church, but not by the Court of
Rome. In another place he reports the King to be much a favourer of Confession,
and says, that by his countenance, Catholics did increase daily.

At the Council of Trent all matters concerning the Court of Rome, which are
of themselves but disputable, were determined and enjoined as points of faith
to be believed upon strict pain of damnation; but matters of faith indeed,
concerning the Church of Rome, were left disputable, and no Anathema annexed to
them. Now, the Court of England having contrary interests in this respect, was
not so far Popish, and therefore Canterbury himself would ever profess
against these Tridentine Papists, whom only he hated as Papists properly so
called. Nevertheless, we must not conceive, that the English Laytie had been
in a condition any whit better or gentler, because the King and the Clergy
here were so stiff against the Court of Rome; for what the King and our great
Primate did deny to the Pope, it was intended to be reserved in the same rigor
to themselves. The Papist properly so called in Canterburies sense so much to
be abominated, was he which maintained a supremacy of the Pope here in England
altogether incompatible with the oath of Allegiance, and not agreeing with the
Archbishops Metropoliticall power. Without any Treaty, without any difficulty
at all, all Popery which was not Popery properly so called; that is, all Popety
so far as the people and inferior Clergy were interessed in it, so it did not
savor of the Court of Rome; nay, let it savor of the Court of Rome, so it did
not derogate any thing from the King in temporalibus, or the Archbishops
independecy in spiritualibus; so far it was acceptable to the Prelates, and
they would be assisting to recommend, or enforce it on all others. This was the
sum of our reconciliation with Rome.

2 Secondly, I come now to the two parties which were to be reconciled; and
they were the Protestants and Papists, divided hitherto by the Puritanes: our
Venetian resolves not only who are, but also what are Protestants and
Puritanes both; and as for the Papists, the third great faction, they need no
description at all: if we desire to know who are Protestants, our Venetian tells
us, They consist of the King, the Nobles Titular, that is, the Court Lords, and
Gentlemen, or such of the Peerage and Gentry, as are enobled and raised to more
than ordinary favors, and honors, besides almost all the Prelates, and both
the Universities: If we desire to know what it is that denominates them
Protestants, it is intimated in this that they hate Puritanes more than they hate
Papists, that they easily combine with Papists to extirpate Puritanes, that
they are such as have not so engaged themselves to the Reformed Religion, but
that they have since set themselves to reduce themselves again to the old
practice of their forefathers: that they are only very opinative in excluding
the Popes supremacy, and by this means have occasioned the Catholics, which
frequented Protestant Churches for 12 years after the Reformation to sequester
themselves. If we desire to know who are Puritanes, He tells us, they consist of
some Bishops, all the Gentry and Communalty, and therefore are the most potent
of all the three parties: If we desire to know what Puritanes are, and what is
intended in that denomination; he tells us, They are such as received the
discipline of the French and Netherlanders, and hold not the English
Reformation to be so perfect, as that which Calvin instituted at Geneva: That
they hate Catholic more than they hate Protestants, that they would be casily
quitted were it not for some great Patrons of theirs at Court, who for private
ends take them into Protection.

If this be a true account given (as it seems to me beyond all doubt) the
greatest part of the Gentry and Communalty of England, under the odious term
of Puritanes is to be oppressed, and destroyed merely because they honor
Calvin, and are averse from the Pope. The name of Protestant also is to be
appropriated to the King, the Nobility, the Prelates, and Universities,
merely because they hate the Gentry and Commonalty, or the Generality thereof
more then they hate Papists: and lastly the Papist and the Protestant that they
may be more fully incorporated, both of them shall be gratified, and their
Union solemnized, as it were with the ruin of the third and most Potent party
of the Kingdom.

This was that great and godly work which was so magnified by Doctor Heylin
and and other Court Chaplains of late; this was that rare bloody machination
which his Grace of Canterbury and the other Grandees of our Church recommended
to us, as the pious inclination of the times, and as a more beautiful
restoration of the Gospel, then that which Luther and Calvin labored to advance.
Rome had not such pregnant hopes of regaining England fifty years ago: for
then (as a great Romanist complained) opposition was made, not only by a
puritan-City, and a puritan-Parliament, but a puritan-Queene also. It should
seem the City of London was puritanicall from the beginning, and so was the
Parliament; in which two is comprised all that is noble and worthy in the
kingdom of England: but who would imagine that so inconsiderable a party as
the Papists and semi-Papists were in Queen Elizabeth's days, should dare to
asperse, not only the whole kingdom, but even the Queen her self? and who
can wonder, if in these times, London and the Parliament have new brands of
disgrace, worse then that of Puritan fixed upon them, (The King himself now
appearing against them) if they could not go unbranded when that unparalleled
Lady professed with them? yet we cannot ascribe this so much to the policy of
the Clergy, as the blockishnesse of the Laity, that the Hierarchy prevails so
far: for if whole Cities, whole Parliaments, whole Nations, are to be conquered
with the mere calumnious words of Puritan, Roundhead, Anabaptist. etc. Who is
able to stand before them? can it be imagined that the same faction should
forbear to call us Roundheads which upbraided Q. Elizabeth as a Puritan,
especially, when by their coming upon the King they have gotten that advantage
now? Which then they had no hopes to get, nor can it be imagined that that
party will fall from its preferment and hopes, rather then to satisfy so
sottish a generation, it will take the pains to invent one reviling term of
scurrility? surely the world for these many ages has had better experience both
of the malice and subtilty of Rome.

3 Thirdly, the means used for the effecting of this reconciliation, and for
the sure transacting and close carrying of it on, are now to be considered. The
King it should seem thought that without all scanda^l he might receive an
Ambassador from the Pope, as well as from other Catholic Princes, and upon
the proposition of the same by Panzani himself to the Queen, and to some
others of power about the King by Panzani's friend; the thing seemed very
reasonable, so that the Nuntio to be sent over were no Priest: howsoever for
more privacies sake, it was ordered, that the Nuntio should address himself to
the Queen, and not to the King immediately; and that the pretended business of
his address should be to mediate a reconciliation betwixt the Regulars and
Seculars in England. This would better blind the jealous Puritanes, and make
the true intent of the negotiation the more involved: and the case of Dr. Smith
the Bishop of Chalcedon expelled by the persecution of the Jesuits, for
claiming jurisdiction as Universal ordinary in England, served well at this
time for a specious color. Reason of state none could be alleged for any
intercourse between England and Rome, therefore the Church affairs must be the
subject of our Embassy, the Jesuits and the Seculars were imbroyled in some
contestation, and it was for the benefit of Rome to appease the heat of it.
Without all doubt the Romish Council De propaganda side would not entertain
agents from us to settle union between Calvinists and Lutherans, or between
Remonstrants and Contra-Remonstrants: but we that have no such council nor no
such design, instead of nourishing enmity amongst our adversaries, allay it,
and in stead of allaying enmity amongst friends, nourish it. Nothing can more
clearly show, that the Court of England stands not disaffected to the
prosperity of Rome, then this endeavor of making atonement betwixt the opposite
Champions of that religion, and yet this was but the shell of the design, the
kernel had more mischief in it: for we may understand by our Venetian, that
Panzani out of his great circumspection and finenesse, having matured the
business of general reconciliation, so well for the further covering of his
true design, he did apply himself after, to his pretended negotiation. And
therefore upon the 22 of November 1635, almost a year after his arrival here
procured some accord betwixt the Seculars and Regulars, though the Jesuits
would not come in. The truth is, the Jesuits were then the principal body of
the Regulars, governing them (as they do still also) the best families of
England, nay the very Court it self, and so they not submitting to the accord,
'twas but nugatory, and a mere umbrage to all the world, except the
phlegmaticall dull English. Nay it is sufficiently proved by our Venetian, that
all pacification betwixt the Jesuits and Regulars is impossible, whereupon if
Con comply with the Jesuits, it is the same thing as if he did abandon the
Seculars, and it is to be doubted that the business of Religion will be rather
hindered than promoted thereby. And what greaterinstance need we of the
Jesuits predominance in Eng. than this, that notwithstanding the distaste of
Canterb. and his dear, confident Chichester, they can excite the Popes
ordinary here, nay, and without all regard to the College of Sorbona, and to
the Popes own interest, they dare inveigh not only against the person of some,
but against the function of all Bishops? Wherefore the accommodation betwixt
Seculars and Regulars, being so useles to Protestants, and so hopeles to
Papists; we must not doubt but some design of more consequence was obscured
under that pretext, for when we hear that the Pope and Cardinal Barbarini
dispatched so many persons, of such quality hither, and that the King stood
bare at their audience, and manifested so much grace in their reception, and
that the Q^. and all the great Lords and Ladies, with extraordinary presents,
and frequent visits, both given and taken, studied to do such honor to them,
the matter in hand cannot seem ordinary. It Is true, the Archbishop would not
personally treat with Panzani; Windebank his creature was to intervene therein,
neither could Panzani treat with the Archbishop, but by Franscis a Sanct Clara
his friend on the other side, but this was merely for secrecies sake; for we
know well what factions soever were in our Court, Panzani was not unacceptable
to any, by the means of Windebank he obtained grace with Canterburies party
and by the means of Cottington he held correspondency with that party which
was adverse. Panzani though not addicted to the Regulars, yet wanted no
acceptance amongst the Cottingtonians, and Con though in grace with the
Jesuits, yet lost no esteem with the Canterburians. All sides conspire to undo
Puritanes, as if our Savior were again to be crucified; Herod in this business
can lay aside all emulations and variance with Pilate, and Pilate can as
peaceably shake hands with Herod. It may be justly surmised also, that when
there was so amicable and general a concurrence betwixt Canterbury, Chichester
and the other 8. Bishops, (amongst whom we may boldly nominate Gloucester) as
also Portland, Cotting. Windebank and so many other Lay Grandees cooperating in
this zealous work of Reconciliation, the order of the Jesuits was not in truth
so odious to the Canterburians as was pretented openly at other times.

4 We are now to consider the advantage, which was the maine motive or
allurement to invite the King to this Reconciliation. That cup of fornication
which the Circe of Rome, (as the Scripture describes it) mingles and prepares
for the Ks. of the earth, must needs be very delicious to the sense, as well as
it is pernicious to the understanding; it must needs please, as well as
intoxicate, or else why should the great Potentates of the world be more apt to
yield to the infatuation of it than common persons? That it does inebriate or
debosh the understanding, must be consented to by all that consent to the truth
of Scripture, and that there is a purpose of mischief in that strumpet, whose
intoxications are so strong to captivate, and delude, cannot be doubted; the
maine knot and difficulty is, what the ingredients are, which render the
Composition so ravishing and sweet to the palate of Princes. Our Venetian
conceives, That the allurement or advantage is something temporal, and not
religious, for in his censure great Princes and Politicians in their souls
make no account of Religion, though in show they always endeavor to appear
extremely zealous, and severely inflict exemplary punishments upon all such as
temerate the purity of it; some men, he admits, may embrace Religion in
sincerity, as it leads to true happiness, but it is hard for him to imagine
that mighty Monarchs, and their nearest privados should honor it at all, but
for its secular commodities as it inclines the people to subjection, and
preserves States from commotion. Neither must we censure this censure, as
utterly causles and injurious, for Paganism, Mahome anism, Judaism, Papism,
Socinianisme, divide all the world amongst them, except one final
inconsiderable remainder, and divide that remainder into 10 parts, and scarce
one of those 10 is endued with that true power and tincture of Religion, which
Scripture names regeneration; and if we yet make another subdivision, the
mighty, the politic, the honorable of this world will scarce make up the 10 of
that tenth part. The maine bulk of mankind, either makes no profession at all
to regard Religion, or else professes a regard merely for the te^porall
conveniences which attend religion, or else falsely and hypocritically, rest in
the mere shadow or ex ernal formalities of it. Our K. has been always bred up
in the Prot* relig* and with deep vows has expressed often his sincere adherence
to it, though our Venetian therefore being a Papist censured according to the
principles of a Papist; for my part I shall nevertheles have none but
charitable thoughts of our Kings hearty esteem of Religion in general, and of
the Protestant religion in particular. It Is not credible to me, that all
religions should be indifferent, or of the like efficacy in the esteem of our
King, or that the Romish religion should seem spiritually more efficacious to
him, than Protestantisme, some advantages (I conceive) of a secular, political
nature might have the force to dispose his heart to a reconciliation with Rome,
but I am most confident, that no spiritual advantage was aimed at therein. For
if the advantage had been celestial, and such as did appertain immediately to
the soul, then all times had bin alike opportune for reconciliation with the
Church of Rome; nay the first opportunity was most to be embraced; but in this
speech or the Kings cited by our Venetian, a fitnes of season seems to be
impli'd for the inviting to a present reconciliatio^. There is no doubt then
remaining, nor nothing fit for our inquiry but what temporal advantage it was,
which the K. expected and promised to himself, and what kind of reconciliation
it was which he thought fit to conclude with Rome. As for the reconciliation that
has been already spoken to, and as it is uncertain what the K. intended in his
own breast, and how far he resolved to comply with the Pope; so it is most
certain, that the Bish. and those Counselors of his, which were most intimate
with him, and most active in the negotiation with Panzani, etc. intended a
total alreration of religion, and that he was grossly abused and deceived by
them, if he himself intended otherwise. This has bin made sufficiently
manifest; I am now to make it as manifest, if I can, that even in those
temporal advantages also, whereby the King was solicited, and incited to descend
to any agreement at all with the Pope in any degree whatsoever, he was as
grossly abused and deceived also. The sacerdotall Empire of Rome, though it be
founded upon nothing else but mere delusions and incantations (as the holy S.
of God himself perpetually inculcates to us) yet to flesh and blood those
delusions and incantatio^s are so powe^ful, that we may truly say it is a
Throne very cunningly erected, and as firmly under-propped. The Romish Potion
at first had only spiritual ingredients in it, the Bishops were compelled to
act sanctity even almost to the life, before Princes would subject themselves,
and at that time nothing but heaven was the allurement to d^spose Mon^rhs to
such subjectio^. Nevertheles though we may wonder that innocent, well affected
Ks. and Emperors should be so blinded with abundance of zeal, as to think that
they could not sufficiently glorify God with their royalty, unles they disrobed
themselves of some part of it, to communicate the same to Priests, who must
needs grow the more temporal, and not the more spiritual thereby; yet that error
was more excusable then ours is in these latter times. Prin. now adays (except
some very few that are exceeding weak in their intellectuals) do not suffer
themselves to be dementated and made drunk with any conceits of the Popes
holiness, if the Pope did not further sweeten his cup with promises of grandour
and safety, and other temporal additions, 'twould scarce relish in these
depraved, yet quick-sighted times.

Can any man imagine that Hen. 4, in France did totally, or King James in Eng.
partially comply with Rome for conscience sake? no, it is impossible that such
fine spirits and firm intellects, should be so far transformed by any Circean
compound drink whatsoever; doubtless that which drew them in, to carouse was
something proper, and peculiarly qualified for their rellishes, and in
probability it was respect of safety and security, rather than addition of
power and supremacy. That power which Princs first parted with to the Pope, for
religious reasons, enabled him to frame a great party of Clergymen, and
Regular Orders, and to himself all that were eminent for learning, policy, and
reputed piety; and being thus enabled, such Princes as were not to be beguild
by his pretenses, he after oppressed by treachery. Wherefore now some Princes
stoop to him for fear of damage, ut non noceat; others for hope of benefit ut
prosit, and though his Empire be now in a great declination, and the world
begins both to fortify themselves against his powder, poison and poynards on
the one side; and to discover the falsity of his promises on the other side;
yet still his industry never fails him. Howsoever those Princes which submit
to the Pope for fear, are more worthy of blame, than those which submit for
gain; for scarce ever did God leave any just Prince to the cruelty of the
Popes Emissaries, nor scarce ever was it known, that they came to timely ends,
which succumbed to the Pope out of fear, as Hen. the 4 did, and as King James
may be suspected to have done. But it is advantage that is the Popes maine bayte,
especially where Princes value Religion for the general profit which redounds
from it, to humane society, than for any other excellence discerned in it; as
our Venetian observes. And yet the misery and mischief rests not here, for as
our great Pote^tates are not religious enough to addict themselves to divine
worship, without respect of secular ends, so neither are they wise enough to
pierce into the reality and truth of those ends. To serve the Pope does not so
really adva^ce the Prerogative of Princes, as to remain under Gods allegiance,
yet the Pope gains that obedience by empty promises, which God cannot receive
by full assurances.

Amongst other Princes; it seems (at least propable out of this discourse of
our Venetian) King Charles has inclined his ear in some part, to the delusory
bewitching allurements of Rome in this point of temporal advantage, for though
Popery under the gross notion of Popery, (I believe) was never approved of by
our King, yet under the masque of qualifying, and dulcifying distinctions, it
is to be feared it found some acceptance, as being a profession more disposing
Subjects to secu^ity, and blind obedience, then Prostestantisme.

This is the Popes sole fortress, upon this impregnable rock shis throne
planted, it is not so much his pretended predecessor Peter's confession, as
this delusion that he builds upon, so that now the gates of Hell are not
formidable to him. So long as Princes covet to be absolute, and so long as
Popery is believed to favor absolute dominion, so long the Sea of Rome thinks
it self secure, against all mines and barteries whatsoever. Nevertheless it is
the dull sollie of Princes to expect temporal advantages from Rome, or to
suppose the Reformed Religion is more adverse to Monarchy, then the Popish. Our
Venetian tells us that the intentions both of the Court of Rome, and the Court
of England, are contrary, and that in Secular things especially, for (says he)
it is not so much for the extirpation of other heresies, as for the
establishing his own Supremacy, that the Pope strives in pursuance of his old
pretenses, and whereas on the contrary, the Court of England aims not at any
alteration in faith, so much as the toleration of the oath of Supremacy, this
the Pope knows to be contrary to his Maxims, and inconsistent with his
temporal grandour, and therefore no accord can be possible betwixt them upon
these terms: wherefore our great negotiators which were to treat with Panzani,
Con, and Rosetti, what did they else, but abuse the King, proposing to him such
temporal advantages, as they well knew were uncompassable? and contracting
with another party who might gain much, but was certain to lose nothing. But
some will say, are not the Princes of Spain, France, Germany, etc. more
unlimited in their power over their subjects then the Princes of England,
Denmark, Holland, etc. And is not this a good demonstration that the Catholic
religion favors royalty more then the Protestants? I answer no; for this
proves that subjects are more miserable, but not that Princes are more absolute
amongst the Papists, for as much as where the Pope prevails, there is a
Codominion and rivalty in rule, and this Protestant Princes are freed from.

Neither is this Co-dominion so light a thing as some men think, for the Popes
yoke is a hard yoke, and the Popes burden is a heavy burden, he is Antichrist
in this, as in all other things, that is, contrary to Christ.

A late Venetian Ambassador being in discourse here at his own table, about
entertaining of the Popes Nuntios, expostulated openly in this manner; What
wonder is this that the King being freed from Rome, should be so inclineable to
subject his neck to the yoke again? Could we at Venice once fully acquit our
selves of this bondage, we should be sufficiently careful and resolved to keep
our selves for ever free. And this speech was the more remarkable, in regard
that the Venetians better know what the Popes claims are in spiritualibus, and
in ordine ad spiritualia, then our English do; and yet though of all
Catholics they are the wisest, and have best rampired themselves against the
excess of the Popes jurisdiction; yet we see there is still some thing
remaining in the spiritual yoke, that grievs their necks and draws some
regret from them, the secret of all is but this, (for to the Great Lords of the
earth, it remains still a secret and unfathomable, though to true Protestents
it be a plain ordinary naked truth) Popery as it does more countenance and
uphold cruel tyranny in Princes, so it does also more foment dissension, and
rebellion in subjects then the reformed Religion.

And there is no contradiction at all in this (none but half witted men will
think so) for whilst Princes will allow the Pope more then is his due, he will
assist in any oppression whatsoever, but let any thing be denied to him, and
then he present-looseneth the bonds of allegiance, making Subjects as unjust
scourges to their Lords, as he had made the Lords before to their Subjects,
what countries do not abound with stories of this kind? it would be mere
loss of time to set forth what seas of blood have been shed in Europe, by
unnatural civil broils, raised betwixt Subjects and their Lords in the Popes
quarrels merely, I shall desire all true English men to read Mr. Prinnecs
late treatises, concerning this subject, and to compare them with histories of
other countries. The Popes promises to Kings, are like the tempters to our
Savior, all these royalties and glories will I bestow upon you, but with this
proviso, that you then prostrate your selves to serve me, but what is that
service which he requires? that they may endure a baser vassallage under him
then their Subjects do under them.

On the contrary the Protestant Religion seasons us, with such unstained
loyalty, that Princes do presume thereupon, and fear the less to grieve, and
provoke us, as by Contzens the Jesuits advertisements, and the practice of
diverse Princes in Europe of late is testified too clearly, well may we wonder
then at the frontlesse impudence of such Papists as upbraide Protestants with
disobedience to Magistracy, especially when they charge it as a sin resulting,
and issuing out of the Protestant principles, themselves. What does Barclay
imagine of his readers stupidity, when in his book contra Monarchomachos, he
inveighes against his country man Buchanan, as injurious to Royalty, and
imputes this, as an effect, or product of the Protestant Religion?

His Relgion was ever infamous for excommunicating, murdering, deposing
Princes, and imbruing nations in unnatuall, treasonable, execrable wars,
whereas the Protestant Religion equally abhorres both cruelty in princes, and
disloyalty in Subjects, aiming at nothing but that Kingly prerogative and
popular liberty, may be even balanced; and yet this foul railer, here inverts
nature, calling white black, and black white.

The King of England has some Subjects wherein none has an interest, but
himself, and he has other Subjects wherein the Pope has an interest as well
as himself, the first are English, the second are Irish, in whether Nations
loyalty he may rather confide I cannot tell, (for at this present he bends
himself with more violence against the Englsh, then Irish) but the end will
reveal to the confusion of his malignant seducers, that there was nothing but
fidelity in English Protestants, nor nothing but perfidie in Irish Papists, I
shall use no other instances: If there be any curse impendent over the Nation,
both King and People, it is this, that this truth is not yet sufficiently
credited and acknowledged.

But to our present negotiation again, it seemed to our Venetian, that the King
aimed at such a dispensation from the Pope, as that his Catholic Subiests
might resort to our Protestant Churches, and take the oath of Supremacy, and
fidelity, and that the Popes jurisdiction here should be declared, to be but of
humane right, etc. but what needed the King to seek these things from the Pope?
or what hope was there to obtain them at all? and if they were to be obtained,
but not without the loss of other things, ten times more precious, and
profitable to the King, what advantage was in them?

We cannot apprehend that the King should expect any good from Rome of himself,
some strong enchanting solicitation there must be, to induce him, and that by
such, as aimed not at his, but their own interests, and this our Venetian lays
open and makes clear enough for he tells us that the Court of Rome treated
according to its own maxim, and in pursuance of its old pretenses. The Popes
end was temporal grandour, and what co^ld all the Popes vassalls, here more
expect then his advancement? but the Pope and his party, were but Treaters of
one side, the question is, who were Treaters on the other side, and what it
was, which they were to treat for. This question is without question, for the
Merchants of our side, were our Pre^ates, some whereof being single, were to be
made Cardinals, and others were to receive pensions from Rome, as our Venetian
tells us. The Protestant Religion does not so much affect the outward opulence,
pomp, and splendor, of the Church, (that is of Clergy men) as the Popish does,
and therefore the main body of the Clergy, and the Universities have been long
conspiring to alter Religion, at least in that point, and rather then fail in
that, they care not how they debosh the Church inducing an hotohpodge (as Mr.
Cheynell has well observed of Arminianisme, Popery, Socinianisne, any thing
rather then a plain Gospel. If Canterbury may not be allowed to be Alterius
Orbis Papa, as some of his predecessors were called, and as able to give check
to the Crown of England, and if Scholars generally may not insult and lord it
in Church and state, as the use was amongst our ignorant forefathers, they will
make a league with Rome, nay with hell it self, rather then endure it. The
Religion of Scotland is a nasty invention, the discipline of Geneva is a
profaine confusion, the City of London is a nest of Anabaptists, the Parliament
a crowd of croundheads: All Protestants that are not for beautified Altars,
gilt Organs, clinquant copes, are worse Christians then the Romish Catholics:
how soever the true Protestant desires not to see the Clergy despicable, or the
house of God to be without bread, or order confounded in the Church, these are
scandals invented to make all men odious that are not addicted to the Popish
gaity and tyranny of Priests. That Reformation which the Parliament aims at
will avoid all unjustice and extremes, and if the Clergy stand not in their
own light, Religion will flourish and the Church prosper better then they have
done hitherto: for the Vine which is the most natural resemblance of the
Church that can be, proves equally unfertile by luxuriance, when her branches
for want of pruning spread abroad too wildly, as it does by indurance when she
bleeds two prodigally under the dressers knife, And this cannot be unknown to
the Parliament.

5 We come now to view the true obstickles and impe^chments of this
Reconciliation, one hindrance was Sr. Toby Mathewes his ambition, who thinking
his employment lessned, and his person cheapened by the coming over of feig.
Panzani, and not finding such compliance from Panzani, as he expected, openly
expressed himself an adversary to his undertakings. the great stomach also of
the Jesuits, who before had the sway at Court; did not well brook a lay Legate
here in England, and if the reconciliation thrived, they did perhaps fear that
the English Nation might rather incline to favor the seculars then themselves.
Then the Pope doubtless (with reverence be it spoken to his infallibility) was
a little too majesticall at first in his moving toward us, he saw us so
precipitate in our pace toward him that he thought he himself might safely
stand upon rigorous punctilio's. The King required from the Pope only such
natural allegiance of his subjects as other Catholic Princes use to have
paid them, without futher distinguishing, and yet his holiness did conceive it
was too much to tolarate this oath for the assurance of that. His holiness
thought it rather fit that the very words formerly conceived and enacted by the
states of the whole kingdom, should be presently expunged or altered: and
though the King was contented to qualify and correct the letter of the law, by
a milder declaration, and interpretation, yet even that was not held
satisfaction enough.

In the next place also our Prelates were contented to allow the Pope a
priority above all Bishops, but a superiority seemed more then due, especially
in England the Arch Bishop was resolved to be the supreme Ordinary himself, and
yet his holiness did not think it agreeable to his Vice-Godship to admit of
that honor as due to the Archbishop. The dispute was not whether the
Archbishop should execute that office in his own name and right, or by
allowance and deputation from the Pope, nor was there any clause of salvo jure
to either of them, as yet thought on. these were tender points not to be
insisted on too roughly, at such a time as this, when bothsides were so far
resolved of a reconciliation before hand. There must be a more mind and easy
way of composing things then so: for as the Pope had rather we should remain
Protestants, and so desperate of salvation, then that his supremacy should be
too far impeached; so Canterbury had rather we should not turn Papists then
that his Primacie should be too far disabled. The bargain therefore at first
unqualified was thus. The Pope demanded to have a Legate in England that should
be a Bishop, and not favor the oath of Allegiance, on the other side the King
here would have the oath of allegiance favored, and the Bishops thought it
needless, for the Pope to have any other agents, or deputies here besides
themselves. This difference could hardly be composed all the time of Seig.
Panzani, but at last the Bishops durst not wholly neglect the Kings interest,
and so the oath of allegiance was included in the bargain, and the King would
not oppose the Bishops interest, and so a lay Legate was agreed upon, and it
was for the Popes honor that a Legate should be for the saving of his
authority, and therefore because the Pope could not withstand both King, and
Bishops, such a Legate was agreed upon as should favor the oath, yet be no
Bishop. It was pressed home to the Pope, that the Archbishop and his party,
were passionate seekers of this Reconciliation. and in order, and preparation
thereunto, had already brought in many Rites, Ceremonies, and Doctrines, nearly
approaching the Church of Rome, and that if the work were not speeded during his
life time, greater difficulties and re-incounters were likely to interpose
after his death, and yet for a good space the Pope thought the conditions too
unequal. So little weight and proportion did the souls of millions hold, in
comparison of one temporal flower, of the popes garland, and therefore
Panzanies skill, and industry, for a whole year could scarce master these
animosities, and facilitate the business for his next successors:
nevertheless, the Pope at last, grew more a Courtier, and stooped a little to
a smoothy co^pliance by his more crafty ministers, Con, and Rosetti and now the
plot of the agreement is perfected, and there wants nothing, but the putting of
it into execution. Without a effected but by their utter subversion, the wished
reconciliation could not yet be consummated, and the Puritanes being the
greater part of the Kingdom by far, this task must needs be very
cumbersome, Confession (as our Venetian heard say) was a thing held fit to be
urged upon us by violence, but fear of commotion hindered it, and we may very
probably conjecture that some other grosser points of Popery had been obtruded
upon us also by the higher powers, but that the cursed indisposition of the
Puritanes was such, that there was great hazard in the attempt Howsoever our
stout Prelates were not out of all hope of carrying their design, either by
fraud or force, or a mixture of both, and therefore seeing things so equally
poized in England Scotland and Ireland, they were resolved that no mere
hazard should wholly deter them from adventuring the utmost. Scotland appeared
wholly almost puritanicall, but to counterpoise that, Ireland appeared as
generally Popish, and for England, though the major part there was
puritanicall, yet the more potent in place and authority* and the more
exquisite in subtilti^, or rather treachery was Popish or Protestant, that is
inclined to combine with Papists, and therefore in all this there was little
odds, to disanimate them, neither was their any fear of foreign forces: for
under the deceitful pretense of our head-ship and association, the Protestants
in Germany and France were already much weakened and betrayed, and made jealous
of adhering to us, they being brought to such a condition that they could not
help themselves at home, much less annoy enemies abroad. Also the King of
Denmark and Prince of Aurange, though Protestants, yet were Politicians, and
therefore the interest of Royalty, would questionles prevail more with them,
then the interest of Religion. It would please them better to see the
Prerogative gained in England, to the damage of Religion, then religion to
prosper, by the diminution of Prerogative. It only remains then that in
England they plotted Reconciliation be first put in execution, and advanced by
as slow insensible degrees, as may be, and great art must be used, when
Churches, Altars, etc. beg in to be decored; be made to believe, not that
popery is to be induced, but that a fair reconciliation between both Churches
is to be procured; and not that Protestantisme is to be at all in any
considerable matter changed, but that Puritanisme be exterminated. Also when
not only fair allurements, but the two great Carnificines of the Land, The
Star Chamber and High Commission have by rigor prevailed as far as may be; and
when by all other means the English are inured, and familiarized to some
popish rites under the fair pretense of conforming to Reverend Antiquity. Then
the Scots (who are not so apt to be inamoured with the splendour and pomp of
Churchmen as we are) must be by all means assailed, and urged to union and
conformity with the Church of England.

And because it is expected that the Scots should be more jealous of the least
encroachments of Popery, and more adventurous to secure themselves in such
jealousy, and more unanimous in their adventure; therefore their country is
to be made the first Scene of the war. And since it would be too gross to
impeach the whole Nation of Puritanisme, therefore their crime must be
rebellion; and the better to imbarque the English in the quarrel, that in the
Scots they might destroy themselves, some new disguise must be put upon the
war; it must be divulged, that in stead of settling Bishops in their Sees, and
bringing in the English Lyturgie, the King has need to be established in his
Throne, and Scotland to be preserved from Anarchie. All the dispute is; Whether
Subjects may make resistance by force of Arms against a just, pious, clement
Prince, the name of Bellum Episcopale is dis-owned: the Title of the Lords
anointed will better support the envy of these broils; and it is suggested
to the English, that both the Laws and Natives of Scotland are more
Antimonarchicall then those of England.

All these trains, notwithstanding the Puritan faction in England (that is,
all cordial Protestants) abominated the grounds of that war, and in
conclusion, the popish faction, and the Bishops, Nobility, Universities and
Clergy, which only challenge the name of Protestants, were not able to put
the King into such a condition of strength, but that he was driven to give the
Scots their demanded satisfaction. Hereupon likewise a resolution is taken to
summon a Parliament in England, as is pretended for the disbanding of the two
Armies, and composing these National breaches; but some think, for the
turning one or both these Armies another way, and raising farther divisions in
the bowels of England; but God so overruled the matter, that the Scots did
peaceably retire, and our soldiers disband without attempting any thing
against the Parliament.

And now to recover life again in this so foiled an enterprise, nothing will
serve, but that the Irish, (who were placed as in Ambuscado for the purpose)
must rise all in Arms, and most perfidiously execute a secret bloody massacre
upon all the British Protestants in that Kingdom. Doubtless (if ever Rome
showed her excellent skill) 'twas in that silent deep conspiracy, if ever she
showed her fiery zeal, 'twas in that horrid infernal Tragedy: If ever she
discovered her self to the Christian world in her lively colors of whore,
witch, murtheresse, 'twas in this unparalled villainy. By this means the
Popish affairs are in better state than ever; for Scotland stands gazing on,
as if she were lost, in admiration, and Ireland is become not only entire for
the business for its own strength, but is backed also with some supply out of
Flaunders, and other Countries; and even the Kings party in England (though
they hold not open intelligence with them) yet act all the parts of perfect
friends and allies to them.

The Irish Rebels are secured by the diversion of our Cavaliers here, and our
Cavaliers here are secured by the diversion made there by the Rebels; both
sides profess and avow the same cause, and draw their swords against the same
Parliament Roundheads; and were it not that our shipping did prevent their
meetings, doubtless our Cavaliers would procure some forces from Ireland, and
the Irish would be supplied with other necessaries out of England; and yet it is
advantage to the popish abettors here, to disclaim the advantage of Communion
with their popish abettors there.

That very Army also (which to the great exhausting of the good party in
England levied to oppugn the Rebels) is solicited to join against those, by
whom it is levied; and supplies sent for Ireland by the Parliament of England
are intercepted by the Kings forces, and thus the Parliament (more unfortunate
than the Pelican) makes wounds in her own breast, to draw out blood, not for
her friends, but for her enemies advantage. In this strange confluence of
unexpected mischiefs, whilst the Parliament finds her self so relinquished by
her friends, so surrounded with enemies of contrary factions and pretenses, and
so undermined with daily new treasons, She makes her mos^ humble address to
the King to settle the Posse or Militia of this Kingdom, in faithful well
reputed hands; the King at first, in great darkness, neither grants, nor
seems to deny the request, he professes no dislike to the persons nominated,
but alleges, that by this means, the Commissioners should neither be
authorized solely by his Commission, nor should be discharged at his mere
pleasure. The Scots had obtained this due righteous satisfaction before, and
doubtless had taken it as an utter defiance, or invasion, had they not
obtained it; but England is denied so much right (even after its example, and
the good consequence thereof in Scotland) yet remains too insensible of their
own danger in this fatal sad denial. Nevertheless, the contrary faction
takes this as the certain trump of war; and leaving us to our deep
melancholy, bestirs it self towin the City of London, and all military
persons to the King; and though the City will not prove unfirme to the
Parliament, yet the Cavaliers all flock to the Court (and there caressed by
the Queen) vow themselves to any design whatsoever.

Something also is plotted both against the City and Parliament, but proving
uneffectuall, because both are so safe against the Popish party and the
Cavaliers: therefore it is pretended, that they are unsafe to the King and his
Children, and it is spread abroad, that the King is in danger of being surprised
by those, who should have been surprised by his, if God had not otherwise
provided.

The King is counseled in the next place therefore to retire to some remote
Port Town of strength, commodious for receipt of Forces both foreign and
domestical; and his eye is upon Hull, where a great Magazine of Arms is, but
in that he is fore-stalled by the Parliament. This gives the King occasion to
levy men at York, for the safeguard of his person, whilst all intentions of an
Army were solemnly abjured by himself; and the same seconded by the Lords
subscriptions: and this was a good help to increase his Guard into the
proportion of an Army, and to give good hope that he might not only remain
safe in York, but also march forth to storm Hull. But soft, I am not to pass
the story of that march, that was the Rubicon of this war, and it is beyond my
purpose to trace the business any further; what has since followed on both
sides, was enforced by these beginnings.

I must now leave off my discovery, Venit Hespe^us; the day it self would
fail me, if I should prosecute these things too far. He which takes all these
premises into just consideration, can want nothing else to convince and
satisfy, who were the chief Incendiaries of this war, and who were the
persons that did commence and continue all our broils. That the people of
these our Kingdoms have of late years, since Queen Elizabeth's death, so
prodigiously degenerated, as of honorable to become generally dishonorable,
of loyal to become universally disloyal, of natural to become totally
unnatural, is monstrous to believe. But that King James and King Charles have
varied from the government of Queen Elizabeth, and to hold a good
understanding with Rome, have not been so fixedly devoted to the true interests
of the reformed Religion, and their subjects prosperity, as that blessed Lady
was, is a truth that Heaven and earth will give testimony to. That ambitious
Prelates have been our prime Firebrarnds is manifest also; for without their
strong enchantments, our Kings would not have been so far alienated from us,
and without that alienation, the Papists could not have so far trampled upon
us. To compass to themselves an Empire above Princes, 'tas been ever the
charm of Priests to make promises and assurances, that they will elevate
Princes as far above their Subjects, by an addition of royalty, and
enlargement of prerogative. In this, all Priests conspire, that prefer earth
before Heaven, be they Protestant or Popish, be they English or Romish, the
difference is only this: the English Prelate affects Popery for Tyrannies
sake, whereas the Romish prelate affects Tyranny for poperies sake; but both
affect both for their own preferments sake: for without Tyranny popery cannot
be enforced, and without popery Tyranny cannot be supported; and as both
cannot be established, but by a conspiracy of both parties, so neither is that
conspiracy sufficient, unless the King also be won by it. Therefore in the
Scots war it was suggested to the King, that the Crown could not stand without
the Myter, and thereupon amongst the Plebeians it was dispersed and maintained,
that the Bishops fought to maintain the Kings Crown, not that the King fought
to uphold the Bishops Myter. And what difference is there now in our case? Is
not this war in England a mere reviving of that war which was in Scotland? Did
not our prelates as openly imbark the King in their quarrel then, as they do
now? And do not our prelates struggle and stir as unanimously now, and stand for
the same ends, and adhere to the same confederates, the papists, as they did
then? One drop of water is not more like another, than the Scottish war is like
this. And if it be objected, that the prelates now incense not the King against
the Scots, and therefore there is something new in the difference, more than
was in that: and further, that they disclaim and abhor the Irish rebellion,
and therefore they combine not with papists. This answer is readily given. The
Scots, it is true, are fairly entertained in words, but in deeds, all the
hostility offered to us is aimed at them, and will reach them in the next
place, their ruin is most inevitably involved in ours, and the Stoccado that
pierces it, will easily find a passage through our bodies into theirs. I am sure
they are too wise a Nation to apprehend otherwise: so also for the Irish rebels
it is as true, they are ignominiously entertained in words, but indeed all the
hostility offered to us, is amity to them, it is arms, moneys, supplies sent to
them; their protection is involved in our destruction, and our graves are their
strongest bulwarks. But oh! how is it, that I am constrained to mention that
detestable word Ireland? How is it, that that habitation of Zim and Ohim should
enter my mind, to make there as dismal a mansion of horror as it self? Had I
such fountains of tears in my head as Jeremiah had, to power out upon the
slain Protestants there, 'twould be some relaxation of grief to me; or had I
the bitterness of soul which David had, when the Image of Judas, traytorously
imbrued in his Lord and Saviors blood represented it self to him, that I
might power out all his Prophetical execrations upon them, and their
posterities, who have animated and enabled the rebels there; (especial, if any
of them were Protestants, or of the British race, or in high place of
authority) that, perhaps, would disburthen the too too pressing agonies of my
spirit. But alas, alas, perhaps it is more seasonable for me, to pray that the
Celestial groans of Manasses, than the infernal tortures of Judas may be
given by God to those deeplingaged sinners, upon whom this woeful guilt lies. I
now wander, and am lost; I must return to the business in hand: I hear some
say, that the Parliament did first plot and contrive against the Court of
England; and that all this in the Court has been but a defensive contriving
or counterplotting. Nothing more absurd, nothing more impossilbe, nothing more
inconsistant with the means, nothing more repugnant to the ends of
Parliaments: we must suppose that there are about ten Anabaptists now in
Parliament, that first expelled the major and better part there, and then
overcame the major and better part of such as remain unexpelled; then by
authority of Parliament, and the help of some few other Anabaptists in the
City, they master and inslave the major and better part also by far, and then
by some tumults there raised, they drive the King and all his popish
prelaticall courtly and military Adherents from the City; then they impose
taxes upon the Kingdom, for the maintaining of diverse Armies, and thereby
tyrannize as the Decemviri did in Rome, in spite of King, in spite of
Nobility, in spite of Gentry, in spite of Commonaltie, in spite of
Protestants, in spite of Papists, in spite of their own Armies. And then not
being sufficiently disconsonant to reason and nature, we must suppose that
these ten Anabaptists have been in travail with this design almost 40 years
before King James began to comply with Prelates and Papists, and before
Prelates and Papists began to conspire against Protestants, under the names of
Puritans, these Anabaptists were consulting in a close Iunto, how to get
themselves chosen of a Parliament, then how to get a Parliament called, then
how to preserve that Parliament from being ever dissolved, then how to effect
all these divine miracles, by such means as none but themselves should ever be
able to discern or comprehend. Is not this a rare subject for our great wits
at Coutt to work into Proclamations and Declarations? It Is reported that the
Lord Digby of late, being at Mr. Knightley's house in Northamptonshire in a
parlour there, whilst his Soldiers were busily searching, and plundring, and
rifling other rooms, he smote his hand upon the table, and swore; That that
was the table whereat all these civil wars had been plotted at least a dozen
years before. It should seem Mr. Pym had sojourned sometime in that house and
that was sufficient for an inference, that the nest of Anabaptists had been
there too, and that that nest had studied something, which neither our Kings
Cabinet Councillors, nor the Iunto's of Italy or Spain could make defeisable.
But if there were some means for Parliaments thus to debase Prerogative, and
disable Monarchy. To what end should they attempt it? Is it for the felicity
of Parliaments, to subject themselves to ten unlimitable Anabaptists, rather
than to endure one most admirably bounded Prince, and rather to make the whole
Land a stage of blood, horrout, and cruelty, than to be presidented by the
loyalty, policy, and religion of their Ancestors? Other men have spoken and
written of this sufficiently. And besides, if it were possible, if it were
profitable for Parliaments to turn public oppressors, yet sense and
experience tells us, that this Parliament has not used any oppression, but with
much difficulty been redeemed from oppression. But of this sufficiently also
has been written and spoken.

It remains therefore, that we compare the means, the ends, the practices of
Parliaments, with those of Princes, Papists, Prelates, etc. and taking a view
of what has been already set forth in this Discourse, parallel the same with
that which is objected by the other side, and it cannot be denied, but prelates
and papists have been formerly conspirers and drawers on of the Scotch war, and
other alterations in Church and State, as is here discovered. Then the question
is, whether or no they have since desisted, or changed their resolutions: some
change perhaps there is, but not such as may secure us; for before they did
combat against us de victoria, now de vita; hope of victory before inflamed
them, but fear of ruin now exasperates them; and in this respect our danger
is not the less, but the more.

FINIS.

