TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty.

The Humble Petitionary Poem of EDMOND DILLON, Esquire;

Temporibus laetis tristamur Maxim Caesar.

Corn. Gallus ad Aug. Caesar. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1664.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petitionary Poem of EDMOND DILLON, Esquire;
PArdon (Dread Sir) your Suppliants bold Essay,
That he Petitions not the formal way
Of Prose; or that his pressing greivance he
Dressed in the Rags of simple Poetry:
Numbers, though never of so faint a stream,
Are thought the best ingredients to a Threne:
The grovelling Muse that durst not tower so high,
(Lest singed by the Sun of Majesty)
As strive to prove the Trumpet of your praise,
(Such levets sound best from Maeonian lays:)
Presumes, in a low Eleglack style,
That sits the Genius of her native Isle,
To give those plaints, some kind of Mourning cloase,
Her prostrate Master, thus most humbly shows:
Great Sir, whilst you fair Halcyon days restore,
Transmuting the late Age of Churlish Ore,
By a blessed Chemistry to golden times,
Such, as that suckling world, the Poet chimes;
When undeflowr'd Astraea at the Helm
Of every peaceful Commonwealth and Realm
Presided; and the streams of Justice ran
Clear and unthwarted, when frail mortal man,
With heavenly Nectar had sublimed his blood;
For then the Womb of every common flood
Went pregnant with that sacred drink; no pride
Or lux gave sources to that Scarlet tide
Of blood, and strife, which since the Earth has stained;
A native innocence as Empress reigned,
And wise simplicity made States secure;
No Politics or mischief were in Ure.
Much of these blessings now (like Manna) showers
On Albion, from Jehovah's azure Towers
Dispensed by You; since that auspicious time,
God made his Type, and lawful Steward climb
The Widowed Throne; and in this Orphan-land,
Restored the Fathers Sovereign Command:
A land that panted underneath the weight
Of Tyranny, swollen to a lasting height:
No Joys, nor lucid intervals, were seen,
No truce to ills, nor holy days between.
O were the teeming Fates ever brought to bed
Of happier wonders, in no story read!
Then met in you; Who could at once set free
Your peoples Necks, without Phlebotomie,
From slavish yoaks; and so resume in peace
Your Scepter, on which Traitors Swords did seize:
Christ came in peace; You in that Juncture come
When Janus's Fane was shut; and Christendom
Charmed down her feudes, to Usher in our King
With a calm Sunshine: This mysterious thing,
Or rather Miracle of Providence,
None fathomed with the line of humane sense.
But stay; Veni, vidi, vici.
You came, and saw, and overcame
All hearts on sight, outstripping Caesar's fame,
And winged exploits; his Triumphs sanguin'd were,
Your Trophies richer; love and filial fear:
On this Foundation a kind Conquest laid,
You in short time stupendous Works displayed;
Struck out of Chaos that over spread this place,
A light, that gave all things a smiling face;
As Titan does, emergent from the Sea,
Shoulder the night, and guild the sacred day;
That Babel razed, proud ^^^^rous would have reared
Here, Gods anointed, and the Heavens to beard;
And out of dark confusion did create,
New luminaries in the spears of State:
Witness your Council; Men so sage, so grave
And Argus-ey'd, ^s dangers well may stave
Off, from your Crown: And old Romes Senate might,
Have hugged their Maxims, for a Ruling light;
Intrigues of State, to your chief The Lord Chancellor of England.
Praetor are,
As obvious and familiar as the Air.
That he can solve the most abstruse with ease,
Not Cato himself could Rival him in these.
Your Parliaments so well affected stand,
(Ah that your Sire had that high Court so manned)
As, to your Service, brisk, to consecrate
More, then your Moderation may sat.
The wholesome Law now vigorously returns
Unto the pristine Channel; and their turns
Justice and Mercy, in your God-like Soul
Have, but your Meroies the ascendant hold;
Those bright endowments radicate and plant
The Throne, upon a Base of Adamant.
Your Naval, and Landforces, may give work,
Nay, Plough up the invading numerous Turk,
With all those Barbarous Troops; should they but lie
Contiguous, for our Heroes Chivalrie.
Yorks Royal Duke, Your Neptune of the Seas,
May give our little world a Writ of ease
From Foreign Wars; Who, as with Brazen walls,
With Canon, Men and Oak our Isles impales.
Nor may Your Kingdoms dread, henceforth, those scars
Of civil, yet the most Bella -- plus quam civilia -- Lucan.
uncivil, Jars;
Whilst the RESTORING Albermarle, does stand,
Your tutelar Plutarch. in the life of Camillus.
Camillus of the Land.
That Hydra'of Plots, too often hatched in Hell
Against You, (I hope) is now crushed in the shell.
No corner of the Earth, but spues forth those
To Tyburn, or the like, Your Traiterous foes.
Great Princes in their spousals, less consult
Their private fancies, then what may result
To public good; both interests of weight,
You in your Royal Bride did complicate;
Whose All-divine accomplishments do lie,
Almost transparent to each vulgar eye;
As they create all Reverence and Love,
Which that diffusive grief, last year, might prove,
In her great sickness, whose sad bruit expressed
Even real sobs, from the Fanatique breast.
Clotilde, Eudoxia, and Pulcheria,
Queens, only Angels quils, may well pourtray,
Are copied out in her; their virtues there
Meet, and constellate all, on that bright sphere;
And what does solace much a pious Son,
Your Mother Queens rich benediction
And heavenly converse, add to your delight;
Her venerable Glories feast Your sight.
Not Cybele the Goddess-dame of all
The spangled dwellers, of high heavens White Hall,
More luster gave t'Her deathless progeny,
Or they to Her (famed in old Poesy)
Then you do both, by mutual reflex,
The best of Men, best of the female Sex.
What would the Caledonian Nation crave,
Or England wish? They by your influence have
Peace, Liberty, and Amaltheas horn;
Their collaps'd Honors raised from the Urn.
Nihil deinde optare a Diis homines, nihil Dii hominibus prastare possent,
Nihil voto concipi, nihil felicitate con ^mma^i, quod non Augustus post reditum
in urbem, Beib. populoque Romano, terrarumque orbi representavit. Vel. Pa^ere.
in Hist. Rem. lib. 2
The peoples full content, in Roman story,
Makes the Corolary of Augustus's Glory;
Which he indulged, at his return to Rome,
As You have done, since You arrived at home.
Whilst these things speak you happy, good, and great;
All in Superlatives, and to complete
Her Joys, great Britain naught can want,
If with due sense, She on her bliss descant:
Shall your poor Irish vassals solely be,
Excluded still from the grand Jubilee?
And we are Excommunicated all,
From mixing in the public Festival?
By what Caprich of fortune does our clime
Wear blacks, whilst rays of Grace so near us shine?
How comes our Nation to sing Lachrimae,
On Jovial Christmas and the Paschal day?
Our Seniours, who longed ( Simeon-like) to hear
Or see their King, Christ's figure, in his sphere
Of Regal power to move; though they retriv'd
Their drooping spirits, soon as you arrived;
And seemed (like Eagles) to resume their youth,
Thinking, that day should terminate their Ruth;
Yet, now court deaths Post-haste, because they see,
Naught else alleviates their Misery.
Our youth seem Et doloraetatem jussit in esse suam. Boet. de Consol. Phi.
superannuated, with grief;
There Is such cunctation used in their releif;
And maids wear squallid looks; their sprightly airs
Changed, to the pallid symptoms of despairs.
Our Matrons spent their tears, that liquid stock
In them, is drayn'd by sorrows constant shock;
Their ills, that crusted Niobies, outvi'd,
And so Curae leves loquntur, ingentes stupent Sen. Trag.
t'amazement they are petrifi'd.
Who, but a Jeremy, with Enthean quil,
Our Woes in Tragic lines could well distill?
No Age or Sex but is disconsolate,
Such is our Countries lamentable State:
As if Nolls ghost should from the Stygian Strand,
Raise Magic Vapors still t'enchant our Land
Under old bondage, which his Laws imposed;
For our Estates lie (a great part) transposed,
As he assigned them, 'twixt his Creatures shared
And Independent host, whose fat does lard
Numbers of them: And thus did he divide
Our spoils and Fortunes; and so gratified
His Armies active Zeal t'exterminate
This Monarchy, and buoy him up in State.
Rich Et pro crimine omni aut opes, aut opimi agri. Lip. de constable.
Fields and Loyalty were our chief Crimes,
The last was Virtue, in serener times;
For which shall we make constant Penance thus,
The only Plea that should ingratiate us?
Who of three shattered Nations, were the last,
Fought out your Cause, and in your Quarrel cast,
The final Ruins of your Party; You
May with your Fiat, build us up a new;
Who suffered crushing, e're we'd violate,
By yielding soon, that Peace of Forty Eight:
Solemn Piece; I hope it is not forgot,
Your Ermines will not sully with that blot.
He Is scarce your Friend, would seek to conjure down
Those public condescentions, You did own;
Would Sacrifice, to private ends, or spleen,
A Glorious Monarchs hallowed esteem:
What need I hint the confluence of our men
From all those Foreign parts, they served in,
About your Sacred Person, then abroad;
Those timely duties You do not explode,
But mind; so to their Sovereign, the Sea,
Rivers flow far, and Crystal tributes pay:
Nor was it by land alone, in that Exile,
The Touchstone of true Faith; as we may style
All such disasters, They espoused Your Cause;
But on the Ocean too, steered by your Laws;
Their loyal Palinures sought to support
Your Admiralty-Court, from Port to Port:
Then (as we should) our hopes we anchored, sure,
On Your glad Restoration, for our cure;
Yet still our Country-business, panting lies,
And with slow Hectiques languishing, it dies.
The Irish Ordeil, was the Court of Claims,
Few through that fire, with slender venial stains
Could pass unsing'd; Yet were the Judges free
From the least byaz of Partiality:
But by their Rules, such as were strictly chaulk't
Out, for our Trials, they exactly walked;
Whilst heinous Crimes are blauncht, forgot, or drowned
In that vast Sea of Mercy, most have found,
Flowing in Your Amnestia; only we
Are left obnoxious to all scrutinie:
Our lives are sifted, and set on the Rack,
False evidence suborned to make us black.
Of Heavens strait ingress, what the Gospel says,
On Earth is typified in our days:
Our Innocence (which to the test was put)
Must shine like that of Infants, ere they shoot
Up, to their dangerous years; or else no man
Of our poor Israel enters Canaan;
None are restored; Yet through those narrow straights
Some have got in, unto their old Estates;
And hundreds more, on this preciser score
To Innocence have title; but the door
(They say) is shut, the time efflux'd for those,
As though men would your long-lived justice close;
Or bounty stint t'a few months space; who can
So circumscribe it, shackels The Ocean,
The Law defines; An droit ne poit mourir,
An ancient Right, is like the Vestal fire,
Never extinct, though darkn'd it is, sometime,
When gold or favor will not make it shine;
Nay some restorable by Acts of Grace
And Parliament, a shadow yet embrace;
Whilst the effects of your intendments are
Wanting; they are only Landlords titular.
Bill after Bill, we see transmitted over
One clashing with the other, though before
An Act; like that Penelope.
chaste Princess's endless web
Wrought with great pains, yet soon unravelled;
Our Souls were night-mar'd by these Ambages,
These Circuits did our vital bloods oppress;
And after all, a rueful murmur was
Of late, there should a fatal sentence pass
On Irish Interests; oh! a public grief,
Nothing can cozen me to the belief;
We should be in a righteous Princes sense,
Made victimes to alleged convenience:
Angels defend, That, that anointed hand,
Should sign the desolation of a Land,
Or people, whose hands, hearts, and all they have,
(As bound) are Yours devoted, to the grave:
Ex ungue leonem.
And if we know the Lion by his paws,
Those three late Noble Irish Scaevolaes,
Who in Losanna did such miracles
For You, do by that recent feat express
The loyal Genius of our Nation still,
To live or dye at their great Sovereigns will.
But with this Subject I no more shall grate
Upon Your Royal patience; They could state
With greater Emphasis our sad distress,
Who long in steady Prose made our address;
We have this comfort, that Your Wisdoms choice
Was such a Viceroy, as by general voice,
Of us and all true Subjects; none could be
More fit to play that Arduous game, than he;
Brave Ormond your Cui fidus Achates it comes, and paribus curis vestigia
figit. Vir. lib. 6. Aeneid
Achates, went a share
In all your Foreign strayings, all your cares,
None Plutarch, in the life of Alex.
loved the KING, with more entireness, since
Craterus did the Macedonian Prince;
The Spirit of his Government we found
E're now, so sagely tempered, and so sound,
As we may hope a future Plenilune
Of blessings by it; and that his Grace will tune
For you the Irish Harp, long speechless grown,
In the sad solstice of Her Sovereigns Throne;
And with the Music of his Ruling hand,
Compose the jarring Interests of that Land;
As once Amphion by the rise and fall
Of his sweet noats, had built the Theban wall;
Charmed the materials thither; stones, that be
Of different forms, danced to a Symmetry.
But public matters, and affairs of State,
Th'officious Muse does Supererogate
To touch upon; for those are things beyond
Her flagging fancies humble Horizon:
It were presumption in a puny wit,
A kind of Sacrilege it may commit,
Handling of those absconded Mysteries,
Not penetrable by thick-sighted eyes:
An honest Subject must revere, not fret
At the Results of's Princes Cabinet.
Now give me leave, most Gracious Liege, to say
Somewhat expressed in a doleful key
Concerning my own case; it is singular;
As, I, with all submission, will declare:
When Cromwell, that prodigious Tyrant was
Raised to the height, on Collosses of brass
His greatness built, above the shock of fate,
As many thought, who did not meditate
That so excentrique and unjust a Rise,
Preluded to a signal precipice:
When he had trampled on the necks of all,
His terror became Ecumenical;
That Bird of prey, whose sanguinary beak
Quarri'd on us, and did his fury wreak;
Who made each Fault, a Capital offense,
And molded Laws of bloody Elements,
Tacitus de domit.
Domitian-like; when thinking of our King,
Were no less than a Treasonable thing;
If thoughts had a material substance been,
Or could be felt, heard, understood, or seen:
Much more to Speak, or Write against the State,
Naught but th'Offendors death could expiate:
Even in those slavish, touchy times, have I
(It is a Truth, and no thrasonick lie)
Declared in Ireland, for the Royal Cause,
And the Usurpers Paricide did blaze,
Th'Injustice of that Regicidal Court,
Veiled under Justice's pageantry and port
Decry'd; against those, that would all Law subvert,
Did to my power Just Monarchy assert:
This, after the reduction of that Isle,
When an iniquous Peace did seem to smile
In servitude; and none could roll one stone
In your behalf, all Armless, overthrown;
I made my best, though impotent Essay,
Some Lectures of Allegiance to display;
And so revive the thoughts of Majesty
In some, which by long dissuetude might die:
Timists were posed, each (O imprudence) cried,
To duel thus a violent stream or tide.
But old experience, as a truth, defines,
That Difficile est sapere, and amare.
Love and Wisdom are not always Twins;
A loyal passion, and my bleeding sense
Of Injured Sovereignty and Innocence,
Transported then my Soul, so to discharge
Her just resentments; and foretell at large
A Change; the hanging of some Demagogues, Bradshaw and Cook.

Giving them genuine Characters of Rogues;
Which, since fulfilled, Your Majesty, I see,
Dubbed that gross speech, a kind of Prophecy.
My charge, and censure may in part appear
By the annexed, which thousands can averr:
The Crime (forsooth) was public, and looked on
Unpresidented there, a monstrous one,
Which, Jealous Rebels, whom their Conscience racked,
Thought, sure, was, with a Belgic Army backed,
Or rather Irish waiting on their King;
From Flanders straight all dangers hovering:
My person was secured, a perilous wight,
In labor with deep Kingish plots, to light
Now brought; so did they word it, then, of me;
Would I could merit that proud Elogy.
I wanted power, but evidenced my will
The Effects of their ombrages to fulfill.
And, as I fought by female dint of Tongue
Or Pen, to vindicate that horrid wrong:
The unexampled Murder of my Prince;
When other Arms, we had not for offense;
Had I Brydreus's hundred hands to boot,
A Gyant-stature of a hundred foot
In each dimension, and Alcides Club,
And strength; I would, in short, those Monsters grub,
Those poisons quell, whose Luciferean pride
Murdered one King, the other did proscribe.
But all I could, I did, not what I would;
God takes the hearts pure Incense, more than Gold,
Or Hecatombes; a richer Sacrifice
Than that, or what most precious, men do prize;
Life, fortune, goods, I could not offer you;
All which I staked, and fairly ventured too;
Nay Shipwrackt all almost upon one shelf,
By loyal gustes, I scarce survive my self:
From Prison, unto Prison, guardes did hale
Me, as a holocauste, prejudged by all
To their Protectors Shambles (such have been,
Where Cavallier-flesh did feast their spleen.)
Now the dire Pageants, all the Plus terret pompa mortis, quam mors ipsa.
pomp of death,
More dreadful than Death'self (our vital breath
Is often exhaled with ease) before me dwell,
And every Tongue became my Passing Bell:
At length they hurried me unto the Bar,
And strange Tribunal mixed of Peace and War;
I was Arraigned, Convicted, and with sound
Of a Fanatic Verdict, guilty found;
Yet with vast charges, and what Friends could do,
In those extremes, my tendered life, to woo
With all the Charms, that to some mercy'encline
Obdured hearts; I, with a pondrous fine
And heavier mulcts, was form^lly repriv'd
Beyond all hopes; yet malice so contrived
The sentence past; as men might call that doom
A dying life, or living Martyrdom:
For I have languisht, sans main-prize or bayl,
Whole years, a constant tennant to the Jayl;
(Such was my censure) to the huge decay
Of health and wealth, which melted all away;
Exhausted what I had, and what had not,
Signed bonds for sums, which yet I could not blot,
And pawned the Rubbish of my fortunes; down
Tumbled, before, in the Ruins of the Crown.
My solace was the Justice of my Cause,
For King, and Kings Prerogatives and Laws;
When some that well remark't; and took the height
Of my great Persecutions, cause, and weight
Of circumstances, that attended these,
So signalized in those Neronian days,
Made sure account, some guerdon lay in store
For this; when God should our great Charl's restore.
But I digress, such was my passive state,
Till Oliver dropped hence b' a slugish fate;
And Richard from Usurping, like his fire,
A Meteor fallen, scarce dwindled to a squire;
Since have I changed the Scene, but not my woes;
London, a kind of splendid durance grows
To me; where more then thousand days did pass,
Whilst I these banks of Silver Thames do trace;
Wore out almost the pavements of White Hall,
Dancing attendance, gazing on the Wall;
My waiting, often was paid with empty air,
Though my pretensions, I thought, just and fair.
Papers on Papers, long since I have pil'd,
Petitions of my Tragic stories filled;
Yet, most times, that elaborat Address,
Was soon blown over, and but cold success;
Arachnes subtle textures in a Room,
Are thus confounded by the careless broom.
Due Reverence, long from your Princely ears
Stav'd off my plaints, the subject of my tears;
Whilst here a Rumper, there, Fanatic Elves
Did all the while, par tort, possess themselves
Of my true Birth right; cultivate that clay,
My loyal Syres acquired a fairer way,
And whose fruition they designed for me:
The Posthume shadow of their Family.
Twelve tedious years with leaden wings are flown,
Since I, ( En queis conscevimus agros. Virg. Ec.
That house, This soil was once my own)
Could make the burden of my Song, it is time
I change that note, and say, These now are mine;
If your poor Sufferers narrative, you rate,
As, to indulge that happiness, Libertas, quae sera tamen, respexit inertem.
ibid.
though late;
Its true, long since, I got an Antipast
Of Grace; my name put on the Act that is past
For Irelands Settlement; but tantaliz'd
My hopes were still, by those words; till Repriz'd;
Remove from me (dread Sovereign) this spell,
Which your few Gracious lines can soon unspel;
For though my Fortunes deeply wounded lie,
Your hand has balm, and healing faculty;
Which in some measure will effect their cure
If you vouchsafe subscribing, to secure
My Title; and what should result of that,
Possession, in the now bill; (which like fate
To me's uncertain) if you please to say
The word, Your Sage Committee will obey.
O sacred breath, that with one sound can heave
My Fortunes Resurrection from the Grave!
My suit's not great; the Giver dignifies,
What, otherwise, men slenderly might prize.
Stories relate, how, in that ancient time,
When Mantuan Virgil in a Matachine
Of fate, was hurried from Estate, and Land;
(Like ours, that Transplantation, Authors brand)
Octavius gave his orders to restore
This Titirus, with many favors more;
Sir, You Are Augustus like; but (ah) where is now
The Magic of great Maro^'s lines to move;
Caesar! look on the samness of our case,
Not on the different cloase, my homespun phrase,
Which through the limbeck's not distilled, or terse,
Like that refined, late modish flux of verse;
My Muse has peccant humors; wants a leech,
Whose Mother-tongue's the quainter English speech,
As it is not hers, who with cross fortune still
Wrestling; never clammer'd up Parnassus hill.
Titus, the darling of mankind, their grace;
Neminem oportet a Principis vultu tristem discedere. Sueton.
Thought, none should from before the Princes face
In sadness turn; O Titus of our world,
Now that the Irish Seas are to be curled
By my slow Oars; I hope, I shall not part
This awful presence with a down-cast heart;
My debts contracted here, are great; those things
That most oppress, next to the weight of sins;
Debts by three years attendance, were incurred,
Since I, for right, to this Fount-head recurr'd;
Which, if your bounty daigns, are soon defrayed;
To beg of Kings, is no ignoble trade,
Yet when it is practiced least; a modest man,
Before he craves, his wants will strictly scan;
All I implore, tautologizing thus,
Is, but my old Estate, to pay those dues.
My sufferings signal were, so may they be
The objects of your Princely clemency;
And if with some compassion they affect
Your Royal breast; be pleased, of your elect
Restorable, among the Nominees
I may be one; (so Jove, I hope, decrees;)
And your Petitioner will acquiesce
In Praying God, Your Majesty to bless.
FINIS.

