Directions for the Use of this Famous, Admirable and Never-Failing CORDIAL
DRINK.
Keeping all Sexes in their Pristine Health.
1. ALL Ages, Sexes, Complexions, and Constitutions, may take it at any time of
the Year, in Hot or Cold Seasons, Sick or Well; It does most perfectly Defend
the Head from all Noisome Vapors and Fumes that continually ascend from the
Stomach: And takes away Diziness or Megrim as has been experienced. And for
Healthy Persons, or Aged, it Maintains, or Restores Strength, and keeps Nature
from most Diseases, making the Breath Sweet, the Body Lusty. Did the World but
know what Benefit of Health this Cordial would afford them, they would esteem
it as their sure Friend in time of Need; (that will not fail them:) I shall not
need to nominate Particulars, or name a Multitude of Diseases: but let its own
Excellent Virtues show forth its Praise. Therefore at this time I shall only
set down the Directions how to take it.

2. ^rand ^pers.
And those that expect to receive that benefit the Bill mentions, must observe
and keep close to the Papers Directions: And those whose Distempers have
Continued long upon them, or have taken hold, and perhaps grand Ones too; THE
DOSE SHOULD NOT BE TOO LITTLE UPON A SETTLED DISTEMPER, BUT SHOULD GO ON in the
taking of it for some time. Their Bodies must be first Cleansed by this
Cordial, and then afterward to expect the Effects and Operation of it.

3. (...) to take it
For any Distemper that you are troubled with (healthful or weak,) if your body
be easily wrought upon, you may with great Safety First begin to take one
Spoonful of it, the last when you are ready to undress to go to Bed; and one
Spoonful the first when you are risen with your Clothes on in the Morning: If
that work not 5 or 6 times, take 2 at Night, and 2 in the Morning: If not so
many times, raise your Dose according to your strength, by taking 3 at Night,
and 3 in the Morning, (*this is the Dose that usually is kept to,) working with
all 4, 5, or 6. times; but that I would reach all Tempers by the abovesaid
Method, and that every one might find out the temper of their Body.

Neither Frost nor Sun will hurt its if there be setlings in the bottom of the
Glass, then pour out the Dose that you intend to take as clear as you can.
Measure what you take with a midling spoon brim full, into a little Cup or
Glass, then drink it off.

4. ^anner of ^orking.
The manner of its Operation is principally in evacuation by Siege, and
provoking Urine: it works without making you sick, or any trouble to the
Tenderest Patient. It does not give many stools, neither does it work violently
or suddenly. Sometimes it opens the Body 8, 10 or 12 hours after it is taken,
sometimes sooner, according to the Disposition of the Stomach and Body, without
any Care, or any inconveniency to ensue thereupon. You are not to take
Posset Drink, or other thin Broths as is used with other Physic to make it
work, wherein is its Great Excellency so fitted to all Natures, that it needs
nothing to help it, but does most innocently search all Obstructive parts; and
does insinuate it self into the mass of blood, purifying, it and becomes Master
of the Distemper to admiration; you may eat or drink what you will; (an hour or
two after it in the Morning) be Active and Cheerful in your Business; Walk or
Ride where you please, it hinders No public Employment: If not, stir about
as you use to do, I need not bid you keep your selves warm in Cold weather:
(But be * sure keep a good Diet.) MIND WHAT YOU READ, FOR IT IS TRUTH
EXPERIENCED, WRIT WITH SERIOUS CONSIDERATION AS IF I WERE BY YOUR ELBOW.

5. ^ee the ^h of its ^cts is be^ing.
As often as you take after the first or second working, if you please, be sure
continue to observe it Constantly, that you may see the several Obstructions
come away, especially the Crude, viscous or slimy Humors, which are the
original Cause of most Distempers, (roping tough Phlegm) As in some black
Choler, others green; in some yellow Choler; others the glass Phlegm, or black
and green, or green and yellow mixed, and the redundant water in the belly, if
you are troubled with any of them, that you may see the truth, as well as feel
it. It has also that Excellent Quality, that it does not bind the Body
afterward, as other Physic does.

6. ^w Children ^^d Aged are (...) take it.
To an Infant in the Month take half a quarter of a spoonful, mixed with double
the quantity of small Ale; at six, eight, or ten weeks old, the same quantity;
if pretty strong a quarter of a spoonful, with double the quantity of Ale; If
sixteen weeks, half a year or three quarters, begin with a quarter, and double
it with Ale; If pretty strong, half a spoonful, with double the quantity of
small Ale; To a Child of a year old, or younger, begin with a quarter or half a
spoonful, mixed with double the quantity of small Ale, and as you find the
strength of the Child, then give it one spoonful, mixed with double the quantity
of small Ale: unto a Child of 3 years old a Spoonful, with the same quantity of
small Ale: And unto one of four years of age almost one spoonful alone. To one
of 7 years, one Spoonful. To one of 12 years of age one Spoonful and a half,
always observing, that some Children are as strong at 7 years, as others at 12.
Observe further, That the stronger you find the Distemper is upon the Patient,
and according to his strength, give then somewhat the larger quantity (* not
proceeding three spoonfuls) unto Man or Woman without mixture.

7. ^ow you are (...) continue it ^n a settled ^istemper.
If you are able, take it two days together, and rest a day or two, and to it
again; and rest again in that manner till your Pince is out; and as you see
cause afterward, 1 day or 2 days together in a weak, till you find your self
better; or twice a week; after that, one day or two in a Formight: and so the
like for them that are Aged, to take it according to their strength, or as
Children do: If it work in one day, above 5 or 6 times, take it but one day at
a time: * For one may throw the Door off the Hinges if they will, if it work
not 3 or 4 times in one day, take three spoonfuls according to the third
Article: and if it work but two or three times in a day, Continue it the
longer, or the oftener. For it will not fail, but be Master of all Obstructions
that are offensive to Nature, as you may plainly see: Also there are weak
Persons like Children, whose Bodies are very Obstructive, and hard to work
upon, that may take 2 or 3 spoonfuls, and it will carry downwards that which
worked not; (After that) Nature rejoices.

8. If the Person be Aged, or the Distemper be the Stone or Gravel, For the
Stone and Gravel.
and have continued long upon them, they must begin with a Quart or two, taking
it according to the ad, 3, and 7th Article, till your Quart or two be spent:
And afterward, at any time if you should feel any pain on your Knees, or under
your Ribs or Flank; then to it again for 2 or 3 days, and then it will vanquish
it away, so that (...) shall not come to a Fit; it will bring the Gravel away
when they are well, as when they have a Fit: But some may not use it so often
as others. It does so cleanse the Reins from all Foulness and Gravel, that they
shall Never have the Stone in the Bladder; (* for it stifles it in its Birth.)

9. It will Not fail to Kill the Raging Gout in its Full For the Gout.
Strength, for it draws and carries away from all parts of the Body those Crude
and Viscous Humors, which are the Spawn of it: as you may see * Mavelous is
the Operation in those that take it for the Continuance of some time: according
to the 2d, 3d, and 7th Article; Only forbear drinking in the Night when you are
in Bed, and as little betwixt Meals as you can.

10. It will not fail, For Melancholy.
* but perfectly Cure you of the Hypochondriack Melancholy, Commanding those
Choking Puffs all downwards to their proper Passage, being most Friendly to
Nature; For no Melancholy Humor Can stand or Remain in the Body, taking it
according to the 2d, 3d, and 7th Article.

11. It Cuts the very Sinews of Scurvies and Dropsies; For Scurvies and
Dropsies.
it purifies the Bones, Sinews and Veins, purging the Body in every part, from
these and all other Distempers mentioned in the Bill, (under God it never
Fails:) taking it according to the 2d, 3, and 7th Article.

12. For the Cholick at Night and Morning; For Cholicks and Gripings.
but for the Griping of the Guts Night and Morning, and 2 or 3 times in the
day, as your strength will bear it, according to the 3d Article: It will not
fail, but perfectly free you of the Cholick, or Griping of the Guts.

13. This Cordial is a Remedy prised Choice in the World, Green Sickness; to
clear Complexions.
and speedy to cure the Virgin disease, commonly called the Green-fickness in
two days time, and in some sooner, yet I would advise all to continue it till
their Bottle be out, for it is not safe to leave in the Body dregs behind; and
with the use of it sometimes they shall have their Monthly Visits, to their
great ease and satisfaction;

Or other Obstructions relating to Women-kind, Obstructions, Barrenness,
Miscarriage.
A very little time does perfectly free them of those inconveniences, and
helps Barrenness, if Coldness or Foulness be the Cause. And after Miscarriage
is an effectual Remedy to recover them to Health, though in danger of death, as
has been testified by them that proved and experienced it, taking the Cordial
for these, according to the third Article.

14. Also for any Dangerous Surfeits, two days will recover them; For Surfeits,
it strengthens men if they do not abuse it.
and as for those that love Corrowsing Cups, commonly called good fellows, this
is a most sure and safe Antidote for them at all times, if they love
themselves, and not to be covered over with shovels before their time.

It does Cure the pissing of Blood, The Pissing of Blood, or Vlcerations, or
Flux. All stoppages of the stomach or swellings of the Belly,
proceeding from Ulcerations in the Kidneys, Reins or Bladder, or Excoriations
by Stones or Gravel, 3 days will stop it; or a violent Flux 6 spoonfulls
taking will stop it.

It takes away all stoppages, or pains of the Stomach, and shortness of
Breath, or any hardness or swelling of the Belly, take the Cordial for these
according to the 3d Article.

15. IF SOME SHOULD SAY, THESE ARE LARGE DIRECTIONS TO BE OBSERVED; IN A WORD
TO SUCH, I REFER THEM TO THE THIRD AND SEVENTH ARTICLE, WHICH IS THE SUM OF ALL
FOR TAKING IT.

So that I need not to name other Distempers, And many more that I cannot here
insert.
but as they take it for one; So you may take it for all other, as is set down
in the Bill; Taking it according to the 2d, 3d, and 7th Article; It provokes a
good Stomach, and turns all into good nourishment: It does taste very
pleasant; A spoonful after Dinner, and so the like after Supper, will be a
Great Preservative, to prevent the aforesaid Distempers.

16. And He or She that desires to live a Long life, and a Healthful, Take it
at the Spring and Fall.
it will be convenient to take the Cordial one day or two in a Fortnights time;
and in the Spring a Pint; and at the Fall a Pint: And this is my own Practice,
that have gone through Unspeakable Extremity: but do now enjoy most perfect
Health, and my Joints Nimble and Active: Yet notwithstanding the Burnt Child
will take heed of the Fire.

And they that will follow these Directions, Keep close to these Directions.
shall not fail of their Desire.

17. To conclude, Be Patient in using the means.
Some there are that have had their Distempers upon them many years, and it may
be, may think by taking this Cordial in a Week or two to be Cured; and if it
proves not presently, -- then neglect and flight it.

18. But to all such Persons, I say, When you are helped, give God the glory.
I had rather they would let my Cordial alone, and keep their Money. -- For I
Declare to the World, I set not out my Bills to make a Prey upon any. (I need
it not.)

This water was first brought into Oxford 1673. 3s half pint.


