DIRECTIONS FOR BREWING MALT LIQUORS.

SHOWING, What Care is to be taken in the Choice of Water, Malt, and Hops: And
in what Proportions they are to be Mixed, and how Boiled and Fermented, for
Making the best March, or October Beer, Strong Ale, etc.

In a Method never before Published.

Useful for all such as are Curious in Malt LIQVORS.

By a Country Gentleman.

WITH A SATYR upon BRANDY, By another Hand.

LONDON, Printed for J. Nutt, near Stationers' Hall. 1700.

DIRECTIONS FOR Brewing.
THEY who are Curious in Malt Drinks, as it is fit every one should be that
uses 'em, (unless their Circumstances be such that they must be contented with
what they find) generally make out all their first Wort alone into Ale or
strong Beer. Ale is the only word used in the North of England for strong Malt
Drink: And was likely the only strong Drink our forefathers made of Malt. This
was the English Beverage Celebrated by our Poets, who yet could not forbear to
blame the foul Thickness of it. One says, Men drink it Thick, and piss it Thin,
Mickle Faith by St. Eloy, what leaves it within?


Which seems thus Translated by another, unless good Wits jump.

-- Nil spissius illa,
Dum bibitur, nil clarius est dum mingitur; ergo
Constat quod multas faeces in ventre relinquit.
Indeed before the use of Hops, which began in England about the Year 1540, as
I take it, it was hard to Brew Drink, which would be Fine before it was Eagar.
All good Ale is now made with some small mixture of Hops, though not in so great
Quantity as Strong Beer, designed for longer keeping: And is for that purpose
usually Brewed in March or October.

He that will Brew well, must be careful in the Choice of his Water, Malt, and
Hops, and in the manner of mixing and fermenting them.

1. As to Water, Pond-Water and other Standing Waters in fat Grounds, if clear
and sweet, make a Stronger Drink with less Malt, then Well, Pump or Conduit
Waters: Though any of these that are not hungry, and will bear Soap, and lather
without breaking, are good. Rainwater, which Lathers the best of any, if saved
from Lead, or where it brings no Salt from the Mortar over which it may pass,
is good to Brew Ale to be drank new, but is not proper for Drinks to be long
kept: It being very apt to change, and unless kept cool and in great
Quantities, as in the Leaden Cesterns in Cellers at Amsterdam, will corrupt and
putrify the soonest of any Water. Thames-Water taken up about Greenwich at Low
Water, where it is free from all Brackishness of the Sea, and has in it all the
Fat and Sullage from this great City of London, makes very Strong Drink. It
will of it self alone, being carried to Sea, ferment wonderfully, and after its
due Purgations, and three times stinking (after which it continues sweet) it
will be so strong, that Several Sea Commanders have told me it would burn, and
has often fuddled their Mariners. Other Commanders have denied this, which I
thought I had Reason to impute to their want of Observation. However I conceive
Thames-Water is by no means fit to Brew Strong Beer to keep, for that, let the
Drink which is Brewed of it be never so clear, it is apt on any considerable
and sudden change of Weather, to ferment and grow foul. And I take this for a
Rule, That no Malt Drink is truly good, which is not perfectly fine. Upon the
whole, the best Liquor to Brew with, is that which is taken from a small clear
Rivulet or Brook, undisturbed by Navigation or Fording: And taken up in dry
Weather, when no Rain has lately washed the Banks. My first two Brewings were
made of such Water; which with all my Care and Experience I could never equal
since: Though I have been very curious and sent some Miles for my Water.
Possibly much the best Water in England is that at Castleton in Derbyshire,
commonly called, The Devils Arss, etc. Which Owzes from a great Rock, covered
over with a shallow Earth and short Grass a top. It is incredible that so much
Water should percolate through so vast a Quantity of one Rocky Stone, were it
not obvious to any one who goes into Pools Hole, where he will find the Water
continually dripping through the Top, and running down the Sides, till it makes
a kind of Crystal Rivulet at the Bottom of that Prodigious Rocky Concave. I
have seen the Ale made of Castleton-Water as clear in three days after it was
Barrelled, as the Spring Water it self, and impossible to be known by the Eye
in a Glass from the finest Canary Wine. Brewers should be as curious in the
Choice of Water for their first Wort, as Cooks are for their Boiling of Yellow
Pease. For as some Waters will never Boil them soft; so will they never make
good Ale or Strong Beer. However if the best Water be not to be had, but at too
great a distance and charge, you may for your Second and Third Worts which are
quickly spent, and used only for Table Drink, make use of such Water as you
have near at hand.

2. As for your Malt. The North Country Malts from Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire,
Leicestershire, Cheshire, Lancashire, etc. are the best, especially for Ale,
but are generally too slack dried for March or October Beer, which is to be
kept at least half a Year before it be Drank. The Goodness of these Northern
Malts proceeds partly from the Corn which grows on Grounds more rested than in
the Southern Countries, where the Rents are more racked, and the Grounds more
worn by continual Sowing; and partly from the making, in which they take more
time then in other parts, and dry it leisurely with Pit Coal Charkt, called in
some Places Coak, and in others Culm, which is sweet and gives a gentle and
certain heat. Whereas in the South East parts, they dry their Malt with Straw,
which is hard to keep to a moderate and equal heat. And in the West Countries
with Wood, which gives a most ungrateful Tack to such as are not by Custom
familiarized to it. Besides, in the North, they do not run out their Barley in
Malting to such Lengths as in other parts: And in Grinding they set their Upper
Millstone so high, that it breaks off only the Tops of the Clevel, which makes
their Drink so fine. And Malt small ground will never make fine Drink.

There is possibly some Reason for the Observation, that Malt mixed of several
kinds makes the best Drink: And that it ought to ly ground in the Sacks three
or four days before it is used.

3. Your Hops must be bright, well scented, well dried, cured and bagg'd; and
generally speaking are best about a Year old. They are a very uncertain Crop,
and consequently of a very uncertain Price, sometimes sold at about Six Pence,
sometimes at about half a Crown per Pound. And I believe it may be truly said,
That better Hops have been sold for Six Pence or under, then ever were sold for
Two Shillings per Pound, or upwards. Indeed all Fruits are best when they are
cheapest. Those Years that are kindest for the Quality allways producing the
greatest Quantity. So that it is certainly a wise way, on all accounts, to
furnish one self well with Hops well cured in a cheap Year.

4. In your mixing and fermenting all these three together, That is in Brewing,
after you have made a discreet Choice of your Matterials; You must first
consider what sort of Drink you design to Brew, and accordingly proportion your
Quantities. If you design your first Wort for strong Ale or March or October
Beer; you must proportion five Gallons of Drink to every Bushel of Malt (that
is to say avoiding Fractions) Eleven Bushells of Malt to an Hogshead of Ale or
Beer. But it must be remembered, that in so great a disproportion of Malt to
Drink, as Eight to Five, almost a Third of your Liquor in the first Wort will
be absorped by the Malt, never to be returned, and an allowance is to be made
of about a Sixth Part to evaporat in Boiling. So that if you expect to clear a
Hogshead of Drink, that is fifty four Gallons, from your first VVort, you must
put into your Mesch-Tub near Ninety Gallons of Liquor. But for your Second or
Third VVorts, the Goods being wet before, you need put up no more Liquor then
you intend to make Drink, except an allowance of about a Tenth part for wast,
that not Boiling so long as your first VVort. And you may of your Second VVort
make one Hogshead of good middle Beer or Ale, as Strong as the common Alehouse
Drink in London. And your Third VVort will make one Hogshead of good Small Beer.

I propose in this Case the drawing of Three VVorts because of the great
Quantity of Malt to a smaller of Liquor. Otherwise in Ordinary Brewings, where
you design not very strong Drink, six or seven Bushells of Malt will make one
Hogshead of good strong, and another of small Beer. And in such case, two
Moakses will as well take out the strength of your Malt, as three in the other.

It is certain that in either of these cases your Malt will not be run out as
the Common Brewers uses to be, so that if you take up an handful of the Grains
you may blow them out of your hands with your Breath.

But it is hardly worth any Man's while, who is not indigent, to run it out
farther for his own Family; for all the Drink you can after make of it, will be
but like the washing of Grains, it will prove poor Stuff. and if not drank
presently, it will be apt to stink, unless you mix it with some of the former
Worts which it will but spoil. Besides, what you leave in your Grains, by the
way proposed, is not lost. For if you live in the Country, they will nourish
your Cattle and Swine, and if in a Town, the Poor will be gratified by letting
them put up some cold Water to run through them, which they will carry away
cold in Pails, and boil at home without any trouble or charge to you; so that
in effect you really relieve the Poor only with a little of your Cold Water
which they themselves draw.

The Proportion of Hops may be half a Pound to an Hogshead of strong Ale; one
Pound to an Hogshead of ordinary strong Beer to be soon Drank out: And two
Pounds to an Hogshead of March or October Beer: And for the after VVorts, which
are not to be kept long, what comes from the first VVort will serve well enough
to Boil again with them.

If you put into your first VVort a greater Proportion of Hops, and Boil them
all the while your VVort Boyls, you will make it too bitter: But I conceive it
advisable to double the Proportion, by taking out the first parcel when your
VVort has Boiled half the time you design it, and then adding the same Quantity
of fresh Hops to continue Boiling till you take your VVort out of the Copper.
This will somewhat increase your Charge, but that will be very inconsiderable,
if your furnish your self in a cheap year of Hops.

By this way you will take out only the fine quick Spirits of the Hops, (which
I take to be an useful and wholesome Vegetable) and will have a good Quantity
left fit for the use of the Poor, if you give them the last running from your
Malt.

Hitherto of the Qualities and Proportions of your Materials. Now concerning
the manner of putting them together.

After you have put your Liquor in your Copper, strew an handful two or three
of Bran or Meal upon it, not so much to strengthen your Liquor, as to make it
heat quickly, for simple Water alone will be long ere it Boil. But you must
take your Liquor out of the Copper when it begins to simmer, and not suffer it
to Boil: For though it were granted that the Boiling did no harm to your
Liquor, by evaporating the Natural Spirit of the Water (which it likely does)
yet it is a needless expense of Fuel and Time, first to make it too hot, and
after to stay till it is cooler again. For you must by no means mix your Malt
with Boiling hot Liquor, which will make the Malt clot and cake together, and
the most flowery parts of it run whitish, glewy and sizy, like Saddlers Paste,
so that it will never mix kindly, and give out its Strength equally to the
Liquor.

I had not dwelt so long on this Head, but that I know many put their Malt
first in the Mesch-Fat, and then pour in their Liquor for the first Wort, which
is indeed necessary in the Second and Third Worts.

The contrary Practice of putting in your Liquor first, has these Advantages.

First, You can never otherwise guess when your Liquor is just cool enough to
be mingled with your Malt: But in this case, you have a certain Criterion and
Rule to judge by, that is, you must let your Liquor remain in your Mesch-Fat
till the Vapor from it be so far spent, that you can see your Face in the
Liquor: And then pouring your Malt upon it, you have this farther Advantage,
that you keep your Liquor longer hot, and it sinks gradually, distributing it is
strength to your Liquor equally, without matting, and if it does not descend
fast enough of it self, you must press it down with your Hands or Rudder, with
which you use to stir your Moaks. This must be done by degrees: Allways
remembering, that you shake your Sacks before you remove them over the sides of
your Mesch-Fat, to get out the Flower of your Malt which sticks to them. And
after all your Malt is settled, and your Liquor appears above it, you must put
up in your Mesch-Fat as much more hot Water out of your Copper, as will make in
all Ninety Gallons, for one Hogshead. Then stir it almost without ceasing, till
it has been in the Mesch-Fat about two hours from the first putting up your
Malt, in which your Servants may help and relieve one another.

After this pull out your Rudder, and putting a little dry Malt a top, cover it
close, and let it stand half an hour undisturbed, that it may run off clear,
and the Malt being sunk to the bottom, the Liquor a top will run through it all
again, and bring away the strength of it. After this, you must lift up your
Tap-staffe, and let out about a Gallon, not into your Tub underneath or
Under-back, which is to receive your Wort, but into your long-handle Jett, and
put it up back again, stopping your Tap hole: This do two or three times, till
you find it runs clear, which it will not do at first, though your Tap-hose be
never so well adjusted.

Throughout the whole Course of your Brewing, you must be very careful to do
all you can to promote the Fineness and Clearness of your Drink.

In the North of England, where much the best Malt-Drink is made, they are so
careful of making their Drink Fine, that they let their first Wort stand in
their Receivers till it is very clear, all the gross parts being sunk to the
Bottom, this they continue to do about Three hours in Summer, and Ten or Twelve
hours in Winter, as occasion requires, which they call Blinking, after which,
leaving the Sediment behind, they only lade out the Clear Wort into the Copper.
Which Custom is peculiar to the North and wholly unpractised in other parts.

When all is run out into your Receiver or Under-Back, Lade or Pump out your
Second Liquor, ordered so as to be just then ready to Boil, on your Moaks: And
putting your first Wort into your Copper again, let it Boil reasonably fast
(which Boiling the Hops put on it will much accelerate) for about one hour and
an half, for March or October Beer to be kept long: And one Hour for strong
Ale, to be Drank new. I know that a longer Boiling is generally advised. But I
shall answer that when I come to show the Reasons why Common Brewers seldom or
never make good Malt Drinks. I advise the VVort rather to be Boiled reasonable
fast, for the time, then to stand so long to simmer, because common Experience
shows it wastes less, and Ferments better, after so long Boiling, than
Simmering. And this Observation, grounded on Experience, will not seem strange
to Philosophers; who know, that Six hours of a kindly insensible Perspiration
shall make a Man lighter in the Morning, then so many hours of ordinary
Sweating.

Possibly a less Fermentation and greater Evaporation is best for the Blood,
and greater Fermentation and less Evaporation is best to prepare other Liquors
for a new Fermentation.

Your first Wort, being thus Boiled, must be Pumped or Laded off into one or
more Coolers or Cool-Backs, in which leave the Sullage behind, and let it run
off Fine. The more Coolers, and the thinner it stands, and the sooner it Cools
(especially in hot Weather) the better: Let it run from your Cool-backs into
your Tun very Cool, and set it not there to Work, in Summer, till it is as cool
as Water. In Winter it must be near Blood Warm, at least the Bowl in which you
put your Yest to set the rest on Working must have a mixture of VVort hot
enough to make it all Ferment. When you find it begins to work up thick to a
Yest, mix it again with your Hand Jett, and when it has workt it self a Second
time to a Yest: If you designed it for Ale and speedy Drinking, and hopp'd it
accordingly, then beat in the Yest every five hours, for two days together, in
the Summer time, or more, according as the Weather is; and for three or four
days in Winter, covering your Fat close that it fall not in your working Tun.

When your Yest begins to work sad, and upon turning the Concave of your Bowl
downwards sticks fast to the inside, then, skimming off the Yest first, cleanse
the rest into your Vessel, leaving all your Dregs in the bottom of your Tun,
and putting only the clear up: After it has a little Fermented in your Vessel,
you will find it in a few days fine, and fit for your Drinking. Though
according to the Quantity of your Hops you may proportion it for longer keeping.

If you Brew in March or October, and have hopp'd it for long keeping, you must
then upon its Second Working to a Yest (after once beating in) cleanse it into
your Vessel with the Yest in it, filling it still as it works over, and leaving
when you stop it up a good thick head of Yest to keep it.

In Brewing March and October Beer, it it is advisable to have large Vessels
bound with Iron Hoops, containing Two, Three, or Four Hogsheads, according to
the Quantity you intend to make, putting all into one Vessel. This sort of
Drink keeping, digesting and mellowing, best in the largest Quantities.

Your Vessels must be Iron hoop'd, else your March Beer will be in danger to be
lost or spoiled: Leaving your Vent Peg allways open Palls it, and if it happen
to be fastened but Six Hours together in the Summer, a sudden Thunder or Stormy
Night may happen next Morning to present you in your Cellar an empty Vessel and
a covered Floor.

It is pretended that March is the best Month for Brewing, and the Water then
better than in October: But I allways found that the October Beer, having so
many cold Months to digest in, proves the better Drink by much; and requires
not such watching and tending as the March Beer does, in opening and stopping
the Vent hole on every change of Weather.

Many Country Gentlemen talk of, and magnify their stale Beer of Five, Ten, or
more years old. It Is true more Malt and Hops than I propose will keep Drink
longer than I use to do: But to small purpose; for that it will not exceed mine
in any thing desirable, except such an extraordinary Strength as few Men care
for. I allways broach mine at about Nine Months end, that is my March Beer at
Christmas, and my October Beer at Midsummer, at which times it is generally at
the best. But will keep very well in Bottles a year or two more. Stop your
Vessel close with Cork, not Clay, and have near the Bung-hole a little
Vent-hole stopped with a Spile, which never allow to be pulled out, till you
Bottle or draw off a great Quantity together. By which means it is kept so
close stopped, that it floushes violently out of the Cock for about a Quart, and
then stops on a sudden, and Perles and Smiles in a Glass like any Bottled Beer,
though in the Winter time. But if once you pull out the Vent-Peg, to draw a
Quantity at once, it will sensibly loose this Briskness; and be sometime before
it recovers it.

I propose no Directions for the Second and Third Worts: He that can manage the
first well, can never fail in the rest. Your Third Wort, being poured on hot
Goods, may be only Cold Water.

Now that I have given the best Directions for Brewing that readily occur to my
Memory. I come to show the Reasons why Common Brewers very seldom or never make
good Drink. This I know is generally attributed to their Underboyling their
strong Worts, which to prevent, some Brewers to their Detriment, and no manner
of Advantage to their Drink, have Boiled them three hours, which is thrice as
long as needed; and all to no purpose.

In most (if not all) of the Northern Counties there are few or no Common
Brewers. The Innkeepers and Public Ale Houses Brewing what they Retail in
their own Houses. And Private Families for themselves. And in all these
Counties it is as rare to find any ill Malt Liquors, as it is to find good in
London, or the adjacent Counties.

This may serve to show the Mistake of those, who ground their Computation of
the Number and Proportion of Inhabitants, between some Southern and Northern
Cities and Towns, on the Kings Revenew of Excise arising out of them. For that,
in the Eastern and Southern Counties, abounding in Common Brewers, almost all
the Inhabitants of Cities and great Towns there, and the meaner People of their
Neighborhood, take their Drink of the Common Brewers, clogged with Excise;
which few or none of all the Inhabitants of the Northern Towns do.

In the West of England, They have some Common Brewers, but not in Proportion
to the East and South. In most parts of the West, their Malt is so stenched
with the Smoke of the Wood, with which it is dried, that no Stranger can endure
it, though the Inhabitants, who are familiarized to it, can swallow it as the
Hollanders do their thick Black Beer Brewed with Buck Wheat.

In Bristol they have considerable Quantities of Malt by Sea from Wales, some
dried with Straw, some with Coak or Culm, much the best way of Drying. Yet have
little good Drink made from it, which is generally imputed to the Brackishness
of their Water.

In short, the Reason why Public and Common Brewers seldom or never Brew good
Drink is, That they Wet more Malt at once, then it is possible they can have
Vessels and Servants enough to Work, and set it cool enough to Ferment kindly:
And withal, Brew so often, that they cannot sufficiently, between one Brewing
and another, cleanse and scald their Brewing Vessels and Barrels, giving them
due time to dry, but that they will retain such a Rest as will always Char and
Sour their Liquors. And the Mischiefs accrewing by such Neglects are incredible
to Persons unexperienced.

My Brewers have been so cautious in this Particular, that if any Servants of
the House, have by accident made use of any long handled Jett, hand Jett, or
Pail, with cold Water during the Brewing; they have scalded it a new, and let
it dry before they would use it again.

This Practice of the Common Brewers Wetting such vast Quantities of Malt at
once, and Brewing so often, puts me in Mind of the Story of Melibeus the
Mantuan Shepherd in Boccalin, who tells the Roman Empire, that whilst he and
Menalcas kept Five Hundred Sheep each, as they long did, they made a Crown a
Head by the Wool and Lambs, amounting to Five Hundred Crowns Per Annum. But
when Menalcas, from Covetuousness doubled his Flock to a Thousand Sheep,
expecting to get thereby a Thousand Crowns a Year, he made but Three Hundred
Crowns; and when he trebled his Flock, and made them Fifteen Hundred Sheep, he
got nothing.

This is but a Course APPLICATION of a STORY, framed with a great Contexture of
Wit and Political Wisdom.

A SATYR UPON Brandy.
Farewell damned Stygian Juice, that do bewitch,
From the Court Bawd, down to the Country Bitch;
Thou Liquid Flame, by whom each firey Face
Lives without Meat, and blushes without Grace,
Sink to thy Native Hell to mend the Fire,
Or if it please thee to ascend yet higher,
To the dull Climate go, from whence you came,
Where Wit and Courage do require your Flame;
Where they Carouse it in Vesuvian Bowls,
To crust the Quagmire of their spungy Souls:
Had Dives for thy scorching Liquor cried,
Abraham in Mercy had his suit denied;
Had Bonner known thy force, the Martyrs Blood
Had hissed in thee, and saved the Nations VVood:
Essence of Ember, scum of melting flint,
With all the Native sparkles floating in it;
Sure the Black-Chymist with his Cloven foot,
All Aetna's simples in one Lymbeck put,
And double stilled, nay quintessenc'd thy Juice,
To charcoal Mortals for his future use.
Fire-ship of Nature, thou do doubly wound,
For they that graple thee, are burnt and drowned:
As when Heaven pressed the Auxiliaries of Hell,
A flaming storm on cursed Sodom fell,
And when it is single Plagues would not prevail,
Egypt was scalt with kindled Rain and Hail.
So Natures feuds are reconciled in thee,
Thou two great Judgments in Epitome.
God's past and future Anger breath in you,
A Deluge and a Conflagration too.
View yonder Sott, I do not mean Shr -- Sh --
Grilled all over, by thee, from head to foot,
His greasy Eyelids shoar'd above their pitch,
His Face with Carbuncles, and Rubies rich,
His Scull instead of Brains supplied with Cinder,
His Nose turns all his Handkerchiefs to Tinder;
He breaths like a Smiths Forge, and wets the fire
Not to allay the flame but raise it higher.
His Stomach don't concoct, but bake his Food,
His Liver even vitrefies his Blood;
His trembling hand scarce heaves his Liquor in,
His Nerves all crackle under's Parchment Skin;
His Guts from Natures drudgery are freed,
And in his Bowels Salamanders breed.
He Is grown too hot to think, too dull to laugh,
And steps as though he walked with Pindars staff.
The moveing Glass-house lightens in his Eyes,
Singes his Clothes, and all his Marrow frys,
Glows for a while, and then in Ashes dies.
Thus like a sham Promethius we find,
Thou stol'st a Fire from Hell, to kill mankind.
But stay, least I the Saints dire Anger merit,
By stinting their Auxilliary Spirit;
I am informed, whatever we wicked think,
Brandy's reformed, and turned a godly Drink.
Ever since the Public Faith for Plate did VVimble,
And Sanctified thy Gill with Hannah's Thimble,
Thou'st left thy old bad Company of Vermin,
The swearing Porters, and the drunken Carmen,
And the new drivers of the Hackney Coaches,
And now take up with sage discreet debauches;
Thou freely drop'st upon Gold Chains and Fur,
And Sots of Quality thy Minions are.
No more shall thou foment an Alehouse brawl,
But the more sober Riots of Guild Hall;
Where by thy Spirits fallible Direction,
The Reprobates once pol'd for an Election:
If this trade hold, what shall we Mortals do,
The Saints Sequester even our Vices too.
For since the Art of VVhoring's grown precise,
And Perjury has got demurer Eyes,
It Is time, high time to circumcise the Gill,
And not let Brandy be Philistian still.
Go then thou Emblem of their torrid Zeal,
Add flame to flame, and their stiff tempers kneal,
'Till they grow ductile to the Public Weal.
And since the Godly have espoused thy cause,
Don't fill their heads with Liberty and Laws,
Religion, Privileges, Lawless Charters,
Mind them of Falstaff's Heir-Apparent-Garters,
And keep their outward man from Ketches quarters.
One caution more, now we are out of Hearing,
Many have died with drinking, some with swearing:
If these two Pests should in conjunction meet,
The Grass would quickly grow in every Street:
Save thou the Nation from that double blow,
And keep thy fire from Salamanca T. O.
FINIS.

