DIRECTIONS TO OUR Archbishops and Bishops, FOR THE Preserving of Unity in the
Church, AND THE Purity of the Christian Faith, Concerning the Holy Trinity.

By His* Majesty's Special Command.

(...) MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI (...) English royal blazon used as a printer's
device

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1695.

Directions to Our Archbishops and Bishops, for the Preserving of Unity in the
Church, and the Purity of the Christian Faith, concerning the Holy Trinity.
WILLIAM R.
MOST Reverend, and Right Reverend Fathers in God, We Greet You well.
Whereas We are given to understand, That there have of late been some
Differences among the Clergy of this Our Realm about their Ways of Expressing
themselves in their Sermons and Writings, concerning the Doctrine of the
Blessed Trinity, which may be of dangerous Consequence, if not timely
Prevented; We therefore, out of Our Princely Care and Zeal for the Preservation
of the Peace and Unity of the Church, together with the Purity of the Christian
Faith, Have thought fit to send You these following Directions, which We
straightly Charge and Command You to Publish, and to see that they be Observed
within Your several Dioceses. I. THat no Preacher whatsoever, in his Sermon or
Lecture, do presume to Deliver any other Doctrine concerning the Blessed
Trinity, than what is contained in the Holy Scriptures, and is agreeable to the
Three Creeds and the Thirty nine Articles of Religion. II. That in the
Explication of this Doctrine they carefully avoid all new Terms, and confine
themselves to such ways of Expression as have been commonly used in the Church.
III. That Care be taken in this Matter, especially to observe the Fifty third
Canon of this Church, which forbids public Opposition between Preachers, and
that above all things they abstain from bitter Invectives and Scurrilous
Language against all Persons whatsoever. IV. That the foregoing Directions be
also observed by those, who write any thing concerning the said Doctrine.


And whereas We also understand, That diverse Persons, who are not of the
Clergy, have of late presumed, not only to Talk and to Dispute against the
Christian Faith, concerning the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, but also to
Write and Publish Books and Pamphlets against the same, and industriously
spread them through the Kingdom, contrary to Our known Laws Established in this
Realm; We do therefore strictly Charge and Command You, together with all other
Means suitable to Your Holy Profession, to make use of Your Authority according
to Law, for the Repressing and Restraining of all such exorbitant Practices.
And for Your Assistance We will give Charge to Our Judges, and all other Our
Civil Officers, to do their Duty herein, in Executing the Laws against all such
Persons as shall by these Means give Occasion of Scandal, Discord and
Disturbance in Our Church and Kingdom.

Given at Our Court at Kensington the Third Day of February, 1695. In the
Seventh Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command, SHREWSBURY.


