THE LOVER'S LUCK: A COMEDY. As it is Acted at the Theater in Little
Lincolns-Inn-Fields, BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by Mr. DILKE.

-- Habet Comaedia tanto;
Plus Oneris quanto veniae minus.
Hor. LONDON: Printed for Henry Playford in the Temple-Change. And Benj. Took
at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleetstreet. 1696.

To the RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord RABY.
MY LORD,
SInce I must own this Comedy, which I now humbly Present to Your Lordship, to
be very deficient, I am sure I have done well to make choice of a Patron so
able to protect it, as Your Lordship is. I am heartily willing to confess my
want of Ability in writing; but am proud of an opportunity to record the
General Approbation the Town has been pleased to afford me; a great share of
which must be attributed to Your Lordship's Appearance on my behalf.

I have been long desirous of making some evident Acknowledgments for the
Favors I have received at Your Lordship's hands. And however I have now failed
in my Performance, I have done my self right in publishing my Thanks; Returns
which are most justly due to Your Lordship: To You, my Lord, whose early
Actions I have seen with Admiration; and whose future Achievements will, I am
confident, be answerable to the Honors which are devolved to You from a most
Noble and Heroic Ancestor. I shall herein wave any thing that may have the
least resemblance to Flattery in respect to Your Lordship, or to Ostentation as
to my self; and so far deviate from the common method of Epistles Dedicatory,
that I shall not trouble Your Lordship with a single Quotation. What
Acquaintance I have with Criticisms, I will never show by collecting Sentences,
nor by reciting the Names of Authors, lest at the same time I should discover
my want of those most essential parts which I ought to have retained in reading
them. If for the future I shall be able to accomplish what will be any ways
suitable to the Encouragement* Your Lordship has been pleased to bestow on me,
it will wholly answer the Intentions, as well as the Ambition, of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obliged, Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant,
THO. DILKE.

PROLOGUE.
Spoken by Mr. Hodgson. WELL! Now for a kind-hearted Pit to day,
To hide the Blushes of a Virgin Play.
Oh Pox! Here Is store of old Campaigning Faces;
Faith, Critics, now you would best to quit your Places*
These are the Men, that point of Honor know,
And will be generous even to a Foe:
Whilst you your snarling brutish Rage display,
And Cannibal like, upon each other Prey.
From the nice powdered Sparks we little fear,
Their Judgment only does in Dress appear;
Nor need we care, how much we do expose
Those tame unthinking Animals, the Beaux;
Who still are Satyr-Proof, be it never so keen;
They Will all things bear, rather than not be seen.
But welcome now, you She-obliging Cits,
Who gull your Husbands to equip the Wits,
Leaving the Drones to mind their Cheating Tasks,
And hither flock, prink'd up in Vizor-Masks:
So may your Issue still supply the Stage,
And furnish Scandal for the ensuing Age.
To the Ladies.
And now to you, the Glories of our Isle,
Give but to day one kind consenting Smile;
'Twill more than doubly pay the Poet's Toil.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Nicholas Purflew, Joint-Guardian to his Niece, Mrs. Purflew, a formal
Herald and Antiquary, Mr. Bright. Alderman Whim, The other Joint-Guardian to
Mrs. Purflew, her Uncle by her Mother's side, a Projector and Humorist, Mr.
Underhill. Bellair, A Flanders-Collonel in love with Mrs. Purflew, Mr.
Betterton. Breviat, A Lawyer of the Temple, a Pretender to Mrs. Purflew, by the
Interest of the Alderman, Mr. Freeman. Goosandelo, A Self-admiring Fop, a
Pretender to Mrs. Purflew, by Sir Nicholas's Interest, Mr. Bowman. Eager, A
Sharper of the Town, that lives by Pimping and Cheating, Mr. Bowen. Sapless, A
raw Cheshire Squire, Mr. Dogget. Jocond, Boy to Colonel Bellair, Mrs. Ayloff.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Purflew, Neice to Sir Nicholas and the Alderman, an Heiress and great
Fortune, Mrs. Bracegirdle. Mrs. Plyant, Her Cousin and Confident, of no
Fortune, and of light Inclinations. Mrs. Bowman. Vesuvia, A Woman of the Town,
Mrs. Lee. Sprightly, An old Housekeeper to Sir Nicholas and the Alderman Mrs.
Lawson. Landlady, To Colonel Bellair. Mrs. Perin.
Tipstaff, Constables, Bullies, and Servants.

The SCENE in LONDON.

THE Lover's Luck.
ACT I.
SCENE the Temple Walks. Eager meeting Breviat.
Eager, G'Morrow Mr. Breviat; I Am taking a Mouth full of your Temple Air: But I
profess it is so blowed upon by the White-Fryars Knights of the Post, the Noble
Attestors of your studied Frauds and Falsehoods, that it is dangerous giving it
Reception in an honest Breast.


Breviat, You are very Conscientious Eager, -- And speak as if your Profession
was a Secret.


Eag. I dare own my Profession, and justify my self a generous public spirited
Person, a Promoter of civil Understanding, and a charitable Procurer of
Fellow-feeling betwixt both Sexes, in order to the Establishing the mutual
Correspondence of Mankind -- Whilst you Wranglers, at the Bar, disturb the
Peace and Repose of all Men; then basely build your Fortunes upon your own
Client's Ruin.


Bre. Prithee leave this Railing, -- And communicate some of your Instructions
for the effectual prosecution of my Amor I told you of.


Eag. Oh! -- with the great Heiress Mrs. Purflew; -- Why look you now, here you
find the want of my Faculty already -- managing a Match, and procuring a
Mistress, is still Pimping -- though by distinct Methods we attain our
different Ends.


Enter Bellair, Jocond, and Servants with Baggage, as just Landed. Bellair, Go
Jocond, get my things to my Lodgings, and call at my Tailors, and the Exchange,
and -- bid them send home what I writ for.


Jocond, Yes Sir. -- Now must I quest amongst a Covey of Strumpets; All the
Eringo my Master has been chawing this Voyage, will not supply a single Pittance
to each of the Game I shall spring.


[Exit with Servants. Eag. 'Ods so, here comes Col. Bellair -- by his Garb. I
belive just arrived.


Brev. Col. you're welcome back to England -- I will not ask how stand Affairs in
Flanders, since your safe return will atone for the loss of Hundreds.


Eag. I am confident the hearty Jollys of the Old Devil, as well as the buxom
She Is about Covent Garden, will subscribe to Mr. Breviat's Opinion.


Bell. Your Servant Gentlemen -- What do you entertain a Stranger with
Raillery? But I am glad to find the same gaiety of Humor reigns with you
still. -- Eager thou look very Spruce, -- Do lucky Hits fall apace? But thy
Calling can never be at a stand, whilst either young Fools have Money, or the
old ones Leachery. -- You see I must go and Accouter. For the present adieu.


[Exit. Eag. See how heavily the Col. walks, with a score or two of dead Men in
each Pocket, and half a dozen of vacant Commissions.


Brev. I don't grudge him the fruits of his Fatigues, -- Since he is a brave,
honest, generous Gentleman. -- I think he has 'scap'd without the Badge of a
single Scar.


Eag. Though he has lost no Blood this Summer, yet he has sweat for it
sufficiently, and has swelled out his Honor, in a graceful Chair of State. --
I heard that he was laid up Stewing all the beginning of the Campaign.


Brev. O fie! -- Eager, thou art ill-natured.


Eag. The truth on it is, I ought to be silent -- For I know I shall be employed
by him -- I must hunt the City for some Merchants Prentices, that have broke
into their Master's Cash; or some young Recreants of the Law, that have made
themselves Purses by a decent Robbery of their Father's, or some rich Uncles;
-- So they shall have Commissions, and handsome retreats to the Army. And the
Col. shall have his Recruits made, and I shall have my Snacks -- And so that
business is done.


Brev. I find you are very instrumental in military Promotions; -- Is that the
way to Preferment?


Eag. That Is a safe way to the first step; but there is another, a sure Card to
Advancement for such as have an exquisite Knowledge in my honorable Vocation
of Pimping; as prostrating a handsome Relation, or so.


Brev. But, what a Pox, is this to my business? -- my little charming Purflew,
and those killing Graces, of her Manors, Lands and Tenements.


Eag. I must confess her well stuffed Purses are weighty Perfections, had she
no other.


Brev. 'Sbud they are -- I would willingly shake hands with this crabbed Study
of the Law, with all the dull Ribaldry of Infeofment, Disseizins, Vowchings,
and the Devil and all.


Eag. A -- h, That black old Gentlemen you speak of, was the first of your
Employ, he sui'd out a Writ of Ejectment against poor Father Adam.


Brev. And I don't care if he claims his Right to the whole Tribe of Gown-men
Ecclesiastical and Civil. -- If I get my Mistress, he shall have nothing to say
to me, on that score, I promise him. -- Therefore, prithee, let us come to the
Point -- thou know I will not be backward to whet thy Invention. -- There
honest Eager, do understand the Language of old Jacobus's?


[Gives him Money. Eag. Ay, Sir, now you say something to the purpose. -- Then
to be plain and short with you.


Brev. Come -- begin then.


Eag. I have already told you something of Alderman Whim's Humor. -- He has a
greater Influence over his Niece Purflew, than her other Uncle Sir Nicholas,
who is joint Trustee with him.


Brev. Good --


Eag. And though the young Lady be enjoined by Will not to Marry till Eighteen,
without the consent of both Uncles; yet I am confident the Alderman alone is
able to effect the business, -- she being already of that Age, or very near the
matter, though kept in Ignorance of it.


Brev. Very well.


Eag. You must know both the Uncles design to make their Markets -- Yet will
not trust each other: Therefore you must come down a good handsome Donative to
the Alderman, which will bring him to treat of further Terms.


Brev. A lusty round Bribe you mean. -- I belive you're much in the right on it,
for that is the chief Spring in all the grand Movements of both Church and State.


Eag. Oh fie! -- You must not call it barefaced Bribery; it is not good breeding
to term it so -- I that have no other way of Living should be loath to have
Gentlemen's noble Gratuities have that scandalous Title. -- But to proceed, You
know he is a magotty Projector; You must humor his extravagant Notions, and
what you deposite, you must pretend to entrust him withal for the Encouragement
of some Project.


Brev. Very pretty. -- I find downright Suborning is improved to a delicate
nice Science.


Eag. O God, Sir, a curious Study, and has its different Appellations by the
several Stations of Men. -- The Churchmen call it an Earnest of Merit. -- The
Courtier a Hint of Remembrance. -- Ministers of State, and Officers in the
Courts of Justice term it Expedition. -- The Grandees of the Army a
Recommendation. -- The Parliament Men a Promoting of the Business. -- The Bawd
a Gratuity. -- The Whore a Pair of Gloves; and the Jockeys a Barnacle. -- All Is
to the same purpose in Faith.


Brev. Why, look you Mr. Eager, I believe what you utter is downright Oracle;
therefore I having a parcel of old Granam Gold by me -- I am resolved to put it
in, and venture my Luck for the Double-Chance, Wealth and Beauty.


Eag. Do so; I have urged your business to the Alderman already, and found it
work; therefore about it.


Brev. I Will go to my Chamber, and take my Credentials with me, and to him. --
Eager, wish me good Luck; -- Farewell.


[Exit. Eag. Sir, I am your most Obsequious: So there is one Bubble dispatched.
-- Let me look over my Table Book, and see how I must order the Business of the
Day. -- To meet Mr. Goosandelo to introduce him into Sir Nicholas's Company,
and assist him in his Amor with Mrs. Purflew; the same with Breviat's: But
that will not prejudice my Concern. -- To bully Squire Sapless out of a certain
Sum of Money. Good, that will be done with ease: A rich Prize, that Cheshire
Spark, in Faith -- I must make this Booby bleed stoutly. -- To Solicit for
Alderman Whim, that he may solace himself, as he calls it, with Madam Vesuvia;
so. -- To procure an honorable Interview betwixt the old Herald, Sir Nicholas
Purflew, and the bright Inhabitant of the Azure Apartment; (as his Letter
styles her) very well. The same Lady Vesuvia -- I must put the grand Menage
upon these two old lustful Satyrs. -- Well, I profess mine is a laborious
Employ. -- All the Qualifications for a Secretary of State, or a Principal
Minister, are not sufficient to accomplish a thorough-pac'd Pimp, and Cheat. By
your leave, sweet Mr. Eager; but, I think, I may make bold with my self now I
am alone.


[Exit. SECENE opens to Col. Bellair's Chamber.
Bellair, Jocond, and Lanlady. Bell. I vow, Lanlady, you grow younger -- I
never saw you look better in my life.


Lan. Ah, -- Lord bless you noble Col. it is the sight of your sweet Face has
brought the Blood into my Cheeks; I cannot choose but smirk and simper to see you
come well back. --! hope you have brought your Limbs, and all your Members safe
and sound home, or else we shall have a filthy Outcry in the Parish, God knows.


Bell. I thank my Stars, Lanlady, I am no ways disabled.


Lan. Troth I am glad on it. -- You're a happy Man, Col. and I dare say was
lap'd in your Mother's Smock; God rest her Soul. -- There has been some how
notice of your coming, for I have had nothing but rapping at my Door, Coaches
and Chairs every Hour, and all the same Questions, squeaking through their
Vizor-masks, Is Col. Bellair come to Town?


Bell. Say you so, Lanlady?


Lan. Ay Troth, -- I protest I pity you; -- I am sure I know what a Man is, and
as much of a Man as any Woman; and therefore know you will have too much upon
your Hands.


Bell. I have good store of very able Assistants a coming over, Lanlady.


Lan. I vow you Men of the Sword strike deep with the Ladies. -- How sneakingly
do the peaking Chits, the Summer Beaux look, when you Men of Mettle, armed at
all points, appear?


Bell. Faith the Soldiery is obliged to you. -- But, I assure you, I design to
lead a reserved course of Life, having very serious matter upon my Hands.


Lan. Marry, God send alls well with you say I; or that you ben't near your End
-- So, do you near? they are knocking; look to your self, for your Quarters are
attacked already.


[Knocking without. Bell. Good Lanlady, let 'em know I am indisposed after my
Journey, and gone to rest.


Lan. I know they will be very pressing: but I am resolved they shall not disturb
you.


[Exit. Bell. Jocond, Are my things come?


Joc. Yes Sir; and the Women will soon follow. -- As soon as I told them you
were returned, away they run to their Glasses, fell a setting their Heads, and
clapping on of Patches; then skip'd over the Counters for haste. -- I Would advise
you, Sir, to stop some Cotton in your Ears, you will have a hideous buzzing about
your Head in a moment.


Bell. I am resolved I Will see none of them. -- Jocond, Go get your self clean
and ready, then come and receive your Instructions; I must send you to my
Mistress to give notice of my return, and to know how stand Affairs in that
Family.


Joc. Well, Sir* for tipping of Billet Deux, and Whispering of soft Messages,
let me alone. -- I find whoever serves an Officer long, may in time expect to
be principal Messenger to the Prince of Darkness.


[Aside. [Exit. Bell. I find that I begin to abominate the Thoughts of the
obstreperous, rampant Sluts of my former Acquaintance; -- and would marry, were
it purely in my own Defense, had I not the blessed Inducements of a blooming
Beauty, that wants not the poor assistance of Art; Of a lovely Innocence,
without the least tarnish of Folly; Of maturity of Sense, without a vain
knowledge of it; -- And such a plentiful Fortune, that may at all times furnish
a hospitable Table, Means for charitable Reliefs, supplies for Building,
Plantations and Adornments, and all necessary Expenses for Gentleman-like
Diversions. -- Such is the Platform of my future Happiness; -- And so adieu to
the toils of War, and the fatigues of Campaigning; Whilst, in the circle of my
Purflew's Arms, I shall enjoy more solid Pleasures, than the Conquest of
Kingdoms can afford to martial Heroes, and ambitious Princes.


The SCENE closes to Covent Garden.
Sir Nicholas Purflew, and Eager. Eag. Upon my Reputation, Sir Nicholas
Purflew, he is every way a fine Gentleman; a Man of nice Honor.


Sir Nich. That I profoundly approve of.


Eag. In short he is -- Master of all the worthy Endowments I know you esteem.
-- The circular Rays of the Drawing Room center on him; by him the Beaux of the
Chocolate-house adjust their Garniture; -- And the Wits at Will's, Commonplace
his Sayings; his Pedigree, Sir, you very well know.


Sir Nich. Mr. Goosandelo, I can peremptorily attest to be of a very ancient
and honorable Family.


Eag. Without dispute, Sir.


Sir Nich. Let me see, -- if my memory betrays not my overburthened Knowledge,
he is of old Gaulish Extraction. -- He bears in a Field Gules, three Geese
Heads Eras'd Argent by the name of Goosandelo.


Eag. Very like so.


Sir Nich. A just reward that for their impertinont Cackling, and preventing
that noble Enterprise upon the Capitol. -- The Coat does plainly illustrate the
heroic Actions of his valiant Ancestors.


Eag. A mighty Exploit to ring off the Necks of three Geese. [Aside.] And
what is more, Sir, I heard him say, he designed to make an offer of a
considerable Sum, to be employed by you in search of Antiquities -- and hopes
you will give him a favorable admittance to make his pretentions to your
beautiful Neice; -- But here he comes to plead his Amor himself.


Enter Goosandelo. Goosandelo, Sir Nicholas Purflew, I humbly kiss your hand,
and foot too, if you will give me leave, with all the Respect I am capable of
paying so honorable a Personage as your self.


Sir Nich. Worthy Mr. Goosandelo, with expanded Arms I embrace your Friendship.


Eag. So --, here is like to be a pretty medly of young Foppery and old
Formality.


[Aside. Sir. Nich. I magnanimously applaud your noble Intentions of tracing
the hidden Footsteps of Antiquity, and searching into the petrifi'd Bowels of
past Ages.


Eag. It Is the searching into your pretty Neice, he would be at in Faith.


[Aside. Goos. With the Directions of so sure a Guide, as you Sir --, I
question not of making a good Progress in those Studies --. I must own without
vanity, my Genius is quick and perceptive; that you may find by the vivacity of
my Eyes. -- Don't you see a peculiar Sparkle about them? If you look narrowly,
you will perceive some thing of the true black Water --. They are composed of
Diamantick Principles, and are able to make legible Characters in the most
obdurate of Hearts.


Sir Nich. A pretty ingenious Remark of yours --. I suppose you are already
acquainted with the Rules of Heraldy.


Goos. Oh* Dear Sir! How can a Gentleman pretend to that Name, without knowing
the Affinity he bears to the Beasts, Birds, or what else adorns his Shield?


Eag. So, by his own Rule he may find a flock of Relations on every Common.


[Aside. Sir Nich. What you say is infallibly true, Sir, --. And then the
Ancient Heroic Laws of Chivalry affords matter of high Speculation.


Goos. No question; I should be very happy in fancying Devices, and composing
of smart Motro's for Knights Adventurers.


Sir Nich. Then again, the Embellishments of Coat Armor, the branching of
Genealogies, are the Grounds to build upon the worth of a Family. -- And for
the Illustration of History, the exquisite knowledge of Hieroglyphics,
Obelisks, Urns, Sculptures, Statues, and Medals, nervates the Undestanding. --
I Will show you a Medal lately sent me from Rome, by my Son that is making the
Grand-Tour, more worth than all the Mines of Peru.


[Shews a Medal. Goos. Upon my Soul, it is violently fine.


Eag. Pray, Sir, give me leave to see it; -- I cannot for my Life discern any
Impression or Character upon it.


Sir Nich. O'ds heart, O me Man! why that is the rarity of it: -- If those had
been left, every body had known it. I would not give a Button for an
Inscription, that has so much as every tenth Letter remaining; or a Figure or
Statue that has any thing of the Resemblance of what it was intended for.


Eag. I find there is a plag^y Mystery in Ignorance, and it is a wonderful wise
thing to know nothing of the matter.


Sir Nich. Why there is the business; now -- I must take the liberty to tell you
Mr. Eager, that by this you have demonstrated your self of a Vulgar Capacity.


Goos. So he has, I protest, Sir, -- Poor Eager, I pity thee. -- You saw, Sir,
how quickly I discovered its Excellences.


Sir Nich. And by so doing, you demonstrated the great reach of your
understanding: -- I Will undertake by this Medal, to sound the depth of a
Judgment as faithfully, as holding up a young Eagle to the Sun, will discover
the truth of his Breed.


Eag. Gentlemen, my business calls me away; I hope you will pardon me. -- This
dull Stuff gives me the Spleen intollerably.


[Aside. Sir Nich. Mr. Eager, pray don't suffer an Oblivion, to obliterate what
I enjoined you to Commemorate in the the Afternoon upon the Declension of the
Sun.


Eag. What a Pox does he mean? [Aside] -- Oh! I know; by no means; Sir, I Will be
punctual to a minute. -- Confound his Romantic way of Expression: I was
showing my want of Apprehension again. [Aside.]


[Exit. Goos. I design, Sir, to order the payment of a parcel of Money where
you please to appoint, -- if you will give your self the trouble to expend it on
Curiosities.


Sir Nich. I shall industriously apply my self on so noble a Design.


Goos. Now, Sir, I have a matter of another nature to divulge to you. -- It Is
to acquaint you with the violent Passion I have entertained for your pretty
Niece.


Sir Nich. Hum, -- indeed I have no present discernment of any Obstacle that
may ineffectuate your Desires. I shall offer you some preliminary Proposals, --
and so leave it to the Decision of the young Lady her self. -- Your Blood and
Person render you acceptable to the fair Sex.


Goos. If I am left to the Lady, I need not say a word of the matter, tho you
see I have a happy Talent in Polite Oratory were there occasion.


Sir Nich. But, good Sir, will you make love without speaking?


Goos. I Will undertake to thaw a Woman's heart, that is as cold as Ice, with my
bare Appearance, -- and insensibly riggle into her Affections with my pretty
taking Movements, as thus. -- So I come into a Room, and erect my self at a
distance, thus; -- observe my Eyes now. -- Then I jut a little on, twisting my
self thus. -- Now look how I set my Feet. -- Then I gracefully handle my
Snuff Box thus; -- pray mind my Hand. -- Now she Smiles, -- I spring forwards,
-- open my Arms, -- and she poor Soul drops into my Bosom like a shooting Star,
and there dissolves to Jelly.


Sir Nich. On my word, a notable odd way of Courtship. -- Come, Sir, will you
honor me with your Company to Dinner. -- Alderman Whim and I keep a Joint
House over our Joint Trust: -- But not a syllable of it to him.


Goos. No, no, Mum's the word.


Sir Nich. We are both at present as it were Rangers, and Men at large. -- My
good Woman is in the Straw, and his gone to a Funeral of a Relation in the
Country.


Goos. So much the better, for old Women are generally the Plague of young
Society.


Sir Nich. Come, we'll go and take a Whet by the way, -- and agree of Articles.


Goos. Sir, I Will attend you.

Then I with Shape, Mien, Wit, and pleasing Air,
Will snap the Heart Strings of the charming Fair.

[Exeunt. The end of the first Act.
ACT II.
SCENE a Room in Sir Nicholas's, and the Alderman's House.
Enter Alderman Whim and Breviat. Aldman, I Have been preparing my Niece for
your Reception, Mr. Breviat. -- I'dad, I'dad, the young Gipsy is prinking her
self up. -- As soon as I whispered the concern, the little Rogue did so twitter
about the mouth, it made the Blood in my old Veins dance again, tho I am her
own Uncle. -- But I am heartily glad you say you are inclined to Projection.


Breviat, I think Mr. Alderman it is a Study that renders a man most capable of
doing his Country Service.


Ald. I'dad you are in the right on it. -- I Will show you here some rough-drawn
Schemes of Projects, which I hope to put in Execution.


[Looking over Papers. Brev. You Will oblige me entirely.


Ald. This is, -- do you mind me? For making Automata's self-moving Engines, by
which whole Timber Trees shall come Whirling to the King's Yards without the
assistance of a single Horse, I'dad.


Brev. There will be an Improvement of Land-Carriage!


Ald. And by the same Principles, do you mark me? -- I may contrive a fiery
Machine, that shall invisibly roll under Water for some Leagues, -- then burst
with that tremendous Violence, that shall rend the French Fleet to Atoms.


Brev. Good Lord! -- What a Hurricane will there be?


Ald. This again, -- mark me well, is a most exquisite Project if it hits, and
I get a Patent for it, I shall be as Rich as Craesus, and the Nation the most
flourishing Kingdom in the Universe. -- It is, do you see, the furnishing Ships
with Remora's, to each Vessel a Cask of little Emissaries; -- that whenever a
Privateer comes sooping along to seize his Prey, -- I'dad clap him a Remora in
his Stern, -- and so good by to ye IN faith.


Brev. Ah, ah, ah, I laugh to think what a devilish Sputtring will there be
among the French Seamen, when they find their Vessel fixed.


Ald. I believe I cannot put this in practice; -- Do you see? -- without some
preternatural Incantations, some infernal Rhetoric, -- which I shall find out
amongst the Magickmongers; -- and what if the Devil be employed, so it be for
the public Good?


Brov. Oh, to choose Sir! -- A man of excellent Morals, this Alderman.


[Aside. Ald. We all konw what Land-spirits the French have made use on in
their Exploits. -- And the Sovereignty of the Sea being ours, -- Why should not
the Sea-Devils be entertained in our Service?


Brev. It Is but reasonable.


Ald. I think it would be of moment too, to encourage Missions to Lapland to be
instructed there in the way of Barrelling up Winds. -- I see the Ladies a
coming; -- I Will leave you to entertain them, whilst I go into my Study, and
hammer out my Projects to shape and perfection.


[Exit. Enter Mrs. Purflew and Mrs. Pliant. Brev. Now I -- that am never at a
stand to brazen hundreds of Lies at the Bar, can scarce put a face on it to
utter a single Truth in the business of Love; -- but I Will keep to general
Topics.


Ply. Here Is your Lover, Cousin Purflew. -- I vow I like his looks, he is a good
lusty portly Fellow.


Purf. Indeed, Cousin Plyant, I think you are inclined to like any man's looks,
let him be what he will, so he be but a man.


Ply. Prepare your self -- for now he advances; no doubt big with an amarous
Speech.


Brev. I shall never, Madam, sufficiently acknowledge the Alderman's double
Obligations, as well of his own ingenious Conversation, as in affording me the
most ravishing sight humane Eyes are able to bear the luster of -- your most
transcendent Beauty, -- When were you at the Play, Ladies?


Purf. Truly we seldom come there, -- but I find you go, and have picked up a
fulsome way of Expression; -- the style seems to be the young Chaplains when he
makes love to Abigal.


Brev. Faith, I design to go no more. -- The Rogues the Poets make greater
Monsters of us Gentlemen of the Long Robe, then ever they used to make of the
Grandees of the City.


Purf. You know, Sir, Folly and Knavery furnish matter for Satyr; -- and whilst
any of you make profession of the latter so publicly, and detect one another
so ridiculously, they must expect to be the sport of the Ingenious, as well as
the scorn of the most Serious part of Mankind.


Ply. You must give my Cousin Purflew the liberty of Raillery; -- it is her way,
Sir.


Brev. Lord, Madam, what the Lady pleases; -- I shall neither undertake to
palliate the miscarriages of some, nor vindicate the Profession in general; --
fince my study of it has been only for my Accomplishment and Diversion: -- But
I shall adventure to plead my Cause in Love, according to the liberty the
Alderman has pleased to allow in my Pretentions to your fair Ladyship.


Purf. My Uncle is very obliging. -- I suppose he has consulted his own
Interest before my Inclinations, -- and no doubt you have made trial of a
method you find most prevailing in the Affairs of your own practice.


Brev. 'Sbud she is a Devil at guessing. -- I fear I shall be run aground.


[Aside. Ply. Pray, Mr. Breviat, next time you come, bring me an old Limb of
the Law; and being two for two, you would have the fairer play for your Money. I am
for none under the Coif. -- I could perfectly reconcile my self to all that an
old Sergeant expects in a young Wife; -- officiously cut his Corns, rub his
Shins every Night, and his Head every Morning, make him a Pot of Chocolate, set
his Band, give him a Buss, and so dispatch the old Fool to Westminster; -- But
by all means let him be a Circuitire; so much time every Year I could willingly
have at my own disposal.


Brev. I find I am fallen into Hucksters hands, but I am resolved to bear on. [
Aside] You are disposed to be merry, Lady; -- but mine is a serious
undertaking, -- therefore, Madam. --


Purf. Well, Spark. --


Brev. Now she looks me in the Face with such a roguish Leer, that were I to be
damned, I cannot proceed.


[Aside. Purf. Come, shall I speak for you -- you being naturally Lumpish, and
Phlegmatic, and wanting a knack to entitle you to be a Practitioner of the
first Rate; you would willingly save your self any further trouble, -- and be
at Livery and seizin of my Estate. -- Is not this to your purpose, -- Hea?


Ply. Fie Cousin, this was a little too severe.


Brev. Bless me! -- What shall I say now? Would I had my old Gold out of the
Alderman's Clutches, and cooped up in my Study, tumbling over my Volumes of
Reports.


[Aside. Ply. What, Sir, are you silenced? Pull up and stickle in the business,
the Cause is not lost yet, Man. -- It Is the nature of our Sex to rally them
most we like best.


Brev. Have at it once again. [ Aside.] -- Your Beauty alone had to the utmost
enslaved your Admirer -- You had no need to have used such irresistible Shafts
of Wit, to have perfected your Conquest.


Purf. Conquest, of whom, pray Sir? -- You speak as if you were a Person of
Value, -- and that a Woman had need to exert all her Charms, to assure her self
of so rich a Prize, as I find you esteem your self.


Ply. Prithee, my Dear, don't discourage the Gentleman at this rate. -- I Will
assure you I don't think Mr. Breviat despicable. -- His Person robust* and very
promising, his Air grave, modest, and natural. -- And I have heard fortune has
not been the least niggardly in the distribution of her worldly Bounties; since
he is left stated in a handsome paternal Inheritance.


[ Breviat bowing all the while. Purf. IN my Conscience, the Girl is gulling me
of my Lover under the very Nose of me. -- Mr. Breviat look to your self, -- I
find my Couz. Plyant has a Hawk's Eye upon you.


Brev. I am obliged to the Lady, and can aver what she has been pleased to
intimate, that I am not incapacitated for my pretentions to any Gentlewoman. --
Nor shall I ever be ashamed of the sincere Zeal I shall religiously manifest,
in the paying of my Devotion to so Divine a Being as your self.


Ply. Why, look you now, -- there is Temple Love for you; -- an Amorous Bishop
could have said no more to a Woman. -- What would you have?


Purf. If you expect your Sincerity to stand you in stead, you must apply your
self to some Woman that never was within the smoke of London, -- especially not
to one bred at Hackney.


Brev. It Is you alone, I must, and will adore.


Purf. What love Madrigal are you obliged to for that whining Expression? --
Cannot you remember the next Line, and so Court me with Couplets? -- But to deal
plainly with you; which by the bye, you ought not to expect in a Woman, I hope
I shall have no obligation to do otherwise than dutifully submit my self to my
Uncle Alderman's Conduct, -- whose Kindness or Prudence I am unwilling to call
in question.


Ply. D' ye see, Sir, what a pretty conscious Blush attended that Answer? And
how her Fan caught the soft consenting Sigh.


Brev. Oh blessed Accent! -- Oh harmonious Words! -- The Raptures that sieze my
Soul, can be expressed no otherwise than by being Dumb.


[Stands in amaze. Ald. [Within.] A thought a thought, Mr. Breviat. Mr.
Breviat, a thought, I say, a rich thought. [ Enters.] Ods me, Man, what fallen
a Sleep in your Addresses? I certainly have, Sir, the most pregnant Brain of
any Man living. -- It has just now teemed such a thought; come along, I Will show
it you. -- I'dad, I'dad, I have clapped it under the Hatches of Black and White,
that it shall not escape me.


[Exeunt Ald. and Brev. Ply. I fear the honest Alderman will teem so many
thoughts as he calls it, that he will leave himself a very empty Skull at length.


Purf. Nay, it is certain he is a little beside himself already, he would never a
picked up for me such a Fool of a Fellow, as this Lawyer else: -- A solemn Fop.


Ply. The fitter for a Property. -- But prithee Couz, if thou do not like
him, why did you give him that encouragement at last?


Purf. How, dear Child! -- You that are a professed Votary in Amor and
Gallantry; -- a studious Novice of Plays and Romances; and not guess at my
Intentions? -- Is it not plain, how both my Uncles would sacrifice me and my
Fortune to their separate Interests?


Ply. That I believe.


Purf. Have not I reason therefore to take my own Measures, and free my self
from the Danger of their mercenary Proceedings? -- I Will say no more.


Ply. Oh, pure Couz. In Faith. -- Will you that profess your self a severe
Moralist, do any thing that may infringe your Duty to your present Relations?
-- Or offer to contemn the wise Precautions of the Deceased? --


Purf. Cousin, -- I am not unacquainted with either my Age, or my Power; tho
they have been so sedulous to hood wink my Preceptions. -- Nor shall I attempt
any thing but what may concur with Morality, and be justified by Prudence.


Ply. I swear thou art a rare Girl: -- but hark ye, this Affair with Mr.
Breviat may be very well managed for my Advantage. -- You may easily palm him
upon me. -- And to tell you the truth, Couz. methinks it is high time I should
have a Husband; should I once reach that fulsome Title of a Stale Maid, I
should be the miserablest Creature living.


Purf. Alas, poor Soul. -- Well, Cousin, I Will undertake to serve thee
effectually, I am something inclined to projection, as well as my Uncle. --
Sprightly our Housekeeper is stanch and may; -- but here she comes very hot
with some news or other.


Enter Sprightly. Sprightly, Ah Madam. 'Od be thanked I'Goddle, ah, ah, ah. --
Who do you think? Oh, dear heart, I cannot speak -- Oh! Iack-a-day, and marry,
Odd send my heart hold out. Oh! -- Ah, ah, ah -- Oh! I am so glad.


[Laughs and Cries. Purf. What Is? -- What Is the matter? Prithee Sprightly
compose thy self, and let us hear.


Spri. Why then that fine, -- handsome, -- well-favour'd Gentleman, your
Colonel, is come safe to Town; -- so now it is out, and I am pretty well at
ease. -- He has sent his Boy, Jocond, hither who has brought you a Box of fine
Outlandish things. -- I told our Folks he came from an Acquaintance of yours at
Hackney.


Purf. Is this all?


Spri. Marry, and I believe you think it a fine All too. -- But I have more
news to tell you, Sir Nicholas is come home, and has brought another Suitor, --
the gimm^st Moppet that e're has been here yet; -- but as to a Man, no more
like your Colonel, that a Baby upon a Butter-print is like the Man in the
Moon. -- He calls him Mr. Goose -- Goose -- something, I don't know what. --
Well, I Will go keep Jocond company till you come.


[Exit. Ply. Oh, Cousin, it is Mr. Goosandelo, he was the topping Spark at the
Wells this Year.


Purf. Yes, yes, Mr. Goosandelo is a topping Spark wherever he comes.


Ply. Do you know him?


Purf. I know enough of him. -- The last time I was at the Play with my Aunt,
-- I saw him making antic Grimaces, and playing a thousand Monkey-tricks in
Fop-box.


Ply. You must not expect a Mr. Breviat of him, on my word.


Pur. I must expect what is worse; -- shallow Conceits, -- windy Noise, -- and
insufferable Self-applause. -- I find the Air sweetens, the Beaux is making his
Approaches.


Enter Sir Nicholas Purflew and Goosandelo. Sir Nich. Mr. Goosandelo, -- my
Niece, -- my Cousin Plyant.


[ Goos. salutes the Ladies, then Sir Nich. talks with Purflew apart. Goos.
Here I am obliged to break the Rules of modern breeding to please the old
Antiquary. [ Aside. -- [to Mrs. Plyant.] I have not seen you of late, Madam; --
I might say you live very obscurely in this Town, had not your Eyes the power
of dispelling Obscurity it self.


Ply. O dear, Mr. Goosandelo, you still keep your obliging way of Gallantry. --
I think the last time I saw you, I had the honor to be your Partner at a Dance
at Astrop.


Goos. Let me perish, Madam, if ever I Dance when I drink the Waters again; --
it settled such Humors in my Legs, that I was obliged to Cup, and suck 'em down
with Leeches a month or two to give them their true Air and Shape again. -- I
have a mind to forswear Dancing.


Ply. 'Twill be impossible, Sir, to withstand the Importunities of the Ladies.
-- Lord! 'twill be Death to 'em to be denied.


Goos. Let 'em dye. -- I Will not dance, to save the Life of a Duchess. -- To
see a well-shap'd Gentleman move upon huge Porterly Pillars, and be damned all
the days of his life to a sad-colour'd Stockin. -- Oh abominable! -- D' you
think I Will hazard that?


Sir Nich. Mr. Goosandelo, I Will leave my Niece your Charge for the space of
some ensuing moments, whilst I go pay a Visit to my Wife, the Lady Couchant
above stairs.


[Exit. Ply. O Heavens! how came we, Couz, without our knotting? -- What will
this Gentleman think, to see us Idle?


Goos. On my soul Ladies, I am violently concerned that you are without your
Huswifry; I shall want a great part of my Discourse. -- It Is generally the
first Topic we fall upon, when we make our Addresses to Persons of Quality.


Purf. I should think, Sir, 'twere a dry, crabbed subject.


Goos. Ah, ah, ah; because it is so full of knots; but nothing is uneasy to a
Man of Parts. As I could say thus, -- You have knotted so long upon the Thread
of my Affections, that your La'ship has now worked up a Piece sufficient to
fringe round a Squob of Repose, for my long languishing Amor. -- And a
thousand such pretty things. But since I am left here by Sir Nicholas to make
Love, How do you think I Will begin? In what Shape? -- Like what?


Purf. Why you need not take the pains the gods of Yore used to do. -- You see
you have easy access to me in your own shape, and that is more monstrous than
any you can think on.


Goos. Nay, now I swear you talk by contraries. -- Here Is a Lady will tell you
what killing work my Shape has made in the world.


Ply. I know, Sir, you were ever reputed a very pretty Gentleman.


Goos. Phoo -- every body knows that; and my Life on it this Lady shall know it
before I have done. -- I am positive I shall not want shafts, for I design to make
Love to you in the nature of a Porcupine. -- I Will rustle my Habiliments, dart
forth a Poinant Quill, and strike you dead, I'gad. -- Don't you find your self
wounded? -- Hah, Madam.


[Stands taking Snuff. Purf. I must confess your Complicated Perfumes, and your
Cashified Breath have a little discomposed me. -- Therefore pray, Sir, make
Love at a farther distance.


Goos. Now by the Universal Light, I have no occasion for them, were they not
customary to all those that are the exact Models of Wit and Breeding. -- And
now I talk of Wit, do you see this Diamond Ring? -- This Diamond Ring?


Purf. What are you going to show Hocus Pocus Tricks? Have you got any of the
German Artist's Powder la Pimp a la Pimp? -- You should first put on a little
Blue Jacket, tie a Chain about your middle, and skip up and down the Balcony to
gather Spectators e're you begin. About Pug.


Goos. I find you begin to love me, by that pretty endearing word. -- But as I
was saying, this Ring guided by this hand; -- which is a hand I am not at all
ashamed on.


Ply. That I vow you need not.


Goos. Has writ in Ladies Windows such Mysterious Things, that the severest
Critics allow 'em to be Wit it self epitomized. -- The Shashes at Kensington
are full of the Proofs of my Genius; which I daily see entered into the Tablets
of Travelers: -- If you will show me your Closet, I Will write something in your
Window there.


Purf. Gently, Spark. -- Sure we have not proceeded yet so far, as to admit you
into my Closet.


Goos. No? -- I find you are unacquainted with the Assurance that is
inseparable with Men of Wit. -- We often rush into the Closets of Ladies that
we never saw before. I was sent for the other day by a Lady of no small Rank,
to teach her a Song in her Closet. -- It Is one of my own composing; I Will sing
it you, Ladies.


Ply. O! by all means, -- I beseech you, Sir.


Goos. Pray observe the Sweetness of its Air, and the Delicacy of its Turn and
Cadence.


A SONG.
I.
RIch Mines of Hot Love are rooted here:
Flashes of Flames in my Eyes appear,
When swift as the Sun,
To the Arms of Thetis
I run, I run, I run,
To seize of my Bliss,
In the Parts where it is,
Oh! you know, you know, you know where.
II.
She laid by 'r knotting with wondrous haste,
And took me about my well-shap'd Waste:
I envied not Jove
His Caelestial Throne,
Nor all the gods above:
Whilst Kisses came on,
And something was done,
Which I know, I know, I know best.
Purf. Was there ever any thing so ridiculous? --


[aside. Ply. I protest, Sir, it is very pretty and peculiar.


Goos. Ay, so it is, Madam: What an Engaging Freedom is there in that, Oh you
know, you, etc. Alas! this is but the loose droppings of my Pen. -- Upon my
soul, my Songs are reputed the Standard of Lyrick Poesy. -- Most of those Odes
that are entit'led, Done by a Person of Quality, are mine. -- I design to write
a Play by the same hand.


Purf. If you copy your self, you will not fail of one good Character.


Goos. That Is true, Madam. -- The Poets generally do that. -- I Will be the Fine
Gentleman of Wit and good Education; -- You the Fine Young Lady, of Beauty,
Fortune, and good Sense: We'll trick the old Guardians, marry in disguise, and
so have a Dance. -- It Is a good beaten road; a man that writes, can scarce be
out of his way. -- What say you, Madam? Is this to be the conclusion of our
Amors?


Purf. You would not have me surrender upon the first Attack? -- That will
lessen the Hononr of your Conquest.


Goos. Have a care; deferring a Parley may be of dangerous consequence. -- I am
of a fiery Temper. -- If you hold out to be taken with Sword in hand, -- I
don't know what may become of you.


Ply. To prevent your Fury, it is but reasonable that Sir Nicholas Purflew,
whose Name I bear, should have the power of altering mine. What can be gathered
from this, I leave to you. I see him coming to you. -- Come, Couz. let us go
walk a little before Dinner.


[ Exeunt Purflew and Plyant. Goos. This I think is Encouragement enough: --
But how the Devil could it be expected otherwise? -- What Woman can withstand
my perfect agreeableness?


Enter Sir Nicholas at one door, Alderman Whim and Breviat at the other. Ald.
Will Not that I showed you last be of excellent use, and very feisible? I'dad,
i'dad, there was never any thing like it in the known parts of the world.


Brev. No, nor in the unknown neither, I dare say. -- No doubt, Sir, you will
have your Effigies erected in Brass, to transmit to future Ages the universal
Service you have done. -- For what a Pox, has this gaudy winged Insect
Goosandelo been fluttering about my Mistress? 'Sbud, I Will watch his waters for
him.


[aside. Sir Nich. My Brother, Sir, for so our near Affinity makes us term our
selves, does merit very much from the Nation. -- And if it does him that piece
of Justice, I Will take care to form the Model, and compose the Inscription.


Goos. Then no doubt 'twill be according to the true Roman Grandeur.


Ald. My Brother Knight here too, deserves very well to be minded of the world,
i'dad, or else it will be a very ungrateful blockhead of a world, to forget all
its old Acquaintance, that Sir Nicholas daily converses withal.


Sir Nich. Gentlemen, I hope you will honor us with your Company in the Evening.
We are willing to make each other happy with our respective Acquaintance. -- To
day is our Niece's Birthday, the poor Girl is now just Sixteen.


Ald. It Is very true, so she is, Brother.


Sir Nich. The night we'll celebrate with Mirth. -- It shall be my care to
entertain you with an Arcadian Pastoral.


Brev. Sir, you're very obliging.


Sir Nich. Come, Mr. Goosandelo, I Will go show you my Musaeum; you shall see
finer Curiosities than ever you saw at Gresham College. -- The University of
Cambridge shall with my Collections eternalize the Name of Sir Nicholas
Purflew, and by this means she shall have a Purflewean to outdo their Ashmolean
at Oxford.


[Exeunt Sir Nich. and Goos. Ald. Well, Mr. Breviat, how succeeded you? What
said my Niece? -- Was she coming? -- Did you find her glance upon you? -- Did
she take an occasion to walk round you, for a view of those Shoulders? I'dad,
that is a hint the young Gypsies never fail of, as soon as they know the
difference of the Sex.


Brev. She first received me with a very gay and tart Humor. -- She came slap
dash upon me at every word, with terms full of disdain.


Ald. Ah, Mr. Breviat, those are true signs of a yielding Woman. -- I'dad she is
a parless Baggage.


Brev. Then, Sir, she assumed a pretty becoming Gravity: And with an unaffected
Air of Modesty made me sensible that she would submit to your Prudence.


Ald. Poor little Rogue, she has always been very dutiful to me. -- We must
have an eye upon that Spark my Brother brought: -- Does he think he can
overreach a Projector?


Brev. Not in all likelihood:


Ald. I Will take care to confirm my Niece. -- Sprighty, our Housekeeper, is
trusty: To night when Sir Nicholas is busy about his Pastoral, as he calls it,
she shall slip you both into a private Room; where a Tacker-together of Human
Flesh shall be ready. -- Then you shall come and discover it; and so end the
Masque with a Jest. -- Get the Writings ready at Mr. Settlebank's Chamber in
the Temple, and I Will come and see 'em sealed this Afternoon. -- Come, Sir, I Will
wait on you in to Dinner.

He never can fail of Project or Design,
Who has a Brain so Rich in Thought a mine.

Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE Covent Garden.
Eager with his Sword drawn, leading in Squire Sapless by the Nose. Eag. DAm ye
for an overgrown Bumpkin. -- I Will slice you; -- I Will carbonade you, ye Dog, ye
Tub of Cheese-curds and Hogs-wash, I Will kick your Guts out. -- Oounz, why don't
you draw, you eternal Lubbard; I Will pink you, I Will pink you as full of holes as
a Cullender; I Will rip your heart out, you Joulterhead.


Sap. Nea, nea, but hold ye Master Eager. -- Wawns, yo thinken I Am no body. --
Why what a Pox, an yo'll let us lay Swerds by, 'Sflesh, I Will venture a bloody
Nose with yau, or a brawken Head, with best pair Crab-tree Cudgels yo can get.
-- Marry yo shall not find Chicken to deal withal, by Mass.


Eag. Rot ye, you Hounds-face; I am a Gentleman, and know no other way to go to
work with you, but with the point of my Sword; therefore if you will not pay me
the Money, I Will slit your Weazen this moment, you Moon-calf.


Sap. 'Sflesh, it will be a nuncky thing now to be murdered, and to hea our
Lasses in it Country sing Ballads on one.


Eag. Hark ye, Squire Sapless, -- Did not you promise me Twenty pounds upon the
Word of a Gentleman, before sufficient Witness?


Sap. Troth I cannot deny that.


Eag. And have NOT I laid by all business, to saunter along with you? -- Showed
you the Lions at the Tower, New Bedlam, and the Tombs at Westminster?


Sap. Nea, I Am hugeny beholding to yo, that is truth on it.


Eag. And what is more, I took you to a Tavern, made you drunk on my own cost,
and then carried you to a Bawdy House, and have endeavored the accomplishing
you as is befitting a Gentleman of your Quality; and now to disappoint me.


Sap. Come pree-a Master Eager been pacified, and I'n be better on my word, on
that be all.


Eag. Very well, Sir, I am your hearty Servant. -- Faith, Noble Squire, we were
roaring merry last night. Were not they pretty good-natured Pugs I took you to?
-- I believe you parted with a troublesome companion. -- Did not you slip your
Maidenhead, Squire, ha?


Sap. Nea, nea, Master Eager, I Am not the Mon yo taken me for neither. -- I
know a Cat from a Cowle staff, and What-d'-ye-call'n from a Cart-wheel. Marry
we'n a pratty Farrantly Lass, Madge to Dairy-Maid at whom, when I goo a fetch
Mess a Cream, or now and ten see her suckle younck Breendle in the Caw-Crib, yo
little thinken what we don.


Eag. Ay, say you so, Squire? -- I find you 're a very forward hopeful Young
Gentleman; and by that time I have done with you, you shall not be ashamed to show
your self at the Assizes, and make as good a Figure there as the Sheriff.


Sap. Nea, an that be all, I sh't be Shreeve my sen at upshot. -- I can drink
as much Eeal awready as e're a Justice of Peace in aw Cheshire; and that is a
prawd word naw. -- I made 'em aw knock under-boord last Monthly Meeting, b'
mass.


Eag. Gad-a-mercy Squire, by this worthy toping Qualification, you are fit to
be elected Knight of the Shire, the Tun-Representative of all the Hog tubs in
the Country; no doubt you will be a true Patriot, and promote the great
Manufacture of Sandbich.


Sap. Naw I think on it, I mon goa to the Carrier, I hea a Firkin of Stingo a
coming; and I mon send some things dawn to Lady Mother. -- And I'ne tell you
what, Master Eager, if our John to Baily be come to Tawn, I'ne pay you your
Money this Afternoon; and more than that, In It gee yo a Hundred paund besides,
if I shan marry that handsome Gentlewoman yo shoden me in to Painted Gallery.


Eag. Oh ho, Squire Sapless. -- In Faith I find you are no Fool at Faces. --
Sign then and seal to what you have said, and we'll drink a Bottle and be
Friends. -- In the Afternoon I Will take you to wait upon the Lady you saw in the
Blew Balcony. -- She Is my Relation; Madam Vesuvi^. -- Upon my word she has
refused the Offers of several Young Lords; and I have heard her say, she took
great delight in darying; and that she would marry some honest Country
Gentleman.


Sap. Nea, nea, and she been for that, wee'ne as fine Milch Kine as any in aw
Cheshire. B' mass, we maaken two hundred a Cheese e'ary week that comes over
our heads, besides Butter for to house; and Milk for to Caws and Lasses. -- But
naw I think on it, Lady Mother charged two things on her Blessing, Never to set
Han't and Seal to Paper, nor Marry without her Caunsil; -- 'Sflesh, I'ne gooing
to do booth naw: But sure I can wawk without Deading Strings; I'ne Mon enough
to goo by my sen I trow.


Eag. How Is this? -- No scruples, Squire, no qualms of Conscience; the least of
that will raise my Passion again: But if you do as you have resolved, -- I Will
do any thing for you, -- fight whole Armies, encounter Giants, and bid defiance
to Jove and all his Thunder to serve you.


Sap. Oh Lawd! what a wawndy fighting man is this Master Eager! Well, well,
I Will go do a what yo'n hea me. -- Nea, I Would wawk a score a miles barefooted
and barelegg'd to do you good, that I wood.


Eag. Well said, my noble Mirror of Squireship. -- But come, let us to the
Tavern then.


[Exeunt. SCENE changes to a Room in Sir Nicholas and the Alderman's House.
Enter Mrs. Purflew, Plyant, and Jocond. Ply. How sweetly will you furnish your
Closet with those little Pictures the Colonel has brought you from Flanders?


Joc. They are, Madam, as curious a parcel of Nuns-work, as I believe was ever
picked up in those Countries. -- My Master left no place unsearch'd, for what
he thought might be most pleasing to your La'ship.


Purf. Poor Gentleman, he has been at a great deal of pains.


Joc. Ay, and trouble too: I would not have led the life my Master has done
this Campaign, to have had at my beck all the Beauties of Christendom.


Purf. Why Jocond, how was it?


Joc. To have lain in a morning tossing and sighing for an hour or two; then
fling himself out of bed carelessly, clap on his Clothes, and away out of his
Tent to the next Wood that could afford him most Privacy; -- There loll himself
down at the foot of some shady Tree; -- where must I sing the Song of
distressed Amintor; whilst he with his Arms across seemed to be as senseless
as the Tree it self; or like an ancient Stump, from whose Root the present
Plant had sprouted.


Ply. Oh Couz, how dear and passionate was that?


Purf. The Boy is very perfect in his Lesson truly.


Joc. Every syllable truth, as I hope to be saved, Madam. At night again, when
he had left his Company, which always seemed uneasy to him, away to his old
posture, where the Locket of your La'ships Hair, which he always wore next his
heart, must be kissed a thousand times. -- And which was strange in a man that
the world knows as brave as the Sword he wears, not without a frequent Current
of Tears. -- I almost weep to tell the Story.


Ply. Poor Boy! how pathetically does the young Rogue express himself! -- Speak
truly, Couz. -- Do not thee believe thy self a happy Creature? -- To have so
fine a Person as Bellair your Admirer. -- No doubt you may promise your self in
him all the delicious Blessings that man can afford in the Arms of a young
Lady. -- Love and Reverence compose the Air of his Face. -- His Person
Graceful, his Humor Generous, and his Fidelity as unquestionable as his
Courage. -- What a true Drudge at an Amor has he been since he first danced
with you at Hackney. -- How comically he looked when he came to sell us
Cheesecakes? and how prettily he contrived the Locket in that which you bought?


Enter Sprightly, and talks with Jocond apart. Purf. I think his Character will
receive but little advantage by your good word; thou art so sweet natured a
thing that thou speak ill of no man. -- It Is the Sex it self thou art a
lover on. -- And how readily you smother all his wild courses, and those
excessive Rangings which he has been addicted to.


Ply. Your men of mettle must be allowed some small Extravagances, which are
generally abated by the accomplishment of a faithful Passion. -- And I doubt
not but his for you will have that reclaiming effect.


Purf. I am very unwilling to put my self and Fortune into the hands of a
Libertine, and purchase Experiments at so hazardous a rate.


Sprightly comes forward. Spri. But, Madam, what do you think I am come to tell
you? -- You must know, an't like you, that both my old Masters your Uncles are
resolved to marry you this very night. -- The Alderman says you shall have the
Lawyer; and Sir Nicholas is for that Thing that tosses his Head like a
Fore-horse, struts like a Turkey cock, and smells like a Civet Cat. -- I am,
forsooth to be the go between for both, and huddle you together in private. --
Now, an't please you, I humbly conceive that you have a months mind to
another-guess man than either of them, i'troth. -- Therefore let me have your
counsel what to do.


Purf. I find they are very sudden in their Resolves, lest I discover my own
Power. -- Honest old Sprightly, thou shall have thy Lesson before night. Come
Cousin, let us go and consult what measures to take. -- Jocond, you shall have
an Answer presently.


[ Exeunt Purflew and Plyant. Spri. Come Jocond, you shall go along with me
into my Chamber, and tell me stories of Flanders.


Joc. What you please, Mistress.


Spri. There Is a Bed in the room, Jocond; -- and if we chance to sit upon the
side on it, be sure you don't grow waggish; -- be sure you don't, you smock
faced Young Rogue you.


Joc. On my conscience thy withered looks will not provoke me.


[aside. Spr. Methinks Jocond, you have a sort of a languishing lascivious Cast
with your Eyes; -- but be sure you mind what I told you.


[aside. Joc. What a Pox does the old Carrion mean?


Spri. Upon these terms I Will show you the way in: You are too young to do any
harm, and I am too old to receive any; therefore we may cuddle together safely:
And so come along Sweetheart.


[Exeunt. SCENE opens, and discovers Sir Nich. Purflew, Alderman, Breviat, and
Goosandelo, rising from a Table with Bottles and Glasses; they come forwards,
and the Scene closes.
Brev. Gentlemen, your Entertainment has been to the height of perfection: I
rise with my Understanding as much improved, as my Appetite is satisfied.


Sir Nich. 'Lack Sir, I fear there is but small occasion for this Compliment.
-- Indeed at the good old Festivals of the Greeks and Romans, they always took
care to regale the Mind as well as the Body.


Goos. Ay Sir, it is very true; they seasoned their Discourse as well as their
Sauce. -- Peppered it up high when they talked of War; and when it flatten'd
with the dull relish of Religion and Politics, the Poet at the lower end of
the Board took care to squeeze in a smutty Jest, to leave a Flavor upon the
Pallat; -- as nowadays the Smug Chaplain does at my Lady's Table.


Sir Nich. Ha, ha, ha.


Ald. Gentlemen, we expect to see you to night. -- I am engaged this Afternoon;
My fame has reached to Pekin, and the Illustrious Emperor there has sent over a
great Chinese Projector, to consult with me for the finding out a shorter way
of Correspondence betwixt them, and we the Western Inhabitants of the World.


Brev. That, Sir, has been a matter long wished for in vain.


Ald. And I have don't already. I went to my Study, do you mark me? -- and took
a large Bumper of Malaga; which is a notable help to Projection; gave my
Forhead three lusty Rubs; -- whip stitch, out (...), and here it is I dad.


[Takes out a Paper. Brev. Good Sir, let us know it.


Ald. Why do you see, -- it is only making the Rivers navigable, and cutting a
few Cannals through some parts of Crim Tartary, and there it is, -- and a fig
for a North-East Passage. -- What thundering Bribing shall we have amongst our
honest Senators for the establishing a new China Company?


Brev. Ha, ha, ha.


Sir Nich. I am also engaged to take a view of some Egyptian and Asiatick
Rarities, that a great Traveller has collected on purpose for me. -- Amongst
which he say, That there is an odoriferous Arabian Balm, that he will
undertake, if he unstops the Bottle on the top of the Monument, and the Wind
sits right, it shall diffuse its scent so far, that any Person at the same time
upon Salisbury Steeple shall be very sensible of the Persume.


Goos. For Heavens sake, good Sir Nicholas, engage me some of it; -- I would
give the Universe for such a Perfume, that I might by its Effluviums at a
distance give the Ladies notice of my approaching, and they dispose themselves
into a regular Order for my Reception.


Brev. Were thou received as a Coxcomb should be, thou would be obliged to keep
always at home.


[Aside. Ald. Mr. Breviat, you go my way, I Will take you in my Coach.


Brev. I Will wait on you, Sir.


[ Exeunt Ald. and Brev. Sir Nich. The young ones are gone a gadding this
Afternoon; -- they make use of their time now they are freed of the old Ladies.


Goos. How! my Mistress gone, and I not pay my Devoirs to her Coach? -- Ye
eternal Lights, Sun, Moon, and Stars, how come I so stupifi'd! -- But I
overheard them say something of the Walks. -- I Will find them out anon.


Sir Nich. By your favor, Sir, you need not give your Intellectuals this
disturbance, -- for I have ordered matters with that solid Conduct, that she
shall not fail of being your Bride this Evening. -- Come, Sir, you must go Seal
the Writings we gave order for.


Goos. Ay, ay, by all means; -- then I Will to my Chamber new wash and scent my
Body, -- and so make a Bridegroom, able to charm the fairest Goddess that e're
inhabited the Mansions of the Sky.


[Exeunt. SCENE opens to Colonel Bellair's Chamber, and discovers Bellair upon
a Couch in a Melancholy Posture; he rises and comes forward.
Bell. What art thou Love? -- Thou have so subtly diffused thy self throughout
my o're-spreading Veins; -- each Particle of me is sensible of smarting Wounds
received by thy mysterious Shafts; -- thou restless Disquieter of my laboring
Soul. -- But why should I foment my Flames with ungrounded Doubts? -- And fuel
my burnings with boading Apprehensions? -- I have no reason to dread the dismal
Consequences of an unmutual Amor. -- The dear Object of my Wishes has given me
Testimonies, that she is not unsensible of my Passion; -- yet still, O mighty
Love thou 'rt impetuous, -- urging my desires to Fruition. -- O blessed Fruition!
what Transports! what amorous Respiration! what Thought can reach the Ecstasies
that accompany the possessing such immortal Charms! A hey Rapier; come and sing
me the Song you learned last.


A SONG. Set by Mr. John Eccles.
I.
FVll of the God I feel my raging Soul,
Around their Spheres, my glowing Eye Balls roll.
Sparkling forth Raptures from my active Breast,
In vain I beg the sullen God of Sleep.
In vain I call him from his gloomy Deep,
To fetter up my wandering Thoughts to rest.
II.
See, see, bright scorching Flames about me rise,
Bright as the Beams of my Clorinda's Eyes,
And I the Martyr in those Flames rejoice.
Sound all your Flutes, ye softest powers of Love;
Warble your Triumphs from your Seats above;
Then chant my Requium with a dying Voice.
Enter Eager. Eag. What Melancholy in your Chamber, Colonel? -- What Is the
meaning of this?


Bell. Disposed a little to Contemplation.


Eag. Have not you been ranging yet amongst your Bona Roba's, and discharging your
self upon our Covent Garden Proprietors of Lace, Linen, and Silks?


Bell. No.


Eag. Why, you are obliged to propagate an Issue of young Hero's of the Blade.
-- 'T would be of manifest prejudice to the Nation, to have the Striplings of
the next Age be the lumpish lawfully begotten Offspring of Sedantry Cits.


Bell. You Are for propagating thy own dear Vocation, tho it were only for the
sake of Pimping.


Eag. I should be glad to do you any Service in that Province of mine.


Bell. Faith, Eager, I am not grown so far out of Acquaintance to want
Assistance, nor have so little knowledge of the World to trust thee.


Eag. 'Ownz, do you think I have so small a respect for my Garcass, as to
practice my little Tricks upon you? -- You have something Colonel sits heavy
upon your Thoughts. -- Let Us go chat over a Dish of Tea with Vesuvia, she is a
merry Jade, and will give you some Account of the Intriegues of the Town; --
but to prevent us, here she comes to give you a Visit.


Enter Vesuvia. Vesuvia, Your Servant, Warrior; -- what makes you thus
Baricado'd? I have been obliged to force my Entrance. -- Pray for whom amongst
your Flanderkins must we make our Lamentations: -- But we are so used now to
the loss of our dear Creatures, that our Condolance is very short. -- Poor
Rogue, is he gone? -- that is all In Faith.


Bell. We are pretty even with you in good nature. -- When we hear of the
decease of any of you Women of the Town, -- we may be say, she was a good
humored thing, but 'twas pity she should have lived to have made a Bawd.


Ves. Very civil this.


Bell. Why did not you make your Campaign this Year, Madam? You Would certainly
have had the first Post among our Amazons. -- Dutch Hogans. German Counts, and
Spanish Cavaliers, would have been your daily Victims. -- Perhaps you might
have become the Mother of a Vesuvian Prince.


Ves. I had fitted up my Equipage, but I was kindly prevented by a keeping Lord
of our own, as good a Booty I believe, as any of your Foreign Dons.


Eag. I know who you mean. -- Is he well-furnisht, Child?


Ves. He is furiously furnished with an indigence of Ability. -- You know that
entitles us to press for good Payment; -- but I can dispense with that small
Obstacle of Impotency in my Keeper, now Colonel Bellair is come to Town?


Bell. I am obliged to you for the Drudgery you design me; -- but thank my
Stars, I am otherwise provided.


Ves. Good lack, Drudgery! you might have found out a better way of expressing
your self, methinks. -- What has your lusty Excellencies reached the Ears of
some musty Quality, who has made choice of you to prop up her rotten and
tottering Reputation.


Bell. The truth on it is Child, I am going to mislead my self into a right way.
-- How do think I shall become Wedlock?


Ves. As awkardly, I believe, as I do Devotion; -- but if that is all, it wont
spoil your ranging long. -- We don't find that Marriage prevents Leudness in
the least. -- A separate Bed in a Month's time, and a separate Maintenance at
the Years end, are no new things amongst us.


Eag. If that be the business, Vesuvia shall not be behind hand with you. -- I
have got a thumping Squire for you, In Faith Child; -- Two thousand a Year is
the least penny of his Estate.


Ves. Prithee, Eager, be serious.


Eag. On my Soul I am in earnest, -- he has seen you already, -- and swears
Flesh Blood, and Bones, he will have you. -- I Will bring him to you anon; faith I
shall deserve a substantial Pention.


Ves. You know my Temper is far from being ungrateful.


Eag. I have a brace of old Leachers you must help me to manage first. -- It
shall be your farewell in that way.


Ves. With all my heart. -- 'Sdeath, I can but think how I shall rustle in the
World when I come to elbow Quality. -- I Will look big on my Visiting-nights;
loll back in my Coach at Hide-Park, and Box it at the Play with the best of 'em.


Bell. I shall be well-pleased to see it, faith, Vesuvia; -- On my Conscience
thou wilt become Grandeur well.


Ves. Bellair, I shall have you skrewing your self into Cringes at a distance:
-- And when I think fit to admit you nearer my Presence, you will be thrusting
into my Gloves. your impertinent Billet-doux, but I shall be otherwise
provided, and have no need of your Drudgery.


Bell. What will not you forgive me one single blunt Expression?


Eag. You shall get your Booby knighted for the sound sake of my Lady.


Ves. I am confident, I shall not fail in any Application for that piece of
Service. -- I have a large stock of Promises for Court Favors, that I accepted
when ready Cash has been wanting. -- And I know a certain Gentleman that will
usher my Spouse to receive his new Honor, then take him to the King's Cellar,
and make him Drunk whilst I am slipped into a private Room to have a Lord dub
me a Lady.


Bell. Prithee, Vesuvia, let us hear who and who is together. -- You used to be
full of News. -- How go the Affairs of the Town?


Ves. Oh most abominably Scandalous! Every body strives to be first at
Ingratitude and Treachery. -- And the hearts of the Women are as false as their
Beauties.


Bell. That was always so.


Ves. But, what is new is, -- our Ladies now first trust each other, and then
through an accountable Malice make discoveries. -- You Gallants may spare your
selves the vanity of boasting.


Eag. It Is very true.


Ves. Nay, some, as if they envied themselves the Bliss, are the first
Publishers of their own Infamy; -- so that our whole Sex seems to have as
little regard to common Prudence, as they have pretentions to Morality.


Bell. Ah, ah, ah, very good.


Eag. And for the Men, ye Gods defend us. -- Every individial Person is a true
Figure of old Janus. -- Pretentions and meanings are diametrically opposite, a
fawning Grin of a great Man, is a certain Sign he will ruin you.


Bell. Notable Satyr, this.


Eag. For our Principles, we change them as often as Camelions do their Colors.
-- And private Interest in Persons of Trust never fails to overbalance the
public Concern. -- And the discovering of their fing'ring, has not been the
effect of Honesty but Spite.


Bell. The truth on it is, our late Briberies have made a great noise in the
World!


Eag. The World is peopled now with Monsters, -- Church Atheists,
State-Hypocrites, and Conscientious Cutthroats. -- What Is more common than
that ungenerous Trade of Cheating by the name of Friendship? -- In short, all
Vices flourish, whilst poor Virtue stalks about ragged and contemned.


Bell. A pleasant Scene this, to hear a professed Sttumpet talk of Morality,
and a known Cheat of Virtue and Honesty.


Ves. Very blunt again, methinks, Coll.


Bell. How e're unhappy the Age is in its Miscarriages, it is rarely blessed by a
couple of such Reformers.


Eag. We that are most instrumental in the Vices of the World, are the best
able to give an account of them.


Ves. I am sure we are less prejudical to the World, that make Lewdness and
cheating our Profession, than those that practice both, under the Disguises of
Honor and Religion; and pretend to sanctify their Crimes by their Places and
Habits.


Bell. Hark you, good People, I must deal plainly with you, and desire you to
walk off, -- having particular Business that require me to be private.


Eag. By all means, Sir. Come Madam Vesuvia, let you and I go perfect the Work
I have prepared.


Ves. And must I part from your Chamber at this rate, Coll. -- I vow this is a
strange Reformation. -- Well, for the future I Will have nothing to say to you;
from a noble generous Ranger, I see you are grown a sneaking doting Lover, and
therefore ought to be abandoned by every freeborn Breast, and left to the
frozen Embraces of a cold virtuous Wise, where may you starve unpitied by all
Women that have the least grace of Gallantry. With this hearty Curse I leave
you.


[ Exeunt Eag. and Ves. Enter Jocond. Bell. Come, Jocond, you have been an Age
away. -- Well: -- How? -- What? -- Is all? -- Bless me, crowds of Questions
press so upon my Lips, that they hinder each others passage.


Joc. Well, Sir, I Will save you the trouble of asking, and tell you all that you
can wish to know.


Bell. Quick then, why this Harangue?


Joc. Old Mrs. Sprightly, your true Friend, -- did so smuggle me, nay, she said
I should lie with her.


Bell. Ounze, what is this to the purpose?


Joc. Patience, Sir, -- and then the wanton old Jade took me into her Chamber,
and asked so many Questions of Flanders; first, whether I spilt any Blood in
the Wars; and then, whether I had lost my Maidenhead; -- and then. --


Bell. Dam ye, -- you impertinent young Dog; -- what have I to do with this? --
Were not you to tell me of my Mistress, you should never speak a word more.


Joc. Good Sir, bridle your Passion, you shall have no occasion to be angry
when I have told you all.


Bell. Blood and Death, tell me all the next Sentence you speak, or your Bones
shall pay for it.


Joc. Now, Sir, I come to the point, -- your Mistress is very well; she looked
over your Presents with a great deal of satisfaction, -- seems pleased at your
return: -- In fine, you will be better informed by the Contents of this.


Bell. snatches the Letter. Bell. Hell and Furies, why did you not give me this
at first?


[ Bellair reads starting. Joc. O, Sir, there might be danger in an overhasty
Bliss* -- a sudden Joy has often proved fatal; -- withholding a Pleasure is
the way to endear it.


Bell. What have you been abusing me, you young Villain? Make things plain to
me or I Will sacrifice you to the pit of Hell.


Joc. Lord, Sir! what I told you is positive truth. -- I hope you have had
sufficient proof of my faithful service. -- I am sure I discovered so much by
her own looks, and by what both Old Sprightly and Madam Plyant told me; that if
she has writ any thing that seems unkind, I dare swear she has belied her own
Thoughts


Bell. [ Reads] Sir, I must own my self not a little concerned at your present
return, since I am sensible that the Circumstances I now lie under may be very
surprising to you; each of my Uncles are resolved to dispose of me, and have
obliged me to comply with their Intentions. You may take your own Measures, and
propose something most diverting to you; your Endeavors in that nature shall
be seconded by my Wishes, and your Misfortunes shared by


Eliz. Purflew. Adieu. Were I to advise you, it should be to repair to your
Post.

Joc. Why, I dare say every word is truth, and her real meaning. -- Pray let me
see the Letter. -- The Lady I lived withal before I came to you, was notable
at the little Mysteries of Billet-doux, and instructed me mightily in such
Affairs. [Reads to himself.] Why to me it seems you have as blessed an Answer
as you could wish. I should read it thus; [Reads.] Sir, I am very well pleased
you are come to Town, now I can surprise you with the news of being at my own
Disposal. My Uncles have separately engaged me to two several Persons, which I
have seemingly consented to, that I might the better deliver my self to you. If
the possession of me will be what is most diverting to you, use your own
Measures, my Wishes shall kindly meet your Intentions, and your Concerns for
the future dutifully shared by


Eliz. Purflew. Were I to advise you; repair to the Post, a Lover ought to
maintain in his Mistresses Affections.

Adieu. Bell. O my dear Boy! how sweet are those ravishing Accents? -- Yet
still I doubt what most I would believe.


Joc. Upon my life, Sir, there is not a Syllable but bears this Construction,
which perfectly agrees with all other Circumstances. -- And now, Sir, to give
you the Soul and Quintisence of my Embassy, which was whispered to me by your
Mistresses Confident, and no doubt by her order, you are suddenly to meet her.
-- Prepare your self for a Rencounter, -- she is accidentally to fall into the
Ambush, and you are to bear her off with flying Colors. -- Come along, Sir,
I Will show you the place, -- the time draws near.


Strike sure, for it is the Crisis of your Bliss. Bell. I Will strike at Fate,
should I the Blessing miss.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE Covent Garden.
Enter Mrs. Purflew and Mrs. Plyant, Purf. SHall we go look upon some Silks,
Couz? -- Coll. Bellair lodges somewhere hereabouts; should he meet us, he would
conclude I came on purpose to see for him.


Ply. Good lack! and not judge amiss; -- as if you did not know that I sent him
word we should be here, with Resolutions, as I imagined, to conclude on the
matter, when to crown his Passion.


Purf. I know you sent him word! -- I conclude the matter! I crown his Passion!
What does the Girl mean?


Ply. Ha, ha, ha! This is very pretty; -- I am sure you gave me large hints to
guess at your Intentions. -- And pray what is the business of an humble
Confident; if not to inch out coming Inclinations, or bear the blame of
pretended Mistakes.


Purf. I cannot imagine what you would be at.


Ply. Lord, we Women in love are so perverse in our Humors, -- and would
always seem to walk counter to our Intentions; what advances we make are
backwards, like the Marches of a Crab.


Purf. I own I have let the Woman grow a little upon me: -- I have nettled him,
I believe, in the Letter I sent by Jocond; though I left him room for a
favorable Interpretation, but Lovers generally lay hold on the wrong end.


Ply. How many of us do make Pride and Ill Nature our Diversion? We love that
our Tongues should contradict our Hearts; as well as to have our Women belie
our Faces, -- and are always stretching our Thoughts for new Matter to torment
both our selves and our Lovers.


Purf. Well, say what you will, I am resolved, when I see him, to receive him
very coldly.


Ply. And I am resolved to disabuse him. -- I am confident you love him, and
doubt not in the least his Sincerity, why then should you sacrifice the Repose
of him you esteem at the cost of your own?


Purf. I am sure I have reason to scruple his Sincerity; since I very much
believe he gives himself the same licentious freedom in the World as ever.


Ply Why? you would not be so unreasonable to expect to be sole Proprietor,
before you are in possession, would you?


Purf. Besides, there is a secret pleasure to see how our Admirers behave
themselves under a disgrace: who would not know the force of her Frowns, as
well as the power of her Smiles? -- A little insult is an inseparable
Prerogative of our Sovereignty during our Courtship.


Ply. And we often pay dear for playing the Tyrant, -- when a Man of Sense
comes to reflect on the baseness of his Slavery we design him, and prudently
refuses the weight of our Shackles, how contemptible do we appear when we
prostrate our Charms afresh to re-invite his Service; -- therefore, Cousin,
have a care of playing foul in Love, least you lose your Gamester that has the
best Stock and then be obliged to play with others upon Tick.


Purf. I protest yonder he comes.


Enter Bellair and Jocond. [ Ply. talks with Joc. apart. Bell. This, Madam, was
the kindest thing imaginable; -- and though you are fair to a Miracle, it may
bring in question, whether your Goodness is not of larger extent than your
Beauty.


Purf. Perhaps, Sir, you mis-interpret the One, as you mistake the Other.


Bell. My Sufferings have confirmed my Judgment; -- and had I ten thousand
Lives, the force of your Charms would be justified by as many Victims.


Purf. I am convinced you are in no great danger of being sacrificed to the
force of Love; you're not unexperienced of a sure way of Prevention.


Bell. None but your self can cure the Wounds you have made. -- Nature
generally provides the surest Antidote from what caused the Infection.


Purf. And from the first Principle of Nature, I shall take care of
Self-preservation.


Bell. 'T would be Sacrilege in the highest degree to injure her chiefest Work.


Purf. But, Sir, tho you were so Improvident to entertain an unlucky Passion,
-- I am confident your long absence has by this time procured you a good
reasonable Indifferency.


Bell. Absence, Madam, has had the same effect on my Passion, as the Wind has
on Fire; -- it extinguishes a faint Flame, but feeds and excites a great one.


Purf. And has not your She-volunteer had Power sufficient to abate those
Flames?


Bell. What She-volunteer? -- Hang me if I can imagine what you mean!


Ply. Come, what little bickrings are these betwixt you two Lovers?


Purf. Do you know this Hand?


[Shews a Letter. Bell. No, by my Soul don't I.


Ply. How Is this! -- but I do: -- Lord, was this the business that raised your
mighty Scruples?


Bell. [ to Plyant] I beseech you, Madam, the meaning on it?


Ply. That Letter was a Contrivance of your old Aunt Whim's, -- she made Mrs.
Grace Copy it, and then sent her with it, to her Brother at the Post Office, to
put it in amongst the Foreign Letters. -- Let me see, it begins thus; -- You
would do well, Madam, to entertain no farther thoughts of that dear Man, whose
Fatigues I share, and whose Caresses I enjoy, and so forth: -- by the same
token the Night you received it, she laid the Blaid-bone of a Shoulder of
Mutton under your Pillow, and pumped you the next day at Dinner for your Dream.
-- Do you remember this?


Purf. And you, Cousin, privy to the Contrivance?


Ply. Indeed Mrs. Grace showed me the Letter; -- but I profess I looked upon it
so frivolous and improbable, that I never minded to acquaint you with it.


Bell. I am sorry, Madam, you so easily entertain thoughts to my prejudice.


Purf. However, Sir, since it does not lie in my power. --


Ply. Nay, now I swear you tell a Ripper; -- for to let you know the truth, --
it never did lie in her power till this very day; and now she is wholly
Mistress of her self.


Bell. Now, Madam, where lies tho next Objection?


Purf. Well, since as my Cousin Plyant tells you, I am but this day sole
disposer of my Person, it is but reasonable I should spend some time under my
own Jurisdiction.


Bell. Faith my Service should not diminish but enlarge your Dominion.


Purf. I have no mind to be serious now, but will give my Thoughts a loose for
the present. Adieu -- Come away Cous.


[Exit. Ply. Whatever Circumference they take, never doubt, Sir, their centring
upon you, -- Hark you, we'll be anon upon the Walks. -- Adieu, Sir.


[Exit. Bell. Hey-day, -- what can be the meaning of this? If she gets once
into the Town-road of Love, I had been much happier to have received the kind
Salutation of a Twelve-pounder long e're now.


Joc. This is only a feint to draw you to Battle. -- Well, of a Soldier, I
never saw such a timorous whining Lover as you are. -- Why did not you take the
little Baggage and fling her into a Coach, and away with her, I Am confident
you would please her better than to have her repent her bargain.


Bell. Sirrah, hold your profane Tongue, or I Will cut it out; -- what you say,
I could do, did I not love her; -- nay more, cut any body's Throat that
interposed: -- Ravish the Joys she were so nice of, and then abandon her to
Despair and Infamy.


Joc. Ay, now you talk like a Man of your own Profession.


Bell. Such an Action might be the result of Lust; or what were due to a Jilt;
but mine is a Flame pure as the vestal Fire, and she as sacred as the pious
Saint that attends the Altar: -- But this I Will do, I Will pursue her to the
utmost, and reach her too if possible. -- Numberless are the Toils of Love and
War, and whoever expects to succeed in either is required to be indefatigable.


[Exeunt. Enter Eager. Eag. Just upon the stroke of Three; -- the Alderman, no
doubt, will be here presently; here he comes already.


Enter Alderman. Ald. Oh, art thou there, my trusty Mercury?


Eag. I find, Sir, you are punctual to a minute.


Ald. 'Sbud, I am as hot as a pampered Prelate, -- my Blood beat an alarm in
my Veins to give me notice of the time, and away I came, I'dad.


Eag. I Will secure you as cool as Clouted Cream e're she has done with you; I Will
assure you she is almost inaccessible, had not I the influence of a Relation
over her.


Ald. Prithee see, see, good boy; 'Sbodlikins I took a Dose of Cantharides this
morning, and methinks I am so lusty.


Eag. I vow you look as brisk, Mr. Alderman, as though you were but fifteen.


Ald. I? Hem -- hem -- There Is Lungs for you -- I am as sound as Heart of Oak,
boy: -- I was a pretty Youth when I was fifteen -- nay, I am a very comely
handsome old Gentleman now. -- Old -- not very old neither, a little turned my
Prime, not much neither -- But prithee see, see a little whether she be at
leisure, my dear Boy, will you?


[Eager knocks. Enter Vesuvia. Eag. Here she comes -- Madam, a very worthy
acquaintance of mine begs the liberty to kiss your fair Hand.


Ves. I am obliged, Sir, to give civil Entertainment to your self; or to any
friend of yours, so far as it consists with my honor.


Eag. When you hear me knock, take care to slip him into your Closet.


[Aside to Vesuvia, and slips off. Ald. Madam, as the rising Sun is adored by
the prostrate Persian, no less Worship and Veneration shall be paid you, by
your humble Slave and Vassal Nicholas Whim, Citizen and Alderman of London.


Ves. Vou are very Courtly, Sir.


Ald. Nay hold, you shall have more -- Nor has the Rays of your bright Eyes
diffused their Power with less force, through the Territories of my Heart, than
does the Beams of that glorious Planet shed their Influence through the utmost
depths of our sublunary World. Hem, hem. This I heard a City-Poet say to my
Lady Mayress.


[Aside. Ves. What makes you so florid, Sir? you might spare your Rhetoric --
a more familiar way of Expression suits better with the matter of Love; and I
suppose that is your business.


Ald. Yes, my sweet Sugar-sops -- Love, Love's the dear business -- You have
hit the mark, you have nicked it I'dad -- and I Will nick you anon -- and my Name
is Nick -- and there will be Nick upon Nick: how do you like that, Lady Bright?
-- was not that smart and familiar?


Ves. You are a very merry Gentleman, truly.


Ald. Pish, this is nothing, my little Pigsny, to what you shall see me do anon
-- To give you a taste of my familiarity, let me mumble, let me mumble these
Pitty-paddy-pods of yours, E-e-e-e -- now let me smuggle between my little
Biddy's Bubbies, E-e-e-e -- Oh how did they caper it, ferk it and jerk it under
the green-wood Tree. [ Sings and Dances.] O Lawd, O Lawd, I am taken with a
strange Dizziness in my Head -- Pray, Madam, have you ever a Coach, or a
Pallat-bed, where I might repose my self a little.


Ves. Sir, I Will conduct you into my Chamber, and give you some of my Waters.


Ald. Thank you, good Lady; thank you, good Lady. -- There, there was a Project
of mine.


[Aside. [Exeunt. Enter Eager. Eag. So, there is one noos'd -- I shall not be long
without the Fellow on thee: To trap these old Buck-fitches, is, I think, a very
reasonable piece of Service. -- It Is so preposterous a thing to see old
doting, drivelling Fellows pretend to feats of Love; the thoughts of it chills
my blood, and gives me a disrellish to the sweet Sin it self. I protest here
comes Sir Nicholas.


Enter Sir Nicholas Purflew. Sir Nich. I am sincerely glad to find you so
minutely punctual, Mr. Eager.


Eag. Certainly, Sir, I should have been erroneous to a degree of stupidity to
have disappointed a Person of your Worth and Character; especially in a
business of this moment.


Sir Nich. You say well, Sir: It is a matter of great moment -- Scowring off
the Rust of Nature, and refining our Vital Spirits, from the scum and dross
they contract, by cohabiting with the Earthly particles of the Body -- By which
the Mind may become alleviated, and all its noble faculties operate with
greater freedom and vigor.


Eag. I vow, Sir Nicholas, you talk very prittily of Wenching.


Sir Nich. Oh, Sir, I understand it in all its Branches, Divisions, and
Sub-divisions. -- how far it has been encouraged in several of the
best-constituted Governments -- and how we came to be Priest-driver from the
allowed practice of it. -- I have composed a little Tract upon that Subject,
which I design to get Printed at Amsterdam -- It will be of singular use.


Eag. It Is pity but the World should be obliged with it.


Sir Nich. I have there laid down its Rise, Growth and Progress, and have
traced it from its very Original; which I find to be very Ancient -- Wonderful
ancient, truly.


Eag. I protest, Sir, your Discourse of it almost equals its pleasures.


Sir Nich. But, Mr. Eager, pray one word with you -- Is this Lady of any
Descent? -- has she any pretensions to Coat Armor? -- I vow I won'd not
Contaminate my self with vulgar Blood for Christendom -- I would not touch the
Flesh of any under a Gentlewoman.


Eag. Oh, dear Sir, she is a near Relation of mine by my Mother's side, her
Name Vesuvia.


Sir Nich. Vesuvia! Ods so, of the Old Neopolitan Vesuvians -- Let me see, she
bears in a Field-Argent a Furnace Sable, ejecting sulphurous Flames proper.


Eag. Her Furnace may have a Neopolitan Heat in it, as far as I know; do you
look to that.


Aside. Sir Nich. A Family of great Antiquity, upon my Honor. -- Burning of
Brimstone has been of very long dare in the World.


Eag. And is like to continue very long, or else we lie under a great mistake.


Sir Nich. Sir, will you please to Supplicate the Lady to admit of my humble
Devoirs.


Eag. This is her Lodgings, I Will knock and see whether she be at leisure.

[Knocks] So now for my Disguise.


[Exit. Enter Vesuvia. Sir Nich. Having, Madam, received Intimation of your
Ladyships high Worth, and nobleness of Blood, I look upon my self to be obliged
in honor to tender you my Offers of displaying your bearing, and searching
into your Pedigree.


Ves. What a pretty ingenious way you have found of opening your Intentions,
Good Sir Nicholas Purflew.


Sir Nich. A Lady of transcendent Parts, I dare avow.


Ves. Your Character is so honorable, and your Ingenuity so conspicuous, that
I shall be proud of serving you -- Within here, in my Chamber, I have my
Scutcheon; if you please, you shall go in and see it.


[A Noise of Roaring and Singing without.] [ Bullies without.] Scour, scour,
scour; Ferret, ferret the Whores; Bolt, bolt.


Ves. O Lord, what will become of us? some rude drunken fellows are got into
the House, slip into my Closet, and I Will deal with 'em as well as I can.


[ Vesuvia thrusts Sir Nich. into the Closet. Enter Eager in Disguise, with
Bullies. Bull. Here, here is one.


Eag. O, Madam Mynx, are you there? -- Where are the rest of your Coneys of
this Borough? -- Da -- me, we must have every one, one, or you will have very
hot work on it.


Bull. 'Sbud unrig her, uncase her; make the Picture of Fortune of her, and let
her show the Naked truth.


[ Ves. slips off. A SONG.
I.
Let us Revel and Roar, the whole World is our Store;
Nay, the Gods shall Club to our Pleasure:
When we Wallow all Night, in an unknown Delight,
Aurora discovers the Treasure.
II.
Let us never Repine, whilst brisk Wenches and Wine,
Make the Brims of our Lives run over;
Leave the How and the What, to the Politic Sot,
And the When, to the Fool of a Lover.
III.
Thus free from all Cares of Taxes and Wars,
We know not the Name of Dull Sorrow;
Every Purse is our Prey, which we spend in a Day,
And the Devil take Care for to morrow.
Eag. What, is the Brimstone vanished? -- I Will rummage her Closet for a Bottle
of cold Tea.


Bull. Da -- me, do, and we'll see the bottom of it.


Bull. To -- t me so we will, and then stagger to fresh Game.


Eag. 'Ounz here is a brace of old Fornicators.


Bullies. Out with 'em, Out with 'em.


Eag. No, one at a time. -- What a pox does your Goatship here?


[Pulls out Sir Nich. Bull. Kimbaw him, Kimbaw him.


Bull. Ay, ay; Kimbaw him, Kimbaw him.


Eag. We'll only make you lighter by a stone or two -- that is all, get a cleft
stick and a sharp knife here.


Ald. [In the Closet.] O -- h.


Eag. Hold your bellowing, your turn's a coming.


Sir Nich. Why look you, friend, I am a Man of honor -- Sir Nicholas Purflew
by name, Herald and Antiquary by profession; Therefore out of a just respect to
all honor either past, present, or what is to come; I hope you will regard me
with a due Decorum, and desist from any rudeness.


Eag. Da -- m your Decorum -- You have been a Traitor to your own lawful
Spouse, therefore you must be reversed.


The Bullies set him on his Head, and shake all the Money out of his Pockets,
which Eager gathers up. Bull. Ay, ay; Reverse him, reverse him.


Eag. It rains plentifully; this is one of Old Jupiter's showers; so in with
him: now for the next.


[They turn him in, and the Alderman comes skipping out. Ald. Why Gentlemen, do
you see, Gentlemen, I love a Wench, Gentlemen, as well as the best of you,
Gentlemen -- and believe you are very honest Gentlemen; and make use of this
project to get a little Ready -- Pray take this Purse I'dad, and I will not grudge
you a Groat on it.


Bull. A very reasonable Gentleman.


[ Eager and the Bullies go off, shaking the Purse, and Singing, Every Purse is
our Prey, which, etc. and crying, Scour, scour, scour. Ald. Come Brother Sir
Nicholas, the Coast is clear, a couple of very pretty fellows I'dad. -- A -- h,
Brother, this comes of Whoring.


Sir Nich. O Lawd, O Lawd, I shall not get my Guts in their right place this month
-- And the fright for my Manhood will not off, I fear, much longer. -- This must
certainly be an enchanted Castle; those three were Gyant's Cubs, and that
Jezebel the Witch, I dare say she had Cloven feet, had we looked.


Ald. Let Us make the best of a bad Market; pop into a Coach; -- Drive to a
Tavern, and drink away Sorrow.


Enter Eager stripped. Eag. Gentlemen, I heard a great Noise, thought you might
be abused; and coming to your Rescue, was met in the next Room by some
Ruffians, stripped as you see, and beat most confoundedly.


Ald. I'dad I began to have but an ill opinion of thee.


Sir Nich. I must confess I began to have some Dubitation, that Mr. Eager had
not dealt very heartily.


Eag. This I get by being serviceable to my Friends -- and now to be Ill
thought on sticks worse by me than my Bastinading. -- Wrong my Friends? -- I Would
be drawn Piecemeal first.


Ald. Come Eager, we'll take thee along with us, and recompense thee for thy
misfortunes.


Exeunt. Enter Goosandelo, and Footman. Footm. That Is the House, Sir, where the
two Ladies went in.


Goos. Very well, enough, enough: -- Go bid my Coachman turn the Coach before
the door, and lash the Horses, -- and do you Dogs make a noise, that the Ladies
may look out of their Windows and see the Splendor of my Equipage: -- I would
have the Eyes of a Whole street upon the Gaze, as soon as ever I approach it.
-- Lol, lol; la, ra, la, ra.


[Tunes aloud. Enter Sapless hastily, Puffing and Blowing. Sap. Oh, Couzin, ha
I found you?


Goos. How now, Mr. Sapless, -- how long have you been in Town? -- What a pox
makes you in such a heat?


Sapl. Why, I was going to see for yo, to know whether yo can os^e me, to find
out our John't Baily; I ha been running up tawn and dawn tawn to finden, and
one had as good looked Needle in Bottle a Hay, as any body in this tawn.


Goos. What the devil does he say? Da'me if I understand him a syllable -- How
does my Lady and your pretty Sisters? -- When do they come to town?


Sapl. They Are aw weel at whom, thank ye. -- T'lasses are aw-ways tawking on
you, Couzin -- They lov'n you hugeny b'mass.


Goos. Don't say Couzin, when you speak to a Person of Quality, but say, Sir --
and prithee try to speak intelligibly; Lawd, lawd, what a monster of a thing is
a Country Squire -- Oh saw, how he stinks of Sweat.


[Takes Snuff. Sapl. Giss a little Snush.


[Snatches the Box. Goos. Ounz how he paws it! -- a foot of an Ox would take it
out handsomer -- 'Od confound him, he has dropped my box. -- What the devil have
you done, Sir? -- there is not another box-full of it in the Universe -- I had
it from Donna Aurelia Formalitosa, and she had it from Don Antonio Ernesto
Steffatito, and he had it out of the King of Spain's own Box.


Sapl. A chawnce, a chawnce comes aws we will, aws we will:


[Gathering it up. Goos. Pray, for the Respect I bear your Family, let me
furnish you with a Tutor, that he may cut you out of the Rough, and Polish you
a little; -- and when you have got your English, and know how to put on your
Clothes, you may be fit to go to the Accademy -- Then I Will take care to lay on
the finishing strokes, and make a complete Gentleman of you.


Sapl. Yo tawken -- 'Sflesh I am a Gentleman enough aw-ready in mine none
Country, and I thinken I ought to be thoughten so here; for I ha been faw drunk
at Tavern, and have layn all Neet at a Bawdy House; and they tell'n me yo
London Geutlemen do no more.


Goos. O abominable! I find thou art beyond the hope of Retrieving. -- IN gad
here comes the Ladies -- away Sapless -- vanish, prithee vanish, I would not be
seen in the Company of such an Animal for the Universe.


Sapl. Marry, and yo been thereabouts -- I had rather be Coupled to our Joler
for a twelve month, than be forced to stay with yo for an hour: and so fare you
well with a Murrain to you.


[Exit. Goos. Powder me, Powder me, ye Dog.


[His Footman flings Powder on him. Enter Mrs. Purflew and Mrs. Plyant. Goos. O
Ladies, I seize you here as lawful Prize -- I rule in this Parish of
Covent Garden as Sovereignly by day, as ever Stoaks did by night, and the
Beauties of these Precincts contest my power with as little success as the
Bullies did his.


Purf. Sure Sir, the limits of a Parish are two small to confine your Graces --
the Rays of your Charms have an influence that is Universal.


Goos. That Is true, Madam; and when ever they contract themselves to give place
to a greater Light, it is in your Presence.


Ply. Right Mr. Goosandelo still.


Purf. Indeed there is little danger of Mr. Goosandelo altering his temper -- a
hardened Fop is as irreclaimable as a sottish Drunkard.


[Aside. Goos. But, Madam, I suppose you are not unacquainted with Sir
Nicholas's Resolution.


Purf. I don't at all dispute his Intention, Sir.


Goos. Nor scruple his Judgment, I hope.


Ply. There was little occasion for its being over-discerning in its Choice of
you, Mr. Goosandelo.


Goos. That Is true again, Madam. -- I vow I pity some Ladies that I know --
this Wedding will mortify 'em strangely.


Purf. No doubt of it. -- Come, Couzin, let us away.


Goos. I Will Usher you to your Coach, Ladies.


Drive on Dull Time, to reach my Waiting Joys,
Moments are Ages in a Lover's Eyes.
[Exeunt. The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE Walks.
Bellair and Jocond. Bell. THese are the Walks -- But I see nothing of them yet.


Joc. Never doubt their being here anon, Sir. -- I question not but she is as
intent upon the Matter as your self.


Bell. Sirrah, hunt about, and be as vigilant as a Lynx -- You shall meet with
me hereabouts.


Joc. I Will secure you, Sir, my part shall not be wanting -- I Will say that for my
self, there is never a Puppy-dog in the Kingdom better taught to seek out and
find, than I am.


[Exit. Bell. For my life I cannot find out the true nature of Woman -- not a
single motion of their Minds, but seems irregular -- their Thoughts and
Resolves no sooner bubble up, but they break and are dissipated with the same
puff of Air, that first raised 'em -- the Composure of their Souls is too light
and unsuitable for the strength of their Charms; which have power to oppress
with a delight, and to enslave with a pleasure, whilst with a secret Joy, we
lose our selves, and blindly trace the mazing Labarinths of Love.


[Exit. Enter Eager, talking with Goosandelo. Eag. It Is no otherwse than I
expected -- 'Sbud, Sir, you look very charming -- with this Presence you have
power to kill like Lightning at a distance -- It Is but clapping your Hat before
your face, and taking it away again of a sudden -- Flash, if ere a Woman in
Christendom would not fall as flat as a Flounder, I Would perish.


Goos. May be so, I now -- Ha bien ajuste; let me die, Eager, I think thou
do not flatter me.


[Looking in his Glass, and pruning himself. Eag. Flatter you! -- You cannot be
flattered, your Perfections are unspeakable.


Goos. I have now put on most of my Graces, in order to the celebrating my
Nuptials.


Eag. Why, the Bride cannot choose but think she has got a Young God in her Arms.


Goos. Gad I am a Violent Fool to make Love to Mortals, paultry flesh and blood
-- I should reserve my self for Nymphs and Goddesses.


Eag. No doubt they will come in search of you; if you will have but patience --
Was you never attack't with a Succubus yet?


Goos. Succubus, succubus, who is she? Some foreign Princess! is it not?


Eag. No Sir, no; they are black-ey'd Ladies of the Royal Blood of Pluto --
when they find a Man that is cast in something more than Humane Mould, you
appear to be; they slip gently into his Bed when he is fast a-sleep, -- clasp*
their airy Limbs about him, and so enjoy him in a Dream.


Goos. Pox on 'em, if those are they I have 'em every Night; -- they harass me
off my Legs.


Eag. They are very busy when they find out such a complete, sweet, youthful
Person as your self, especially if he is a Lover of Provocatives, such as
Shellfish, Cavere, Eringo-roots, Pistachoo-past, Spanish Chocolate, etc.


Goos. There Is the business then, for I violently love all such things; -- but,
Eager, there is a great bulky Volume of the Law, a Favorite of the Alderman's,
hankers after my Mistress.


Eag. I know him, Breviat: Dam him, next time you see him in your Mistresses
Company, kick him, he dares not fight: -- To my knowledge he is as fraid of a
drawn Sword as an Atheist is of Thunder.


Goos. Would I were sure of that, -- not but that I know it impossible for any
Man to supplant my Interest in her; but I would not have her blowed upon by the
breath of such a Bear, and I am so passionate, that I protest I dare scarce
trust my self with repairing my own Injuries: -- Can not get him murdered
for me?


Eag. It will be something chargeable if you will have it done decently.


Goos. Decently? No, no, butcher him any how, his foul Carcass does not deserve
a jauntee thrust, else I Would do it my self.


Eag. First do you beat him, if he mutters I Will take him to task.


Goos. Let me die, Jack Eager, you are a very honest fellow; -- prithee accept
of this, and stand my Friend; [ gives him Money.] thou shall stay with me: --
If he comes, you and I and my Footmen will trounce him, I'gad, -- we'll
sacrifice him, a Dog, a Rogue, a Son of a Whore. --

Enter Breviat. -- O Lord, here he comes, -- don't take any notice of it, for I
ben't in a quarrelling temper at present. -- Your Servant, good Mr. Breviat, --
I must own I never had any esteem for a Man of your Profession till your Worth
laid an Embargo on me and my Services.


Brev. Pray, Sir, trade freely with your Services where you please; -- I fear
your Stock is so low, that you are not able to freight for a Passage, were it
only to cross Covent Garden, to give an account how your Complexion heightens.


Goos. What, do you intend to be sharp upon me? -- if you do, look to your
self, for I Will ^serk you with Repartee, I Will promise you. -- Eager, this is the
Gentleman that is like to carry the great Fortune, Mrs. Purflew.


Brev. 'Twill be impossible if you make Pretensions, Sir.


Goos. Oh, Sir, I protest every moment, you make fresh Discoveries of your
Sense and Judgment. -- Let me perish if I have not forgot to be put on my Scented
Leather-Shooes. -- Gentlemen, a matter of high concern requires my attending
upon my self to my own Apartment.


[Exit. Brev. Was there ever such a Fop in Nature? -- and yet they tell me,
that the Ladies dote on such Fools.


Eag. That the Ladies love Fools is true enough, but they must be Harmless,
Credulous, Passive Fools, not such a Self-admiring Fool, as Mr. Goosandelo is,
that insists so much on the Theme of his dear self, that he cannot afford the
fair Sex their share of Worship and Flattery.


Brev. That I believe is very true.


Enter Sapless and Vesuvia; Sapless making awkard Love apart. Eag. Then a
Country Eldest Brother Fool, goes down very well with a Lady, though she be a
Woman of good Sense, such as there is a pattern of [ pointing to Sapless] and
she will very lovingly take into her Arms his Worship's lump of animated Earth,
though the Blockhead's Brains were composed of the worst Mud about his Estate.


Brev. But still I apprehend some danger from this Coxcomb Goosandelo.


Eag. When you see him in your Mistresses Company affront him; -- Pull him by
the Nose; all Women hate a Coward, as much as they do the Man that deals
sincerely with their Looks or Conduct; -- and I am confident he dare not resent
it.


Brev. Are you sure of it?


Eag. As sure as that a London Justice go's snacks with Pick-pockets, or that
his Clerk gathers Contribution round the Whores Quarters. -- Your Man of Dress
is ever too nice for a Quarrel, -- he has just now owned that he fears you will
take occasion to fall out with him.


Brev. 'Sbud, I Will do it then. But he has been* at Paris, and has learnt how to
push Mathematically, and kill by Demonstration.


Eag. If he comes to pushing, let me alone with him. I'gad I am as ready at
whipping Men through the Lungs as a Smithfield Cook is at spitting of Pigs at a
Bartholomew Fair.


Brev. Stick to me, honest Eager, in this Business, and there is a token of
Encouragement for you. -- I must step to a Gentleman's Chamber, I Will be here
again in a moment.


[Exit. Eag. Well, noble Squire, hey for Cheshire, how proceed you with the
Lady, ha?


Sap. Marry, Master Eager, we fadgen prattily: -- I ha fast hold on her, and I
con but keep her: -- But they sen in our Country, that he that has holt on a
young Woman has got a slippery Eel by the Tail.


Sapless holding Vesuvia by the Skirts of her Gown. Eag. Spear her then,
Squire, and that will secure her.


Sap. 'Sflesh, and so I wood, on I could but lighten on her on a Sond-bed: --
Nea, what sen yo, Mistress?


Ves. I say, it is very hard for a poor weak Woman to withstand your strong and
pressing Importunities.


Eag. Do you think you can dispense with a Country-life, Madam?


Ves. No doubt I shall be happy with my pretty Squire in any place.


[Chucks him under the Chin. Sap. Oh, we han huge merry Folks in Cheshire! --
I'se mind my Horses and my Dogs, and yo san take care of the Dairy and feeding
of the Swine; -- and then at Night to Bed, to play at high Gaffer hoop, old Lass.


Eag. Come, make no bones on it, there is a Spiritual Flesh-broker lives hard by,
that will mould you both up into one Mass of Flesh and Blood in a trice.


Sap. Mass I'se lead her thither then. [ Hawls her by the Tail, and Sings.]
Come away, come away; sweet if thou love, come away.


Enter Bellair. Eag. Coll. Bellair, you are come to the Conclusion of a merry
Bargain: here is a Couple just going to be Priest-link'd; -- you shall see Madam
Vesuvia the Honorable Lady Sapless in a little while.


Bell. Ay? -- Are you the Son of Sir Thomas Sapless of Cheshire, Sir?


Sap. Yea, b'Mass, I am his Son and Heir too, as God would hea it.


Bell. Your Father, Sir, was an honest Gentleman, and a very good Friend of
mine.


Sap. So he was of mine, Sir, to die in good time and leave me the Estate.


Eag. So, -- here is all at an end, I fear; -- we shall have that impertinent
mischievous thing called Honor, spoil this business, In Faith.


[Aside. Bell. I vow, Madam, I must do that piece of Justice to my old Friend,
to put a stop to this Affair; -- I cannot in Honor do otherwise.


Eag. I thought so, I'saith, -- it is time for me to be gone, lest for the sake
of his old Friend, he should think fit to break my Bones out of a point of
Honor too.


[Aside and Exit. Ves. Pray what do you mean, good Mr. Colonel? do you think
with your Flams to make a breach betwixt our true Conjugal Love and Affection?
-- Don't believe a word he says, Squire. -- Sir, you have nothing to do with
Mr. Sapless, -- he is my lawful Husband already; he has promised me, and that is
enough; -- and I Will have him if all the Law in the Kingdom will get him me,
that I will, ye Scarlet Scarecrow, ye tool of Death and Destruction.


Bell. Hold your noise, for it is to no purpose: -- Mr. Sapless, you were upon
the brink of Ruin, and going to marry a Doll Common, therefore come along with
me, -- I Will make you sensible of the piece of service I do you, -- and for this
time put you into secure Hands.


Sap. Marry, and may be yo tel'n me nothing but what is truth, and therefore, as
they sen in our Country, Two words a bargain, I Will look before I leap, so I
will.


Bell. Come away, Sir, pray come along with me.


Exeunt Bell. and Sap. Ves. What? do you think to run away with my Husband?
I Will have him; I tell you, I Will have have him in spite of you, -- ye paultry,
filthy Upstart you.


[Exit: Enter Mrs. Purflew and mrs. Plyant. Purf. It Is pleasant being abroad
this Evening.


Ply. I am glad it draws so near Night, I would willingly be Femme Covert under
the lusty Lawyer: -- Here he comes, I vow; I find he has followed us upon the
dry scent.


Enter Breviat. Purf. What are you upon the hunt for, Spark? -- Some Vizor-Mask
to put Law-Cases to.


Brev. I am come, Madam, to retrieve a purloin'd Heart, -- I have issued out a
Writ de Cord Replegiendo, and it is returned Elongat' by your Ladyship.


Purf. You make very learned Love, this might take with some old
Westminster Hall Trotter.


Brev. I had rather referr my Business with you, Madam, to the Abbey than to the
Hall at present.


Purf. That you may not be out of your Road, I Will entertain my Cousin here to
put in my Plea.


Ply. I fear I shall betray your Cause for self-interest, as all Lawyers do; --
I must plead guilty, and put in Security for restoring the lost Heart, for
which, Sir, I Will be bound body for body.


Brev. I cannot except against the Bail; -- but if I had it under the Lady's
Hand and Seal 'twere sufficient.


Enter Goosandelo. Purf* What, would you be hooking me into Contract? -- If you
are so mistrustfull beforehand, I may well judge of your Jealousy afterward;
-- and so, Mr. Lawyer, you may turn over another leaf, for you will find nothing
to your purpose here, I Will promise you.


Goos. How Is this? my Mistress hot upon the Lawyer? I am glad to see that, I
faith. -- What now, Black-Box, with Broad-Seal of Yellow Wax? -- for such seems
your Face afixt to your Body when your Gown's on: What receiving Reprimand at
the Bar, ha?


Brev. What make you ask? -- thou Composition of persum'd Past worked up by the
Hands of Quack Operators, thou have nothing of thy own about thee, but thy
Sense, that indeed seems thine by making so dull a forced Jest, and afterward
explaining it.


Purf. Do you think this is very becoming, Gentlemen, before us?


Goos. I apprehended this Lawyer had some-how disobliged you, Madam, and so
looked upon my self bound in honor to engage on your Ladiship's side.


Brev. 'Sbud I Will venture to affront him.


[Aside. Purf. I beseech you, Sir, if you must engage, let it be for your self.


Goos. My self? so now I have a good subject, Madam, I am --


Purf. Hold, Sir, if you once begin to talk of your self, we shall never stop
your Mouth, therefore you shall hear me handle that Subject concisely: -- You
are a vain, noisy, empty, insipid --


Brev. Fool.


Goos. How Is this, Sir, is it manners thus to take the Fool out of a Lady's
Mouth?


Ply. I think, Gentlemen, it would be Manners to share your Discourse so, that
you might by turns entertain us both. -- I have not had a syllable from either of
you yet.


Goos. That Is because this Body of the Law has interposed; I know my self
accomplished with all the Rules of general Conversation, and have suitable
Sayings for all Complections.


Ply. I am no stranger, Sir, to your most refined way of Discourse.


Goos. You confound me, Madam, with your Encomium, tho I must own the justice
of it: Now for you, Madam, [ to Purf.] let us look fixed on each other a while,
that I may drink up your Eyes with mine; -- and I that look so brillant with my
own, how glorious shall I appear with the addition of your Rays?


Purf. Still you take care to squeeze in your self; -- I believe you would
suffer more patiently the loss of your Mistress, -- than be deprived of that
dear Self-Opinion; -- and in my Conscience you undergo more hazard of being
jilted by your self, than by the most subtle of our Sex.


Goos. What, Madam, do you design to be severe upon me, but I have bethought my
self of a sure way of overpowring you, [ Clapping his Hat before his Face, and
taking it away again of a sudden:] Flash, flash, I'gad you're fixed and
transfixed. -- What, Lawyer, are you Thunderstruck too?


Brev. What a pox can you mean by this Foppery and Impertinence?


Purf. Come, Couz. let us slip into another Walk, and leave the Blockheads to
wrangle by themselves.


[ Exeunt Purf. and Ply. Goos. What was that you said, Sir Foppery and
Impertinence; -- you lie Sir, Foppery in the Face of you, and Impertinence upon
your backside.


[Hits him a slap in the Face, and a kick on the Breech. Brev. Say you so, Sir?
Come on, Sir.


Goos. A Fool, Sir.


Brev. The Lie and a Kick, Sir?


They often draw their Swords part of the way out, and slip them up again by
turns. Goos. Impertinent Fop, Sir.


Brev. Ay, Sir.


Goos. Then no more to be said, Sir.


Brev. Then no more to be said neither, if that be all; and so farewell till I
meet you next.


[Exit. Goos. Fare you well too, if you be so huffish.


Enter Bellair. Bell. I was coming, Sir, with what haste I was able, to prevent
mischief, but I find your Prudence has over-ballanc'd your Passion.


Goos. I'gad, Sir, we were very near it; -- had I drawn an Inch farther, my
Sword had been unsheathed, and then by this time, this spot of Ground had been
deluged with a Crimson Flood.


Bell. You keep the Field, I see.


Goos. Yes, Sir, the Enemy fled not being able to make Head against the terror
of my Puissance, -- and e're he rallies again I Will pursue and perfect my
Conquest.


[Exit contrary way to Breviat. Enter Mrs. Purflew and Mrs. Plyant. Purf. What
are become of the Combatants? -- We saw the desperate Action through the Hedge.


Bell. Ha, ha; they have taken different Routs, I suppose, to prevent meeting
again, tho, as far as I see, they may do it safely at any time; -- they are
certainly acting a Farce, or they are the rankest Cowards upon the face of the
Earth.


Ply. They are very much in earnest, I Will assure you, Sir, and the Prize they
contest for, no less a Stake than this Lady.


Bell. I fear it would be very hazardous for the Lady to trust her Honor under
either of their Protections.


Purf. I shall take care never to bring my Honor so far in question to need a
Champion for its Defense.


Bell. The most virtuous, Madam, may be subject to Detraction*


Purf. And a public Vindication seldom abates the Scandal, -- Innocence is the
surest Guard and the best Defense against a Reproach.


Bell. Now your hand is in, pray Madam, give your Reasoning Faculty the liberty
of determining what ought to be the recompense of an unsullied Faith, and how
long a time is required to be convinced of the reality of Pretensions.


Purf. It Is easily answered, Sir, -- if that Faith respects a Reward, it seems
to be too selfish, and therefore deserves none; -- and if those Pretensions
grow faint, and weary, it is a sign they were never real, and therefore ought
not to be valued.


Ply. Perhaps, Sir, I can give you a more satisfactory Answer; -- hark ye, a
word in your Ear.


[Whispers. Purf. I vow, Couzin, the Air grows so very cool, it is time we
should be going, come away.


Ply. Adieu, Sir, -- I know we shall not be long before we see you.


[Exit Purf. and Ply. Bell. Come in disguise, bring a Parson with me and Jocond
Masked in a Woman's Habit, this exactly agrees with what the Boy said: -- Now
methinks the ineffable Joys begin to appear in view, a sudden (...) shoots
through my Veins; -- my Blood moves quick, and my Breast heaves high, as
doubting their force to sustain the approaching Bliss, my hasty Thoughts
anticipate the flowing Pleasures, and leave me all dissolved with the power of
Apprehension.


[Exit. SCENE changes to a Room in the Alderman's and Sir Nich. House.
Enter Alderman and Sprightly. Ald. Well, old trusty Trojan, is all things in
order? -- has the Canonical Black his proper Post of Darkness? -- have given my
Niece the Cautionary Instructions, honest old dry Chops, ha?


Spright. Yes, an't please your Honor's Worship, all things are as they should
be, and God send the Lawyer be so, all will be well over, I'gad -- I ha shed
many a Tear to think on my poor young Mistress to Night, God love her, poor
tender Chicken.


Ald. Never doubt her, old Sprightly: -- I'dad, I'dad, I shall grow as mad as a
March Hare to hear the young Hussie squeak. -- If I should come Caterwawling
into the Garrets to Night amongst the Wenches, be sure thou exercisest thy
retentive Faculty, do hear?


Spright. An't like your Worship, I was never given to twittle twattle.


Ald. Don't you babble then, but hold your Clack.


Spright. I Will warrant you, I Will be as silent as a Mouse in a Cheese.


Aid. I hear some body a coming, I believe it is the Lawyer, I Will go see.


[Exit. Enter Sir Nicholas. Sir Nich. Is every thing in a decent posture, to
make an honorable Reception for that true Epitomy of Honor, my spruce Nephew
that must be? Alderman Whim smoaks nothing of our Project, I Will vow thou
merit'st Coat Armor for thy Cunning and Secrecy: -- What think of a Cat
Couchant, ods-life thou shall have one for thee and thy whole Posterity.


Spr. Bless your Honor, -- ^eckins I am glad at Heart I can serve your
Honor's Worship: -- I warrant my young Mistress, Lord save my Child, will feel
the Cockles of her Heart leap, when she has got that sweet smockfac'd Gentleman
in Bed with her. -- I Will go see that all things be done in print to your
Honor's liking.


[Exit. Sir Nich. Do so, honest Sprightly. -- Here comes old Whim to vent some
new-hatch'd Project, I dare say.


Enter Alderman. Ald. I have been considering of it, Brother, -- and find, if
the War holds, we must of necessity introduce Poligamy for the supply of Men.


Sir Nich. On my word, Brother, you say well -- The Huns, Lombards, Goths and
Vandals, had never made so many Southern Incursions, had they not had a
plurality of Wives.


Ald. You shall invent Additions of Honor for them that are most dextrons at
Propagation, and add to their former Coats, Bulls, Goats, Stone-horses, and
Cock-sparrows -- I'dad as old as I am, I Will have for my share half a score at
least, and strut about, my little Seraglio, the lusty predominant Alderman,
Sultan, Whim.


Sir Nich. You do well to talk of a Seraglio, for were those ten Wives to go
loose, the Neck of the best Town-Bull in the Country would not be able to
support your Horns.


Ald. But hark ye Sir Nicholas, my dear Brother and worthy Knight -- Let Us
consider of disposing of our Charge -- I'dad if she gets sensible of her own
Power, she will perhaps bob us both in short.


Sir Nich. Your Advice, dear Brother, is of great Importance -- Here I Will read
you a List of our Proposals.


Ald. And I Will give you my Opinion.


Sir Nich. Imprimis, My Lord Grimace promises us Court-preferment.


Ald. He has not Interest there, not so much as to have a Stand-by from the
Yeoman-Usher.


Sir Nich. Item, My Lord Supple says he will make his Appearance for us in the
Country at the next Elections.


Ald. His Honor is ham-string'd by bowing two ways at once, therefore his
Cringes will be of no farther use. But here is the Company a coming, to morrow
we'll settle this Matter, and dedicate this Night to Mirth.


Enter at one Door Breviat, Goosandelo, Sapless and Eager, at the other Plyant
and Jacond Masked; soon after Purflew also Masked. Goos. Oh, you Heavens! what,
the Ladies in Masquerade! -- had we known that, we would have been in Habits
too. -- I would have been the Great Mogul, Brother of the Stars, and Son of the
Sun, and have out-shin'd my Glorious Father himself: -- The Lawyer should have
been Prestor John of Aethiopia, Mr. Sapless, Garagantua; and honest Jack Eager,
Pantagruel.


Sir Nich. It Is no matter, the Ladies shall Unmask presently. -- Pray Place you
selves, Fiddles: Strike up.


[The Fiddles flourish. Enter Tipstaff, and Constables. Ald. Hey-day, what is
here to do? -- What, Sir Nicholas, is your Arcadian Pastoral to be performed by
Tipstaves and Constables?


Tip. By your leave, Gentlemen, our Business is with one John Eager, alias
Curryman: here is the Gentleman, seize him.


Sir Nich. What, what is the matter? what Process have you against Mr. Eager?


Tip. Only a Warrant, Sir, that Charges him with a few small Forgeries, of
Bonds, Wills, and Indentures; that is all, Sir.


Eag. So now must I be clapped up betwixt a pair of Iron-Grates, and squeezed
dry, and then be turned loose for new Exploits -- That Is the main business I
protest, Gentlemen.


Constable. Away with him, away with him.


[The Constable carries off Eager. Ald. I'dad I began to believe this Eager was
a sort of a Dangerous Spark.


Sir Nich. You would not believe me, Brother; for my part, I saw it in his
Eyes, and discovered the Perfidy of his Soul through the Port-holes of his
Body. -- Now, now stand clear.


An Entertainment of Singing and Dancing by Sheppards and Satyrs; in the
beginning of which, Sprightly slips off, Goosandelo and Jocond at one Door, and
Breviate and Plyant at the other, who soon after return again. At the latter
End of the Dance, Bellair appears in Disguise.

A SONG, in Dialogue, Sung by Mr. Reading and Mrs. Hodgson: Set by Mr. John
Eccles.
1 COme, Thyrsis, come; let us our Voices try,
And Charm the Woods with Orphean Melody.
2 This is the Glorious Annual Night,
That first gave fair Corinna Light.
1 The Bright Corinna,
2 Divine Corinna.
1 Corinna, who has Joys in store;
2 Corinna, whom all Eyes adore:
[Both.] Corinna, who, etc.
1 Come, let us of her Graces tell,
Charms that do Themselves excel.
2 Let us softest Notes rehearse,
And Sing her Beauties in Immortal Verse.
[ Both.] Let us softest, etc.
CHORUS.
We'll all join in Chorus, and Echo her Praise;
Pay our Vows to the Gods, to smile on her Days:
May she ever be Gay, may she ever be Young;
As our Harmony sweet, and as soft as our Song.
Sir Nich. Very well performed, the Interlude we'll have after Supper.


Ald. Brother, Brother; Pray what Spark is this that looks so big, and struts
about at this Rate?


Sir Nich. It may be he is dropped from the Sky, for I know nothing of him.


Brev. [ Leading up Plyant to the Alderman and Sir Nicholas] Gentlemen, I have
the Honor to be your Nephew, and humbly beg you will Approve the Choice your
Niece has made.


Ald. Ay, Niece: Have you been too nimble for us? Come, Brother, since it is so,
Mr. Breviat is an ingenious worthy Gentleman, let us wish 'em Joy.


Sir Nich. Ounz, what is the meaning of this?


Goos. [ Leading up Jocond.] Ah, ah, ah; Faith, Lawyer, you are a little beside
the Point: Gentlemen, your Beautiful Niece has delivered her fair Person to
me. -- Under therefore your benign Aspect, we shall shine the two brightest
Glories of this your Hemisphere.


Ald. What a pox is the matter now?


Sir Nich. Ay, ay, Brother; Mr. Goosandelo is a Person of Honor and Quality; I
think we shall do well to Congratulate the Match.


Bell. [ Leading up Mrs. Purflew.] Make room here, I lay claim to this Lady,
who lately bore the Name of Purflew, and am ready to justify my Title.


Sir Nich. and Alderm. Bless us, who is this?


Purflew [ Discovering her self.] I hope, Uncles, the different Measures in
each of your Conducts will excuse my Choice of this Gentleman, whom I have made
my Husband.


Ald. Pray will you all Unmask, that these Riddles may be explained.


Bell. [ Discovering himself.] My Name is Bellair; it shall be my Care to set a
true Value on the Blessing I have obtained.


Omnes. Coll. Bellair!


Ald. Who have you got, Mr. Breviat? [Plyant discovering her self.] What, my
Couzin Plyant!


Brev. O Lord, what will become of me when I go the Circuit! -- Faith I may now
go and take a gentle Swing into the other Word, and so finish the Law upon my
self.


Ply. Don't despair, Sir; now I am yours, I may be allowed to own my Affections
for you, and since Custom deprives our Sex of making Court where we like; when
I was assured of my Couz Purflew's Pre-ingagement, I took this method, and
shall, I hope, by my Duty, procure your Esteem.


Goos. [Jocand discovering himself.] Oh ye Powers above, I have Married a Boy
here.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Goos. And Ha, ha, ha, too: -- I'gad I Am glad on it, it is a very pretty Boy by
my Soul: come to my Arms, my dear little Ganymede.


Ald. Fine doings, I'dad. -- Ah, Brother, we are well enough served for being
so distrustful of each other.


Sir Nich. Since my Niece has disposed of her self -- I am glad she has made
Choice of you, Sir: -- I am not unacquainted with the Family of the Bellairs,
and you, Colonel, have added fresh Laurels to the Deeds of your worthy
Ancestors, and have maintained an indisputable Character of a Man of Honor. --
Come, let us have another Dance, and so in to the Collation.


A DANCE by Two Sheppardesses. Sir Nich. Come, now to Supper.


Bell. Then to that grand Regale of Bliss, where famished Love may make an
insatiate Feast of Beauty.


Purf. What share, Sir, I have of it, is but a just Reward for your faithful
Passion


They Are sordid Flames, that Interest does impart;
Nothing but Love's a Purchase for a Heart.
Exeunt. EPILOGUE: Spoke by Miss Howard, in Pages Habit.
I Find I Am forward in my Tender ^ge,
And show the Early Manhood of a Page.
I dare already for a Mistress Tilt,
Bully a Bawd, and Kick a Bant'ring Jilt;
Can cheat at Cards, Slur, Strike, or Palm ^ Dye,
Break Windows too, with Midnight Gallantry.
Thus being qualified, I need not fear,
To go abroad a Taring Volunteer,
And be a Captain by another Year.
Ladies, look to it, by that time I come back,
I shall have learnt to Manage an Attack;
I Will Court you then in Military Strain,
And, by my Dint of Conduct, Conquest gain:
But ever I bid adieu, Faith I Have a mind
To leave you some good Wishes here behind.
May Virgin never her first Desires baulk,
So fall to feeding upon Coals or Chaulk.
May never Wife any Occasion miss,
To wipe her Lips of Husband's nauseous Kiss.
May no Rich Widow ever her Kindness smother,
Or spare to pay the Pains of Younger Brother.
May none of either Sex, ever fail to find,
A Lover constant, or a Mistress kind.
FINIS.
Advertisements.
OROONOKO: A Tragedy. Written by Mr. Southern. Deliciae Musicae, the Fourth
Book: which compleats the First Volume. Printed for H. Playford and B. Took.


