A DIRECTORY FOR The Public Worship of GOD, Throughout the Three KINGDOMS OF
England, Scotland, and Ireland. Together with an Ordinance of Parliament for
the taking away of the Book of COMMON PRAYER: AND For establishing and
observing of this present DIRECTORY throughout the Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales.

Die Jovis, 13. Martii, 1644.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Ordinance
and Directory be forthwith Printed and Published:

Joh: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.



LONDON: Printed for Evan Tyler, Alexander Fifield, Ralph Smith, and John
Field; And are to be sold at the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill, near the
ROYALL-EXCHANGE. 1644.

Die Veneris, 3. Januarii, 1644.
An Ordinance of Parliament for the taking away of the Book of Common Prayer,
and for the establishing and putting in execution of the Directory for the
public Worship of God.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into serious
consideration the manifold Inconveniences that have arisen by the Book of
Common Prayer in this Kingdom, and resolving, according to their Covenant, to
reform Religion according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best
Reformed Churches, have Consulted with the Reverend, Pious and Learned Divines,
called together to that purpose; And do judge it necessary that the said Book
of Common Prayer be abolished, and the Directory for the Public Worship of
God, herein after mentioned, be established and observed in all the Churches
within this Kingdom: Be it therefore Ordained by the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, That the Statute of the second and third years of King
Edward the sixth, Entitled, The Penalty for not using Uniformity of Service,
and Administration of Sacraments, etc. And the Statute of the fifth and sixth
years of the same King, Entitled, Uniformity of Prayer, and Administration of
Sacraments, shall be used in the Church: And so much of the Statute of the
first year of Queen Elizabeth, Entitled, There shall be Uniformity of Prayer
and Administration of Sacraments, as concerns the said Book of Common Prayer,
and the Uniformity of Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments: And so much
of the Statute of the fifth year of the same Queen, Entitled, By whose Order,
the Bible, and Book of Common Prayer shall be Translated into the Welsh Tongue,
as concerns the Book of Common Prayer: And so much of the Statute of the eighth
year of the same Queen, Entitled, All Acts made by any person since Primo
Eliz. for the Consecrating, Investing, etc. of any Archbishop, or Bishop, shall
be good, as concerns the said Book; Be, and stand from henceforth Repealed,
void, and of none effect, to all intents, constructions, and purposes
whatsoever; And that the said book of Common Prayer, shall not remain, or be
from henceforth used in any Church, Chapel, or place of Public Worship,
within the Kingdom of England, or Dominion of Wales; And that the Directory for
Public Worship herein set forth, shall be henceforth used, pursued, and
observed, according to the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance, in all
Exercises of the Public Worship of God, in every Congregation, Church,
Chapel, and place of Public Worship within this Kingdom of England, and
Dominion of Wales; Which Directory for the Public Worship of God, with the
Preface thereof follows. And it is further Ordained by the Authority
aforesaid, That there shall be provided at the charge of every Parish, or
Chappelry in this Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales, a fair Register Book
of Velim, to be kept by the Minister and other Officers of the Church; And that
the Names of all Children Baptized, and of their Parents, and of the time of
their Birth and Baptizing, shall be written and set down by the Minister
therein; And also the Names of all persons Married there, and the time of their
Marriage; And also the Names of all persons Buried in that Parish, and the time
of their Death and Burial: And that the said Book shall be showed by such as
keep the same, to all persons reasonably desiring to search for the Birth,
Baptizing, Marriage, or Burial of any person therein Registered, and to take a
Copy, or procure a Certificate thereof.

A DIRECTORY FOR The Public Worship OF GOD In the three KINGDOMS.
THE PREFACE.
IN the beginning of the blessed Reformation, our wise and pious Ancestors took
care to set forth an Order for Redress of many things, which they, then, by
the Word discovered to be Vain, Erroneous, Superstitious, and Idolatrous, in
the Public Worship of God. This occasioned many Godly and Learned men to
rejoice much in the Book of Common Prayer at that time set forth; Because the
Mass, and the rest of the Latine-Service being removed, the Public Worship
was celebrated in our own Tongue; many of the common People also received
benefit by hearing the Scriptures read in their own Language, which formerly
were unto them as a Book that is sealed.

Howbeit, long and sad Experience has made it manifest, That the Leiturgie
used in the Church of England, (notwithstanding all the pains and Religious
intentions of the Compilers of it) has proved an offense, not only to many of
the Godly at home; but also to the Reformed Churches abroad. For, not to speak
of urging the Reading of all the Prayers, which very greatly increased the
burden of it; the many unprofitable and burdensome Ceremonies, contained in it,
have occasioned much mischief, as well by disquieting the Consciences of many
godly Ministers and people who could not yield unto them, as by depriving them
of the Ordinances of God, which they might not enjoy without conforming or
Subscribing to those Ceremonies. Sundry good Christians have been by means
thereof, kept from the Lords Table, and diverse able and faithful Ministers
debarred from the exercise of their Ministry (to the endangering of many
Thousand Souls, in a time of such scarcity of faithful Pastors) and spoiled of
their livelihood, to the undoing of them and their Families. Prelates and their
Faction have labored to raise the Estimation of it to such an height, as if
there were no other Worship, or way of Worship of God amongst us, but only
the Service Book; to the great hinderance of the Preaching of the Word, and
(in some places, especially of late) to the justling of it out, as unnecessary;
or (at best) as far inferior to the Reading of Common Prayer, which was made no
better then an Idol by many Ignorant and Superstitious People, who pleasing
themselves in their presence at that Service, and their Lip-labor in bearing a
part in it, have thereby hardened themselves in their ignorance and
carelessness of saving knowledge and true piety.

In the mean time Papists boasted, that the Book was a compliance with them in
a great part of their Service, and so were not a little confirmed in their
Superstition and Idolatry, expecting rather our return to them, than
endeavoring the Reformation of themselves: In which expectation they were of
late very much encouraged, when, upon the pretended warrantablenesse of
imposing of the former Ceremonies, new ones were daily obtruded upon the Church.

Add hereunto (which was not foreseen, but since has come to pass) that the
Leiturgie has been a great means, as on the one hand to make and increase an
idle and unedifying Ministry, which contented it self with set Forms made to
their hands by others, without putting forth themselves to exercise the gift of
Prayer, with which our Lord Jesus Christ pleases to furnish all his Servants
whom he calls to that office: So on the other side it has been (and ever would
be, if continued) a matter of endless strife and contention in the Church, and
a snare both to many godly and faithful Ministers, who have been persecuted
and silenced upon that occasion, and to others of hopeful parts, many of which
have been, and more still would be, diverted from all thoughts of the Ministry
to other studies; especially in these latter times, wherein God vouchsafes to
his people more and better means for the discovery of Error and Superstition,
and for attaining of knowledge in the mysteries of godliness, and gifts in
Preaching and Prayer.

Upon these, and many the like weighty considerations, in reference to the
whole Book in general, and because of diverse particulars contained in it; not
from any love to Novelty, or intention to disparage our first Reformers (of
whom we are persuaded that were they now alive, they would join with us in this
work, and whom we acknowledge as Excellent Instruments raised by God to begin
the purging and building of his House, and desire they may be had of us and
Posterity in everlasting Remembrance, with thankfulness and honor;) but that
we may in some measure answer the gracious Providence of God, which at this
time calls upon us for further Reformation, and may satisfy our own
Consciences, and answer the expectation of other Reformed Churches, and the
desires of many of the godly among our selves, and withal give some public
Testimony of our endeavors for Uniformity in Divine Worship, which we have
promised in our Solemn League and Covenant: We have, after earnest and
frequent calling upon the Name of God, and after much Consultation, not with
flesh and blood, but with his holy Word, resolved to lay aside the former
Leiturgie, with the many Rites and Ceremonies formerly used in the Worship of
God: And have agreed upon this following Directory for all the parts of
Public Worship, at ordinary and extraordinary times.

Wherein our care has been to hold forth such things as are of Divine
Institution in every Ordinance; and other things we have endeavored to set
forth according to the Rules of Christian Prudence, agreeable to the general
Rules of the Word of God. Our meaning therein being only that the general
heads, the sense and scope of the Prayers and other parts of Public Worship
being known to all, there may be a consent of all the Churches, in those things
that contain the substance of the Service and Worship of God; And the
Ministers may be hereby directed in their Administrations to keep like
soundness in Doctrine and Prayer; and may, if need be, have some help and
furniture: And yet so, as they become not hereby slothful and negligent in
stirring up the gifts of Christ in them: But, that each one, by meditation, by
taking heed to himself and the Flock of God committed to him, and by wise
observing the ways of Divine Providence, may be careful to furnish his heart
and tongue with further, or other materials of Prayer and Exhortation, as shall
be needful upon all occasions.

A DIRECTORY FOR Public Prayer, Reading the Holy Scriptures, Singing of
Psalms, Preaching of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments, and other
parts of the Public Worship of God, Ordinary, and Extraordinary.
Of the Assembling of the Congregation, and their Behavior in the Public
Worship of God.
WHen the Congregation is to meet for Public Worship, the people (having
before prepared their hearts thereunto) ought all to come, and join therein:
not absenting themselves from the Public Ordinances, through negligence, or
upon pretense of Private meetings.

Let all enter the Assembly, not irreverently, but in a grave and seemly
manner, taking their seats or places without Adoration, or Bowing themselves
toward one place or other.

The Congregation being assembled; the Minister, after solemn calling on them
to the worshipping of the great name of God, is to begin with Prayer;

In all Reverence and Humility acknowledging the incomprehensible Greatness
and Majesty of the Lord, (in whose presence they do then in a special manner
appear) and their own vileness and unworthiness to approach so near him;
with their utter inability of themselves, to so great a Work: And humbly
beseeching him for Pardon, Assistance, and Acceptance in the whole Service then
to be performed; and for a Blessing on that particular portion of his Word
then to be read: and all, in the Name and Mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Public Worship being begun, the people are wholly to attend upon it;
forbearing to Read any thing, except what the Minister is then reading or
citing; and abstaining much more from all private whisperings, conferences,
salutations, or doing reverence to any persons present, or coming in; as also
from all gazing, sleeping, and other undecent behavior, which may disturb the
Minister or people, or hinder themselves or others in the service of God.

If any through necessity be hindered from being present at the beginning, they
ought not, when they come into the Congregation, to betake themselves to their
private Devotions, but reverently to compose themselves to join with the
Assembly, in that Ordinance of God which is then in hand.

Of Public Reading of the holy Scriptures.
REading of the Word in the Congregation, being part of the public Worship of
God, (wherein we acknowledge our dependence upon him, and subjection to him) and
one Means sanctified by him for the edifying of his People, is to be performed
by the Pastors and Teachers.

Howbeit, such as intend the Ministry, may occasionally both read the Word,
and exercise their gift in Preaching in the Congregation, if allowed by the
Presbytery thereunto.

All the Canonical Books of the Old and New Testament, (but none of those
which are commonly called Apocrypha) shall be publicly read in the vulgar
Tongue, out of the best allowed Translation, distinctly, that all may hear and
understand.

How large a portion shall be read at once, is left to the wisdom of the
Minister: But it is convenient that ordinarily one Chapter of each Testament
be read at every meeting; and sometimes more, where the Chapters be short, or
the coherence of matter requires it.

It is requisite that all the Canonical books be read over in order, that the
people may be better acquainted with the whole Body of the Scriptures: And
ordinarily, where the Reading in either Testament ends on one Lords day, it
is to begin the next.

We commend also the more frequent reading of such Scriptures, as he that
reads shall think best for edification of his Hearers; as the Book of
Psalms, and such like.

When the Minister, who reads, shall judge it necessary to expound any part
of what is read, let it not be done until the whole Chapter, or Psalm be
ended: and regard is always to be had unto the time, that neither Preaching or
other Ordinance be straightened, or rendered tedious. Which Rule is to be observed
in all other public performances.

Beside Public Reading of the Holy Scriptures, every person that can read,
is to be exhorted to read the Scriptures privately (and all others that cannot
read, if not disabled by age, or otherwise, are likewise to be exhorted to
learn to read) and to have a Bible.

Of Public Prayer before the Sermon.
AFter Reading of the Word (and singing of the Psalm) the Minister who is to
Preach, is to endeavor to get his own, and his Hearers hearts to be rightly
affected with their Sins, that they may all mourn in sense thereof before the
Lord, and hunger and thirst after the grace of God in Jesus Christ, by
proceeding to a more full Confession of Sin with shame and holy confusion of
face; and to Call upon the Lord to this effect;

To acknowledge our great sinfulness; First, by reason of Original sin, which
(beside the guilt that makes us liable to everlasting Damnation) is the seed of
all other sins, has depraved and poisoned all the faculties and powers of
Soul and Body, does defile our best actions, and (were it not restrained, or
our hearts renewed by Grace) would break forth into innumerable
transgressions, and greatest rebellions against the Lord, that ever were
committed by the vilest of the sons of Men. And, next, by reason of Actual
sins, our own sins, the sins of Magistrates, of Ministers, and of the whole
Nation, unto which we are many ways accessory. Which sins of ours receive
many fearful aggravations, we having broken all the Commandments of the
holy, just, and good Law of God, doing that which is forbidden, and leaving
undone what is enjoined; and that not only out of Ignorance, and Infirmity,
but also more presumptuously against the light of our Minds, checks of our
Consciences, and motions of his own Holy Spirit to the contrary, so that we
have no cloak for our sins; Yea, not only despising the riches of Gods
goodness, forbearance and long-suffering, but standing out against many
invitations and offers of grace in the Gospel, not endeavoring as we ought to
receive Christ into our hearts by Faith, or to walk worthy of him in our
lives.

To bewail our blindness of mind, hardness of heart, unbelief, impenitency,
security, lukewarmnesse, barrenness, our not endeavoring after mortification
and newness of life; nor after the exercise of godliness in the power
thereof; and that the best of us have not so steadfastly walked with God, kept
our garments so unspotted, nor been so zealous of his glory, and the good of
others, as we ought: And to mourn over such other sins as the Congregation is
particularly guilty of; notwithstanding the manifold and great Mercies of our
God, the Love of Christ, the Light of the Gospel, and Reformation of Religion,
our own purposes, promises, vows, solemn Covenant, and other special
obligations to the contrary.

To acknowledge and confess, that, as we are convinced of our guilt, so, out
of a deep sense thereof, we judge our selves unworthy of the smallest
benefits, most worthy of Gods fiercest wrath, and of all the Curses of the Law
and heaviest Judgments inflicted upon the most rebellious Sinners; and that
he might most justly take his Kingdom and Gospel from us, plague us with all
sorts of spiritual and temporal judgments in this life, and after cast us
into utter Darkness, in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone, where
is weeping, and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

Notwithstanding all which, To draw near to the Throne of Grace, encouraging
our selves with hope of a gracious Answer of our Prayers, in the riches and
all sufficiency of that only one oblation, the satisfaction and intercession
of the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of his Father, and our Father; and,
in confidence of the exceeding great and precious promises of mercy and grace
in the new Covenant, through the same Mediator thereof, to deprecate the heavy
wrath and curse of God, which we are not able to avoid, or bear; and humbly,
and earnestly to supplicate for mercy in the free and full remission of all our
sins, and that only for the bitter sufferings and precious merits of that our
only Savior Jesus Christ.

That the Lord would vouchsafe to shed abroad his love in our hearts by the
Holy Ghost; seal unto us by the same Spirit of Adoption, the full assurance of
our Pardon and Reconciliation; comfort all that mourn in Zion, speak peace to
the wounded and troubled spirit, and bind up the broken hearted: And as for
secure and presumptuous sinners, that he would open their eyes, convince their
Consciences, and turn them from darkness unto light, and from the power of
Satan unto God, that they also may receive forgiveness of sin, and an
inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus.

With remission of sins through the blood of Christ, To pray for sanctification
by his Spirit; the Mortification of sin dwelling in, and many times
tyrannizing over us, the quickening of our dead spirits with the life of God in
Christ, grace to fit and enable us for all duties of conversation and callings
toward God and Men, strength against temptations, the sanctified use of
blessings and crosses, and perseverance in Faith, and obedience unto the end.

To pray for the Propagation of the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ to all
Nations, for the conversion of the Jews, the fullness of the Gentiles, the
fall of Antichrist, and the hastening of the second coming of our Lord; For
the deliverance of the distressed Churches abroad, from the tyranny of the
Antichristian faction, and from the cruel oppressions and blasphemies of the
Turk: For the blessing of God upon all the Reformed Churches, especially upon
the Churches and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, now more strictly
and religiously united in the solemn National League and Covenant; and for
our Plantations in the remote parts of the World: more particularly for that
Church and Kingdom whereof we are Members, that therein God would establish
Peace and Truth, the purity of all his Ordinances, and the power of Godliness;
prevent and remove heresy, schism, profaneness, superstition, security, and
unfruitfulnesse under the means of Grace, heal all our rents and divisions,
and preserve us from breach of our solemn Covenant.

To pray for all in Authority, especially for the Kings Majesty, that God would
make him rich in blessings, both in his Person and Government; establish his
Throne in Religion and Righteousness, save him from evil Counsel, and make
him a blessed and glorious Instrument for the conservation and propagation of
the Gospel, for the encouragement and protection of them that do well, the
terror of all that do evil, and the great good of the whole Church, and of
all his Kingdoms; for the conversion of the Queen, the religious education of
the Prince, and the rest of the Royal seed; For the comforting of the
afflicted Queen of Bohemia, sister to our Sovereign, and for the restitution
and establishment of the illustrious Prince Charles, Elector Palatine of the
Rhene, to all his Dominions and Dignities; For a blessing upon the High Court
of Parliament, (when sitting in any of these Kingdoms respectively) the
Nobility, the subordinate Judges and Magistrates, the Gentry and all the
Commonalty; For all Pastors and Teachers, that God would fill them with his
Spirit, make them exemplarily holy, sober, just, peaceable, and gracious in
their lives; sound, faithful, and powerful in their Ministry and follow all
their labors with abundance of success and blessing; and give unto all his
people Pastors according to his own heart; For the Universities, and all
Schools and Religious seminaries of Church and Commonwealth, that they may
flourish more and more in Learning and piety; For the particular City or
Congregation, that God would power out a blessing upon the Ministry of the
Word, Sacraments and Discipline, upon the Civil Government, and all the
several Families and persons therein; For mercy to the afflicted under any
inward or outward distress; For seasonable weather and fruitful seasons as
the time may require; For averting the Judgments, that we either feel or
fear, or are liable unto, as famine, pestilence, the sword, and such like.

And, with confidence of his mercy to his whole Church, and the acceptance of
our persons, through the merits and mediation of our great High Priest the Lord
Jesus, To profess that it is the desire of our souls to have fellowship with
God in the reverent and conscionable use of his holy Ordinances; and, to that
purpose to pray earnestly for his grace and effectual assistance to the
sanctification of his holy Sabbath, the Lords day, in all the duties thereof,
public and private, both to our selves, and to all other Congregations of his
people, according to the riches and excellency of the Gospel this day
celebrated and enjoyed.

And, because we have been unprofitable hearers in times past, and now cannot
of our selves receive, as we should, the deep things of God, the mysteries of
Jesus Christ, which require a spiritual discerning, To pray that the Lord who
teaches to profit, would graciously please to pour out the Spirit of Grace,
together with the outward means thereof, causing us to attain such a measure of
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, and in him, of the
things which belong to our peace, that we may account all things but as dross
in comparison of him: And that we, tasting the first fruits of the glory that
is to be revealed, may long for a more full and perfect communion with him,
that where he is, we may be also, and enjoy the fullness of those joys and
pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore.

More particularly, that God would in special manner furnish his Servant (now
called to dispense the bread of life unto his household) with wisdom, fidelity,
zeal, and utterance, that he may divide the Word of God aright, to every one
his portion, in evidence and demonstration of the Spirit and power; and that
the Lord would circumcise the ears and hearts of the Hearers, to hear, love,
and receive with meekness the ingrafted Word, which is able to save their
souls, make them as good ground to receive in the good seed of the Word, and
strengthen them against the temptations of Satan, the cares of the World, the
hardness of their own hearts, and whatsoever else may hinder their profitable
and saving hearing; that so Christ may be so formed in them, and live in them,
that all their thoughts may be brought into captivity to the obedience of
Christ, and their hearts established in every good word and work for ever.

We judge this to be a convenient Order, in the ordinary Public Prayers; yet
so, as the Minister may defer (as in prudence he shall think meet) some part
of these Petitions, till after his Sermon, or offer up to God some of the
Thanksgivings, hereafter appointed, in his Prayer before his Sermon.

Of the Preaching of the Word.
PReaching of the Word, being the power of God unto Salvation, and one of the
greatest and most excellent Works belonging to the Ministry of the Gospel,
should be so performed, that the Workman need not been ashamed, but may save
himself, and those that hear him.

It is presupposed (according to the Rules for Ordination) that the Minister of
Christ is in some good measure gifted for so weighty a service, by his skill in
the Original Languages, and in such Arts and Sciences as are handmaids unto
Divinity, by his knowledge in the whole Body of Theology, but most of all in
the holy Scriptures, having his senses and heart exercised in them above the
common sort of Believers; and by the illumination of Gods Spirit, and other
gifts of edification, which (together with reading and studying of the Word)
he ought still to seek by Prayer, and an humble heart, resolving to admit and
receive any truth not yet attained, when ever God shall make it known unto him.
All which he is to make use of, and improve, in his private preparations,
before he deliver in public what he has provided.

Ordinarily, the subject of his Sermon is to be some Text of Scripture, holding
forth some principle or head of Religion; or suitable to some special occasion
emergent; or he may go on in some Chapter, Psalm, or Book of the holy
Scripture, as he shall see fit.

Let the Introduction to his Text be brief and perspicuous, drawn from the Text
it self, or context, or some parallel place, or general sentence of Scripture.

If the Text be long (as in Histories and Parables it sometimes must be) let
him give a brief sum of it; if short, a Paraphrase thereof, if need be: In
both, looking diligently to the scope of the Text, and pointing at the chief
heads and grounds of Doctrine, which he is to raise from it.

In Analyzing and dividing his Text, he is to regard more the order of matter,
then of words; and neither to burden the memory of the hearers in the
beginning, with too many members of Division, nor to trouble their minds with
obscure terms of Art.

In raising Doctrines from the Text, his care ought to be, First, that the
matter be the truth of God. Secondly, that it be a truth contained in, or
grounded on that Text, that the hearers may discern how God techeth it from
thence. Thirdly, that he chiefly insist upon those Doctrines which are
principally intended, and make most for the edification of the hearers.

The Doctrine is to be expressed in plain terms; or if any thing in it need
explication, is to be opened, and the consequence also from the Text cleared.
The parallel places of Scripture confirming the Doctrine are rather to be
plain and pertinent, then many, and (if need be) somewhat insisted upon, and
applied to the purpose in hand.

The Arguments or Reasons are to be solid; and, as much as may be,
convincing. The illustrations of what kind soever, ought to be full of light,
and such as may convey the truth into the Hearers heart with spiritual delight.

If any Doubt, obvious from Scripture, Reason, or Prejudice of the Hearers,
seem to arise, it is very requisite to remove it, by reconciling the seeming
differences, answering the reasons, and discovering and taking away the causes
of prejudice and mistake. Otherwise, it is not fit to detain the hearers with
propounding or answering vain or wicked Cavils, which as they are endless, so
the propounding and answering of them does more hinder then promote edification.

He is not to rest in general Doctrine, although never so much cleared and
confirmed, but to bring it home to special Use, by application to his hearers:
Which albeit it prove a work of great difficulty to himself, requiring much
prudence, zeal, and meditation, and to the natural and corrupt man will be
very unpleasant; yet he is to endeavor to perform it in such a manner that
his Auditors may feel the Word of God to be quick and powerful, and a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart; and that if any unbeleever
or ignorant person be present, he may have the secrets of his heart made
manifest, and give glory to God.

In the Use of Instruction or information in the knowledge of some truth, which
is a consequence from his Doctrine, he may (when convenient) confirm it by a
few firm Arguments from the Text in hand, and other places of Scripture, or
from the nature of that Common place in Divinity, whereof that truth is a
branch.

In Confutation of false Doctrines, he is neither to raise an old Heresy from
the grave, nor to mention a blasphemous opinion unnecessarily: but if the
people be endanger of an Error, he is to confute it soundly, and endeavor to
satisfy their judgments and consciences against all objections.

In Exhorting to Duties, he is, as he sees cause, to teach also the means
that help to the performance of them.

In Dehortation, Reprehension, and public Admonition (which require special
wisdom) let him, as there shall be cause, not only discover the nature and
greatness of the sin, with the misery attending it, but also show the danger
his hearers are in to be overtaken and surprised by it, together with the
Remedies and best way to avoid it.

In applying Comfort, whether general against all tentations, or particular
against some special troubles or terrors, he is carefully to answer such
objections, as a troubled heart and afflicted spirit may suggest to the
contrary.

It is also sometimes requisite to give some Notes of trial (which is very
profitable, especially when performed by able and experienced Ministers, with
circumspection and prudence, and the Signs clearly grounded on the holy
Scripture) whereby the Hearers may be able to examine themselves, whether they
have attained those Graces, and performed those duties to which he Exhorts,
or be guilty of the sin, Reprehended, and in danger of the Judgments
Threatened, or are such to whom the Consolations propounded do belong; that
accordingly they may be quickened and excited to Duty, humbled for their Wants
and Sins, affected with their Danger, and strengthened with Comfort, as their
condition upon examination shall require.

And, as he needs not always to prosecute every Doctrine which lies in his
Text, so is he wisely to make choice of such Uses, as, by his residence and
conversing with his flock, he finds most needful and seasonable: and,
amongst these, such as may most draw their souls to Christ, the fountain of
light, holiness and comfort.

This Method is not prescribed as necessary for every man, or upon every Text;
but only recommended, as being found by experience to be very much blessed of
God, and very helpful for the peoples understandings and memories.

But the Servant of Christ, what ever his Method be, is to perform his whole
Ministry;

1. Painfully, not doing the work of the Lord negligently.

2. Plainly, that the meanest may understand, delivering the truth, not in the
entising words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of
power, least the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect: abstaining
also from an unprofitable use of unknown Tongues, strange phrases, and
cadences of founds and words, sparingly citing sentences of Ecclesiastical, or
other humane Writers, ancient or modern, be they never so elegant.

3. Faithfully, looking at the honor of Christ, the conversion, edification
and salvation of the people, not at his own gain or glory: keeping nothing
back which may promote those holy ends, giving to every one his own portion,
and bearing indifferent respect unto all, without neglecting the meanest, or
sparing the greatest in their sins.

4. Wisely, framing all his Doctrines, Exhortations, and especially his
Reproofs, in such a manner as may be most likely to prevail, showing all due
respect to each man's person and place, and not mixing his own passion or
bitterness.

5. Gravely, as becomes the Word of God, shunning all such gesture, voice and
expressions as may occasion the corruptions of men to despise him and his
Ministry.

6. With loving affection, that the people may see all coming from his godly
zeal, and hearty desire to do them good. And

7. As taught of God, and persuaded in his own heart, that all that he
teaches, is the truth of Christ; and walking before his flock as an example to
them in it; earnestly, both in private and public, recommending his labors
to the blessing of God, and watchfully looking to himself and the flock
whereof the Lord has made him overseer, So shall the Doctrine of truth be
preserved incorrupt, many souls converted and built up, and himself receive
manifold comforts of his labors, even in this life, and afterward the Crown of
Glory laid up for him in the world to come.

Where there are more Ministers in a Congregation than one, and they of
different gifts, each may more especially apply himself to Doctrine or
Exhortation, according to the gift wherein he most excels, and as they
shall agree between themselves.

Of Prayer after the Sermon.
THe Sermon being ended, the Minister is;

To give thanks for the great Love of God in sending his Son Jesus Christ
unto us; For the communication of his Holy Spirit; For the light and liberty of
the glorious Gospel, and the rich and heavenly Blessings revealed therein; as
namely, Election, Vocation, Adoption, Justification, Sanctification, and hope
of Glory; For the admirable goodness of God in freeing the Land from
Antichristian Darkness and Tyranny, and for all other National Deliverances;
For the Reformation of Religion; For the Covenant; and for many temporal
blessings.

To pray for the continuance of the Gospel, and all Ordinances thereof, in
their purity, power and liberty. To turn the chief and most useful heads of
the Sermon into some few Petitions; and to pray that it may abide in the heart
and bring forth fruit.

To pray for preparation for Death, and Judgment, and a watching for the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. To entreat of God the forgiveness of the
iniquities of our holy things, and the acceptance of our spiritual sacrifice,
through the merit and mediation of our great High Priest and Savior the Lord
Jesus Christ.

And because the Prayer which Christ taught his Disciples, is not only a
Pattern of Prayer, but it self a most comprehensive Prayer, we recommend it
also to be used in the Prayers of the Church.

And whereas, at the Administration of the Sacraments, the holding Public
Fasts and days of Thanksgiving, and other special occasions, which may afford
matter of special Petitions and Thanksgivings; It is requisite to express
somewhat in our public Prayers (as at this time, it is our duty to pray for a
blessing upon the Assembly of Divines, the Armies by Sea and Land, for the
defense of the King, Parliament and Kingdom,) Every Minister is herein to
apply himself in his Prayer before, or after his Sermon to those occasions;
but for the manner, he is left to his liberty as God shall direct and enable
him, in piety and wisdom to discharge his duty.

The Prayer ended, let a Psalm be sung, if with convenience it may be done.
After which (unless some other Ordinance of Christ that concerns the
Congregation at that time be to follow) let the Minister dismiss the
Congregation with a solemn Blessing.

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE SACRAMENTS.
And first, Of BAPTISM.
BAPTISM, As it is not unnecessarily to be delayed, so, is it not to be
administered in any case by any private person, but by a Minister of Christ,
called to be the Steward of the Mysteries of God.

Nor is it to be administered in private places, or privately, but in the place
of Public Worship, and in the face of the Congregation, where the people may
most conveniently see and hear; and not in the places where Fonts in the time
of Popery were unfitly and superstitiously placed.

The Child to be Baptized, after notice given to the Minister the day before,
is to be presented by the Father, or (in case of his necessary absence) by some
Christian friend in his place, professing his earnest desire that the Child may
be Baptized.

Before Baptism, the Minister is to use some words of Instruction, touching
the Institution, Nature, Use and ends of this Sacrament: showing,

That it is Instituted by our Lord Jesus Christ: That it is a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace, of our Ingrafting into Christ, and of our Union with him, of
Remission of Sins, Regeneration, Adoption, and Life eternal: That the Water in
Baptism, represents and signifies, both the blood of Christ which takes
away all Guilt of Sin, Original and Actual; and the sanctifying virtue of
the Spirit of Christ against the Dominion of Sin, and the Corruption of our
sinful Nature: That Baptizing, or sprinckling and washing with water
signifies the cleansing from sin by the Blood, and for the Merit of Christ,
together with the Mortification of sin, and rising from sin to Newness of
life, by virtue of the Death and Resurrection of Christ: That the Promise is
made to Believers and their seed, and that the seed and posterity of the
faithful, born within the Church, have by their birth, interest in the
Covenant, and right to the Seal of it, and to the outward Privileges of the
Church, under the Gospel, no less then the Children of Abraham in the time of
the Old Testament; the Covenant of Grace, for substance, being the same; and
the Grace of God and the consolation of Believers, more plentiful then before:
That the Son of God admitted little children into his presence, embracing and
blessing them, saying, For of such is the Kingdom of God: That children by
Baptism are solemnly received into the bosom of the visible Church,
distinguished from the world, and them that are without, and united with
Believers; and that all who are baptized in the Name of Christ, do renounce,
and by their Baptism are bound to fight against the Devil, the World and the
Flesh: That they are Christians, and foederally holy before Baptism, and
therefore are they Baptized: That the inward Grace and virtue of Baptism is
not tied to that very moment of time wherein it is administered, and that the
fruit and power thereof reaches to the whole course of our life; and that
outward Baptism is not so necessary, that through the want thereof the Infant
is in danger of Damnation, or the Parents guilty, if they do not contemn or
neglect the Ordinance of Christ when and where it may be had.

In these or the like Instructions, the Minister is to use his own liberty, and
godly wisdom, as the Ignorance or Errors in the Doctrine of Baptism, and the
Edification of the people shall require.

He is also to admonish all that are present;

To look back to their Baptism; to repent of their sins against their
Covenant with God; to stir up their faith; to improove and make the rigbt use
of their Baptism; and of the Covenant sealed thereby betwixt God and their
souls.

He is to exhort the Parent;

To consider the great mercy of God to him and his child; To bring up the child
in the knowledge of the grounds of the Christian Religion, and in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord: and to let him know the danger of Gods wrath to
himself and child, if he be negligent. Requiring his solemn promise for the
performance of his duty.

This being done, Prayer is also to be joined with the word of Institution, for
sanctifying the water to this spiritual use, and the Minister is to pray to
this or the like effect.

That the Lord who has not left us as strangers without the Covenant of
Promise, but called us to the privileges of his Ordinances, would graciously
vouchsafe to sanctify and bless his own Ordinance of Baptism at this time:
That he would join the inward Baptism of his Spirit with the outward Baptism
of water; make this Baptism to the Infant a Seal of Adoption, Remission of
Sin, Regeneration, and Eternal Life, and of all other Promises of the Covenant
of Grace: That the Child may be planted into the likeness of the Death and
Resurrection of Christ; and that the body of sin being destroyed in him, he may
serve God in newness of life all his days.

Then the Minister is to demand the Name of the Child, which being told him, he
is to say (calling the Child by his Name)

I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

As he pronounces these words, he is to Baptize the Child with water: which,
for the manner of doing it, is not only lawful, but sufficient and most
expedient to be, by pouring or sprinckling of the water on the face of the
Child, without adding any other Ceremony.

This done, he is to give thanks and pray, to this or the like purpose;

Acknowledging with all thankfulness, that the Lord is true and faithful in
keeping Covenant and Mercy; That he is good and gracious, not only in that
he numbreth us among his Saints, but is pleased also to bestow upon our
children this singular token and badge of his love in Christ: That in his truth
and special providence, he daily brings some into the bosom of his Church,
to be partakers of his inestimable benefits, purchased by the blood of his dear
Son, for the continuance and increase of his Church.

And praying, That the Lord would still continue, and daily confirm more and
more this his unspeakable favor: That he would receive the Infant now
baptized, and solemnly entered into the household of Faith, into his Fatherly
tuition and defense, and remember him with the favor that he shows to his
people; That if he shall be taken out of this life in his Infancy, the Lord,
who is rich in mercy, would be pleased to receive him up into glory; and if he
live, and attain the years of discretion, that the Lord would so teach him by
his word and spirit, and make his Baptism effectual to him, and so uphold him
by his Divine power and grace, that by faith he may prevail against the devil,
the world, and the flesh, till in the end he obtain a full and final victory,
and so be kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Of the celebration of the Communion, or Sacrament of the LORDS Supper.
THe Communion, or Supper of the Lord is frequently to be celebrated: but how
often, may be considered and determined by the Ministers and other
Church Governors of each Congregation, as they shall find most convenient for
the comfort and edification of the people committed to their charge. And when
it shall be administered, we judge it convenient to be done after the morning
Sermon.

The Ignorant and the Scandalous are not fit to receive this Sacrament of the
Lords Supper.

Where this Sacrament cannot with convenience be frequently administered, it is
requisite that public warning be given the Sabbath day before the
administration thereof: and that either then, or on some day of that week,
something concerning that Ordinance, and the due preparation thereunto, and
participation thereof be taught, that by the diligent use of all means
sanctified of God to that end, both in public and private, all may come
better prepared to that heavenly Feast.

When the day is come for administration, the Minister having ended his Sermon
and Prayer, shall make a short Exhortation,

Expressing the inestimable benefit we have by this Sacrament; together with
the ends and use thereof: setting forth the great necessity of having our
comforts and strength renewed thereby in this our pilgrimage and warfare: How
necessary it is that we come unto it with Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love,
and with hungring and thirsting souls after Christ and his benefits: How great
the danger, to eat and drink unworthily.

Next, he is, in the Name of Christ, on the one part, to warn all such as are
Ignorant, Scandalous, Profane, or that live in any sin or offense against their
knowledge or conscience, that they presume not to come to that holy Table,
showing them, That he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks
judgment unto himself: And on the other part, he is in especial manner to
invite and encourage all that labor under the sense of the burden of their
sins, and fear of wrath, and desire to reach out unto a greater progress in
Grace then yet they can attain unto, to come to the Lords Table; assuring them,
in the same Name, of ease, refreshing and strength to their weak and wearied
souls.

After this Exhortation, Warning, and Invitation, the Table being before
decently covered, and so conveniently placed, that the Communicants may orderly
sit about it, or at it, The Minister is to begin the action with sanctifying
and blessing the elements of Bread and Wine set before him (the Bread in comely
and convenient vessels, so prepared, that being broken by him, and given, it
may be distributed amongst the Communicants: The Wine also in large Cups;)
having first in a few words showed, That those elements, otherwise common, are
now set apart and sanctified to this holy use, by the word of Institution and
Prayer.

Let the words of Institution be read out of the Evangelists, or out of the
first Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians. Chap. 11. verse 23. I
have received of the Lord, etc. to the 27. verse, which the Minister may, when
he sees requisite, explain and apply.

Let the Prayer, Thanksgiving, or Blessing of the Bread and Wine, be to this
effect;

WIth humble and hearty acknowledgement of the greatness of our misery, from
which neither man nor Angel was able to deliver us, and of our great
unworthiness of the least of all Gods mercies; To give thanks to God for all
his benefits, and especially for that great benefit of our Redemption, the love
of God the Father, the sufferings and merits of the Lord Jesus Christ the Son
of God, by which we are delivered; and for all means of Grace, the Word and
Sacraments, and for this Sacrament in particular, by which Christ and all his
benefits are applied and sealed up unto us, which, notwithstanding the denial
of them unto others, are in great mercy continued unto us, after so much and
long abuse of them all.

To profess that there is no other name under Heaven, by which we can be
saved, but the Name of Jesus Christ, by whom alone we receive liberty and life,
have access to the throne of Grace, are admitted to eat and drink at his own
Table, and are sealed up by his Spirit to an assurance of happiness and
everlasting life.

Earnestly to pray to God, the Father of all mercies, and God of all
consolation, to vouchsafe his gracious presence, and the effectual working of
his Spirit in us, and so to sanctify these Elements both of Bread and Wine,
and to bless his own Ordinance, that we may receive by Faith the Body and
Blood of Jesus Christ crucified for us, and so to feed upon him, that he may be
one with us, and we with him, that he may live in us, and we in him, and to
him, who has loved us, and given himself for us.

All which he is to endeavor to perform with suitable affections answerable
to such an holy Action, and to stir up the like in the people.

The Elements being now sanctified by the Word and Prayer, The Minister, being
at the Table, is to take the Bread in his hand, and say, in these expressions
(or other the like, used by Christ, or his Apostle upon this occasion:)

According to the holy Institution, command, and example of our blessed Savior
Jesus Christ, I take this Bread, and having given thanks, I break it, and give
it unto you (There the Minister, who is also himself to communicate, is to
break the Bread, and give it to the Communicants:) Take ye, eat ye; This is
the Body of Christ which is broken for you, Do this in remembrance of him.

In like manner the Minister is to take the Cup, and say, in these expressions
(or other the like, used by Christ, or the Apostle upon the same occasion;)

According to the Institution, command, and example of our Lord Jesus Christ, I
take this Cup, and give it unto you (Here he gives it to the Communicants,)
This Cup is the new Testament in the Blood of Christ, which is shed for the
remission of the sins of many; Drink ye all of it.

After all have communicated, the Minister may, in a few words, put them in mind

Of the grace of God, in Jesus Christ held forth in this Sacrament, and exhort
them to walk worthy of it.

The Minister is to give solemn thanks to God,

For his rich mercy, and invaluable goodness vouchsafed to them in that
Sacrament, and to entreat for pardon for the defects of the whole service, and
for the gracious assistance of his good Spirit, whereby they may be enabled to
walk in the strength of that Grace, as becomes those who have received so
great pledges of salvation.

The Collection for the poor is so to be ordered, that no part of the public
worship be thereby hindered.

Of the Sanctification of the Lords Day.
THe Lords day ought to be so remembered beforehand, as that all worldly
business of our ordinary Callings may be so ordered, and so timely and
seasonably laid aside, as they may not be impediments to the due sanctifying of
the Day when it comes.

The whole Day is to be celebrated as holy to the Lord, both in public and
private, as being the Christian Sabbath. To which end it is requisite, that
there be a holy cessation, or resting all the Day, from all unnecessary
labors, and an abstaining, not only from all sports and pastimes, but also
from all worldly words and thoughts.

That the Diet on that Day be so ordered, as that neither servants be
unnecessarily detained from the public worship of God, nor any other persons
hindered from the sanctifying that Day.

That there be private preparation of every person and family, by prayer for
themselves, and for Gods assistance of the Minister, and for a blessing upon
his Ministry, and by such other holy exercises, as may further dispose them to
a more comfortable communion with God in his public Ordinances.

That all the people meet so timely for public Worship, that the whole
Congregation may be present at the beginning, and with one heart solemnly join
together in all parts of the public Worship; and not depart till after the
Blessing.

That what time is vacant, between, or after the solemn meetings of the
Congregation in public, be spent in Reading, Meditation, Repetition of
Sermons; (especially, by calling their families to an account of what they have
heard,) and catechizing of them, holy conferences, Prayer for a blessing upon
the Public Ordinances, singing of Psalms, visiting the sick, relieving the
poor, and such like duties of piety, charity and mercy, accounting the Sabbath
a delight.

The Solemnization of Marriage.
ALthough Marriage be no sacrament, nor peculiar to the Church of God, but
common to mankind, and of Public interest in every Commonwealth; yet because
such as marry are to marry in the Lord, and have special need of Instruction,
Direction, and Exhortation, from the Word of God at their entering into such a
new condition; and, of the blessing of God upon them therein; we judge it
expedient, that marriage be solemnized by a lawful Minister of the Word, that
he may accordingly counsel them, and pray for a blessing upon them.

Marriage is to be betwixt one man and one woman only; and they, such as are
not within the degrees of Consanguinity or Affinity prohibited by the Word of
God. And the parties are to be of years of discretion, fit to make their own
choice, or upon good grounds, to give their mutual consent.

Before the solemnizing of Marriage between any Persons, their purpose of
Marriage shall be published by the Minister three several Sabbath days in the
Congregation, at the place or places of their most usual and constant abode
respectively. And of this Publication, the Minister, who is to join them in
marriage, shall have sufficient Testimony, before he proceed to solemnize the
marriage.

Before that Publication of such their purpose (if the parties be under age)
the consent of the Parents, or others, under whose power they are (in case the
Parents be dead) is to be made known to the Church Officers of that
Congregation, to be Recorded.

The like is to be observed in the proceedings of all others, although of age,
whose Parents are living, for their first marriage. And in after marriages of
either of those parties, they shall be exhorted not to contract marriage,
without first acquainting their Parents with it, (if with convenience it may be
done) endeavoring to obtain their consent.

Parents ought not to force their children to marry without their free consent,
nor deny their own consent without just cause.

After the purpose or contract of marriage has been thus published, the
marriage is not to be long deferred. Therefore, the Minister, having had
convenient warning, and nothing being objected to hinder it, is publicly to
solemnize it in the place appointed by Authority for public Worship, before a
competent number of credible witnesses, at some convenient hour of the day, at
any time of the year, except on a day of Public humiliation. And we advise
that it be not on the Lords Day.

And because all Relations are sanctified by the Word and Prayer, the Minister
is to pray for a blessing upon them, to this effect:

Acknowledging our sins, whereby we have made our selves less then the least
of all the mercies of God, and provoked him to imbitter all our comforts,
earnestly in the name of Christ to entreat the Lord (whose presence and favor
is the happiness of every condition, and sweeten's every Relation) to be their
Portion, and to own and accept them in Christ, who are now to be joined in the
honorable Estate of Marriage, the Covenant of their God: and that as he has
brought them together by his Providence, he would sanctify them by his Spirit,
giving them a new frame of heart fit for their new estate; enriching them with
all Graces, whereby they may perform the duties, enjoy the comforts, undergo
the cares, and resist the temptations which accompany that condition, as
becomes Christians.

The Prayer being ended, it is convenient that the Minister do briefly declare
unto them, out of the Scripture,

The Institution, Use, and ends of marriage, with the Conjugall duties which in
all faithfulness they are to perform each to other, exhorting them to study
the holy Word of God, that they may learn to live by faith, and to be content
in the midst of all marriage cares and troubles, sanctifying Gods name in a
thankful, sober, and holy use of all Conjugall comforts, praying much with,
and for, one another, watching over, and provoking each other to love and good
works, and to live together as the heirs of the Grace of life.

After solemn charging of the persons to be married, before the Great God, who
searches all hearts, and to whom they must give a strict account at the last
Day, that if either of them know any cause, by praecontract or otherwise, why
they may not lawfully proceed to marriage, that they now discover it: The
Minister (if no impediment be acknowledged) shall cause, first, the man to take
the woman by the right hand, saying these words,

I N. do take thee N. to be my married wife, and do, in the presence of God,
and before this Congregation, promise and covenant to be a loving and faithful
husband unto thee, until God shall separate us by death.

Then the woman shall take the man by his right hand, and say these words,

I N. do take thee N. to be my married husband, and I do, in the presence of
God, and before this Congregation, promise and covenant to be a loving,
faithful, and obedient wife unto thee, until God shall separate us by death.

Then, without any further Ceremony, the Minister shall, in the face of the
Congregation, pronounce them to be husband and wife, according to Gods
Ordinance; and so, conclude the action with Prayer to this effect,

That the Lord would be pleased to accompany his own Ordinance with his
blessing, beseeching him to enrich the persons now married, as with other
pledges of his love, so particularly with the comforts and fruits of marriage,
to the praise of his abundant mercy, in and through Christ Jesus.

A Register is to be carefully kept, wherein the names of the parties so
married, with the time of their marriage, are forthwith to be fairly recorded
in a Book provided for that purpose, for the perusal of all whom it may
concern.

Concerning Visitation of the Sick.
IT is the duty of the Minister not only to teach the People committed to his
charge, in public, but privately and particularly to admonish, exhort,
reproove and comfort them, upon all seasonable occasions, so far as his time,
strength, and personal safety will permit.

He is to admonish them, in time of health to prepare for death; and for that
purpose they are often to confer with their Minister about the estate of their
souls: and, in times of sickness to desire his advice and help, timely and
s^bly, before their strength and under^ing (...) them.

Times of Sickness and affliction are special opportunities put into his hand
by God, to minister a word in season to weary souls: because then the
Consciences of men are, or should be more awakened to bethink themselves of
their Spiritual estates for Eternity, and Satan also takes advantage then, to
load them more with sore and heavy temptations: Therefore the Minister being
sent for, and repairing to the sick, is to apply himself with all tenderness
and love, to administer some Spiritual good to his soul, to this effect:

He may, from the consideration of the present sickness, instruct him out of
Scripture, that diseases come not by chance, or by distempers of body only, but
by the wise and orderly guidance of the good hand of God to every particular
person smitten by them. And that whether it be laid upon him out of displeasure
for sin, for his correction and amendment, or for Trial, and exercise of his
graces, or for other special and excellent ends, all his sufferings shall turn
to his profit, and work together for his good, if he sincerely labor to make a
sanctified use of Gods Visitation, neither despising his chastening, nor waxing
weary of his correction.

If he suspect him of ignorance, he shall examine him in the Principles of
Religion, especially touching Repentance and Faith; and, as he sees cause,
instruct him in the nature, use, excellency, and necessity of those graces; as
also touching the Covenant of Grace, and Christ the Son of God, the Mediator of
it, and concerning Remission of sins by faith in him.

He shall exhort the sick person to examine himself, to search and try his
former ways, and his estate toward God.

And if the sick person shall declare any scruple, doubt or temptation the are
upon him, instructions and resolutions shall be given to satisfy and settle
him.

If it appear that he has not a due sen^e of his sins, endeavors ought to be
used to convince him of his sins, of the guilt and deser^ of them; of the filth
and pollution, which the soul contracts by them, and of the curse of the Law,
and wrath of God due to them; that he may be truly affected with, and humbled
for them; and withal to make known the danger of deferring Repentance, and of
neglecting salvation at any time offered, to awaken his Conscience, and rowze
him out of a stupid and secure condition, to apprehend the Justice and wrath of
God, before whom none can stand, but he that being lost in himself, lays hold
upon Christ by Faith.

If he have endeavored to walk in the ways of holiness, and to serve God in
uprightness, although not without many failings and infirmities; or if his
spirit be broken with the sense of sin, or cast down through want of the sense
of Gods favor; then it will be fit to raise him up, by setting before him the
freeness and fullness of Gods grace, the sufficiency of righteousness in
Christ, the gracious offers in the Gospel, that all who repent and believe with
all their heart in Gods mercy through Christ, renouncing their own
righteousness, shall have life and salvation in him. It may be also useful to
show him, that death has in it no Spiritual evil to be feared by those that
are in Christ, because sin the sting of death is taken away by Christ, who has
delivered all that are his from the bondage of the fear of death, triumphed
over the grave, given us victory, is Himself entered into glory, to prepare a
place for His people: So that neither life nor death shall be able to separate
them from Gods love in Christ, in whom such are sure, though (...) they must be
laid in the dust, to ob^ (...) ^rection to (...).

Advice also may be given, as to beware of an ill grounded persuasion on mercy,
or on the goodness of his condition for heaven, so to disclaim all merit in
himself, and to cast himself wholly upon God for mercy in the sole Merits and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, who has engaged himself never to cast off them, who
in truth and sincerity come unto him. Care also must be taken that the sick
person be not cast down into despair by such a severe representation of the
wrath of God due to him for his sins, as is not mollified by a seasonable
propounding of Christ and his merit for a door of hope to every penitent
Believer.

When the sick person is best composed, may be least disturbed, and other
necessary offices about him least hindered, the Minister, if desired, shall pray
with him, and for him to this effect;

(...) and bewailing of sin Original and Actual, the miserable condition of all
by nature, as being Children of Wrath and under the Curse, acknowledging that
all Diseases, Sicknesses, Death, and Hell it self, are the proper issues and
effects thereof: Imploring Gods mercy for the sick person through the Blood of
Christ, beseeching that God would open his eyes, discover unto him his sins,
cause him to see himself lost in himself, make known to him the cause why God
smites him, reveal Jesus Christ to his soul for Righteousness and life, give
unto him his holy Spirit to create and strengthen faith, to lay hold upon
Christ, to work in him comfortable evidences of his love, to arm him against
Temptations, to take off his heart from the world, to sanctify his present
visitation, to furnish him with patience and strength to bear it, and to give
him perseverance in Faith to the end.

That if God shall please to add to his days, he would vouchsafe to bless
and sanctify all means of his recovery, to remove the disease, renew his
strength, and enable him to walk worthy of God, by a faithful remembrance, and
diligent observing of such vows and promises of holiness and obedience, as men
are apt to make in times of sickness, that he may glorify God in the
remaining part of his life.

And if God have determined to finish his days by the present Visitation, he
may find such Evidence of the Pardon of all his sins, of his interest in
Christ, and Eternal life by Christ, as may cause his inward man to be renewed,
while his outward man decays; that he may behold Death without fear, cast
himself wholly upon Christ without doubting, desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, and so receive the end of his Faith, the Salvation of his Soul,
through the only merits and intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ, our alone
Savior and All-sufficient Redeemer.

The Minister shall admonish him also (as there shall be cause) to set his
house in order, thereby to prevent inconveniences, to take care for the payment
of his debts, and to make restitution or satisfaction where he has done any
wrong, to be reconciled to those with whom he has been at variance, and fully
to forgive all men their trespasses against him as he expects forgiveness at
the hand of God.

Lastly, the Minister may improve the present occasion to exhort those about
the sick person, to consider their own mortality, to return to the Lord and
make Peace with him; in health to prepare for sickness, death, and judgment,
and all the days of their appointed time so to wait until their change come,
that when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, they may appear with him in
glory.

Concerning Burial of the Dead.
WHen any person departs this life, let the dead body, upon the day of
Burial, be decently attended from the house to the place appointed for
public Burial, and there immediately interred, without any Ceremony.

And because the customs of kneeling down, and praying by, or toward the dead
Corpse, and other such usages, in the place where it lies, before it be carried
to Burial, are Superstitious: and for that, praying, reading, and singing both
in going to, and at the Grave, have been grossly abused, are no way beneficial
to the dead, and have proved many ways hurtful to the living, therefore let
all such things be laid aside.

Howbeit, we judge it very convenient, that the Christian friends which
accompany the dead body to the place appointed for public Burial, do apply
themselves to meditations, and conferences suitable to the occasion: and, that
the Minister, as upon other occasions, so at this time, if he be present, may
put them in remembrance of their Duty.

That this shall not extend to deny any civil respects or differences at the
Burial, suitable to the rank and condition of the party deceased whiles he
was living.

Concerning Public Solemn Fasting.
WHen some great and notable Judgments are either inflicted upon a People, or
apparently imminent, or by some extraordinary provocations notoriously
deserved; as also, when some special blessing is to be sought and obtained,
Public solemn Fasting (which is to continue the whole Day) is a Duty that
God expects from that Nation, or people.

A Religious Fast requires total abstinence, not only from all food (unless
bodily weakness do manifestly disable from holding out till the Fast be
ended, in which case somewhat may be taken, yet very sparingly, to support
nature when ready to faint;) but also from all worldly labor, discourses and
thoughts, and from all bodily delights, (although at other times lawful) rich
apparel, ornaments and such like, during the Fast; and much more, from what
ever is, in the nature, or use, scandalous and offensive; as, garish attire,
lascivious habits and gestures, and other vanities of either sex, which we
recommend to all Ministers in their places, diligently and zealously to
reproove, as at other times, so especially at a Fast, without respect of
persons as there shall be occasion.

Before the Public meeting, each Family, and person apart, are privately to
use all religious care to prepare their hearts to such a solemn work; and, to
be early at the Congregation.

So large a portion of the Day, as conveniently may be, is to be spent in
Public Reading, and Preaching of the Word, with singing of Psalms fit to
quicken affections suitable to such a Duty; but especially in Prayer, to this
or the like effect.

Giving Glory to the Great Majesty of God, the Creator, Preserver, and Supreme
Ruler of all the World, the better to affect us thereby with an holy reverence
and awe of Him. Acknowledging his manifold, great, and tender mercies,
especially to the Church and Nation, the more effectually to soften, and abase
our hearts before him. Humbly confessing of sins of all sorts, with their
several aggravations: justifying Gods righteous Judgments, as being far
less then our sins do deserve; yet humbly and earnestly imploring his mercy
and grace for our selves, the Church, and Nation, for our King, and all in
Authority, and for all others for whom we are bound to pray (according as the
present exigent requires) with more special importunity and enlargement then
at other times. Applying by faith, the Promises and Goodness of God, for
Pardon, help, and deliverance from the Evils felt, feared, or deserved; and for
obtaining the blessings which we need and expect; together with a giving up of
our selves wholly and for ever unto the Lord.

In all these, the Ministers, who are the mouths of the people unto God, ought
so to speak from their hearts upon serious and through premeditation of them,
that both themselves and their people may be much affected, and even melted
thereby; especially with sorrow for their sins, that it may be indeed a Day of
deep humiliation and afflicting of the soul.

Special choice is to be made of such Scriptures to be read, and of such Texts
for Preaching, as may best work the hearts of the hearers to the special
business of the day, and most dispose them to humiliation and repentance;
insisting most on those particulars, which each Ministers observation and
experience tells him are most conducing to the edification, and reformation of
that Congregation to which he preaches.

Before the close of the Public Duties, the Minister is, in his own, and the
peoples names, to engage his and their hearts to be the Lords, with professed
purpose and resolution to reform what ever is amiss among them, and more
particularly such sins as they have been more remarkably guilty of; and, to
draw nearer unto God, and to walk more closely and faithfully with him in new
obedience, then ever before.

He is also to admonish the people with all importunity, that the work of that
day does not end with the Public duties of it, but that they are so to
improve the remainder of the day, and of their whole life, in reinforcing upon
themselves and their families in private, all those godly affections and
resolutions which they professed in Public, as that they may be settled in
their hearts for ever, and themselves may more sensibly find that God has
smelt a sweet savor in Christ from their performances, and is pacified toward
them, by answers of Grace, in pardoning of sin, in removing of Judgments, in
averting or preventing of plagues, and in conferring of blessings suitable to
the conditions and prayers of his people, by Jesus Christ.

Beside solemn and general Fasts enjoined by Authority, we judge, that at
other times, Congregations may keep days of Fasting, as Divine Providence
shall administer unto them special occasions. And also that Families may do
the same, so it be not on days wherein the Congregation to which they do
belong, is to meet for fasting, or other public Duties of Worship.

Concerning the Observation of Days of Public Thankesgiving.
WHen any such Day is to be kept, let notice be given of it, and of the
occasion thereof, some convenient time before, that the people may the better
prepare themselves thereunto.

The Day being come, and the Congregation (after private preparations) being
assembled, the Minister is to begin with a word of Exhortation to stir up the
people to the Duty for which they are met, and with a short prayer for Gods
assistance and blessing (as at other Conventions for Public Worship)
according to the particular occasion of their meeting.

Let him then make some pithy narration of the Deliverance obtained, or Mercy
received, or of whatever has occasioned that assembling of the Congregation,
that all may better understand it, or be minded of it, and more affected with
it.

And because singing of Psalms is of all other the most proper Ordinance for
expressing of Joy and Thanksgiving, let some pertinent Psalm or Psalms be
sung for that purpose, before or after the reading of some portion of the Word
suitable to the present business.

Then let the Minister who is to preach, proceed to further Exhortation and
Prayer before his Sermon, with special reference to the present work: after
which let him preach upon some Text of Scripture pertinent to the occasion.

The Sermon ended, let him not only pray, as at other times after preaching is
directed, with remembrance of the necessities of the Church, King, and State
(if before the Sermon they were omitted) but enlarge himself in due and solemn
Thanksgiving for former mercies and deliverances, but more especially for that
which at the present calls them together to give thanks: with humble petition
for the continuance and renewing of Gods wonted mercies, as need shall be, and
for sanctifying grace to make a right use thereof. And so, having sung another
Psalm suitable to the mercy, let him dismiss the Congregation with a
blessing, that they may have some convenient time for their repast and
refreshing.

But the Minister (before their dismission) is solemnly to admonish them, to
beware of all excess and riot, tending to gluttony or drunkenness, and much
more of these sins themselves, in their eating and refreshing, and to take care
that their mirth and rejoicing be not carnal, but spiritual, which may make
Gods praise to be glorious, and themselves humble and sober; and that both
their feeding and rejoicing may render them more cheerful and enlarged further
to celebrate his Praises in the midst of the Congregation, when they return
unto it, in the remaining part of that Day.

When the Congregation shall be again assembled, the like course in praying,
reading, preaching, singing of Psalms, and offering up of more praise and
thanksgiving, that is before directed for the morning, is to be renewed and
continued so far as the time will give leave.

At one or both of the public meetings that day, a Collection is to be made
for the poor (and in the like manner upon the Day of Public Humiliation) that
their loins may bless us, and rejoice the more with us. And the people are to
be exhorted at the end of the latter meeting, to spend the residue of that Day
in holy duties, and testifications of Christian love and charity one toward
another, and of rejoicing more and more in the Lord; as becomes those who
make the joy of the Lord their strength.

Of Singing of Psalms.
IT is the duty of Christians to praise God publicly by singing of Psalms
together in the Congregation, and also privately in the Family.

In singing of Psalms, the voice is to be tunably and gravely ordered: but the
chief care must be, to sing with understanding, and with Grace in the heart,
making melody unto the Lord.

That the whole Congregation may join herein, every one that can read is to
have a Psalm book, and all others not disabled by age, or otherwise, are to be
exhorted to learn to read. But for the present, where many in the Congregation
cannot read, it is convenient that the Minister, or some other fit person
appointed by him and the other Ruling Officers, do read the Psalm, line by
line, before the singing thereof.

An Appendix touching Days and Places for Public worship.
THere is no Day commanded in Scripture to be kept holy under the Gospel, but
the Lords day, which is the Christian Sabbath.

Festival days, vulgarly called Holy days, having no warrant in the word of
God, are not to be continued.

Nevertheless it is lawful and necessary upon special emergent occasions, to
separate a day or days for Public Fasting or Thanksgiving, as the several
eminent and extraordinary dispensations of Gods providence shall administer
cause and opportunity to his people.

As no place is capable of any holiness under pretense of whatsoev^ Dedication
or Consecration, so neither is it subject to such pollution by any superstition
formerly used and now laid aside, as may render it unlawful or inconvenient
for Christians to meet together therein for the public worship of God. And
therefore we hold it requisite that the places of public assembling for
worship among us, should be continued and employed to that use.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Ordinance. The Preface. Page 1 Of the Assembling of the Congregation. 9 Of
Public reading of the holy Scripture. 12 Of Public Prayer before the
Sermon. 14 Of the Preaching of the Word. 27 Of Prayer after the Sermon. 36 Of
the Sacrament of Baptism. 39 Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 48 Of the
Sanctification of the Lords Day. 56 Of the Solemnization of Marriage. 58 Of the
Visitation of the Sick. 64 Of Burial of the Dead. 73 Of Public solemn
Fasting. 74 Of the observation of days of Public thanksgiving. 80 Of singing
of Psalms. 83 An Appendix touching Days and Places of Public Worship. 85

