A DISCOURSE OF LOCAL MOTION.

Undertaking to Demonstrate The LAWS of MOTION, And withal to prove, That of
the SEVEN RULES Delivered By M. Descartes on this SUBjECT, He has Mistaken
SIX.

BY A. M.

Englished out of French.

London, Printed by W. G. and are to be sold by Moses Pit at the White-Hart in
Little-Britain, 1670.

The PREFACE.
I Pretend not to celebrate in this place the Mechanics, and to set forth the
advantages, which the Knowledge of Motion affords us. It is sufficiently known,
that all the Productions, which come either from the Industry of Men, or from
the Causes of Nature, are made no otherwise but by Motion. So that it is not
possible to penetrate into the Secrets of Nature, nor to succeed in the
Invention and Practice of Arts, without the assistance of the Mechanics, that
is, without the Knowledge of the Laws of Motion.

Neither do I undertake here to go through this whole Subject. It is too vast
to be comprised in so brief a Discourse as this is intended. I have confined my
self to what may be called the Elements of this Knowledge; and I insist
particularly on considering the Communication which is made of Motion in
Percussions.

It Is true, that this Subject has been handled by very Eminent Men; but I take
it quite otherwise in hand, me thinks, than they have done. For, without making
any particular Hypothesis, I make it my business to search in the very sources
of Nature the Causes of all the Effects we find in Motions, and I undertake to
give the Demonstrations of them, which, without supposing any Experiment at
all, are only founded upon incontrolable Principles of pure Metaphysics.

The Design will doubtless appear bold to those, who know the difficulty, there
is in thus preventing Experiments, and in prescribing to Nature such Laws as
she is afterward to observe.

It may also come to pass, that the Difference, to be found between the Rules,
which I endeavor to establish here, and those which M. Descartes has laid
down in his Principles of Physics, will furnish matter to exercise the
curiosity of those, who love the Philosophy of that Author, and engage them, to
make search, wherein my Paralogisms may consist, in regard that the
ratiocinations, which I employ, are so opposite to those, which many have taken
hitherto for true Demonstrations. For I advow, that of the Seven Rules of
Motion, which M. Descartes delivers, there is but One only, which agrees with
mine: So that either this Philosopher has not hit aright in this point, or I
my self am fallen into considerable Errors.

Mean time I cannot be ignorant of what has been published through all France
touching the Rules of percussion, which have been proposed by some famous
Mathematicians of the Royal Academies of London and Paris. If there be honor
in inventing any thing new in Sciences, I do not contest with these persons
about that, which they pretend to, of having found the Secret of the Laws of
Motion. I willingly and fully yield it to them, and I claim nothing therein.
Yet this I can say, that it is now three years, that I gave abroad all what I
deliver here in this Discourse; and that, if my Rules be compared with theirs,
there may possibly be found conformity enough to make Men believe that I have
lighted together with them upon the truth: But there will also be found
difference enough to make Men judge, that I have not learned it from them.
Besides, that they have done no more than merely to propose their Rules without
proving them; whereas I undertake to demonstrate all those, I advance. And
although M. Hugens has given us hopes of publishing shortly a Book, wherein he
would prove all his Rules; yet not withstanding, without comparing my self to
so excellent a person, I dare affirm, that his Method will be quite different
from mine; forasmuch as he has already explained himself sufficiently, to give
us to understand, that his Demonstrations are grounded upon particular
Hypotheses.

However, I have already declared my self about the little pretension, I have
to the glory of passing for the Inventor of these things: I leave it altogether
to those Gentlemen; and if they will allow me a share therein, I shall receive
it as a favor, and take it kindly, that they will acknowledge I have hit upon
their thoughts, or at least not considerably shot besides the Mark.

A TABLE of the HEADS.
I. A Body is in it self indifferent to Rest or Motion. page 1. II. If a Body
be once at Rest, it will ever remain therein. page 2. III. And if it be once in
Motion, it continues also to move always. page 3. IV. That Rest is not a mere
Negation. page 4. V. That there is as much positive Action in Rest, as in
Motion. page 5. VI. Objections. page 8. VII. A Finite Cause may have an Effect
that lasts always. page 9. VIII. This Quality, which is called Impetuosity,
lasts always. page 11. IX. The Bodies which we move, do cease to move, because
they are impeded. page 13. X. A Demand for the safety of the following
Demonstrations. page 14. XI. A Body receiving successively many Determinations,
remains only affected with the last. page 16. XII. A free Body cannot be
determined to move in a Curve Line, nor with unequal celerity. page 17. XIII.
Every Body that moves about a Center, endeavors to recede from it. page 19.
XIV. The Stars cannot move of themselves. page 20. XV. How a Body may be moved
circularly. page 21. XVI. One Body moving against another Body gives it its
whole Motion. page 23. XVII. In the meeting of two Bodies there is made a
percussion, which is mutual, and equally received in both. page 24. XVIII. A
moving Body, meeting with another Body that is quiescent, gives it all its
Motion, and remains it self moveless. page 26. XIX. What is meant by absolute
and respective velocity. page 28. XX. The Percussions are as the respective
Velocities. page 29. XXI. Two Bodies meeting one another, turn back, making an
exchange of their velocity. page 31. XXII. Two Bodies moving toward the same
places, continue after their encounter by exchanging their velocities. page 33.
XXIII. An hard Body coming to hit another Body that cannot be shaken, is
reflected with its whole Motion. page 35. XXIV. The Angle of Reflection is
equal to the Angle of Incidence. page 38. XXV. It may be imagined, that tbe
oblique Motion is composed of two Motions. page 40. XXVI. A Remark upon the
Argument of P. Riccioli. page 42. XXVII. A Remarque upon some Citadels. page
45. XXVIII. A general Rule of all Percussions. page 46. XXIX. There is always
equal quantity of respective Motion. p. 48. XXX. The midst of two Bodies is
always uniformly moved in a direct Line. page 49. XXXI. All these Rules are
true, whether the Bodies be equal, or not. page 50. XXXII. A Body moves in
pleno as freely as in vacuo. page 52. XXXIII. Motions diminish little by little
in the Air. page 54. XXXIV. The Percussions of equal Bodies are made in pleno
as in vacuo. page 56. XXXV. When the Bodies are unequal, the percussions are
made in pleno otherwise than in vacuo. page 57. XXXVI. The Percussions of
unequal Bodies cannot be reduced to one General Rule. page 59. XXXVII. Of
Refraction. page 61. XXXVIII. The Conclusion. page 62. An Appendix containing a
Review of this Discourse, made by the Author himself. page 67.
A DISCOURSE OF LOCAL MOTION.
I. A Body is in it self indifferent to Rest or Motion.
IF we should imagine, that in the World there were nothing corporeal but one or
two Balls, and sever from the same whatever might cause any kind of secret
Commerce, whereby the one might attract or repel the other: Or, if we should
consider such Balls free from all kind of particular Determination; without
Levity, without Gravity; in Vacuo, or at least in a Space altogether uniform,
where nothing were that might carry them rather this than that way, or hinder
them to move freely, if they should happen to be propelled toward a place:
Then should we conceive these Balls to be absolutely indifferent to touch one
another, or to be severed; to be here, or there; forasmuch as they would find
nothing more in one place than in another, and consequently be equally
indifferent for Rest or Motion.

II. If a Body be once at Rest, it will ever remain therein.
ANd so if we further conceive, that one of these Balls is at Rest, having been
put in that state by some Cause, that has power to stir or stop Bodies; we at
the same time conceive, it will eternally remain at Rest, if there be not some
new Cause displacing it, by putting it into Motion; because this Ball, being of
it self indifferent to Rest or Motion, and being once determined to Rest, it is
impossible it should of it self quit that Rest, and fall to Motion: Wherefore
it must needs continue forever in that Rest, if nothing happen to make it
change that state.

III. And if it be once in Motion, it continues also to move always.
BY the same Reason we must conceive, that if one of these Balls be put in
Motion, by some Cause or other, it will continue to move forever, if no new
Cause come to stop it: Because this Ball being of it self indifferent to Motion
and Rest, and being once determined to Motion, it is impossible it should
determine it self to cease from that Motion, to take Rest: And so it must ever
remain in this Motion, if nothing else come to stop it.

IV. That Rest is not a mere Negation.
I Find that we are generally inclined to consider Rest as a Cessation of
Action, and to take Motion for a positive Action, which we experiment in our
selves, when we move our selves, or will move another Body: Whereas we conceive
a Body to be at Rest from the time that no Body touches it, or that there is no
other Cause which actually imprints in it this Quality or this Action necessary
to Motion. And so it seems, that although a Body, being once at Rest, remains
therein forever, yet it should not follow, that if it be once in Motion, it
should ever persist therein; since that for to be moved there is required a
positive Action, but that Rest is nothing else but a Negation or a Ceasing from
Action or Motion.

V. That there is as much positive Action in Rest, as in Motion.
BUt if the Weight of our Bodies, which we must bear; the rigidness of our
Limbs, which we must bend; the agitation of the Spirits, which we must employ;
and many other things make us feel some resistance, and oblige us to use some
force to overcome these impediments: We cannot draw from thence any Sequel
against our Hypothesis, in which we suppose, there is no impediment neither of
Gravity, nor of particular Inclination, nor of any Body resisting from without.
In this Case it is manifest, that there needs no more Action for Motion than for
Rest; and that for the Rest of a Body it is not less requisite, it should be
put at Rest, than it is necessary for its Motion, that it should be put into
it. And indeed if we consider well the nature of Rest and Motion, we shall
find, that Motion may as well be called a Cessation of Rest, as Rest a
Cessation of Motion; or rather we shall find, that both are something positive,
in regard that Motion is a state, by which a Body corresponds successively ^o
many places; or, a passing Presence; or, a sequel of diverse Presences in diverse
places: As Rest is a state, by which a Body always corresponds to one and the
same place; or, one and the same Presence in one and the same place: So that
Rest as well as Motion is a State, or a Presence; but differing in this, that
Rest is a State of Consistency, and a Constant Presence, always kept to be the
same; whereas Motion is a Changing State, and a Transitory Presence. Now in
what manner soever, these constant or passing Presences be considered, if there
be any Action, or any Power, or any kind of Cause in the Body, which is to
produce this Consecution of diverse Presences in Motion, there is no less Action
or Force necessary in Rest, to preserve the same Presence, in regard that to
preserve a thing, is to produce it continually. It is therefore evident, that
after the Presence has been produced by a Body in the first instant (I speak
in the sense of those, who hold, that there is a true production of these
Presences) it must needs be also produced a new in the instant following by the
same Body, to make it remain Quiescent: But, methinks, there is in that as much
Action and as much Power, as there is for the producing in the second instant a
new Presence, instead of reproducing the first.

Nec minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri.
So that, whether there be to be produced every instant a new Presence for
Motion, or reproduced the same Presence for Rest; it will always amount to the
same, and a Body will have no less work to preserve to it self this same
Presence, and to remain Quiescent, than to produce new Presences, and conserve
it self in Motion. Whence it is to be concluded, that as a Body from the very
time, it has been once determined to Rest, is sufficiently determined always
to keep it self in the same Presence; so also from the very moment, it has
been once determined to Motion, it is sufficiently determined always to produce
new Presences, and so to move it self without ceasing.

VI. Objections.
I Shall not stay to answer all the cavilling Scruples that may be cast in upon
this Subject, seeing they are easy enough to resolve: For instance, it is said,
That a Finite Cause cannot produce an Infinite Effect, and that this Motion
would be Infinite, since it would last forever. It Is further alleged, That
whoever moves a Body, impresseth therein a certain Quality, called
Impetuosity, and that as long as this Quality lasts, the Motion lasts also; but
when that cease, the Motion cease likewise. And it is added, That this
Quality cannot last always, being in its nature so imperfect, that it cannot
last long. Besides, it is Objected, That Experience shows, that all Motions do
cease little by little, as appears in a Wheel that has been violently
agitated, in a Ball that has been rolled on a Billiard-Table, in a Ball
suspended and vibrated, and in other innumerable Bodies; the Motions of which,
do by little and little diminish, and at last are quite extinguished.

VII. A Finite Cause may have an Effect that lasts always.
I Say, it is very easy to Answer all these Objections, and many such others.
If any one will maintain, that Motion is an Infinite Effect, because it lasts
forever; he must also say, that Rest will be an Infinite Effect, if it thus
last eternally; and, that consequently, a Finite Cause not being able to have
an Infinite Effect, it must be said, that after a Man has put a Body at Rest,
this Body cannot remain in that Rest forever, but that Rest must at last cease,
and the Body begin to move: which is not consonant to reason. There is a great
difference between an Infinite and an Ever-during Effect. And if it be true,
that a Finite Cause cannot produce an Infinite Effect; it is as true, that a
Cause, how bounded soever it be, may produce an Ever-subsisting Effect, if it
be not destroyed by some new Cause. For if I make a square Figure upon Wax,
this Figure will last always, if nothing survene to spoil it, or to destroy the
Wax it self. So that it is not incongruous at all, to say, that if Rest or
Motion be once produced in a Body, this Rest or Motion shall last without end,
if nothing come to destroy it.

VIII. This Quality, which is called Impetuosity, lasts always.
AS to that Quality, which is pretended to be produced in the Body by him that
strikes it; it is all one to me, whether it be believed to be so or not: But
this I say, that if that Quality be necessary, it will last forever, after it
has been once produced, and that it will never cease to be, till some new
Cause destroy it. And herein the Sentiment of Vasquez 1. 2. d. 81. c. 2 and 3.
is very remarkable, when he teaches generally of all Forms, substantial and
accidental, and particularly of Motion and Impetuosity, That, if they can
subsist one moment without needing the influence of their first Efficient
Cause, they will last always, until they be destroyed by the production of a
new contrary Form. If Men will still persist in this Opinion, and say, That
this Quality is so weak in its own nature, that it destroys it self; I do
maintain, that, after this Quality shall have been destroyed, the Motion
notwithstanding must continue for the reasons already delivered, in regard that
Motion cannot cease, unless Rest be produced a new: But there must always be a
positive Cause to produce a new, what Effect soever it be; whereas there needs
none such to make that subsist, which is already in being. And this is the true
reason, why a square Figure, made in Wax, would last eternally, if God should
keep all external Agents from destroying any thing in that Wax, because this
square Body of Wax could not lose this Figure, unless another Figure were
produced: And as a Figure cannot begin to be a new, unless there be some
positive Cause to produce it, and we also suppose, that there is none such in
this Case; it must needs follow, that this first Figure, which is already
produced, keeps forever the possession of its existence, It Is the same thing
with Motion: And although this pretended Impetuosity cease to be, yet the
Motion, which is already produced, is not therefore to cease also, because
there is no new Cause, producing Rest, and Motion cannot cease, but Rest must
be produced instead thereof.

IX. The Bodies which we move, do cease to move, because they are impeded.
LAstly, when we see, that Bodies moved by us do in a little time cease to
move, that proves nothing against us; it being certain, that those Bodies meet
with impediments to their Motion: Whence we see, that the more or the less we
remove of those impediments, the more or less do those Motions continue. Thus a
Ball rolleth much longer over a very smooth Alley, than in a rugged way: A
Wheel turns much better, if its Axle-tree be slender and well turned, than when
it is big and irregular. A Stone is cast much farther in the Air, than in Water.
But I shall endeavor in the Sequel of this Discourse to explain, how all these
Impediments do by little and little make the Motion of Bodies to cease.

X. A Demand for the safety of the following Demonstrations.
ALl I have been just now deducing about the Nature and Perpetuity of Motion,
is in a manner necessary for the understanding what I pretend to demonstrate in
this Discourse. But as this Question can never be handled so clearly, but that
it will always be obnoxious to the Cavils of Disputants; I foresee well enough,
that after all my reasonings it will doubtless so fall out, that all will not
be convinced of what I shall have undertaken to prove. And besides, not being
willing to clash with any, nor to leave ground to believe, that I build my
Discourse upon a doubtful Principle; I declare, that for the firmness of my
Demonstrations I need not it should be thought, that Motion would in effect be
perpetual; so it be but allowed me (which no Man can deny) that Motion, once
begun, lasts at least for some time, and continues the more uniformly, the less
impediments there are to stop or diminish it. Let this Continuance of Motion be
explained by the production of an impressed Quality, or by a simple
Determination, or by whatever you please, it is indifferent to me: I only
demand, it may be allowed me to take this as a Postulatum of Geometry, That,
after a Body is once moved, it continues to move for some time, and that this
time is considerable, when there is nothing without, able to stop or lessen the
Motion. By the means of which Demand, I hope, that all the following
Demonstrations will be found of full force.

XI. A Body receiving successively many Determinations, remains only affected
with the last.
A Body not only persevereth in Rest or Motion, according as it has once begun
to be in either; but it persists also in the same kind of Motion, and with the
same degree of Celerity in which it has been put.

For Example:
If it have begun to move in a straight Line Eastward with one degree of
Celerity, it continues to move with the same degree without ever receding a jot
from the same Line: Which is evident from the same reasons, I alleged to
prove, the Motion to last always.

But it is to be Noted, that, when a Body has successively received many
different Determinations, it remains affected with the last of them, the
precedent making no impression at all upon it.

For Example:
If a Ball be propelled with the hand, or otherwise from a to b, and that
afterward the same Ball be carried from b to d, and there abandoned; I say,
that Fig. 1.
the Ball will continue to move toward e, in the same Line b d e, and with
that celerity it moved from b to d; and that first determination, it had
received from a to b, and which would have carried it to c, serves nothing
now, no more than if it had never been, because it is destroyed by this second
determination.

XII. A free Body cannot be determined to move in a Curve Line, nor with
unequal celerity.
THence it follows, that a Body cannot be determined to move in a Curve Line,
or with unequal velocity; but that every Body that is free, continues to move in
a straight Line, and with an uniform velocity.

For Example:
Let a Body be moved in a Curve Line from a through b c d e unto f (as a Stone
in a Sling) and let this Body be abandoned in f, to see what will become Fig. 2.
of it. I say, that it will not continue to move in a Curve Line toward h, but
that it will pass toward g in a straight Line, which will touch the Curve in
the point f. For, however the Body were first moved from a to b, that is
nothing to this last determination; and it would now move the same way, though
it had only begun to move from the point b, or from c, or from d or e, or yet
nearer; provided it had still in f the same degree of celerity: Because that
these first Motions are so many different determinations, the latter of which
destroy the former; and so the Body remains affected with the last of all: But
this last did carry it toward g, that is to say, you are to take the
inclination, which the Curve Line has at the point f, and this inclination is
measured by the Tangent, as Geometers know: And so it is according to this
Tangent that the Body has been determined last of all; and consequently it is
according to this Line that it continues to move.

XIII. Every Body that moves about a Center, endeavors to recede from it.
THence it appears, that the Axiom is very true, which says, That every Body
moving round indevours to recede from the Center of its Motion: As a Stone in a
Sling, which makes the hand sensible of its endeavor to move in a straight
Line, and consequently to go from the hand, which is the Center of its Motion.
So also do the drops of water, or the grains of sand, which fly out into a
straight Line as soon as they can get free from the Wheel of the Cutler; and
the like.

XIV. The Stars cannot move of themselves.
IT appears also, that those are deceived, who supposing the Celestial Matter
liquid and immovable, do believe, that the Sun and the other Stars may have
received a first impetuosity, which lasts still, and makes them move
circularly about the Center of the World. For it is manifest, that if an Angel,
or some other Cause whatsoever, had thus moved a Star in a Circle about the
Center of the World; as soon as that Angel, or that other Cause, should abandon
that Star, it would cease at the same instant to move in a Circle, and fly out
into a straight Line toward the extremities of the World.

XV. How a Body may be move'd circularly.
BUt if a Body fastened, as might be a Ball suspended by a Thread, or a Wheel
fixed upon its Axis, or, if it be liquid and enclosed in a Vessel, as Water in
a Basin; then this Ball, or this Wheel, being once agitated with sufficient
violence, or this Liquor being also stirred; all these Bodies will continue to
move in a Circle; the Ball about the Nail, by which it is suspended; the Wheel
about its Axis, where it is fastened; and the Liquor about the Center of the
Vessel, in which it is enclosed. So also if two Bodies being tied together, are
equally agitated toward different places, it must needs happen, that these two
opposite Bodies do move circularly about the point which is in the midst of
them: And thus it is, that a Fusee, or a Whirligig, continue to move in a
Circle; because the opposite parts being fastened and united among themselves,
and besides moved by ones fingers two different ways, one, one way, and the
other, another way; this Fusee must needs move about it self. And then, if
these opposite parts are moved unequally, so that the one be carried a little
faster one way; then this Body, besides its circular Motion about it self, will
have another Motion, which will carry it altogether in some different Lines,
according to the diversity and combination of these Determinations. And thus it
is, that a Whirligig describes by its Axis upon a Table diverse figures
enterlaced, whilst it moves with an incredible swiftness about its own Center.

XVI. One Body moving against another Body gives it its whole Motion.
NOw let us take a Body moving in a straight Line, and encountering another,
and see, what will become of these two Bodies.

First, In regard that Bodies are impenetrable, it is impossible the Body A
should move, but that the Body B Fig. 3.
hitting against it will move also; because that otherwise these two Bodies
would penetrate one another: And as I elsewhere suppose, that the Body B is
there altogether indifferent, either to remain quiescent, or to take that
Motion that may be given it; as soon as the Body A shall come to hit against it,
it will determine it also to a like Motion: And so, there being no impediment,
this Body B will take full as much Motion as the Body A had, and pass toward
the same place, in the same Line, with the same celerity; and all this for the
same reason, to wit, because the Bodies being impenetrable, and the Body a
tending to move toward b, and then the Body B meeting there with an absolute
indifferency, and free from all impediment; it is evident, that the Body B must
move toward b with the same celerity, that the Body a did move toward the
same place. And thus it seems, that there is no more difficulty to understand,
that naturally a Body can move another Body, than there is to conceive, that
two Bodies are impenetrable, and that one Body in its Motion may meet another.

XVII. In the meeting of two Bodies there is made a percussion, which is
mutual, and equally received in both.
NExt, It is to be considered, that in this encounter of two Bodies there is
made a certain percussion, which is nothing else but a shock or hitting of two
Bodies, which meeting do hinder one another by their impenetrability. But
although very often there be but one Body moving and striking, whilst the other
remains moveless and receives the stroke; yet notwithstanding, the percussion
is always mutual and equally received by both Bodies: So that as much as the
Body a strikes the Body B, so much is it struck it self. Which we may easily
conceive, if we Fig. 3.
suppose, that these two Bodies are altogether like in bulk, shape, and
hardness, and if besides we imagine them to have feeling, and capable to resent
pain when they are struck: For then it is manifest, that the Body a coming to
hit against B, will it self feel as much pain as the Body B; as we see, that a
hand striking another hand, does as much hurt to it self as it does to the
other, if that be as tender. The same is also to be understood, if you suppose,
that there are two Nails, altogether equal, half fixed, the one to the Body a,
and the other to the Body B, and that in the Motion of the Body a against B the
two heads of the Nails do meet; for then we conceive, that in this percussion
these two Nails are struck deeper in; and that there is no reason to make us
believe, the Nail B should be sunk deeper than a: On the contrary, since both
the Nails are equal, and equally sharp, and the Bodies equally hard, without
any other difference; the two Nails must needs equally be struck in, and the
one as much fixed as the other. Thus we may make it a general Maxim; That when
two Bodies are struck, the percussion is mutual and equal on both sides.

XVIII. A moving Body, meeting with another Body that is quiescent, gives it
all its Motion, and remains it self moveless.
LEt us resume our Example. The Body A is moved with one degree of velocity
toward a; and there it meets in a straight Line the Body B, and by the
percussion communicates to it its Motion, which will carry the Body B with one
degree of velocity toward b, according to what has been demonstrated in 16.
Since therefore the percussion, which the Body B receives, is of one degree,
that is, Fig. 3.
capable to carry the Body B with one degree of celerity toward b; it must
needs be, that the percussion, which the Body a receives at the same time, be
also of one degree, that is, be able to carry the Body a with one degree of
celerity toward the opposite parts, namely, toward A. (For these percussions
strike and drive the two Bodies toward the opposite places, the one, toward b,
the other, toward A.) And as the Body a had already one degree of impetuosity
or swiftness to go toward b; and that now it receives such another to return
toward A; this Body must needs remain moveless at the Point a, without going
forwards or backwards, forasmuch as it is equally driven toward the opposite
places. Thus in this percussion the Body a gives its motion and celerity to the
Body B, and mean while remains it self moveless.

XIX. What is meant by absolute and respective velocity.
NOw let us suppose, that the two Bodies move toward one another in the same
Line; the one, from b with one degree of celerity toward B; the other, from A
with the same degree of celerity toward a, where they meet; and let us see,
what will follow. The percussion will here not only be of one degree, but of
two; and to understand this, we are to distinguish between the absol^te and
resp^ctive velocity of a Body. I call that absolute velocity, which is
considered in a Body compared with the Space wherein it moves; and res^^ctive,
that which is considered in two Bodies compared together, by which velocity
these two Bodies mutually approach to, or recede from, one another. As in our
Example: If we consider the Body b, comparing it to Fig. 3.
the Space, for Example, of one Foot, which it moves in one Minute; that shall
be called one degree of absolute celerity; but if we compare it with the Body
A, which is moved on its part toward a with the same degree of absolute
celerity, passing also one foot through, in one minute; then the respective
celerity of both will be of two degrees; because they mutually approach one
another with this celerity, and make in one minute two feet, by which they were
before distant from one another.

XX. The Percussions are as the respective Velocities.
NOw the force of the Percussion is to be measured, not by the absolute, but
the respective Velocity; because the percussion proceeds only, as we have said,
from the impenetrability of two Bodies, which mutually approaching one another
do hinder their first Motion, and receive also new impressions. Whence it
appears also, that the percussion will be so much the greater, by how much
swifter that mutual approach shall be made. So that the Percussions are always
as the respective Velocities, caeteris omnibus paribus. Thus two Bodies
approaching, each with one degree of absolute celerity, and making each a foot
on its part in one minute; it is manifest, that the percussion, which each Body
will receive in a B, will be the same, that it would be, if one had remained
moveless Fig. 3.
in A, until the other were come forth from b to A with two degrees of absolute
celerity, making in one minute both the two feet, that are from b unto A:
Forasmuch as the respective celerities are still the same, whether we suppose,
that whilst the one remains moveless in A, the other is moved with two degrees
of absolute celerity, and makes both the feet in one minute; or, that both
Bodies move, by approaching to one another, each with one only degree of
velocity; so that in one minute they shall have made by their approach both the
feet, that were betwixt them at the beginning of the minute.

XXI. Two Bodies meeting one another, turn back, making an exchange of their
velocity.
IT being therefore certain, that the percussion, which is made in this
encounter, is of two degrees; and that each of these Bodies receives in this
shock an impression, that would carry them with two degrees of velocity toward
the opposite places; that is to say, that the Body a receives a stroke, which
would carry it toward A with two degrees of velocity; and that the Fig. 3.
Body B receives likewise one, which would carry it with the same two degrees
of velocity toward b: It must of necessity be, that the Body a turn only back
with one degree of celerity toward A, because it is carried by two impressions
unequal and altogether contrary; by one, of two degrees, toward A, which it
receives in the percussion; by the other, of one degree, toward b, which it
had before; and so there remains to it only one free degree of impression and
celerity, which carries it toward A. And likewise B will be carried toward b
with one degree also of celerity; so that both turn back in the same Line with
the same swi^tness they came. If we suppose, that the one advances with more
celerity than the other; for Example, that A moves with one degree and an half
of celerity, running one foot and an half in one minute, and that b moves with
half a degree of celerity, running half a foot only; then, the percussion being
of two degrees as well as in the precedent case, since the respective celerity
is the same, although the absolute ones are different, each Body must receive
two degrees of impression and celerity to turn back; and by consequence, the
Body B, which had half a degree only of celerity, will return toward A with
one degree and an half; whereas a, which formerly had one degree and an half,
will return toward b with half a degree only. And after this manner it may be
proved, That two Bodies, moving toward one another in a straight Line, turn
both backward, after their encounter, by making an exchange of their velocities.

XXII. Two Bodies moving toward the same places, continue after their
encounter by exchanging their velocities.
IF the two Bodies move toward the same places in a straight Line, so that the
slowest, moving first, be at last overtaken by that which moves faster after
it; then both will continue to move in the same Line toward the same place,
but they will exchange their velocities. Let the Body A be moved with two
degrees of velocity toward b, making in one minute two feet as far as to a. At
the same time let the Body Fig. 4.
B be moved in the same Line with one degree of celerity, making only one foot
as far as to b, and that there it be overtaken by the Body a. The force of the
percussion being measured, as I have showed, by the respective celerity; this
percussion must here be but of one degree, because the respective celerity is
but of one degree, seeing that these two Bodies do not approach one another but
with this degree of celerity, and that in one minute they make, the one in
respect of the other, but one foot of space, which was betwixt both at the
beginning. Now, since the Body b had, before, one degree of celerity, which
carried it toward a, and that now in the percussion it receives another
toward the same places; it must move with two degrees and make two feet as far
as to b; whereas the Body a, which before had two degrees of velocity toward
b, and receives now one, to turn back toward B, is constrained to go toward
a with one degree of velocity.

XXIII. An hard Body coming to hit another Body that cannot be shaken, is
reflected with its whole Motion.
IF the Body, which is struck, be altogether unshakeable, we must see, what
force the percussion will have, and what will become of the percutient Body.
Let us suppose, that the Body A do move with one degree of velocity toward a,
and that there it meet the Fig. 5.
Body b, indifferent to move, yet so as that betwixt both there be found a
plate or a surface indifferent in it self to Rest or Motion, but yet
impenetrable. In this case, the Body a, striking this plate, strikes also
thereby the Body b, which is met with close behind it: And as I elsewhere
suppose, that this plate makes no resistance at all, but only in being
impenetrable; it is manifest (by what has been proved in 18.) that in this
encounter the Body a remains moveless in a, and that as well the plate, as the
Body b, does move toward B with one degree of velocity. But if we suppose,
that when A comes to strike the plate in a, at the same time B also strikes it
in b; this plate will remain moveless, in regard it is struck equally from both
the opposite sides, and each Body will turn back with its degree of celerity,
wherewith it came. For, as I have said, these two Bodies strike one another,
notwithstanding this plate, as if there were nothing betwixt them: But if there
were nothing betwixt them, they would reflect with their same degree of
velocity, as has been proved 21. And so, although this plate be there, they
will not the less be reflected. Now let us consider, that this same plate,
being impenetrable, be moreover quite firm, so as to be unshakeable and
inflexible; and let us move as before the two Bodies A and B so as they may
strike it at the same time in a and b: I say, that after this shock each Body
must reflect with the same degree of velocity; because if the plate had been
indifferent, and not firm, they would have reflected, and this plate been
moveless: But the same effect must follow, though we suppose, that this plate
be of it self moveless, firm, and unshakeable, in regard that either way it
remains without any kind of Action or Motion. If lastly we suppose, that the
sole Body A moves toward a, and hits the plate fastened and beyond shaking,
it must then also be said, that the Body a turns back toward A; because it
would return, if at the same time the Body B had come to hit in b; therefore it
reflecteth also, when the Body B does not come, because the plate being
unshakeable, causes still the same effect in respect of the Body a, whether b
strike it or not. And thus you see, how it is demonstrated, That an hard Body
coming to hit another Body that is hard, inflexible, and unshakeable, is
reflected with all its Motion. Which I think no Man has yet demonstrated.

XXIV. The Angle of Reflection is equal to the Angle of Incidence.
HItherto we have always supposed, that the percussions are made altogether
direct: Let us now see, what will happen, when the Bodies strike one another
obliquely. And to make this to be more clearly understood, I shall still employ
Balls or flat Bodies; and it will afterward be very easy to understand what
shall happen in Bodies that have Figures less regular. Let the Ball A be moved
toward a, striking Fig. 6.
obliquely the unshakeable Body B. Through the Point of contact let a straight
Line be drawn e d, then a parallel A c a, the perpendiculars A e, a c, next c a
or B d equal to c A, or to B c. I say, that the Ball will turn back by the Line
a a, so as the Angle of Reflection a a d is always equal to the Angle of
Incidence A a e. For proof, let us consider, that the Ball A receives at once
two strokes or impressions; one, driving it toward e with Fig. 7.
one degree of velocity, and the other toward c with two degrees; it must then
move in the diagonal A a, and there hit the Body B. But the force of percussion
will be but of one degree, because the percussion is only made, as I have often
said, by the impenetrability of the two Bodies hindering their Motion. But the
Motion which carries the Ball toward c a, is not at all hindered by the Body
B. There is but the Motion, which carried the Body A toward e B, that is
hindered by the Body B, and consequently all the force of this percussion is
measured by this respective velocity, which makes the Body A approach toward
the Line e B. In this case also, the percussion is the same, as if the Body A
had only moved from c to a with this sole degree of celerity; and so in the
percussion it must turn back with the same degree of swiftness, and be carried
toward c a, as before it was carried toward e B, whilst the other Motion
remains all entire toward a d. Whence it follows, that the Ball reflecteth in
the Line a a.

XXV. It may be imagined, that tbe oblique Motion is composed of two Motions.
BEcause this is important, it will be worth while to explain it yet after
another manner. Let us imagine the Body B moveless; and another Body A a, moving
parallel betwixt the Lines A c, a d, and hitting the moveless Body: Fig. 8.
Then (according to what has been already proved in 23.) this Body will be
reflected wholly toward A a with its same velocity. Besides, let us imagine,
that this Body is hollow Channel-wise, and that in this Channel there is a Ball
rolling from A toward a, in such a manner that in the same time, wherein the
whole Body moves from A a unto the moveless Body B, the Ball makes in its
Channel the way A c. Thus, whilst the whole Body shall turn back after the
percussion, the Ball shall continue to move in its Channel from c toward a
with its same velocity. But the true way, which this Ball shall have made, will
be A a a, so as the Angle of Reflection will be equal to the Angle of
Incidence; in regard that as well the Lines A c, c a, as A e, d a, are equal.
But it is manifest, that the same percussion, and consequently the same
reflection would be made, if the Ball had hit immediately coming from A to a,
than if it were the Channel A a that had hit, whilst the Ball had rolled in the
Channel without any interruption. Whence we may conclude, that in all oblique
Motion when one Body hits another obliquely, we may distinguish as 'twere two
Motions; one, which we shall call perpendicular, which carries it to hit the
Body, and which receives a change in the percussion; the other, lateral, by
which the Body only slideth against the other without hitting it, and which by
consequence remains entire after the percussion. Here the perpendicular Motion
is that, which carries the Ball toward e d, whose velocity is measured by the
perpendicular A e; and the lateral Motion is measured by the parallel A c,
which continues after the percussion toward c a.

XXVI. A Remark upon the Argument of P. Riccioli.
I Cannot hold to make here two remarks on the occasion of the oblique
percussion. One is, touching the Argument, which one of the greatest Men of our
Age makes to decide the Question about the Motion of the Earth. He pretends,
that if heavy Bodies did descend by a Curve Line, such as Galileo describes,
the percussions of heavy Bodies would not be made, as we see they are. For,
according as a Body falls from a greater height, it strikes the more forcibly,
so as the percussion will be ten or twenty times stronger of a fall of a
hundred or four hundred times the height: Mean time in the Hypothesis, which
this Author, of whom I speak, opposes, the force of the percussion should be,
thinks he, always the same, at least there would be no sensible difference,
what difference soever there should be found in the heights of the descents;
because the heavy Body would go in this Curve Line with an almost uniform
velocity: And the force of the percussions being always proportionate to the
velocity, he concludes, that the velocities being always equal in what hight
soever it be, the percussions would be so too. But this Argument is not
concluding, because, the celerity remaining always the same, the percussions
may diminish if they be made obliquely: And if we conceive, that the Bullets a,
b, c, hit the Wall in d, all with the same celerity, but some more obliquely
than others, the percussion certainly of that Bullet which hits more directly
will be the greatest; and the force of these oblique percussions is measured,
as I have showed, by the perpendiculars c e, b f, a g. So that the Bullet c may
hit so obliquely, that it shall only graze along the Fig. 9.
Wall without having any considerable effect. Thus although the weights, which
are supposed to fall in a Curve Line, should be moved in almost an uniform
velocity, yet they would for all that hit more forcibly, falling from a greater
height, because then the percussion would be more direct: And in effect if one
shall go to make the calculation of it (which is very easy to do even upon
that, which this Author has made in Astronomia Reformata) it will be found,
that the obliquity of these Motions is always fully that, which is requisite to
make that diversity, which we see in the percussions of falling Bodies.

XXVII. A Remarque upon some Citadels.
THe other Remarque is upon what I have seen in some of our Citadels, where
those that have raised them have preferred the pleasingness to the Eye before
the strength of the Walls, when instead of making them all even and plain, they
have diversified them with many Ornaments of Stones advancing above others; and
besides, have cut each Stone Diamond-wise, or at least have made a Brim therein
by notching them round about; so as the joining Stones leave betwixt them an
hollowness after the manner of rural Archirecture: I say, that however all this
variety may please the Eye, it is disadvantageous for Defense. For, these
sinkings and sallies of Stones give to the oblique Batteries of Guns the same
advantage and the same force, which direct Batteries have: So that a Bullet,
which coming side-ways would only graze along the Wall, if it were all flat and
even, when it shall meet the sallies of those advancing stones, will have the
same effect, and make as great a breach, as if it had hit direct
perpendicularly; and even a greater, because it will be more easy, thus
slopingly to carry away a stone, which giving hold-fast to a Bullet is not
supported by the others, than it would be, if it had been struck directly
against the thickness of the Wall. But let us return to our subject.

XXVIII. A general Rule of all Percussions.
AFter we have made this distinction of two Motions in the oblique Motion, it is
easy to make a General Rule, explaining all the Effects of Percussions. You
may here see the Proposition, Fig. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
together with the Figures, which express all the possible Cases of oblique
Percussions, and even of the direct ones, when the Bodies are not unshakeable.
Let the Body A be moved toward a with the velocity of A a, and the Body B with
the velocity of B b in the Line B b; or let one of the two be moveless, so as B
b be but a point. Let the encounter be in a b. Join the Centers by the Line a
b, continued both ways, if need be. Let there be drawn the perpendiculars A c,
B d. We may here distinguish two Motions in each Ball; the one perpendicular,
as if the Body A had moved from c unto a, and the Body B from d unto b: the
other is the lateral, which carries the Body A toward c, and the Body B
toward d, and this lateral remains entire after the percussion in both Bodies;
whereas, the whole percussion being made by perpendicular Motions, these
perpendicular Motions must be changed according to what has been demonstrated,
that is, the Body b will take the perpendicular Motion and velocity c a, and
the Body a will take the velocity and Motion d b. Let therefore be drawn the
Line a e equal and parallel to A c, and the Line e a equal and parallel to d b;
I say, that the Body a shall move, after the percussion, in the Line a a with
the velocity a a. Likewise let there be drawn b f equal and parallel to B d,
and the Line f b equal and parallel to c a; I say, that the Body b shall move,
in the Line b b with the velocity b b; and this needs no new proof.

XXIX. There is always equal quantity of respective Motion.
IT is to be observed, that it is not true, that there is always as much
absolute Motion after the percussion, as there was before. But it is easy to
demonstrate, that the respective Motion is always the same; so that the Bodies
recede one from another after the percussion, as fast as they approached before
it. Thus taking two equal times before and after percussion, the distance A B
is always the same to the distance a b. And after I shall have also explained
the Motions made in pleno, I believe it would be easy to me to prove, that
having a respect generally to all the Bodies that are in the whole World, there
is at present as much respective Motion, neither more nor less, than there was
in the beginning of the Creation of the Universe.

XXX. The midst of two Bodies is always uniformly moved in a direct Line.
IT is also to be observed, that the point of the middle between two Bodies is
always moved uniformly in a direct Line, drawing without any interruption
toward the same places. Thus taking two equal times, before and after
percussion, and supposing that o is the point of the middle between the two
Bodies at the time of the percussion; and O being also the middle of the two
Bodies before the percussion, as o is after; O o o will be in a straight Line,
and O o will be equal to o o: Which I stay not to demonstrate, though that may
be done Geometrically.

XXXI. All these Rules are true, whether the Bodies be equal, or not.
IT will perhaps be wondered, that in all the preceding Rules I have not made
any mention of the Equality or Inequality of the Bodies, that strike one
another. And it seems at first, that, to verify what I have been saying, I
must suppose the Bodies to be perfectly Equal: For, if the one be bigger than
the other, all those Rules must vary; and experience shows, that a great Body
striking a lesser that was before quiescent, the great Body cease not from
continuing to move after the shock, though it moves more slowly, and quite
contrarily, if it be the lesser Body that strikes, it reflecteth with a part
of its velocity. But if I have here omitted to distinguish these Cases of
Equality and Inequality of Bodies, I have done it with consideration: I have
all along confounded the Velocity and the Motion, and I designed to give the
Reader to understand, that all these Rules are true, whether the Bodies be
Equal or not. And if notice be taken of the force of the reason, alleged by me
in 16. it is always the same, although the Bodies be of different Magnitudes.
For, the Body struck being altogether indifferent to remain at Rest or to take
Motion, and the whole effect of the percussion proceeding from the
impenetrability of Bodies; if we suppose the Body struck to be greater,
provided that all the parts thereof be well united together, it must move with
the same velocity, with which the Body striking moves, by the same reason, it
does so when they are equal, that is, because they are impenetrable, and the
Body percutient cannot move forwards, unless the Body percussed, which is
before, take all its velocity: And as otherwise the Greater is as indifferent,
as the Equal Body, for Rest and Motion, certainly the Greater will make no more
resistance than the Equal, forasmuch as neither of them will make not the least
of all. If Experience shows the contrary, it is because the Motion of Bodies,
which we see, are not made in vacuo, as we have hitherto supposed, but they are
moved in a space filled with some fluid Body, such as the Air or some other yet
more subtle substance. Now therefore we are to consider the Motion which is
made of solid Bodies in a fluid substance.

XXXII. A Body moves in pleno as freely as in vacuo.
IF this substance be perfectly fluid, that is, if all its parts, as well small
as great, are flexible and liquid; if besides, this same substance be perfectly
full, so as it cannot be condensed or rarifi'd, as a Sponge is compressed or
dilated by reason of its pores; if lastly it be enclosed in some place, whence
it cannot at all issue: Then an Hard Body, that shall have begun to move in the
midst of this Liquor, will continue to do it as freely as in vacuo, and will
go to the extremities of the Liquor, where meeting with a firm unshakeable
Body, it is reflected with the same velocity, and so it will move forever. The
reason of it is, that when an hard Body moves in a liquid substance, there is
made a reflection of impetuosity, which communicates it self in a moment to
all the parts of the Liquor, in such a manner that the Body moving drives all
the parts of the Liquor, that are found before it, and so it should stop, if
nothing else did survene (by 18.) But these parts of the Liquor being thrust,
do thrust others, and so on to the extreme, where is made a reflection, by
which the parts that are found after the hard Body, are thrust with the same
force to follow this same Body: Because, all the Liquor being shut in, and not
capable to be condensed, and there being no vacuity; it is not possible, that
all the parts which go before the Body should move, but the parts which follow
the same Body must move also with the same force. Thus as much as the Hard Body
is retarded by the parts preceding, so much it is driven back by those which
follow; and by consequence, if the Motion have once begun, it must continue as
if it were in vacuo. Whence it appears, that those who will prove the necessity
of a vacuum from Motion, do not reason well.

XXXIII. Motions diminish little by little in the Air.
BUt if the hard Bodies are in a spongious Liquor, capable of compression, or
if this Liquor be not so well bounded in, but that the extrimeties will yield a
little; then the Motion will not be perpetual, but diminish by degrees, and be
at last quite extinct. For the hard Body will find more resistance by the
anteriour parts of the Liquor, than it will receive of impulse by the
posteriour; because the Liquor, which is before, being compressed, or the
extremities yielding, the communication of the impression cannot be made
perfectly; and so the posteriour parts of the Liquor will not be so much thrust
as the anteriour, and consequently will not so much thrust the hard Body, as
the anteriour ones retard it. And it is for this reason that all the Motions
cease in the Air and Water, or in other Liquors, because it is certain, that the
Air is spongious and easily compressed: And that the Liquors are not bounded
but by the Air when they are abroad, or at least by the sides of some Vessel
that can yield and bend a little. For we know by certain experience, that Glass
Vessels will stretch, and even those of Iron and Brass will bend to the strokes
made upon them.

XXXIV. The Percussions of equal Bodies are made in pleno as in vacuo.
THe percussions, that are made of Bodies thus moving in Liquors, differ in
something from those that are made in vacuo. To understand the Cause thereof,
we are to note, that, when an hard Body is moved in a Liquor, it also
communicates its Motion to the same Liquor, in such a manner that it moves
also in following the hard Body, so as to divide it self and to open before,
and to follow and close it self after the Body. And if the Body by any accident
should come to lose its Motion; yet the Liquor being thus determined to move,
would give again to that Body its Motion, and carry it away with it self, in
some such manner as Rivers carry away with them the floating Wood. If therefore
a Body comes to hit another equal to it, the phoenomena will happen as in
vacuo; because these two equal Bodies, being encompassed with the same quantity
of Liquor, as much as the Liquor of the Body percussed hinders this same Body
percussed from moving freely, so much an equal quantity of Liquor, which is
about the Body percutient, drives also anew the percutient as well as the
percussed: Thus their Motion after the percussion will be made as in vacuo,
forasmuch as the resistance of the Liquor from the Body percussed, is precisely
recompensed by the impulsion of the Liquor from the Body percutient.

XXXV. When the Bodies are unequal, the percussions are made in pleno otherwise
than in vacuo.
BUt if the Body percutient be greater, it must needs receive not so great an
effect from the percussion, as the other, because it is carried away with more
violence by the Liquor which environs it: For we see, that a Beam carried away
by the Stream of a River has much more effect, when it comes to hit against a
Bridge or a Mill, than a stick would have being carried down by the same River;
although the Beam should not move swifter than the Stick: And that, because the
Beam coming to hit, is also carried by the great quantity of water surrounding
it, whereas the Stick is but little so, by reason of the small space it takes
up, and of the little water, by which it is carried away. Thus therefore if the
little Body be at Rest, and the greater come to hit it; this greater by
communicating its motion to the smaller will not so be stopped as to become
moveless, as it would do in vacuo; but it will continue to move, and to follow,
though more slowly. On the contrary if the great one be quiescent, the smaller,
after it shall have hit the other, and communicated to it a part of its Motion,
will be reflected losing a part of its velocity. And from all this it appears,
that Aristotle is not so much to be blamed as some pretend, when, to explicate
the causes of the continuation of the Motions we see, he has made use of the
medium, that is, of the liquid substance wherein our Bodies are moved.

XXXVI. The Percussions of unequal Bodies cannot be reduced to one General Rule.
TO determine the excess, which there may be in the resistances or in the
greatest impressions of these unequal Bodies, I esteem a thing not to be
undertaken, at least if we consider the Bodies such as we have them among us;
because that depends from the resistance made by the liquid Bodies, wherein the
Hard Bodies, we see, are moved; from the facility, they have to be condensed or
rarefied; and from many other things, that cannot be known to us, no more than
an infinity of other impediments, the combinations whereof may infinitely
diversifie all the effects of the percussions. Only I may say, that making a
certain Hypothesis, which appears natural enough, it may be showed by the
precedent Rules, that the percussions of Bodies unequal, shall be, after the
manner delivered by Monsieur Hugens in the late Published March 18. 1669. in
French; and inserted also in the Philosophical Transactions, Numb. 46. page
927. Which Rules of Motion are conform to those of Dr. Christ. Wren, Printed in
the Transactions, Numb. 43. page 867.
Journal Des Scavans. But I shall not stay longer upon that; I may possibly
meet with another opportunity to discourse more amply of it.

XXXVII. Of Refraction.
THere appears also from what I have been explaining, the reason of the
Refractions, that are made when an hard Body passes out of one Liquor into
another of different consistence. For if the Hard Body passes out of a more
free Liquor into one that is less so, it will lose somewhat of its velocity in
the passage, finding more resistance in the Liquor which is before, than it
feels it self thrust by that which follows; and so the Refraction will be made
by receding from the Perpendicular. On the contrary, if the Body passes out of
a more impeding Liquor into another more free, the Refraction will be made by
approaching to the Perpendicular, and the Body will increase its velocity in
the passage, because it is thrust more by the Liquor which follows, than it is
detained by that which is found before. And it is of this augmentation of
velocity, which I think no body has as yet given the reason of. I shall not
note the measures of these Refractions, because that has been done by others,
and their Demonstrations may be very well accommodated to the things, here by
me advanced. Nor do I speak in this place of the Refraction of Light, because I
believe, that that is made quite otherwise, that is, by causes and means
altogether different; as I could make out, if I should write other Discourses
of Motion.

XXXVIII. The Conclusion.
THere would remain something to be said of the Motion of Heavy Bodies, as well
of those that fall or are projected in the Air, as of those, which roll on
inclined Plains, or which being suspended by a thread do vibrate to and fro.
Somewhat also should be spoken of the Motion of Liquors, as well of their fall
as their prosiliency, as also of their Undulations, and the like: But all those
particulars deserve so many particular Discourses. And as I think, I have found
something new concerning these things, I shall not scruple to publish my
thoughts for examination, if I find, that this first Discourse has not been
judged altogether unworthy to be read by persons, who take a delight in such
matters.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THe Author of this Tract about Local Motion, having been informed by a Friend,
that some persons who had read these papers, as they were coming from the
Press, gave out, that he followed altogether the Doctrine of Monsieur Des
Carts, and that, al^^ough in some places he seemed (...) oppose him without
naming him, yet he did establish all the Sentiments of that Philosopher
concerning this Subject: He has thought himself obliged to undeceive those,
who should believe those persons upon their word, by the following Notes, which
he thought fit to annex at the end of this Tract, before it should appear in
public.

NOTES UPON THE DISCOURSE OF LOCAL MOTION.
WHen the Author of this Discourse insisted to prove, that Motion is never
destroyed but by a contrary determination, survening a new; he did sufficiently
declare himself concerning the little addiction he had to this Sentiment. But
as those, who have treated of this matter in Italy, England, Holland and
France, agree almost all in that particular; he did not think, he was to recede
from so common a Doctrine. Galilaeo, Gassendi, Hobbes, Regius, Magnan, Digby,
Kircher, Fabri, and many others, do all maintain in some manner this Perpetuity
of Motion; and they only differ in the way of proving it. Of all the proofs,
alleged hitherto on its behalf, the weakest doubtless is that of Monsieur
Descartes. This Author pretends, that if Motion or Rest, once begun, should
cease, God would be subject to change: Which is a ratiocination that makes
those smile, who have any tincture of Theology; there being none that knows
not, that all these changes in the Creatures are made without any change in
God. Apud Deum non est transmutatio, says St Augustine; and ideo apud eum
Cursus temporis, diei noctisque alternatione nequaquam variatur. And it is
manifest, that the Cessation of Motion is no more repugnant to the Immutability
of God, than the Creation of the World, or the actions of our Wills, or the
vicissitude of Days and Nights. If this reason of Monsieur Descartes were not
so easy to answer, it would be a dangerous one; because it would prove, that
God should have made from Eternity all the Motion, which is now found in the
World.

As many in the choice of Opinions have a regard to the Sentiment of the
Ancients, and of the Scholastic Doctors, it may be added here, that besides
what Vasquez has said; who insists to prove at large this Perpetuity of
Motion, affirming, that Motion, once begun, never cease, unless there survene
some new Cause, producing some positive form contrary to this Motion: Besides
that, I say, three of those great Disputations of Lions, held at several times,
affirm the same thing. Moreover, Aristotle is of the same mind. See, what he
says in his third Book of Meteors, Chap. 2. If a Body, that were without
gravity or levity, be moved, it must needs be moved by some adventitious force,
and being once so moved, it will move in infinitum: (...). And in the fourth
Book of his Physics, Text. 69. speaking of a Body, that had moved in vacuo,
where it is supposed that there is no kind of impediment, he has these words:
No Man can say, why a Body, that were thus moved in vacuo, should stop any
where. For, why should it rather stop here than there? And therefore it will
not stir at all* or, if it begin to stir, it must move in infinitum, if
something st^onger does not stop it. (...).

Monsieur Descartes makes very ill use of the Principle that has been
explained in 13. That a Body which is moved about a Center, endeavors to recede
from it. It can be made out, that he has mistaken in attempting thereby to
explicate the Gravity of Bodies. Neither do we mean to allow to this Principle
all that Latitude, which Monsieur Descartes has given it. And we approve much
of that restriction, that has been put by an Intelligent person, viz. That
that is true in Artificial Motions, and that it cannot be so in the Natural.

What has been proved in 16. and the following, shows, that Monsieur
Descartes has been deceived in Six Rules of the These Rules may be found in
the second part of Descartes 's Principles of Philosophy. Sect. 46, 47, 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, in my Edition, which is printed at Amsterdam, A. 1656.
Seven, which he has delivered about Motion.

In 26. It is not at all pretended, to favor the Opinion of the Motion of the
Earth. The Author of this Discourse is fully persuaded, that, although there
were not the Holy Scriptures, the Hypothesis, which makes the Earth moveless,
is preferable to all others. He would only show, that that Argument of P.
Ricciolo was not cogent. There are others that are better; especially that,
which has been prevalent on very good occasions, taken from the ^onique motion
of the Lodestone.

The 29. is against Monsieur Descartes, who has not distinguished the Motion
which is here called absolute from that, which is called respective. And when
he says, that there is always an equal quantity of Motion before or after the
percussion, he means it of this absolute Motion; or it is very apparent, that
he has therein mistaken. For (in the figure 14.) before the percussion, the
Motion of the two Balls A and B is A a and B b, and all the Motion after the
percussion, reduced together in the sole Ball b, is only b b, the other Ball
remaining moveless in a.

When in 21. mention is made of a substance more subtle than the Air, the
Reader is not to imagine, that it is the subtle Matter of M. Descartes. All
Men acknowledge, that there are subtiler Bodies, than the Air which we inspire.
And as Aristotle in his Constitution of the Universe has placed the Sphere of
the Air above the Water, so has he put the Fire above the Air, and the Ether
above the Fire; which are all different substances, which the more subtle they
are, the higher they are raised.

It is pretended in 37. that M. Descartes has not proved the Refractions of
Bodies, and much less that of Light.

FINIS.
These Books are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the White-Hart in Little-Britain.
Folio.
CAssandra, the famed Romance, 1667. Brigg's Logarithms. Francisci Suarez
Metaphysica.
Quarto.
Dr John Pells Introduction to Algebra, Translated out of High-Duch into
English by Thomas Branker, M. A. Also a Table of odd Numbers less than 100000,
showing those that are Incomposits, and resolving the rest into their Factors
or Coefficients, 1668. Nich. Mercatoris Logarithmo-Technia, sive Methodus
construendi Logarithmos, 1668. Jacobi Gregorii Exercitationes Geometricae,
1668. Dr. Joh. Wallis Opera Mechanica, pars prima and secunda, 1670. Banister's
Works of Chyrurgery. Hugh Broughton's Consent of Scripture. Snellii Typhis
Batavus, Lugd. Bat. 1624. Observat Hussiacae.
Petrus Paaw, de ossibus Amstelreod. 1633. A Letter from a Gentleman of the
Lord Howard's Retinue to his Friend in London. Dated at Fez, Nov. 1669. Wherein
he gives a full Relation of the most remarkable passages in their Voyage
thither, and of the present State of the Countries under the power of
Taffaletta, Emperor of Morocco; with a brief account of the Merchandising
Commodities of Africa, as also the Manners and Customs of the People there. Lex
^alionis, sive Vindiciae Pharmacopoeorum: Or, A short Reply to Dr. Merret's
Book, and others, written against the Apothecaries; wherein may be discovered
the Frauds and Abuses committed by Doctors professing and practicing Pharmacy.
Octavo.
Biblia Hebraea, Josephi Athias, 1661. Gualteri Needham, Disquisitio Anatomica
de Formato Foetu, 1667. Buxtorfius's Fpitomy of his Hebrew Grammar, translated
in English by John Davis, 1658. Crow, Scriptores in Scripturam: Now in the
Press. The Fortunate Fool, or the Life of the Dr. Cen^udo, 1670. The Adventures
of Mr. T S. an English Merchant, taken Prisoner by the Turks of Argiers, and
carried into the Inland Countries of Africa; with a Description of the Kingdom
of Argiers, and of all the Towns and Places thereabouts; as also a Relation of
the chief Commodities of the Country, and of the Actions and Manners of the
People: Whereunto is annexed, an Observation of the Tide, and how to turn a
Ship out of the Straights Mouth the wind being westerly, 1670. Contemplations
on Mortality, 1669. A Discourse written to a learned Friar by M. Des
Fourneillis, showing, that the Systeme of M. Des Carts, and particularly his
Opinion concerning Brutes, does contain nothing dangerous; and that all he has
written of both, seems to have been taken out of the First Chapter of Genesis:
To which is annexed the Systeme general of the Cartesian Philosophy. Basilius
Valentinus of Natural and Supernatural Things; also of the first Tincture, Root
and Spirit of Metals and Minerals, how the same are Conceived, Generated,
Brought forth, Changed and Augmented: To which is added Alex. van Suchten of
the Secrets of Antimony, 1670. Pharmacopoeia Land. 24o. 1668.
geometric figures


