A DISCOVERY OF One Sham more: Designed against three of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace For the County of Surrey.

depiction of vase of flowers

Printed for Benj. Took, 1681.

A DISCOVERY OF One Sham more, etc.
IT cannot but very much afflict the minds of all sober and good men, that
Forgeries and Subornations have been of late so frequently practiced that
Perjury seems to become a Trade, which any indigent profligate man, who has
nothing left but his Soul to dispose of, may as his last Refuge plausibly set
up for. By the original Laws of Society, every man has such a Right to Truth,
and his good Name, so long as he does nothing to forfeit it, is so much his
Property, that it is an act of high Injustice for any one to endeavor by a
false Accusation to deprive him of it. But of all Attempts of this kind none
are of so pernicious consequence as those that are levelled against the Esteem
and Reputation of persons of Quality and Magistrates, and thereby tend to
weaken that Authority by which they are rendered useful and serviceable to the
Public. This I have said in short, and without spinning it to the length of a
solemn Preface, only to point the Reader to the Nature of what he is to expect
in the following Papers, which contain a villainous Design laid to stab the
Reputation of three of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of
Surrey, and through their sides the Government it self; a Plot hatched by one
who has since acknowledged himself to be a Rogue, and nursed up by others who
are concerned to wipe off the just suspicion of their being such, which with
some not uncharitable men they do at present lie under. I for my part shall do
no more than the duty of an Historian, give you the Names and Characters of the
persons concerned, set down matter of Fact, and publish Letters whose Originals
I have by me to warrant it, with such necessary Connexions, Transitions and
Remarks as may give the Reader a clear Prospect of so much of the Contrivance
as has as yet come to light: Which take as follows.

One John Fitz-Gerrald, an Irish man, and formerly a Romish Priest, professing
himself to have forsaken the Errors and Superstitions of that Church, came
into England upon pretense of making some Discovery concerning the Plot, which
was said to be carrying on in Ireland by the Popish Faction, and was one of
them who came to the Bar of the Honorable House of Commons, when diverse other
Irish men did upon the same Account there appear. This Fitz-Gerrald living here
a considerable time without such supplies as it is probable he might expect,
ran deeply in Debt to his Landlord for Diet and Lodging, and upon default of
payment was arrested and imprisoned in the Marshalsea in Southwark. Some kind
of Acquaintance it appears he had contracted, though by what means I know not,
with Mr Sclater, Mr. Sylvester, Nonconformist Ministers, and other Separatists;
from whom he received (upon what score I leave the Reader to judge) several
Contributions at such seasons and in such measures as they thought fit. But
whether his Allowance from them were too scanty, or was wholly withdrawn,
certain it is, that having Acquaintance with one Mr. Isaac Cooper, formerly a
Servant to Dr. Tongue, he wrote and sent to him the following Letter,

Mr. Cooper.
MY Confignement obstructs me to stur in my own Affairs; Wherefor I request
you to procure some Loyal Majistrate unto whom I could confide to discover
some impartant matters (satisfactorie to the King and Country when reveald) on
such reasonable Terms as I shall propose, I beseech you fail me not herein,
but come to me with all convenient speed who; Am Sir

Your very humble Servant John Fitz Gerrald.
In the Marshalsea of Southwark, September the 21. 1681.

I Need not prompt the Reader to take notice of his peculiar way of phrasing,
viz. Loyal Magistrate and upon reasonable Terms; intimating plainly that he was
inclinable to be on the Loyal side, if he might thereby procure his Enlargement
or have other Encouragement; but that he would not discover any thing without
hire.

Well, this Letter was communicated to a Person of great Quality and by him
transmitted to Mr. Reading, Mr. Daniel and Mr. Rich, Gentlemen of known
Prudence and Integrity, and to whom as being not only in the Commission of the
Peace for the County, but also living in the Neighborhood, it was thought most
proper to commit the business of taking his Information. Accordingly on Friday
the last of September, they went to him in the Marshalsea, and showing him his
Letter to Cooper, he owned it to be his Handwriting. Hereupon they asked him,
whether he was ready to make any such Discovery, as he therein mentioned? He
replied, It was not a seasonable time, because Sir James Butler kept Court
there that day, and many people being about, great notice might be taken, which
he desired might be avoided.

What his private reason was, why he would have the taking of his Information
concealed, they being Gentlemen more wisely tenacious than to divulge the
matter to a Crowd, I leave the Reader the same freedom of guessing with my
self; but this I know, that one of the Justices thereupon fairly told him, that
he would do well to take his own time and draw up what he had to discover in
writing under his own hand at his leisure, and they would come any other time
that^ he would appoint to receive it, Their condescension herein he seemed very
much to admire and prayed that it might be the Monday following. But before
their going away Fitzgerald began to speak faintly concerning Dr. Tongue,
^that he could discover something of him; but says he again presently,
correcting himself, he is dead, and why should I be believed of him? He added
further, that he could give an account of his coming from Dunkirk, and who they
were that sent him^ into Ireland about the Letters in the Wall. Upon this the
Justices said to him, Mr. Fitzgerald, Draw up in writing what you can
discover, but withal be careful you charge no man wrongfully, Remember there is
a day appreaching wherein we must all give an account of our doings and sayings.

Thus you see, they treated him with a Can^or becoming Gentlemen and a sense of
Religion befitting Divines, for which he himself thanked 'em and repeated his
request, that they would come again on Monday following, by which time his
Information should be ready; upon which they took leave of him. But as they
were going down stairs, he begged of them for the Lords sake to pity his poor
condition and give him some relief for he was ready to starve. To which when
Mr. Daniel replied, that though they commiserated his condition and would give
order to Mr. Lowman the keeper of the Prison,^ that he should not be famished,
yet they thought it not proper to give him any Money. Fitzgerald said, Do you
think, Gentlemen, if you should bestow your Charity I should tax you for
subornation? and Mr. Daniel replied again, we will not trust you.

But before I go on directly to the matter, it is necessary I make only a short
digression thereby to give the Reader some light into the story of the Wall,
which he may collect from the following Deposition of Mr. Cooper before Justice
Warcup in the presence of three Witnesses.

The Information of Isaac Cooper late Servant to Dr. Tongue deceased, taken upon
Oath.
Middx. ss.
I Do hereby acknowledge, and am willing to depose upon Oath, that when I asked
Mr. John Fitzgerald who they were, who promoted his going for Ireland to
discover those Papers he pretended were Concealed in the Wall of the Convent of
Galbally; He replied, He would discover the Contrivers, and mentioned my L. of
E. Sir W. W. and my Lady R. [their Names are at length in the Original] and
that it was a mere Contrivance. In witness I subscribe my hand

Isaac Cooper.
Jurat. 31 die Octobris 1681. cor. me Edmond Warcupp.

Let the Reader hereupon make what judgment he pleases concerning Fitz-Gerald's
veracity, I return to the place where I left off. The Justices having parted
with him in the manner before-related, not without expectation of some
Discoveries he would make on Monday; He, instead of drawing up any Information,
in probability the same day contrived, but manifestly on the next day sent two
Letters, one to a Person whom he calls Madam Jordan, with another enclosed to
Mr. Slater a Nonconformist Minister, which are as follows,

October the first, 1681. Madame Jordane
I Have to let you understand that since you honored me with your last visit,
I have been putt to a very great Terror, For yesterday here were three Justices
of the Peace with me to put me to A plunge A bout my Correspondencie with the
Reverend Dr. Tongue, deceast, propounded many questions to me of him, And
others, and promised if I should reflench from my Testimony of the Popish
Plott, And help to accuse the protestants with it they would have released me
from my Imprisonment, And likewise procure A pardon from the King, And
continual Maintenance. But when I told them that I had noe more to say to that
matter then what I have Already declared to the King, Council, And
Parliament, And they said in Answer to that that I should deeply repent for
not Imbraceing their proffer for I should be Compelld by other means to Answer
to their expections. And thereupon they said that they would Come on monday
next, which Cannot be Immadgined how dreadful it is to me; therefore I would
humbly request you to show these lines to Mr. Slater, Mr. Sylluester And others
to see if they Could procure me my Liberty speedily that I may shelter my
self from their hands of Cruelty which I expect noe l^tter from them
therefore I request most humbly that if pity or mercy be in the hearts of any
Christians to let me Meet with it for otherwise my Life is like to be made a
sacrifice for the protestant Cause, for Gods sake dear Lady Let me hear
speedily from if any Christian be to be had for now it would be very
seasonable, Madam I am almost starved for want of foods, let not the Bearer
know the Contents of this letter which is now all from your faithful friend
until death,

I pray deliver the Enclosed to Mr. Slater.

John Fitz Gerrald.


I desire to be heartily rememberd to Mr. Jordane, not forgetting your sweet
self and the verteous Lady that was with you here last.




Reverend Mr. Slater,
I Have sent you to Acquaint with my distress about 12 days a go, In hopes
of your Charitable Commiseration, But I am now under very difficult
Circumstances then ever I was therefore Sir I pray pity me if you Judge it
fit, for I am Almost famisht, And likewise Afraid of my life, I do humbly
Crave your Answer by Madam Jordane unto whom I writ of my Circumstance more
at large which is all at present from Sir

8 beris die p^. 8 1. Your very humble Servant, John Fitz Gerrald.


Who this Madam Jordan is I know not, nor have any acquaintance with Mr.
Slater; but it is manifest that they were both known to him, that they had given
him hopes of procuring his Liberty, and that he thought the most likely way to
prevail with them to expedite that Affair was to make dismal Outcries of the
danger he might pretend to be in for the Protestant Cause; and to blacken the
Reputation of these three Loyal Magistrates. For, when he had been so
ingenuously and fairly dealt with by these Gentlemen, what else should move
this Caitiff immediately to load with so many Reproaches Persons of such
unspotted Integrity as they are? Did ever any professed Actor upon a Stage
alter the Muscles of his Face, or counterfeit a turn of his humor, in less
time than this man tacked about his Conscience? No sooner were their Backs
turned upon him, but he wracked his Invention to fasten the greatest infamy in
the World upon them. But his Liberty was that which he aimed at, and as it
appears he was resolved to be a Protestant on their side, who should accept the
service of his Conscience to make a Purse for the procuring it. Now I appeal to
all men who have any Reputation left them to lose, whether they are not
concerned to express a just detestation of all such palpable and pernicious
Forgeries, and of all those that countenance them? Who can be secure of his
Credit, if it shall be in the power of a fellow who will sell his Soul for 20
l. and fresh Air, to impair it? But I am confident the honest Reader's
Indignation at such foul practices will out-go any words which I can use to
express mine by. To proceed therefore,

Fitzgerald, whether his consciousness of having injured these Gentlemen in so
high a manner did really strike that terror into him, which he only pretended
in his Letter; or whether he flattered himself with hopes that if he could
carry it cleverly on both sides, he should gain his Releasment by one means or
other; whatever his Reason was, he endeavored to decline the Visit of these
Gentlemen, upon some slight pretenses mentioned in the following Letter, which
he wrote to Mr. Rich on the third of October, the day he appointed for the
Justices coming to take his Information. The Letter was in these words:

Worshipful Sir,
Having Considered since you were here last, of several inconveniences: that
I may be made subject to by your Appearing here this day according to
Appointment, Impediates me in showing my self in it so publicly, for it is
not to be Immadgined what notice was taken of three Justices to Come to me of a
Court day and it renders me very suspicious: therefore I thought fit to
request you not to Come hither: but to Some Tavern, or private place heard by
which will be more Convenient then to Come to this public place where I am
exposed to the Censure of all persons here I am Certain Mr. Lowman will upon
your word let me wait of you only sending your man with a note to him
requesting the same, And also Ashureing him of my safe return, Sir Moreover I
have to let you understand that though I desired to speak with your Worship
by the Correspondencie you were pleased to Creat with me through the means of Mr.
Cooper I did not send for two Justices more Neither shall either speak or
write before any person, or persons, but you, and one more that may be a
witness on both sides: which if you are pleased to yield to, And to the place
of Meeteing above proposed I shall wait of you with all humility, therefore
Sir be pleased to let me hear your Answer herein, And I shall Continue

Die 30 8bris, Anno Domini 1681. Worshipful Sir, Sir your most humble Servant
John Fitz Gerrald.


Mr Rich himself having very well replied to this Letter, I think my self not
concerned to make any Remarks upon it, but shall insert the the Reply as it was
penned by him, after I have told the Reader that Mr. Rich having extraordinary
business that kept him from home that day, both missed of the Letter, and
failed in the meeting, but that the other two Justices, Mr Reading and Mr.
Daniel, not knowing of any such Letter sent to Mr. Rich, went to Fitzgerald
and asked him if his Information were ready; To whom he answered, It was not,
neither would he be examined by them; carrying himself very rudely and
insolentiy toward them. Mr. Rich's Answer to Fitz-Gerrald the next morning was
this,

October the 4th. 1681. Mr. Fitz-Gerrald,
I Came home Late last night, and found your Letter directed to me, which
surprises me in several points, and makes me jealous, that you are employed by
the Jesuits to do His Majesty and His Subjects Hurt, rather than any Good.

When Mr. Reading, Mr. Daniel, and my self were with you on Friday last, it was
occasioned by your Letter to one Mr. Cooper, (whom we neither have seen or
heard of, until you declared who he is) In which you desired to communicate to
some Loyal Magistrate important matters to the service of the King and
Country. But when we were with you, we thought it not convenient to ask you
any Questions; but advised you in the fear of God, to do no man wrong, but
faithfully and truly to draw up in Writing, what you had to discover, without
respect of persons; which you promised should be ready against Monday at four
in the afternoon. But by your Letter to me, you would insinuate, as if you were
in some danger, and do therefore desire, I would correspond with you only. I do
here declare, That in case you have any thing to be made known by way of
Information, I will not take it, but in the presence of some one or more
Justices of the Peace. For I pray where lies any danger for you to reveal the
truth? which we did most seriously admonish you to do. As for sending for you
to a Tavern, or other private place, I am against that; I am for doing all
things above-board. And therefore if you have any Jealousy, make your
discovery to some other Justices. We sought not the Employment.

You are very bold to say in your Letter, I have created Correspondency with
you through the means of Cooper; I knew neither of you, nor ever heard of him,
or of you, further than at the Commons Bar; Therefore this seems to me at first
Sight to be a Popish Sham-trick. Sir, In case you think fit to draw up any
thing which is just and true, by way of Information, and which as you said,
should have concurrent Testimony with it; if you send for any other Justice of
the Peace I Will assist him if there be occasion; but to do it alone with you, or
to make Terms, as Cooper 's Letter you sent him has it, I Will have nothing to do
with you. An honest man does not make bargains to speak truth; You must apply
your self to some persons, that are more zealous for Subornation, for I
abominate the practice: and therefore expect not to correspond with me.

Yours Pr. Rich.
I have desired Mr. Lowman to read this Letter with you; Do you satisfy him in
what one thing I have had any Correspondency with you or with your Cooper, To
which I expect your Answer.




Mr. Lowman having read this Letter with Fitz-gerrald, presently asked
Fitz-gerrald whether he could charge Mr. Rich, or either of the other Justices
that came to examine him, with any Correspondency held with him, or any dealing
or tampering? He replied, no, he could not; but said he would write an Answer
to this Letter, and appeared very angry that it should be sent unsealed, and
Mr. Lowman be desired to read it.

This Mr. Rich did on purpose to show that he would have nothing to do with him
privately and without Witness, which was what himself desired in his Letter;
but Mr. Lowman it seems was not a Witness of that sort which he intended, and
from thence arose his passion upon a circumstance which so ill comported with
his design. For not only from hence, but also from a clause in the conclusion
of his foregoing Letter to Madam Jordan, wherein he desires her not to let the
Bearer know the Contents of it; from both put together, I say, it is clear that
he intended to hold a Correspondency, as he calls it, that is, covertly to
treat with his dissenting Acquaintance and with some Loyal Magistrate at the
same time, that so he might feel which of the two would bid highest to make a
Discoverer on their side. But these honest Gentlemen, you see, refused to give
him the least encouragement of any Reward of any kind, but only according to
their Duty showed themselves ready at his own time to receive any such
Information as he should voluntarily and without a Bribe give in to them.
Whereas on the other side, this Letter which contained such black Calumnies
upon three Gentlemen whom he says to be Justices of the Peace, though he
craftily conceals their Names, was cherished by Madam Jordan and Mr. Slater;
and though they were bound by the Laws of Justice and Charity to have conveyed
this Letter forthwith to some Magistrate whom they might expect to be so
well-affected to the Government, and so tender of the Reputation of Gentlemen,
as instantly to have went to Fitz-Gerrald, and learnt from him who these
Justices were, and then have communicated the Letter to them, that if they were
innocent they might have a speedy opportunity to vindicate themselves; instead
of this, they showed the Letter about to their own Friends and Confidents only,
who made frequent Transcriptions of it, and long brooded upon it. Nay, to show
how willing they were to believe, or how much concerned to have the Letter
true, by order from the superior Juncto, a Committee of four persons, viz. Mrs
Jordan, Mr. Parkhurst a Bookseller, one Mr. Sergeant, and Mr. Evans at the
Bridg-foot in Southwark, on the 13th of October went to him in the Marshalsea,
to know if he would abide by that Letter, and satisfy them who the Justices
were which he accused therein; and upon Fitz-gerrald's owning all the Contents
of it, and naming the Justices he meant in it, it is more than probable he
received from them Promises of Enlargement, as appears by the following Letters
written to Mr. Parkhurst and Madam Jordan.

In the Marshalseas of Southwark October the 17th. 1681. Mr. Parkurst,
SIR, I humbly desire you would be pleased to let me hear from you the
Accounts of your proceedings in my Affairs as to, the getting my Liberty for
me, Sir if I speak either Impertinent or Impurtunat be pleased to impute it to
my Tedious and distressed Imprisonment, And Madam Jordan, And you are all the
friends, or dependencie I have, And being very destitude of any relief for so
long a time As that I am very Cold by reason that I am very Bare Clad, dear
Sir, Therefore I pray Commiserat me if you have got any thing for my present
relief I beseech you send it to me; and I desire you would write to me by the
bearer which is all at present with my best wishes to your sweet self, And
Madam Jordane, I remain Sir

Your very humble Servant, John Fitz Gerrald.


In the Marshalseas of Southwark, October the 19th. 1681. Madam Jordane,
AND dear friend I am every Minute longing to hear the evint of your
proceedings with Mr. Parcurt and the rest of your friends In your efficatious
prevaileings for taking me out of this miserable place, As I may In several
respects call it; whereof the first And Chiefest respect is: that I am every
day troubled with the enemies of the Protestant Cause, tempting me to disowne
what I have Affirmed before the King, Council, And Parliament; And not only
tempting me but also Treatening if I do not disowne it. It shall be worse for
me. For they Tell me; they will Compel me to do it, therefore I say it would
prove prudence, And Charity In these friends that were with you when here
last, to procure me my Liberty, prudence for the forgoeing reason, and Charity
for the premises Considered I Am All most starved, for both Cold, And
distresses, And allsoe much reflected upon by reason of those evil sperits
that haunts me here, as I gave you an Account of: Mr. Lowman told me noe Longer
ago then this Morning, that if I do not take a speedy Course to get my
Libertee, And pay him what I owe him, he would turn me to the Common side where
if I go I shall Certainly Perish, to prevent which, And other Inconveniences
I have no other hopes but your sweet self, And your friends. Therefore I
beseech you let me hear from you and them speedily, for fear of being
surprised unawarse And as I have prouen hitherto Stable And steadfast to my
Testimony, and profession without relapsing or reflenging upon the Account of
it, I humbly desire, And request you and all that are professors, and real
Lovers of true Christianity, And Charity, not to suffer me to ley under this
grievous burden noe Longer, for I am not able to bear it any more, therefore
let religion, be made manifest by faith, And faith by works In such a measure,
As that I may have noe reason to stumble but stick Close to my Took as ever I
have done since I came to England, which is all from your loueing friend and
humble servant as I may

John Fitz Gerrald.
I pray Madam be pleased to Answer me speedily, for Godsake Consider my
Condition And my heavy grieuances that I ly under for the protestant Cause
which otherwise I need not. I earnestly desire to be remembered to Mr. Jordane,
And Mr. Reeues, And to the Laydys both that were with you here Mr. Reeues was
here on Sunday night And left me a Note of Directions where I might Correspond
with him but very unhapily I lost the Not, And I request you to send me an
other, but Dear Madam I pray fail not In Answering this, or I know not what
mischief may In sue if you (...) not.




In the Marshalseas of Southwark, October the 21st, 1681. Mr. Parcurst,
SIR, I was In great hopes of my Liberty, when I seen you had A hand in It,
But I begin to despair of it by reason of your delays, And I am Certain if
you had stured In it, It had been done since you were hear last, but hapily
you will say you durst not meddle In it But Alas? Notwithstanding the great
profession of Religion that several persons makes yet I Could not meet with
such another sufferer Amongst you all as my self for I have Left a Certain
Maintenance And being I have Incurred the displeasure of my relations and
Parent, I have Exposed my life to A dangerous Circumstances at sundry times
And occations, for the Protestant Cause. And now I suffer a Tedious
Imprisonment, and several heavy distresses which I can Lawfully say I had noe
need to suffer as I do, had it not been for the Cause Above mentioned, and I
am not Certain that many Persons who, professes great matters would suffer
the tenth part of what I have done, so that I see Clearly that they do not
mean as they do profess these Complaints Cannot well be taken amiss of me,
Considering the reason I have to speak them. Alias? what danger Cann there
Ensue In Conferring with other well affected persons About my business
Therefore let me not be blinded with such excuses for it is Impossible to make
them pass Current with me, Sir, I am heartily Sorry that I met with such
occations, as to provoke me to these expressions but if you thoroughly consider
all, you Cannot blame me, for God sake take Notice of these few lines and
allsoe of my distress; And Let me know if you be Inclined to do me a
kindness And let me hear your Answer to a prisoner, And Sir your

very humble Servant, John Fitz-Gerrald.


Mr. Parcust,
SIR, I writ to you the Last week and would not now trouble you but that I am
very unwell, And have noe more hopes of Relief, And with much (...) prevailed
with the Bearer who is Steward of this Marshalseas to Carry this Note to you I
promised him you would pay him which I humbly request you to do Sir I beseech
you pity my sickly And distressed Conclusion And allsoe let me know if there
was any thing done as to my releesement which is all at present from

your very humble Servant John Fitz-Gerrald.
In the Marshalseas of Southwark 8 ber, the 24th 1681.

Will not any man who reads these Letters conclude that he apprehended himself
to have got a Hank upon them, as having received great assurances of his
liberty from them upon conditions which he thought they would be unwilling to
have divulged? For he seems now not so much to crave as to demand their
Charity, and his Letter is plainly begging and menacing party per pale. For
what can he be thought to design by those expressions, in that to Madam Jordan,
of efficacious prevailings, and it would prove Prudence, and his fear of being
surprised unawares, and his desire of having no reason to stumble; and his
knowing not what mischief might ensue; and in one of those to Mr. Parkhurst of
the great profession of Religion which several persons make, and his seeing
clearly that they do not mean as they profess, and that he must not be blinded
with such excuses; how, I say, can all this in the connection wherein it stands
in his Letters be otherwise plainly englished than thus, Sir and Madam, you
know very well, that you and others your Friends have been practicing with me,
and encouraging me to persist in my groundless accusations of the three
Justices, and have made me promises of procuring my Liberty if I would not
reflench from my Testimony. My Conscience indeed you did at first with a small
Fee retain, but I find daily more and more that you are, what you delight to
call your selves, Professors, and nothing else. And therefore I advise you to
consider that mortal man, as you know, is frail, and that if you do not
speedily get me released, I may possibly be surpised, and be apt to stumble,
and think my self obliged to tell the whole truth of the matter.

Though this Representation may seem somewhat comical, yet that the substance
of it was the real apprehension of the persons concerned is clear from hence,
that Mr. Parkhurst was so terrified at the consideration of these Letters, that
he thought it not safe to conceal the matter any longer; but looking upon it to
be his best way to cry Whore first, he applies himself to one Mr. Farding, an
ancient Inhabitant of the Borough of Southwark, who had long had the honor of
being known to these three Justices, and who though he be an avowed
Presbyterian, is yet, I verily believe, a man morrally honest. To him Mr.
Parkhurst communicated all the foregoing Letters sent by Fitz-Gerrald to
himself and others; upon the reading of which Mr. Farding said to him in his
plain way, Mr. Parkhurst, do not believe these things, but rather acquaint the
Justices with them, and hear what they can say in their defense. Accordingly it
was agreed upon, and in a day or two after Mr. Farding accompanied Mr.
Parkhurst to Justice Reading, who upon perusing all the Letters, told them that
there was not a word of truth in them so far as concerned the Justices; and for
their fuller satisfaction he proposed that himself with the other two Justices
his Brethren might go at the same time with Mr. Parkhurst and his Friends to
the Prison, where he doubted not but they would soon be convinced of their
Correspondent's Knavery. Hereupon on Friday the 28th of October, the Justices
with most of the other persons mentioned in these Papers, met at the Marshalsea
Prison, where Mr. Reading spoke to Mr. Fitz-Gerrald to this purpose.

Mr. Fitz-Gerrald, you know that about a Month ago, we who are the three
Justices here, were with you to take your Information, upon a Letter you had
directed to one Mr. Cooper. The Letter you did acknowledge to be your
Handwriting. Now I ask you, when we were with you, did we direct or threaten
you to what you should say? Did we put any Questions to you? Did we not advise
you to speak truth, and accuse no man wrongfully? Bad you remember that God is
the God of Truth, and that there is a day of Account approaching? Did we not
tell you, our Desire was that you should draw up your Information your self in
Writing, and appoint your own time it should be ready at, and at that time we
would return to you? Did you not appoint the Monday following, four o'Clock in
the Afternoon to be the time? Were not Mr. Daniel and my self with you at that
time? And did you not tell us you had not drawn your Information, neither would
you be examined by us? Did you not say you had created a Correspondency with
Mr. Rich, and to him you would give your Information? Did we not thereupon tell
you, that you might have done well to have saved us this Labor? For the time
we were all with you, did you not say we were all strangers to you, which made
you so shy of us? Now that your Friends are come hither on purpose to be truly
informed, give them a satisfactory account of the matter, and tell them the
whole Truth.

Fitz-Gerrald (...) pausing a while, and then said that he did not mean these
three Justices, but others whom Cooper told him of. But he was soon con^u^ed in
that, for those four persons beforementioned, who went on the 13th of October
to enform themselves therein, testified that he named Reading, Daniel and Rich
to be the three Justices he meant in his Letter. Furthermore Mr. Cooper himself
having heard that there was to be at that time a meeting in the Marshalsea
concerning Fitz-Gerrald, came thither, and being asked whether he had seen,
heard of, or conversed with any of these Justices, he answered in the Negative;
and proceeded to say, that it was true he had visited Mr. Fitzgerald upon the
score of a former acquaintance contracted while he was Dr. Tong's Servant; and
being with y^u, says he, applying his Discourse to Mr. Fitz-gerrald, you know I
said thus to you, Sir, I am sorry to see you in this condition, and you made
Answer, Never worse. Then said I. Mr. Fitz-Gerrald, you can discover a great
deal of the Plot, for you was very conversant with my Master Tongue; was I in
your stead I would (...) what I knew, for that might be the means to get you
out of Prison; you made me this Answer, that it was the joyfullest News you had
heard since you came into Prison; and afterward you wrote the Letter to me
(viz. that mentioned in the foregoing part of this Narrative) wherein you
desired to be examined. Fitz-Gerrald did not deny any thing that Cooper had
said; but being then called upon to give an Answer to what Justice Reading had
questioned him about, he acknowledged that what he had said or written of the
Justices was all false, and that he had groundlesly aspersed and traduced them.
Hereupon a Gentleman there present asked him, Why did you abuse the Justices in
such a wicked manner, as to write that vile Letter wherein you say, they would
have had you to reflench from your Testimony of the Popish Plot, and help to
accuse the Protestants with it; for which they would release you, procure a
Pardon from the King, and continual maintenance? To which He confidently
replied, He hoped thereby his Friends would have got him speedily discharged.
Upon this bold Answer, one of the Justices said to Mr. Slater and the other
persons there, Gentlemen from this foul dealing, I suspect that the man is a
Popish Priest still; therefore, pray, says he to Fitz-Gerrald, Tell us what
Religion you are of. To which he answered, I am a true Protestant. The Justices
having put all the Questions they thought needful in order to clear themselves,
desired Mr. Slater, Mr. Sylverster or any other there, to put what Questions
they pleased for their better satisfaction. But answer was made they were
heartily sorry that they had believed so much as they had done, and were very
sensible from Fitz-Gerrald's Letters to one and the other, and from what they
heard from his own mouth, that he had been greatly abusive; of which they would
acquaint their Friends.

For once to strain a courtesy, I will make bold in the names of these
Justices to thank you, Gentlemen; but certainly you do not think that by such a
faint pretense you have made sufficient amends for concealing so long from
them, and yet whispering privately among your own Party such foul aspersions
cast upon them. Pray Mr Slater, Mr. Sylvester, and the rest of you be pleased
to disperse your selves to your usual haunts, the Amsterdam Coffee-House,
Richards, Bruens, etc. and having got your wonted select Congregations about
you, declare plainly to them after the following manner. Truly Sirs, we have,
as you know, for a considerable time entertained and propagated an ill opinion
of three of the Kings Magistrates, upon the account of a Letter which you have
often seen* or heard mentioned by us; but finding our selves for certain
private reasons lately obliged to enquire into the matter, and looking upon
those Gentlemen in a good light, we find their Reputations spotless, and that
they are persons perfectly innocent of any such things as we told you were laid
to their charge. Therefore as our bounden duty is, we make this Declaration to
disabuse you, and right them, asking God and those Gentlemen forgiveness; and
not only resolving for our own part, but advising you our Friends, not to be
forward to believe or disperse scandalous Imputations laid against persons in
Authority for the future. This till you have done, I must tell you that you
remain deeply in arrears to those Justices; and you will still stand indebted
to them for their generosity, if they accept of this as satisfaction.

That what I have said concerning Fitz-Gerrald's clearing these Justices of the
Imputations he before laid upon them, is true, will be fully confirmed by the
following Letter written with his own hand to Mr. Reading the very next day
after these passages.

In the Marshalseas of Southwark 8 ber the 29th. 1681. Honored Sir,
IT does not little greiue me that I should upon Any Account give you such
grounds of harboring an opinion of falsitie of me, But I am not Able to make a
satisfactorie Appologie In my own vindication, But Sir finding your tender And
Charitable Construction of my unseemly proceedings as yesternight debated, And
Censured of me Accordingly, but I do intend with Gods permission as I shall
though not now, give your Worship an ampler Account how it came to pass that I
should render my self so oprobious. And ridiculous upon Record; as I am so
looked upon, but Sir, I have noe more to penn at present as to that effect, but
the Lord of his Infinite goodness remitt you, and yours in the measure that
you, and that I find you are Inclinable, to pass such things, and Sir, by it I
am made very miserable, as to my present Condition I was never worse, I
therefore most humbly request you to show me somewhat of your good simpathy And
so far as to Consider that I am in the deplorablest distress that ever I was
redust to for I have noe manner of relief nor noe person to Commiserat me, so
that I am almost starued, therefore Sir be pleased to relieve In Charity,
which is all from ever

Your most humble Servant, John Fitz-Gerrald.


You see here that Fitz-Gerrald does in his way ask of Mr. Reading the Charity
of Forgiveness and Alms at once; and I dare be bold to affirm that there is no
Gentleman in Christendom more ready to grant both than He.

I have now done my story; the matter of Fact I have reported truly, and as
occasion offered I have remarked impartially; designing not to forestal or
prepossess the Readers Judgment, but only to save him the trouble of deducing
inferences himself, by directing his thoughts to that which naturally follows
from the several occurrences contained in this Narrative. I would not have the
Reader think that I have employed so much Paper and Ink merely to prove a
beggarly Irishman to be a bad Evidence. Alas! Fitz-Gerrald is a little
forfeited wretch, ready at any time to mortgage his Soul to Feed and Cloth his
Body. But here were Loyal Gentlemen and Magistrates defamed, and they ought to
be vindicated: and here were men of high pretenses to Religion that secretly
abetted and encouraged the foul aspersions thrown upon them, and their
practices ought to be detected. I am a man in whom of all passions incident to
Humane Nature, Anger is least predominant; and for that reason possibly these
Justices may con me little thanks for representing the Fact so calmly and
indifferently, when it afforded such plentiful matter for Satyr. But the
meekest man upon earth cannot but express his resentments, that persons who
appropriate to themselves the Name of TRUE PROTESTANTS should act thus contrary
to the Rules of Old Heathen Honesty: That a person in Public Office should on
the last Lord Mayors Day, when a Gentleman offered to tell him how three
Justices his Neighbors had like to have been ensnared by an Irishman, reply
quick upon him, Sir, I can sure you the thing is true, and it is sworn upon
them, and neither Justice Reading, Justice Rich, or Justice Daniel, Shall be
able to wipe it off from them as long as they live; and, to conclude, that they
who so loudly decry Irish Evidence when their own Friends are concerned, should
yet so willingly receive and embrace Fitz Gerrald's Testimony against Gentlemen
placed in Authority by His Majesty.

FINIS.

