AN ASTRONOMICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE LATE COMET OR BLAZING STAR, As it appeared
in New England in the 9th, 10th, 11th, and in the beginning of the 12th Month,
1664.

TOGETHER With a brief Theological Application thereof.

By S. D.

Psalm. 111. 2. The Works of the Lord are great: sought out of all them that
have pleasure therein.

Job. 36. 24. Remember that thou magnify his work, which men behold.

Exodus 7. 23. And Pharaoh turned and went into his House, neither did he set
his heart to this also.



CAMBRIDGE Printed by Samuel Green, 1665.

DU BARTAS. There, with long bloody Hair, a Blazing Star
Threatens the World with Famine, Plague and War:
To Princes, death; to Kingdoms many crosses:
To all Estates, Inevitable Losses:
To Heardmen, Rott: to Plow-men hapless seasons:
To Sailors, Storms: to Cities, civil Treasons.

AN ASTRONOMICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE LATE COMET, As it appeared in New England.
I. THis Comet is no sublunary Meteor or sulphurous Exhalation, but a
Celestial Luminary, moving in the starry Heavens.

The Truth hereof may be demonstrated, 1 By the vast Dimensions of it is body.
Some Comets have been observed by Astronomers to be half as big as the Mo^n,
some bigger then the Moon, yea some bigger then the Earth. The exact Dimensions
of this Comet, I may not presume to determine, but it seems not to be of the
smallest size. Now it is not easy to imagine how the Earth should afford matter
for a Meteor of such a huge magnitude, except we grant the greater part of the
lower World to be turned into an exhalation. 2. By the smalness of t^^
Parallax. The Parallax is the Distance between the true place of a Planet and
the apparent. The lower and nearer any Planet is to the Earth, it has the
greater Parallax. The Moon's Parallax in her Perige, is one degree and six
minutes. I could not by my Observation discern that this Comet had any
considerable Parallax. 3. By it is large circular motion. If it had moved in the
upper Region of the Air, it might have finished the whole visible arch of it is
Circle in a few hours: but we saw it perform it is proper motion with great
constancy in a very large Circle, such as the air is not capable of. 4 By it is
long auration and (...). Had it been a Sulphurous Vapor kindled in the Air;
it might have been consumed in a short time; as other fiery Meteors are: but
this continued about three months. 5 By it is Visibility to all Countries and
Nations. We already hear that this Comet was seen at Virginea, Jamaica St.
Martha, Car^^gena and Barbados and no doubt but it was visible to the whole
habitable World. But the highest region of the Air is accounted not much above
fifty English miles from the Earth, and had this Comet been no higher, it had
been impossible that other Countries and Nations so far distant, should have
beheld it. Whether this Comet was created in the beginning of the World
together with the rest of the Sta^s, and has been hidden in the height and
profundity of the Heavens, and at a certain time descending toward the Earth,
becomes Visible and Signal to the World, I leave free to after-disquisition.

II. This Comet is (...) Opake Body, like the Moon and other of the Planets,
but Transparent and Pellucid, the Sun Shining through (...).

The Moon is enlightened on that part only which is next the Sun, and like a
looking glass she reflects the solar Beams, which are cast upon her: but the
Sun irradiates the Comet and shines through it as through a Transparent Gemm,
and illustrates a long tract in the Heavens beyond it. As the Moon, being a
thick and dark Body, casts a dark shadow from the Sun, so the Comet being a
clear and Diaphanous Body transmits the light and casts a bright and shining
stream from the Sun; which alters and varies according to the diverse aspect of
the Sun.

III. The Coma or Blazing Stream that issues from the Comet, is no real flame,
but the Irradiation and Resplendence of the Sun through the Transparent and
Pellucia Body of the Comet.

A Comet is denominated from it is Coma or Bushy-lock for the Stream has some
resemblance of a lock of hair. Now this Stream is not the flagrancy of the
Comet, but the Beams of the Sun shining through the Diaphanous and Translucid
head of the Comet; as may be argued and demonstrated, 1. By it is site and
position, which is always in opposition to the Sun. Had it been a natural
flame, arising from it is flagrant head, it would have constantly moved upward,
as the flame of a Lamp or Torch; unless it had broken forth by violence: but
this streaming was sometimes upward, sometimes somewhat downward, sometimes
westward, sometimes northward, sometimes eastward, according to the position of
the Sun: neither can I imagine that any violence caused it so to move. 2. By
the diverse form and figure of the stream according to the diverse aspect of
the Sun. One while it was like a beard, another while like a tail. 3. By the
diverse dimensio^s of the Stream. It was sometimes longer, sometimes shorter,
sometimes broad^^, sometimes narrower, according as the Comet was nearer or
further from the Earth. 4 By the diverse quality and color of the stream. It
was sometimes bright and radiant, at other times obscure, du^kish and faint,
according to the apparent radiation of the Sun and the Comets distance from us.
5. By it is duration. Had it been a real and natural flame, it is difficult to
understand how the head of the Comet could have supplied it with food and fuel
for so many months together. Obj, If the Stream be an irradiation of the Sun,
how comes it to be conspicuous and visible to us? The Sunbeams passing
through the etherial Heavens are not in themselves visible, neither do they
terminate our sight. Answ. The only reason thereof (that I can yet learn) is
the Refraction and Reverberation of the Sunbeams, as they pass through the
Come^'s condensed body, whereby they are so congregated and so nearly united,
as that they terminate the sight and become conspicuous in the Heavens. I have
read of a certain semitransparent Gemme, called the Heliotrope, that if it be
put into fair water, opposed to the beams of the Sun, it does change it is
beams, and by the repercussion of the Air, seems to shadow the clearness of
it is rays, and so induce a sanguineous color in the Air, as if the Sun by
the interposition of the body of the Moon, did suffer an ecliptic darkness.

IV. This Comet is not a new fixed Star, but a Planetick or Erratick Body,
wandering up and down in the etherial firmament under the fixed stars.

Some learned Astronomers distinguish these more noble and celestial Phenomenon
or appearances into Fixed and Erratick. Several new Stars have appeared which
are fixed. i. e. they keep the same place in the Heaven^, and the same distance
from the fixed Stars. One in C^ssiopeia Anno 1572. which continued a year and
four months. Another in Antinous: another in the Girale of Andromeda, another
in the Whale, another in the Breast of the Swan, which continued many years. But
this Cemet was A (...) (as Jude speaks) a wandering Star, which kept not the
same place in the Heavens, nor the same distance from the fixed Stars.

V. This Comet appeared first in the Constellation of the Raven, from whence it
descended and crossing the Tropic of Capricorn and some part of Hydra, it went
southward until it arrived at the main topsaile of the ship: then it began to
return, and going through the belly of Canis major, it again crossed the
Tropic of Capricorn, and p^ssing through the middle of the Hare, it crossed
the river Eridanus and the Equinoctial, and entered into the mouth of the Whale,
and going through his head, it crossed the Ecliptic and so passed up between
Aries and Linum septentrionale.

Some took notice of this Comet in the beginning of November, and indeed it had
passed through the middle of the Asterism of Co^vus, (as I gather from it is
following motions) before I saw it. Dec. 5. early in the morning it feemed to
me to be very near the Southern Tropic, about 3. degrees southward of the
Ravens bill having longit. Libra 4. D^c. 8 early in the morning I saw it in
some part of Hyara; in Virgo 28. lat. S. 30 gr. The stream overshadowing a
small star in Hydra, that was near. Dec. 16. some observed it among the stars
that are in the mainmast of Argo Navis: where it had longit. Leo 23. Lat. S.
45. Dec. 17. It was seen amongst the stellae informs, which are behind Canis
major: where it was apprehended to have longit. Leo. 2. lat. S. 50. Dec. 18.
The Comet came to Sirius, i. e. the great Dog, and passed through his belly.
That night I saw it in Cancer 13. lat. S. 48. Dec. 19. It ascended from Canis
major and crossing the southern Tropic it arrived at Lepus, i. e. the Hare.
That night I saw it pass over the more northern Star in the Hare's hinder legs:
being in Gemini 24. lat. S. 44. Dec. 23. I saw it as I supposed in Taur. 14.
lat. S. 19. Dec. 24. I apprehended it to be in the Equinoctial which it crossed
in the 44th gr. entering into the mouth of Balaena: hav^ng longit Taur. 12. 30.
lat. S. 17. Dec. 25. In T^ur. 11. 30. lat. S 14. D^c. 28, I saw it in a right
line between two Stars in the head of the Whale, almost in the middle between
them: in Taur. 4. 15. Lat. S. 7. 15. Dec. 29 I saw it very near to another Star
in the head of the Whale: in Taur. 3. lat. S. 6. Jan. 3. It crossed the
Ecliptic in Aries 28. 30. Jan. 16. it came to Aries 26. lat. N. 3. Jan. 24.
Aries 25. lat. N. 4. Jan. 31. Aries 25. lat. N. 5. 30. Feb. 4. Aries 25. lat.
N. 6. 15. Since that I saw it not, nor any man else, that I hear of. If in
these observations I have not attained that accurateness which the Reader
desires* my want of A stronomical Instruments may bespeak his indulgence
therein.

VI. This Comet at it is first appearance was Oriental and Maturine, afterward
it became Occidental and Vespertine.

At first it appeared early in the morning before the rising of the Sun, and
then every day rose sooner then other, (withal changing it is (...) or point of
the Compass in it is rising) until it appeared in the evening, as soon as
daylight was ended.

VI^ This Comet at first mored slowly, then more swiftly; ^ill it came to it'^
Perige: since which time it has gradually decreased in it is motion: toward the
latter end of it is apparition, it has moved most sl^wly.

From Dec. 5^ h. to the 8 h (which was the time between my first and second
observation) the Com^t*s apparent motion in it is proper line upon the (...)
Sphere, was about 2 degrees and a half in a day, one day with another Dec. 17.
it was observed by some to move about 13. deg^ees. Dec. 18 it moved 15, or 16
degrees. Dec. 19 it moved about 13* degrees. [I cannot precisely determine it is
diurnal motion, especially when it was so exceeding swift, because I know not
certainly the hour of the night, when these observations were made. J From D^c.
25, to 29 it moved 2 degrees and half in a day, one day with another. Dec. 29.
2 degr. Dec. 30. 1 degr. and half Dec. 31. 1 degr. In the beginning of Ian. it
moved near 1 degr. in a day: but toward the latter end, not one degr. in
several days. From Ian. 5th to Feb. 4th according to my observation it gained
scarce 7 aegr.

VIII This Comet was continually Retrograde in it is motion, only toward the
latter end of it is apparition, it became Stationary.

This Comet from the first time, it was taken notice of, until the latter end
of Ian. in it is proper motion went contrary to the serte^ and order of the
signs, viz. from Libra to Virgo and so backward to Arts: But in the latter
end of January and in the beginning of February it kept in the same degree of
longirude, only it altered it*s latitude.

IX This Comet has moved constantly almost in a right line, or in a great
Circle, equal to the greatest circle of the celestial Sphere: but toward it is
disappearing, it has deflected a little and become ellipticall.

This may be demonstrated by the Celestial Globe. Depress the Southern Pole 61
degr. (which is the complement of the Comet's greatest declination,) and you
may find almost all the forementioned observations concerning the Comets place
to fall just upon the Hor^zon of the Globe: but toward the latter end, you
shall find the Cometicall line to recede a little from a true circle.

X. The proper Circle of the Comets motion is Eccentrical, i e. it has a
center diverse from the center of the world.

This is evident 1 By the dive^sion of it is Latitude, which was sometimes
southe^^, and sometimes northern. 2 By the inequality of it is apparent motion,
which was sometimes swift and sometimes slow. 3 By the diversity of it is
distance from the earth, which was sometimes greater, and sometimes less.

XI. T^is Comet has ascendea in Meridian Altitude above 44 degr. For it is
lowest meridian altitude with us, was 18 degr. and 40 minutes, and it is
highest, 63 degr. and 15 min.

XII. The Cometical line descended to 29 degr. of Southern declination.

XIII. The Comet's Southern Limit of Latitude was 50 degr.

XIV. The apparent motion of the Comet was anomalous and unequal, but it is
motion in it is proper Orb or Circle, was very near equal and uniform.

That it is apparent motion was unequal and irregular is manifest by it is
Velocity or swiftnes one while, it is mediocrity another while, and it is (...)
or slowness toward the latter end. The cause of which anomaly and inequality,
was the Comet's Eccentricity. That the Comet's motion in it is proper orb or
circle was very near equal and uniform, may be demonstrated by the equality of
it is diurna^ motion in equal d^stances from i^'s perige. For instance, I find
on the 5t^ of December and on the 25t^ the Comet was equally distant from it is
Pe^ige, and that then it is apparent motion was equal, viz. 2 degree and a half
in a day: and therefore it is true moti^n in reference to it is own proper center
was very near equal and regular.

XV. The Comet seemed to be in it is Perige, or nearest to the Earth, when it
was in the belly of Canis major, which was sometime on the 18th of December.

The Perige is that point of the Cometical circle which is nearest to the
earth. The Apoge is the point fartl est distant from the earth. That the Comet
was in it is Perige at the time and in the place forementioned may be argued. 1
From the sw^ftness of it is apparent motion on that day. All the Planets are
slow in their Apoge and swift in their Perige. This Comet was apprehended to
move the most swiftly on that day. 2. from the Equality of it is apparent motion
in equal distances from thence: An instance whereof I gave before. 3. From the
distance of the place assigned, (viz. the middle of the belly of Sirius) to the
place of the Comet's disappearing. In the Cometical line the distance is about
90 degrees* Now according to the Theory and doctrine of Comets* it was never
observed that any Comet from the point of it is swiftest motion, ever ran beyond
the fourth part of a circle, which is 90 degrees. N. B. On the self same day
(viz. the ^8th of December) the Sun was also in his Perige.

XVI. Since December 9th, the Comet has proceeded in it is proper curricle upon
the celestial Sphere, 153. degrees: and I suppose in all, since it is first
apparition, 180. degrees.

XVII. The cometical circle seems to include and encompass the Earth.

This may be Argued. 1. From the length and greatness of the visible and
apparent Arch of the Cometical circle, which was very near to if not a true
semicircle. 2. From the Duration and long continuance of it is Apparition, which
was about three months.

XVIII. The true and real magnitude of the Comet was constantly one and the
same, but it is apparent m^gnitude was Various and Diverse.

At it is first appearance it seemed but small, at length it appeared far
greater, sometime it seemed to be very near half as big as the Moon after that
it decreased successively, till at last it appeared like a cloudy star. The
Reason whereof is evid^nt; at it is first appearance it was very high in the
Heavens, and therefore it is diamete^ seemed less: afterward it descended lower
and nearer to the earth, and then it is diameter increased: at length it went up
higher and was removed further from our sight, and then it is basis together
with the angle of the optic Cone was diminished, until at last it disappeared
and vanished out of sight.

XIX The true color and splendour of the Comet was always one and the same,
but it is apparent color was various and diverse.

At first appearance it is color was pale and obscur^: afterward bright and
radiant, at length it grew very obscure and faint like a cloudy star. In the
West Indies it appeared fiery, red and dreadful.

XX The Coma or Stream that came from the head of the Comet, was always cast
into that part, which was diametrically opposite to the sun.

When the C^met's irradiation was from the southeast, it is streaming was toward
the northwest, when it is irradiation was from S. S. E. it is streaming was
toward N. N. W. when it is irradiation was from the South, it is streaming was
toward the north, when it is irradiation was from S. S. W. it is streaming was
toward N. N. E. when it is irradiation was from the S. W. it is streaming was
toward N. E.

XXI. The Comet in respect of it is stream, has been of a diverse figure
according to the diverse aspect of the Sun.

Comets in respect of their figure are distinguished into Barbate, Caudate and
Crinite. A Comet is barbate, when the stream like a beard, goes before the body
of the Comet. Caudate, when the stream like a tail follows the body of ye
Comet. Crinite when the stream goes right up into the Heavens and seems like a
hairy-lock to be wound up about the Comet's head. This Comet, while it was
Oriental, was Barbate, the stream going before its body, like a beard. When the
Comet became Occidental, it was Caudate, the stream following the Comet's body
like a tail. But it could not be properly Crinite, in regard of the greatness
of the Comet's southern latitude at the time of it is opposition with the Sun.

XXII. The stream has appeared of a diverse height, breadth and extent,
according to the diverse position of the Sun, and the Comet's distance from us.

The stream was not always of the same height in the Heavens with the head of
the Comet, but sometimes higher, and sometimes lower. Neither was the (...) of
the stream always one and the same, but it was sometimes broader, and
sometimes narrower. The length and extent of the stream was also diverse: Dec:
8. It was apprehended to be 38 degr. long. Dec. 17. 20 degr. Dec. 30. 15 degr.
Jan. 6. 14 degr. Ian. 25. 7 degr Ian. 31. 3 degr.

XXIII. This Comet has been vertical to all countries, that lie between 29
degrees of Southern Latitude and 15 degrees of Northern Latitude.

The Comet is said to be Vertical to any people, when the Body of the Comet
passes over their heads. This Comet was vertical to the chief Islands of the
East Indies, as also to Guinea and to the most of the Southern part of Africa:
likewise to Peru, Brasilia, Guiana, Castilia deloro, nova Andaluzia, and to
several of the Islands of the West Indies, as Trinidada, Granada, Barbados,
Matalino, Dominica and many other.

XXIV. The stream which came from the Comet has turned about and pointed
toward most countries and Kingdoms in the habitable World.

XXV. This Comet is not evaporated nor dissolved, but it is ascended higher
toward it is Apoge and so departed out of our sight.

If the Comet be no vapor but a Celestial planetick luminary, moving
constantly in it is Eccentrick orb, and if the stream thereof be no real flame,
but the irradi^tion of the Sun through the Comet's head, it will necessarily
follow that the Comet is not consumed, dissipated or exting^ish^d, but rather
ascended toward it is Apoge, i. e. the farthest point distant from the Earth,
and so being buried in the deep abyss of the Heavens, becomes inconspicuous to
us.

XXVI. This Comet has followed upon a notable Conjunction of the Superior
Planets, Saturn and Jupiter.

Astronomers observe, that Comets do many times follow a Conjunction of the
Superior Planets. The last Year, October 10th, was a great Conjunction of
Saturn and Jupiter in the 13th degr. of Sagittarius.

A Brief Theological Application of this strange and notable Appearance in the
Heavens.
1. THE Holy Scriptures, which are the Authentic and unerring Canon of truth,
teach us to look at Comets, as Portentous and Signal of great and notable
Changes.

Joel 2. 30, 31. I will show wonders in the Heavens and in the Earth, Bl^od and
Fire, and Pillars of Smoke. The Sun shall be turned into Darkness, and the Moon
into Blood before the great and terrible day of the Lord come.

Luke 21. 25 There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the
Stars.

Acts 2. 19. 20. I will show wonders in Heaven above, and signs in the Earth
beneath: Blood, and Fire, and Vapor of Smo^k. The Sun shall be turned into
Darkness and the Moon into Blood before the great and notable day of the Lord
come.

II. The Histories of former Ages, do abundantly testify that Comets h^^e been
many times Heralds of wrath to a secure and impenitent World.

Take a few Instances.

A little before the Achaick War (as Seneca reports) there appeared a Comet
fiery and ruddy, which cast a clear light, whereby the night was enlightened.

Anno Christ* 56. There appeared a Comet. The same Year Claudiu^ died, and
bloody Nero succeeded who slew his Mo^h^r, his Wife and his Master Sene^^* and
exercised a great deal of cruelty and wickedness.

Anno 323. There were diverse Comets which preceeded the Pestile^^ He^esie^^ of
Arius.

Anno. 337. A Comet appeared before the death of Constantine the great, and
innumerable evils followed.

Anno 602. A great Comet appeared, which preceded, if not presaged the
slaughter of Mauritius the Emperor, and the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome.

Anno 675, and 676. There appeared a Comet 3 months, at which time the
Saracens greatly afflicted the Roman Empire.

Anno. 729 Two Comets appeared, and the same year a great Plag^e invaded the
World.

Anno 814. A terrible Comet appeared before the death of Charles the great.

Anno 1066. A Comet appeared a long time to the whole World: the same Year
England was many ways afflicted by William Duke of Norman^y, and at length
subdued.

Anno 1618. There appeared a great Comet: the same year brake forth the Bloody
Wars in G^^ma^y. Anno 1652. There appeared a Comet at the beginning of Mr.
Cottons sickness, and disappeared a few days after his death. The next year
strange and notable changes of state happened in England.

It Is true, some Comets have been thought to presage good to the World, as that
in the days of Augustus before the birth of Christ. [I intend not that
miraculous Star, which appeared to the Magi.] Another before the death of Nero:
Another before the reformation by Wickliffe: Another before the reformation by
Lut^e^: but most commonly they are observed to precede, if not portend great
Calamities.

Anno 79 Upon a Comet followed horrible Winds, an E^^^h-quak^ and Pestilence.
When some showed (...) this Comet, fearing it might portend his death, he
answered merrily that this Prod^gie noted not him, but the King of (...). For
faith he, he nou^isheth his hair, but I am bald. But not long after, Vespasian
died.

III. The Commination of wrath according to Scripture, is to be understood
after a conditional (...), i e. (...) an implicit reservation for Gods
altering and revoking his threatened dispensation upon repentance intervening.

Jer. 18. 7, 8. At what Instant I shall fpeak concerning a nation ^^d
concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down and to destroy it: if that
nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their Evil, I will repent of
the evil that I thought to do unto them.

Jer 36. 3, 7. It may be the house of Judah will hear all the evil, which I
purpose to do unto them, that they may return every man from his evil way, that
I may forgive their Iniquity and their Sin. It may be they will present their
supplication before the Lord, and will return every one from his evil way: for
great is the Anger and the Fury, which the Lord has pronounced against this
People.

Jonah 3. 10. And God saw their works that they turned from their evil way, and
God repented of the Evil, that he had said, that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.

IV. This Blazing Star being in conjunction with diverse other awful
Providence and Tokens of Wrath, calls upon us to awake out of security, and to
bring forth fruits meet for Repentance.

A Eew Instances of some late awful Providence.

1. Earthquakes. About two years ago viz. Ian. 26, and 28. 1662, 63. The
foundations of the Earth trembled, and some of our houses rock't like a cradle,
6, or 7 times did the Earth shake under us in the space of 2 or 3 days. It was
then thought and said, that these Earthquakes might portend the Lords shaking
the foundations of our Churches and of our civil state.

2. The late removal by Death of some of our eminent Prophets and seers, who
were as eyes unto us in the Wilderness, and the Charen of Israel and the
Horsemen thereof. April 5th, 1663, That burning and shining Light, who shone
in the Church of Boston, and gave light to the whole Colony and Country, Mr.
John Norton, a man eminently accomplished, was taken from us, and translated to
an higher Orb. Of whom New England was not worthy.

July 20 1663. That bright and radiant Star, a Star of the first magnitude, Mr.
Samuel Stone, the strength and glory of Connecticut, rested from his labors
and sorrows, and fell a sleep sweetly and placidly in the Lord. A little before
Him, Mr John Miller and Mr. Samuel Newman, faithful, painful and affectionate
Preachers of the Gospel, were also taken from us by death. Thus our Pillars are
cut down, our strongest Stakes plucked up, and our breaches not repaired. Is it
a small thing in our eyes, yt our principal Congregations and Head-townes,
should be so sadly bereaved, as they are at this day?

3. The sad Mildew and Blasting, whereby we have been greatly afflicted the
last Summer, and some ofus the Summer before: our principal grain being turned
into an husk and rotteness.

4. Severe Drought this last Summer, which burnt up the Pastures and the latter
growth.

5. Early Frosts, which smote our Indian Corn, and greatly impoverished our
latter harvest.

Unto these and some other no less threatening Visitations, is superadded this
strange and fearful Appearance in the Heavens, which is now seconded by a new
Appearance this Spring, concomitant to the translation of our Honored and Aged
Governor, Mr. John Endicot, from hence to a better World: By all which
doubtless the Lord calls upon New England to awake and to repent.

To this End Consider.

1. What a jealous eye the Lord has upon us, observing how we carry and behave
our selves at such a time as this. Ier. 3. 8. And I saw, when for all the
causes, whereby backsliding Israel committed Adultery, I had put her away. and
given her a bill of Divorce: yet her Treacherous Sister Judah feared not, but
went and played the Harlot also.

2. What the Lord expects and looks for from a people so highly favored and
privileged, and so awfully warned and threatened. Zeph. 3. 7. I said surely
thou will fear me; thou will receive Instruction: so their dwelling place
should not be cut off; howsoever I punished them.

3. How sadly will the Lord Jesus expostulate with us, if we fall asleep in the
hour of the Passion and Agony of the Gospel. Mat. 26. 40. He comes unto the
Disciples and finds them a sleep, and faith unto Peter, what could ye not
watch with me one hour? each word is very Emphatical

4. The danger of being surprised by temptation before we are aware. Lam. 1. 9.
She Remembered not her last end, therefore she came down wonderfully: she had no
comforter. Rev. 16. 15 Behold I come as a thief, Blessed is he that watches
and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

5. The singular blessing reserved for the Vigilant and penitent. Hab. 3. 16.
When I heard my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice: rotteness entered
into my bones: and I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of
trouble. Luke. 21. 36. Watch ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of Man.

To Conclude: God forbid that any of us, should be (...) wandering Stars,
Eccentrick and Erratick in our motions, as all Seducers and Impostors are: for
whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever. Jude, 1. 13* but the Lord,
grant that we may all become fixed Stars in the new Jerusalem, which comes
down from God, observing the Heavenly order prescribed in his holy word, and
shining as light in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, clearly
reflecting that pure and preciou^ light, wherewith we are irradiated by the Sun
of Righteousness: and then we may assure ourselves, Christ will still hold us
in his right hand and not suffer us to be cast down from Heaven but enable us
to finish our course with joy, and at length translate us into the Kingdom of
the Father, where we shall shine forth as the Sun, and as the brightness of the
firmament, and as the Stars forever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

