The Dissenters Address, to his MAJESTY.
Sir, MAy it please your Majesty
-- We the Saints of the Blessed Reformed Kirk, Presbyterians, Independants,
Fifth-Monarch Men, Quakers, Mugletonians, Pythagorians, Millenarians,
Calvinists, Brownists, Zwinglians, Arians, Atheists, Hypocrites, Blasphemers,
Dissenters, Covenanters, Canters, Ranters, Circumventers, Forgerers, Perjurers,
Subornors, Detractors, Compactors, and Fractors, Whores, Rogues and Bawds,
Coockolds, and Coockold-Makers, a parcel of old perjured Lord Mayors, and
Sheriffs, -- a Race of Worthies, spawnd from: the Loins of fifty odd Non-Cons,
Holders forth, whose Daughters, furnish Whetstons-Park, More-Fields, Wapping,
and other parts of the Town, with Whores their Sons, and their Pimps, and we
are the third and fourth Generation, who now Address to your Majesty and have
overspread most parts of the three Nations -- pray you, Sir, judge if it is
possible for us to be more Loyal than we are, considering our fore Father, The
Rebellious Stalions from whence we are descended -- we do confess we are Imps
of Dissension and Rebellion, by instinct of Nature, and cannot help it, -- it
is innated in us to commit Murders, Plots, Rapes, Forgeries, and all other
Innormities, and Villainies, and thack 'em all upon the Papists: if they deny to
be Guilty of our faults, either at their Trial, or Execution, then we cry
Mental Reservations are the Popish Principles; and would disjoynt them alive if
the Law would let us. Sir, it is our fralties and we cannot help it.

And now Sir, we do with most Insollence, Impudence and Confidence implore your
most Gracious Majesty -- That these Saints of our Community and Holy: Order of
Rebellion, and Commonwealth, in whose good or bad success we have a
fellow-feelling; that the Aspertion of this pretended Presbyterian-Plot may be
taken off us -- for we desire that it may be the Opinion of all the World, that
the Papists have had as great a hand in it; as they have had in all the Plots
this five years last past -- What if my Lord Shaftsbury, in whom we confided,
as chief Patriot of the people, for their several Religions and Propertys and
Privileges and Encouraging us to put our Paws to the Association; to seize and
Assassinate your person and to Raise an Army against you to prevent the growth
of Popery, or so -- and he failing of his purpose ran away to save his Neck --
he was an old Rogue, and shall we be Guilty of Treason for that?

If Oats and Tongue were to modelize a sham Popish Plot, which gave
opportunity to carry on a Presbyterian one.: Contrived before in
Aldersgate Street and other Caballs -- what must the Soul-saving Saints suffer
for that? and if Sanctified Holders forth, have taught us to take up Arms to
fight for King Jesus against his Anointed -- They Will show you Scripture for it
-- and if the Scripture commands us to Rebel; why should Rebellion be Treason
-- and if not why may not we Rebel when we please without being hanged, --
like Dogs? why sure it is not come to that? perhapps Mr. Mead, might say it was
not only policy but necessary to murder his King -- must the holy Rollocks his
flock be counted Rebels for that? And for the Godly Dissenters to murder
their King and lay it upon the the Papists; that is lawful? For it past the
late house of Commons Nemine Contradicente: and tho we in the City contribute
to the maintenance of the cleanly Dr. -- if we had not, he might have
discovered the true Plot indeed. And might as well as it falls out: but if our
designs had took, -- the Doctors oath would have been very necessary, to have
sworn the murder upon the Papists. And would have made his past Plots and
Perjuries to have past for truth into the bargain -- Now for Monmouth, Gray,
Armstrong, Russell, Sidney, Trencher; and a hundred-Thousand -- more, which are
but a handful of hotheaded fellows, -- and since they are detected what
relation are they to us; that are tho sober Godly party? no they are a company
of magot-headed Rascals -- not worth the Society of the Godly. For why should
they undertake buisiness they are not able to go through stick with? Now if the
project had succeeded; there could have been no reason, but we should have been
fellow-sharers in the spoils, being privy to the conspiracy -- but as it
stands now -- we are as Ambitious to fee them hanged for failing, as your
Majesty for their attempting -- for this murder and Massacre looks more
horrid being divulged, than the Act it self would have done both to us and the
sufferers; since the Apprehension of death is more terrible than death it self
-- And thus Sir, You see we have made our selves as clear of the Plot as your
Majesty or any body else can imagine us to be: and we hope you will look upon us
to be as loyal Subjects, as we have approved our selves ever since forty one;
and so you shall ever find us, to the utmost of our power -- Therefore we
beseech your Majesty, not to hang us up like Bunches of Grapes, and Ropes of
Onyons: And suffer our Heads to be sold for 3. d. a piece, and set for Examples
upon necessary Houses; and we shall Remain your Majesty's True, Blew,
Protestant Dissenting Subjects.

Their Petition for some Correction, in the Managing the Plot and Government.
Imprimis -- that Queen Besses Act may be Repealed: that Trencher may be
Speaker in the next House of Commons: that Monky Care, may choose his own
Justice; for fear of falling into L'Estrange's hands: let it be lawful for any
of our Brethren, to Murder his Father or Uncle for intrest: that Howard of
Escreek may have a Crab-Tree to the Tower to preach in, and an Ignoramus Jury
to bring him out again.

But above all we beseech you Remember our Ancient Holy Kirk -- ah; for the
Laird's sake, out Ancient Kirk; for it is so old it wants patching every day --

LONDON Printed for J. D. 1683.


