Diverse remarkable Occurrences that have happened in the TOWER, LONDON, and
Westminster, upon sundry occasions, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday. July
the 1, 2, 3, 4.

Whereunto is added, A true Relation of Mr Thomas Baroms, of the state of
Bandonbridge, (in Munster) and the places thereabouts.

ALSO The death of Sir Win Saint Ledger, Lord President of Munster, with other
remarkable Passages.



LONDON, Printed for NATH: BUTTER. July 8. 1642.

Diverse remarkable Occurrences that have happened in the Tower, London, and
Westminster, upon sundry occasions, Friday, Saturday, Sunday, and Monday; July
1, 2, 3, 4.
ON Friday about five or six at night, came three Gentlemen into the Tower to
speak with Sir John Coniers, Lieutenant of the said Royal Castle and Magazine.
He not being then within, one of the Gentlemen requested of the Yeoman-Usher,
that if he knew he were near about, he will do him the favor to intimate
unto him that there were some attending him which had business from the King:
the yeoman usher caused the message to be delivered unto the Lieutenant of the
Tower, where in a gentleman's house upon the hill he then was. The Lieutenant
forthwith came; and in the mean time they got into their company, Master
Binian long since committed for denying to submit unto the new order of
Militia: they met the Lieutenant upon the Hill: and one of the three (as it
seeemes, a Messenger) delivered a Warrant under the Great Seal of England unto
him, saying, The King greets you Sir. The Lieutenant demanded whom or what it
might concern; it was answered by the Messenger, the speedy and present
release of Master Binian, for whom his Majesty had sent and must go along
with him the Lieutenant desired some hours space to consider of it, it was
answered him that he could not grant it, having express charge to the
contrary, and for that to take any delay, for an utter denial. Then the
Lieutenant would have spoken a word in private with another Gentleman there
present, who excusing himself denied it, desiring his ready answer, and to
conceive what peril might or might not accrue unto himself upon the refusal.
Upon those words, putting off their hats as taking leave; why quoth the
Lieutenant (opening the Warrant and reading it, and once moving a little his
head) then I obey, you may take him with you, and God bless you all. So Master
Binian agreeing for his fees, forthwith takes horse and toward York.

Had not Master Binian made such speedy dispatch he had happily seen Coulchester
before Thursday, and a worshipful Citizen of London mude up in a County
Jail: What thanks and commendation the hononrable House shall think the
Lieutenant worthy of for so speedy an execution of his Majesty's command is not
yet known.

Saturday morning the commission of Admiralty was taken from the Lord of
Northumberland, and the Register with all other officers summoned to give their
personal presence at York.

Sunday the Kings Declaration was read in the Cathedral of Paul's, where the
first and second lessons are usually read; the reader where of turning himself
unto the Communion Table, all men were commanded to stand up and to be
uncovered.

Monday morning my Lord of Salisbury gave notice that the King has taken away
his commission of being Captain of the Pensioners: And my Lord of Leicester is
discharged from his Lieutenantship of Ireland: A message will be sent to the
Earl of Warwick to forbear the Kings Ships, three Captains with their ships
revolted from him, viz. Cap. Price, Cap. Straggling, Sir John M^nce.

Mr Thomas Barom, Esquire, his Relation of the state of Bandonbridge in
Ireland, and the places adjacent: who arrived at Bristow, June 28. being
Tuesday, and came thence into London on Saturday, July the 2. 1642.
THis Gentleman says, that since the death of Sir Win Saint Ledger, Lord
President of Munster, who departed this life, June 17. at his Plantation and
Castle of Downaray; the chiefest ground of his sickness being thought to be
nothing so much as discontent, having had no supplies either of moneys or men
out of England as he expected, and his need required: The Rebels began to grow
very insolent in all those parts, have fired Clannakeltie, and pillaged all the
English in that English Market Borough. Colonel Charles Davasor not being able
to relieve them, lest he should hazard Cork; the Lord Presidents death not
unlikely encouraging them to some daring attempt. Charles, Macke Cartie, Reuth,
appeared before Bandon bridge, June the nineteenth and twentieth, very boldly,
and daringly with eight thousand Rebels, three little Field Pieces, and made
show of a resolution to sit down about the town, wherewith the Inhabitants are
very much amazed; for the Garrison under the command of my Lord Killan Meakei,
and his Lieutenant Graves, is but four hundred; all English, and most
Townsmen: who by reason of the change of their wonted ordinary diet and
lodging, now being forced to make meat of what they can get, not what they
would have, and bound almost to nightly watching, are many of them fallen into
the disease of the Country, viz. the Flux, and die twelve or fourteen a week:
So that without speedy relief, that town (the fairest Plantation in all
Munster) is like to be lost through disease and hunger: For this Gentleman
affirms, (who perfectly knows the place, having lived within six miles of
it above fifteen years) that although Mack Cartie being of no force in
ammunition considerable to take it by assault, most of his rabble being very
ill armed, and Bandon very strongly fortified, yet he may starve them without
being Master of the field, and all the Country about; and the malady waxing
strong (being held in that Country of an infecting and contagious nature soon
make their number grow small within. This Gentleman Master Barom, has a
Petition to deliver unto the honorable House, as touching the inconvenience,
and as future; as present, as fatal to the child, as now unto the Father, by
this new way of undertaking, shall it not please the House in seasonable time
to put a remedy unto it: for the lands of the English being now all the
country over seized by the Rebels, and in process of time (which God grant
with all speed) the Rebels being vanquished, and their lands by the undertakers
divided amongst them, according unto the proportion of their several sums of
money by them disbursed, the said lands are now to be divided of all and entire
by the Rebels, and not any part of them belonging at all unto the poor
distressed English: and so they shall be in as bad a case for matter of
livelihood after the conquest, as before; considering that in the Act newly
made by both the honorable Houses, and confirmed by his Majesty, there is no
mention had of them: So that they are out of all hope of ever recovering any
thing in that Kingdom that was ever their own, shall not the high Court of
Parliament with all conveniencie take them into accustomed tender consideration.

Mac Fynnen of Glanerogh, his Countrimens lamentation for him, being slain at
Black-water, by the Lo: Presidents Troops. June 10. 1642.
THE DIRGE.
OFinnen Mac Donnell Mac Finnen a Cree,
Why did thou Crammacree come from Kerree?
It Was to show thy walliour, dou walliant young man,
Surnamed of some to be Captain Soogan.
To wordy dow vast of such a brave name,
But it is no great matter, thy deeds show the same.
Dow fought like a warrior and only did show,
Dow vast te best soldier of all te great crew.
Dow foughtest like a sou^dier, and dying did fight,
Whilst those that should help dee all took them to flight.
Thy General Barry of three pounds a day,
With armed Lord Muskry, did both run away.
And so did Mack Finnen of Cala hane,
Not wordy hereafter to eat Cheese made of Buttermilk.
Mola hane.
Mack Cartie, Mack Donnagh, Mack Swinnins and all,
Did run from the battle, and let deir Arms fall.
We Cork men bewail dee, but yet for die glory,
Tink heaven to have pulled dee from Purgatory.
Den Fynnen, Mac Donnell, Mack Fynnen farewell,
For all our Priests swear dow art not in hell.
This Mack Fynnen was offered quarter by Captain Lindie: who prizing his
valor, and perf^ctly knowing his friends of what great quality they were of at
Cork, promised him to use him like a Gentleman, would ^e yield and submit to
the King: he curs^ng in Irish his fellows that ran away, answered him in
English, thnt he scorned either: and presently charging upon foot with his
sword and pistol into Captain Lindies Front, was there slain: By his order
brought to Cork, and by his mediation unto the President, permitted to be
buried after the request of his friends.

FINIS.

