A DISCOVRSE OF WOMEN, Showing Their IMPERFECTIONS ALPHABETICALLY.

Newly Translated out of the French into English.

One Man amongst a thousand have I found, but, a WOMAN amongst all those have I
not found.

Eccles. 7.28. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun in Ivy-lane.
M.DC.LXII.

The Epistle Dedicatory, TO The English LADIES.
MADAMS,
THIS is intended generally for you, but yet it excludes none. You are the
ablest judges, whether the French suit with your nature and sex in this
Discourse: I confess it so handsome a Manufacture of theirs, that the
Translator looks like a forbidden Trafficker in the Custom of Women, and an
Interloper in the Merchantry of such Commodities.

But nevertheless the Author is rendered as a Looking-glass to our English
Females, wherein with truer reflections they may see themselves, and correct
those native blemishes, by the exactness of these foreign characters.

French vainly speaks the humor and fashion of your Ladyships, you will
therefore take it the kindlier at a second hand, seeing the first sharpness of
this discourse is something rebated, as their second Impressions have least of
fury.

She that will not see her self herein may court and command adoration, and
reciprocate her wishes; while this Mirror shall only reflect virtue, and make
her happy.

Farewell.
The ANATOMY OF WOMEN; Described in Two and Twenty several VICES
Alphabetically.
A
The first whereof is AVARICE.
AVARICE, is a Vice so detestable, that we hardly know how to describe its
Ugliness, by the most hideous and deformed Monsters in the World. For though
you should imagine a man whose Eyes cast out Flames of Fire, Two terrible
Dragons in lieu of his hands, or flaming Swords instead of Teeth; a Mouth
gaping like the entrance of a Cave, at which issued forth a fountain boiling
with Poison in place of a Tongue, a Belly as devouring as a burning Furnace,
with Wings under his Feet, his face like to the ravening Wolf, and in his hands
lighted Torches, yet would not this sight be so terrible and monstrous as is an
unsatiable Miser. For he is more cruel then a Tiger, more inhumane to his kind
then the Panther, more unsatiable then Hell, greater Enemy to his Parents then
the Viper or Serpent, more unnatural to his issue then the Wolf, and the
cruellest Foe to himself in the World. Such a Pinch-belly, that he grudgeth
himself sustenance, like that Wretch reported by St. Ambrose, who eating of an
Egg for his meat, uttered these words with a sigh, that he had lost a Hen;
repining therein at his great expense. To which purpose Alciat in his Emblems,
drawing the Picture of a Covetous person, represents him under the shape of an
Ass, who though laden with all manner of dainty provisions, eats
nevertheless nothing but Thistles and Wild Vines, and such like, intimating
that the Miser would rather perish through hunger, and save his money, then lay
it out in the maintenance of Life.

Now if this miserable have not pity of himself, how shall he have compassion
of another? If he prefer his gold and silver to his Life and his Soul, how is
it possible he should love God and worship him in his heart.

Nature seems in the production of Gold, to have somewhat presaged the misery
of those who so insatiably love it, ordering it so that where that metal
grows, neither herb nor plant is to be seen, thereby signifying the
barrenness of covetous minds, and their unfruitfulnesse in the production of
works worthy of Glory and Salvation. And is it not an extreme folly to serve
and adore that which nature has put under our feet, nay hid under the earth as
being unworthy to be seen? yes certainly, insomuch that we need not wonder if
the Apostle calls Covetousness the root of all evil, nay Idolatry it self, and
that the Scripture terms unjust riches, to be thorns, stealers away of the
heart of man, snares, Nets, Fetters of the Devil. They who will he rich fall
into the Temptation and Snare of the Devil. 1 Timothy 6.
To this purpose a certain Christian Poet deploring the misery of these
wretched slaves, has most elegantly thus expressed it.

For man with him nothing
into the World did bring,
And when he shall return,
as much shall be in's Vrn;
Then all his Greatness lost,
his Dress, his Goods, his Cost,
Death makes him for to pass,
naked as first he was;
What rage then so unkind,
thus to transport thy mind?
And what misfortune can,
so blind thee wretched man?
Why do thou so affect,
those things which thee neglect?
Which you may not carry,
nor yet for them tarry;
Leave this fond love, and spare
your hopes for happier care;
That which you keep so sure,
cannot thee keep secure;
Let not thy bosom warm,
the Snake will do thee harm;
Then do thy Idol break,
And thy false friend forsake;
Which when our danger's most
deferts and quits its post;
And Traitor like draws back,
when we it chiefly lack.
To this purpose it was, that the Primitive Christians laid the value and price
of their Goods, Lands and possessions, at the Feet of the Apostles: for as St.
Jerome observes, it is to show that the true Christian not setting his heart
upon the goods of the Earth, ought to trample under foot, all Avarice and
immoderate concupiscence of corruptible riches: From whence it follows that
those who embrace and pursue them, preferring them to their Salvation are
odious and detestable.

Many of both Sexes of Mankind, have been sufficiently defamed therefore, but
most especially the Female, and of a certain the inclination of Women is so
strongly swayed to the coveting of riches, and greediness of wealth, that we
may easily believe them to be the most avariciousest creatures in the World.

The sacred Scripture setting down her imperfections omitting not amidst her
noble Epithets and royal qualities to insert the other, calls her a filthy
Swine in reference to her Turpitudes. As a Jewel of Gold in a Swines Snout,
Prove. 11.
so is a fair woman without discretion: a Dunghill for her Nastiness and
Filthyness, a whorish woman shall be trodden down as the Dung in the Street:
Eccles. 9.
a Wind for her levity, he that holds her as if he held the wind: a Scorpion
for her mischievousnesse, Eccles. 25
he that keeps a lewd woman, is as he that cherishes a Scorpion: a Dragon for
her cruelties, it is better to dwell with a Lion and a Dragon, then to cohabit
with a naughty woman: A snare of the Fowler for her dissimulations and deceits,
I have found a woman more bitter then death as the snare of the Fowler: and
lastly a Bear for her proclivity and propensity of her nature to Avarice.

Furthermore they are unfit to give Counsel, the advice of women is invalid
says Aristotle; incapable to govern Cities, to mediate peace and concord, to
be courageous, or to attain to the perfection of Arts and Sciences, the only
true sustainers of Life.

It is therefore no wonder if through fear of falling into want, Covetousness
pricks them forward upon all adventures and means to live, thereby to maintain
the Lusts of their ambition: and to the end that it be not supposed that I will
except many, the sacred Scripture exempts but one which is the Blessed Virgin
Mary according to the sense of that passage in the Canticles, As the Lilly
among the Thorns, Cant. 1.
so is my beloved among the Daughters. Where the Holy Ghost compares the
Blessed Virgin to Lillies, and the other Daughters of Adam to Thorns; for
Lillies being the Emblems of Hope and Affiance, and Thorns of the care of
Riches, do evidently show that our blessed Lady placed all her hope and
confidence in God, affecting Poverty according to the example of her Son, above
all things, whereas to other Women nothing is more pleasurable then Riches, and
nothing more regretful then indigence and necessity.

Does not daily experience inform us, that they have more respect for a rich
Craesus and a Midas though never so ugly and deformed, then of a wise Solon and
Aristotle, were they the most handsome and accomplished persons of the age? But
for what? does it not appear to be a most manifest effect of Covetousness in a
Woman thus to prostitute her body, her Soul and her Honor and all her
Fortunes, yea all her glory which she hopes for in heaven? Although she be a
Christian, yet so base a price, which I dare scarce name, a morsel of Bread
says the Wise man, will make her forsake God and lose the quiet of her
Conscience.

The Romans rather chose to advance to the administration of Government, single
persons then married men, by reason that Women being covetous by nature would
have more regard to their private profit then the public good. lib. observat.
proficissiff. de officio. Indeed they are so noted for taking and receiving,
that Antiquity has it in a Proverb, The love of a Woman and the snearing of a
Cur are nothing worth, but Holdfast is all. But if at sometimes you see them
liberal it is not to seem virtuous but to cherish and better entertain their
impure pleasures, making the Idol of their heart, the Slave of their sensuality.

So if you would know which of her two Enamorato's a Woman loves best, you must
have an Eye to her I berality, which being an effect of her love, whatever she
receives from the one she will give unto the other her best beloved, although
she makes countenance and seems to affect them both in the same degree.

This I shall leave to the judgment of those, who have passed the Pikes, and
know better then my self to speak the truth of it, and shall only add, that
this insatiable Covetousness arises from their imprudency of mind, and want
of judgment. And we see not that the Beasts are so extremely Covetous or
extremely prodigal of necessaries for the sustentation of life, and therefore
if in this the Woman exceeds them, it can be no injury to her, if according to
our Alphabetick method we call her,

B
The Bottomless Abyss of Bestiality.
PLato thanked God for three things, first that by Nation he was a Greek, not a
Barbarian; Secondly, that by Birth he was a man not a Beast; Thirdly, that by
Sex he was not a Woman, but a Man; They are three things which I confess far
excel the most desirable good of humane Prudence and VVisdome, the natural
appetite of the immortal Soul, and a brave courage, because of the
imperfections usually attending the latter, which render them despised and
contemptible. I say nothing to the two first of Plato's, but to his Third of
Sex, I affirm that the Female is so frail and variable, that as a certain
person said, it seems that Nature has only framed her more for the
perpetuation of mankind, and pleasure of man, then for any individual
perfection in that Sex.

The Egyptians in their Philosophy (though much mistaken therein) concerning
the original of Women, report that the Nile overflowing its banks, and watering
the several heaps of miry-fatearth embodyed together, the Sun darting his
Beams, thereupon, engendered by his heat, several kinds of Beasts, among which
the Woman was first, being as it were the Captainness of all the rest: and that
for this very reason it is, that Women are more imprudent and less capable of
discretion then men: but this is but a Barbarian Fable, for the holy writ
teaches us that God took the Woman out of the side of the Man, and that she
might be not his Servant, but his dear Companion, created her as susceptible of
reason as man; but she loosing the rains to her passions, gave such credit to
the opinion of her being endued only with a sensual appetite, that Plato
doubted whether he should take her out of the predicament of Beasts, and from
the rank of those creatures which are capable of discretion. To which purpose,
Neptune and Minerva coming on a time to a dispute about the imposition of the
name of Athens, they made Three Laws and Ordinances against Women.

The first was that no Child should bear the name of its Mother. The second
that no Woman should style her self an Athenian but Attican. The Third that she
should not serve the public, nor have any charge in the Commonwealth, they
wanting Judgment and Wisdom for the conduct of such Affairs. Daily experience
amply instructs us, that they will not advise in matters of their own concern,
their own designs and enterprises, conceiting themselves able enough to do all
of their own head, and to understand all manner of business, without any other
assistance then the od opinions of their own whimsical brain. This is evident
in Heretical Women, who transported with vanity, fancy themselves able to
believe, know and understand, without either Master or instructor, the most
obscure and difficult places of Scripture, being indeed carried on with the
greatest folly and Ignorance in the World.

I wonder not therefore that the Holy Ghost speaking by the Wiseman in the 11.
of the Proverbs uses this expression, that a Woman carries in her Nostrils a
Ring of Gold. For a Ring, being the Emblem of ignorance, according to the
Philosophers is not within the verge or region of the Sciences, for the Circle
is refused of all Arts: It may be also that the Holy Ghost does also further
intimate to us, that the Beauty of a foolish woman runs the same fortune with
that of a Swine, for as that base creature cannot rout up the ground with his
snout, without tarnishing and sullying the Ring of Gold which he bears therein;
so Beauty cannot preserve it self fair and amiable, in a foolish and immodest
Woman. This I discover in the same words, Prove. 11.
a Golden ring in the Nostrils of a Swine is a foolish Woman, for this Genitive
suis in the singular number comes from the Nominative Sus which signifies a
Swine.

I could also further prove this her exceeding folly, by natural reason, for
that man being the head of the Woman, and the head being the seat of the Brain,
by so much the more is the man more wise, more discreet, more judicious in all
affairs then the Woman. This I also prove by a Proverb: he that commands, ought
to be all times better then they that obey. Now since the Man by Gods
ordinance, ought to have command over his Wife, and the Woman to owe him
obedience, we may well conceive that very nature has given him more strength,
more courage, more gravity, more goodness, more judgment, more prudence, more
honor and dignity then to the Woman.

See yet further another reason of the Sottishness and imprudence of Women; as
nothing more bestializeth the Spirit, nor more forcibly dulls the quickness and
ripeness of the understanding, nor which so much debaseth the actions of the
faculties and habits of the Soul then intemperance and sensuality; so also
there is nothing that more subtilizeth the vivacity of the Spirits then
Continence and Chastity. This was that noble virtue, which elevated Plato above
the rest to the contemplation of the Intelligences and metaphysical substances,
and facilitated to him the perfect knowledge of divine and transcendent things.
Foe it is believed, that he never was m^^ied, affecting and embracing Chastity
through the whole course of his Life.

Now beyond all controversy the Woman is more lascivious and more insatiable
of that impure pleasure then man, and by consequent less judicious and less
capable of reason in all her transactions; and so I proceed to that antecedent,
that she rightly deserves for her incontinence, to be termed Concupiscence it
self.

C
Concupiscentia Carnis.
Concupiscence: Lust of the Flesh.
FOr she has two insatiable appetites, which the Wiseman compares to the two
forkets in the Tongue of an Horse-Leech, Leech, The Horse-Leech has two
Daug^^ers crying give, Prove. 30.
give -- by which this little Animal draws and sucks the blood of men with so
much greediness, that she thereby bursts and dies. So Woman, with the avidity
of her sensual desires, sucks out the substance, the health and life of her
slave without any satisfaction; this is evident to those who are versed in
History, I shall only therefore to this purpose, produce and cite the example
of Messalina, the Wife of the Emperor Claudius Caesar, who to make ostentation
of her intemperance, went on a time into the public stews, and there
prostituted her body to all Goers and Comers, waging with the most impudent and
salacious Harlot in Rome, that she would endure more men, then she could, and
won the wager, having laid with 25. several Ruffians in one night, and that
with so much vigor and continuance of Lust, that as Juvenal says, -- Et
lassata viris nondum satiata recessit; she departed in the morning from the
Brothel, wearied, not satisfied; and the other who lost this execrable wager,
for her part had been polluted with three and twenty. A most manifest proof of
their incontinency.

But that which increases and adds to the blame of these miserable wretches, is
this, that with their appetite after these delights and pleasures, they wast
and consume in a short time, the Estate and Wealth of their Lovers without any
companion or commiseration of their future misery; being like the Ivy, which
fastening it self to any Tree, embraces and claspeth it so straight and hard,
and draws its moisture from it so greedily, that Nature not being able to
replenish it with sap and nourishment, it soon becomes dry and withered,
without juice or vigor.

For these unsatiable Women stick so fast to the profuse liberalities of those
that Idolize them, that having them once at their discretion and management,
they will so drain and coaks them out of their money, that soon after, those
wretched deluded persons, must be compelled to take lewd courses, either to the
Highway, or at best to the servile and base condition of Informers and
Catch-poles.

This we see in the example of the prodigal Son, who being constrained by
extreme famine, to betake himself to the Trough of the Swine, returned at last
quite naked to his Fathers House. For these covetous Creatures take with both
hands, and demand things of their Idolaters with such importunity, of those
especially who they know have sufficient to answer it, that no such dare refuse
them under the fear of, and to avoid, their high displeasure.

Sometimes they demand a jewel, other time smaller Trifles as Hoods, Scarfs,
Petticoats, nay Pantoffles, nay they will descend to provant, bread and wine,
and a Dish or two of Meat, but commonly in so great a quantity, that quickly
they will be as chargeable as wearisom; and if herein you refuse them but a
tittle, all the services in the World, and all your past Obligations on them,
are not competent to their fury and disdain.

There are proofs enough in History, and first that beautiful Hynes, so much
beloved by Charles the seventh King of France, who valued the alone possession
of her Love at so high a rate, that not only she enriched her poor Parents, but
was still so furnished and stored with Gold and silver, that she could leave by
her last Will and Testament threescore thousand Crowns, to that place were she
was buried.

The Learned Atheneus reports another story (more prodigious then this) of
Phryne the Courtesan, who had got so much wealth in Loves Combats, that she
offered to the Inhabitants of Thebes, money enough to rebuild the Walls of
their City, beautified with 100. goodly Gates, provided they would place in the
Portals this Inscription, Alexander evertit, Phryne amica erexit; Alexander
demolisht them, and Phryne the Courtesan has reared them: Plutarch speaking of
the same Woman says, that she was so confidently shameless, as to offer at the
Temple of Apollo the Statue of Venus all of pure Gold, whereon these words were
Engraven, Ex Graecorum intemperantia, intimating that she had acquired the
price of the said Statue by the Lusts and intemperance of the Grecians.

How filthily lewd was this miserable creature? who can doubt but that she was
the very sink and common-shore of all impurity, and the utter ruin of
debauched Youth? But not to search further among Historians, it may without
their authority be affirmed, that their concupiscence and carnal desires is
arrived to such a height in this deplorable age, that if those Diamonds,
Pearls and Rubies, those chains of gold, bracelets, those rich garments of
Satin and Velvit, those gaudy dresses and attires, those plumes of Feathers and
Fans, which they wear for the ornament of their vanity, were examined, we
should find them to be the ruin of entire and great Patrimonies, of well
furnished Houses, nay, of private, though gay, Lodgings and Chambers: So true
it is, that so fleshed they are with, and yet so immoderate in the pursuit of
their obscoene pleasures, and the goods of fortune; for which reason we may
further term them.

D
Duellum Damnosum.
A dammagable Dolor or Sorrow.
MAn has not in all the world a more cruel enemy than Woman, and which more
sensibly and apparently is hurtful to his life, his honor, and all his
fortunes, nor which more maliciously opposes all his designs.

A French Poet enumerating all the evils and misfortunes, which men have
received by and from women, seems to impute to heaven its sending them into the
world for their scourge and torment in these Verses.

God sent the Woman unto Man below,
With thousand snares spread in her amorous eyes,
Having a box in hand with mischief filled,
All seeds of ill, suits, discords, grief, and care,
Old age and death; mine was for her dower.
Venus with thousand beauties graced her front,
Apollo did the like unto her speech.
Vulcan did forge her heart, and confidence
Mars gave: Insum, the angry heavens so
Disguised her, that man looked, and liked, and linked,
And so his race undid, (his grace extinct.)
The same Poet speaking of the danger of conversing with them, proceeds,

Hear, wandering Mortal, that so blindly hastes
To servitude; at least see whom you choose:
If rich she be, prepare to be a slave,
Suffer, and murmur not, be blind and deaf.
If she be proud and scornful, she will pretend
To general knowledge; you are a sot, and art
Too happy in her love; thou must not dare
To cross her will, and her ambitious thoughts.
The Galley-slave that ever tugs the Oar,
More happy is than thou with such a whore.
If she be poor, with that you also wed Innumerable discommodities,
A charge of children, crosses, losses too;
Contempt will make you hide your face from friends,
Care and necessity will breaks your heart.
So look for all that lies in mischief's art.
If she be fair, resolve never to be free
From jealousy and care. First, do but see
And mark your neighbors eye, then every man's,
To think to hinder this, is such a task
As Sysiphus's, bound to roll the stone:
A perfect beauty never was one man's own.
If she be ugly, then bid love adieu,
Such as her body, such her mind is too:
Your house will always be a dark some Jayle,
The Sun no more will pleasant on you shine.
In brief, by this, guess of her froward ways,
She will be trouble some within three days.
The Poet could not better express the annoyance she is to man. But to come a
little nearer the matter, I will add another remarque of a great person to this
purpose; It is hard, says he, to find out a good wife, and suitable and
agreeable to those conditions which are required in every good marriage. For if
she be a young maiden, she is usually faulted in this, that though probably her
first love may be fixed on a person, and from her discretion may afford him the
first draughts and traicts of that affection; yet she may reserve enough to
gratify the prerogative of her own inclinations: but if it so happen, that the
humor of her husband be contrary thereunto, she shall carry love in her eyes,
and grief in her breast; for being united in body, but thus divided in heart.
She will sooner be a woe she should not, than a wife she should be.

If she be super-annuated and old, there is danger, that coming so late to the
sport, hunger have not made her to break her fast, in the doing whereof she
will not want for devices, by a sugared and fare deportment to her husband; her
artifices shall broak to her incontinence, and possibly after all she may go
seek the Fruit, where she lost the Flower.

If she be a Widow, her importunate remembrance of the dead will take place of
love; but if she have had children, it is extreme covetousness to gather two
crops out of one field; but if she have had none, it is imprudence to cultivate
that Vine which never bore fruit, a Woman being as a Vine in the house of her
Husband.

If she be rich, the poor man shall find her costly and proud, her speeches to
him shall be punishments, her actions preparations to his funerals. It is a
strange kind of Martyrdom for a man to live in that house, which belongs unto
his wife.

If she be fair, Beauty is a vain thing, and favor is deceitful, as the
Wiseman says; jealousy will soon rage, that discase in the head will beget
suspicion of disloyalty, and a fear of being made Knights * of the Order of the
Crescent, and to wear its Arms.

If she be whorish and given to Venery, she will love your purse better then
your mouth, you shall be sure to pay for the pleasure; she will look you
pleasantly in the face, and pick your pocket. Banqueting and feasts will be the
first Essay, gifts and presents the next profusion in this your Apprentiship;
so thinking you have got the world, you shall possess a woman, who shall be the
world to all, a common Tenure. And though she may be covetous as to
housekeeping and care of the main, yet will her vanity render her prodigal; and
she will so compass her designs with her enticeing and charming semblances of
extraordinary kindness, that the pitiful Cuckold dares not nor cannot deny her,
for love is never covetous. Often must the Coffers be opened to buy rich
apparel, silk Gowns, lockets set with Jewels, Pendants, etc. the modes and
fashions of the times. To conclude, she will reap so clean in her husbands
estate, that nothing will be left for him to glean for a supply to his
necessities.

For the rest of this Batch, I remit the courteous Reader to that elegant
Translation, which the Seur de Souhait has made of Homer's Iliads, toward the
end of his Book, where he shall find I have said nothing here of mine own brain
and invention, and that nothing is more abhorred by me than to fain and make
lies, thereby to charge and tax the vices of naughty women, in the hurt and
evil they do to the other sex, either by acquaintance or by marriage. What I
have further to say to this point therefore I shall allege out of approved
Authors.

Plutarch in his tract of brotherly love, has this passage, A certain
Lace-demonian being reproved by some, for that he had married a very little
woman, replied very sharply thus: You have no reason at all to blame me, for it
was an act of prudence, of evils to choose the least. Another there is to the
same purpose of a Gentleman of Rome, who appearing the day after his marriage
in a very pensive and disconsolate posture, was demanded by some of his
familiar friends what thing it was that could afflict him, having espoused such
an extraordinary handsome wife, rich, and nobly descended. To whom, showing
them a new Shoe which he had put on, he answered; As you know not in what place
of my foot this Shoe wrings me, although you see it well and handsomely made,
and to the size of my foot; so neither can you, nor any body else beside me,
know wherein my wife may incommodate and trouble me. For as the Greek Proverb
has it, Ships and Women are never so exactly and completely framed, as that
there is nothing in them to mend.

Plutarch tells another story of a person called Pittacus, much reverenced for
his valor, wisdom, and justice; this man upon a time feasting some of his
friends, kindred, and strangers, it happened that his wife fell a railing on him
with much fire and fury; which he endeavoring to repress, she was so
outragiously impudent, as to over-turn the table and all that was set upon it.
Whereat when the strangers seemed to be much abashed and ashamed, Pittacus, to
show his constancy, contented himself in saying pleasantly, There is no person
in the world that wants not something; but for me, I were the most happy if it
were not for this cross piece my wife, who so afflicts me, that I am well
ranked in the number of the miserable.

Marcus Aurelius, as renowned a Philosopher as valiant Emperor, having married
to his second wife Faustina the daughter of Antoninus Pius, the most unchaste
and salacious of her sex, made this answer to some discourse concerning it; It
is six years since Antoninus Pius gave me his daughter to wife, and the Empire
for her dower; but we were both deceived, as much the one as the other, he in
adopting me to be his son in law, and I in wedding his daughter.

The same Emperor having experimented the sharp points of his wives extreme
badness, and desiring that himself alone might suffer such martyrdom, left this
good advertisement to all men, young and old Fly lewd women as the plague, for
no Viper or Serpent has so much poison as a wicked woman has throughout her
body, and particularly in her tongue.

Plutarch accosts us again, and tells us, That there is nothing more light then
a woman's unbridled tongue, nothing more picquant or stinging than her outrages,
more rash than her audaciousness, more detestable than her malice, more
dangerous than her fury, more dissembling than her tears, to which purpose they
are often called Crocodile tears; for as that cruel Creature weeps over the
head of any man it kills, not out of compassion, but to soften it, to the
intent the more easily to draw out the brain, which is the dainty bit; so
naughty women, when they cry in their anger, it is not from themselves, but from
rage and despite, that they cannot revenge themselves as they desire, nor know
not how to bring about their wicked purposes and designs. See we here also
what is said in favor of them in this ancient Proverb:

A good Lawyer is an ill Neighbor.
A good Soil is an ill Road.
A good Mule is an evil Beast.
A good Woman's an ill help.
For if you do consider and observe these two last creatures at a nearer view,
you will find some contradictory humors in them, as from the influence of the
Moon. To which purpose, a certain facetious person being asked, What God did
with the old Moons, seeing that Planet so often renewed it self every month,
presently replied, that he put them into the heads of Women and Mules, which
are called by Rhodig. Selenitudes, which is to say, Lunaticks, for that these
two sorts of creatures have always some of the Moons inconstancy, increasing
and waning in their opinions, not only every month, but almost every hour. And
to say no more of the Mule, it is notorious in the forming of the Woman, that
she was to the man a spirit of contradiction, for God framed her body out of
one of his crooked and cross ribs, as a presage, that she should prove wayward
and contrary to him in all his actions. It was the witty answer of one to those
who wondered to see the drowned corpse of his wife to swim above water, My
masters, quoth he, it is heaven that presents this miracle to you, that my wife
has been a thwart to me through all my life, and that against the Law of God
and of Nature, she has perpetually contraried me in my designs.

I shall leave this crime to pursue another, and show, that the remedy which is
used and applied to all other evils, by coercion and restraining of their
violence, renders them the worse, putting them into an unquenchible heat and
fury. So that one may with good reason call them

E
Exitium Iracundissimum.
Envious Rage.
CHoler of it self (to speak properly) is no Vice, but rather an Instrument of
virtue, for being not an Intention or desire to chastise, punish, or correct
all unjust and unbeseeming actions, it is necessary that he who exercise the
justice, must have something of that passion to prove that he abhors such
unequity: but when this passion exceeds its limits, and that it Masters reason,
raising and conjuring up such furious storms in the Spirit of a man to the
precipitation of him into those Designs, which seem fairest and dearest to his
beloved revenge, then it becomes a violent rage and the ready road to Madness,
a foolish passion, which hurries men into unlawful actions, will be judge and
party, would have all men to be of the same scandalous intemperance, which yet
cannot bar or hinder a sorrowful repentance.

Which gave occasion to Pythagoras, to say, That Choler was the beginning of
repentance: But that which is more deplorable is this, that it fastens it self
so tenaciously to the Soul, that it not only deprives it of reason and
judgment, rendering it like a Ship without Rudder, Pilot Sails or Oars,
committed to the mercy of the Waves, Winds, Storms, and Tempests; but so
changes the man as to the outward part of him, that it is a pitiful sight to
see and behold them, for it makes their face as red as the Gills or Comb of a
Cock, enflames, and fills their Eyes with fury, deafens their ears, makes their
mouths foame, their heart pant, disorders their pulse, blows up their veins,
stammers the Tongue, locks the Teeth together, strains their voice to
hoarsenesse, in precipitant and inconsiderate language; in short, it puts the
whole body into a fiery Fever, lamentable to see or consider.

Nevertheless we see four sorts of persons diversely enflamed by this passion,
the one resemble the Chafe or Straw, which soon is set on fire, and soon
consumes it self in the blaze, for their anger passes away as suddenly as it
comes readily: Others are like the hard Oak or Iron, which is with as much
difficulty quenched, as it is difficultly kindled or heated, for they longest
retain their spleen, who are the slower to, entertain it: others voluntarily
thrust themselves into this indisposition of mind; and as unvoluntarily depart
from it: The last are seldom so troublesome to themselves and others, and if
it so happen, are easily appeased, the latter sort of these are certainly the
best.

But if you ask in which of these four we rank Women: I answer, in the Third,
for they provoke and trouble themselves so often, and are appeased so
difficultly, that they might well be consigned to the Hospital of the
Incurables. Their Anger properly resembles the Dog that barks as soon as any
one knocks at Door, not knowing whether it be Master or Man, a stranger or
Domestic: Her sensitive faculties being the quickest, the least displeasure
you do her, sets her off the hinges and transports her beyond her self, without
considering what reason would do.

Upon this very account of her alterations in this manner the Holy Ghost says,
by the mouth of the Wise man, that the wrath of a Woman is beyond comparison,
for she is such a Furnace and violent Fire, that all the Water in the World
cannot quench, especially when this wrath proceeds from some hate and rancour
which she has conceived against any person, for then she lets fly all the
Arrows of her revenge, when like the Devil at Mack, she sets all her wits at
work, particularly against him that would not comply with her lust and desire
and the satisfaction of her pleasure. The proof of this is manifest in Maryzee,
who seeing that Filander her husband returned nor so soon from his voyage as
she wished, and therefore imagining that out of disdain he refused to revisit
her, changed that great affection she had formerly for him into a greater
hatred, and not being able to allay her fury, in vengeance, she wreaked it upon
three children which she had by him, giving them poison in a potion, and took
the like also her self, choosing and delighting rather to dye her self and see
her children do so, then to give any the least contentment to him who so
passionately loved her, equally with himself.

Antonius Muret in his first book, c. 12 of various Lessons, proposes examples
of certain Women, who showed themselves implacable toward those who would not
condescend to their filthy pleasures.

The first of them was the Wife of Potiphar, who having not the power to
corrupt and debauch Joseph by her alluring persuasions, accused him to her
Husband, for an attempt of a rape, and although this were an imposture, and an
effect of the rage of Love, yet was he imprisoned with Gyves and Manacles on
his feet and hands, through the credulity she had begot in her husband.

The second was Phaedra, who because she could not enjoy the Love of Hippolitus
her son in law, accused him to her husband to have attempted her honor, and
effected so much by her counterfeiting dissembling tricks, that Hippolitus was
torn and drawn in pieces by wild Horses.

The third was Antia, wife to King Praetus, whose entreaties not prevailing
with Bellerophon to lie with her, she addressed her self to the King with a
false charge, that he would have polluted his Conjugal and Royal Bed, and
thereupon demanded his life; which was taken away afterward by the stratagem
of a Letter, that is since grown into a Proverb.

The fourth was Philonome, who being denied her pleasure by Tenis the son of
Cygnus, accused him to his father to have solicited her to uncleanness; which
the father too vainly believing, commanded him to be enclosed in a chest, and
thrown into the Sea.

The fifth was Hippolite, wife of Acastus, the King of Magnesia, who not
gaining the affection of Poleus to her wanton services, impeached him to her
husband, that he would have violated and corrupted that fidelity she ought him,
and so caused his life to be taken away.

The sixth was Hippodamie, the wife of Pelops, who riding abroad made him
believe she was extreme thirsty, which caused her husband to alight out of his
Chariot, with Myrtillus the driver. Pelops was no sooner walked off, but she
sollicits her Charioter to lie with her, which he loyally refused; and no
sooner returned, but she acquaints him, that Myrtillus would have forced her;
which he also believing, threw the said wretch into the Sea there adjoining.

The seventh was the beautiful mother of Timasian the Egyptian, who failing of
her design upon the chastity of her son in law, challenged him to his father,
not of the intent of adultery with her, but of buggery, a greater wickedness;
which so incensed the father, that he forced him streightwith into banishment.

The eight was Fausta the daughter of Maximinus, wife of Constantine the Great,
who was so in love with Crispus her son in law, which he had by one of his
concubines, that she endeavored by all means to entice him to her bed; but
finding him not to be debauched, she changed this ardent love into an
irreconcilable hatred, and accused him to the Emperor of endeavoring
th'dishonoring of her. Upon which information the Emperor caused him to be
slain; though afterward understanding the falseness of his wife, and the truth
of the aforesaid matter, he doomed her also to die, to serve as an example to
all other women who would thus revenge the refusal of their baseness and
impudicity, out of an insupportable rage, and unsatisfiable anger and hatred.

I shall name no more Histories, but only in the last place say, that this
choler is more common and more violent among women than among men; for this
passion residing always in the weaker sort, which woman is naturally more then
man, no marvel if she be so extremely subject thereunto.

We see by experience, that the feeblest creatures, as Pismires, Sparrows, and
Cats, as also Infants and sick persons, are always more choleric and
impatient, than those that are strong. For the Naturalists observe, that the
Lion is so gentle and clement, that he will not meddle with children, or with
women, although he be never so hungry, and though he be King for his strength
and courage above all other salvage beasts. This, in my opinion, is also one of
the reasons, wherefore a woman is so perfidious and disloyal, for anger
drowning her spirit, and transporting of her, unfaithfulness soon masters her
mind, and then she cares not how often she break her most serious promises,
although confirmed by a thousand protestations: Which if I prove, no body will
be ang^y, if I place upon their forehead these two words, which agree together
in Gender, Case, and Number.

F
Falsa Fides.
False Faith.
A Woman is a creature so difficult to be known, that the most ingenuous spirit
in the world knows not certainly to define her; she has about her so many
cabinets, such back-shops, so many secret holes, such cunning warehouses, that
one knows not wherein to trust her; now she laughs, presently she will cry for the
same cause; now she will, by and by she will not; now she is sad, straight she is
merry; now like a Lamb, presently like a Satyr. In fine, he is yet to be born
that knows not her instability and lightness, inconstancy and infidelity.

I say, nothing in the world is more perfidious and shifting than the female
sex, which appears in this, that to accomplish their designs, they will deceive
both father and mother, and the best of their friends, even him whom they
pretend to be the life of their life.

I refer my self to what is recorded in the Book of Genesis of that first
woman, who knew not how, or would not keep that fidelity she owed to God, for
six hours, which might have rendered her posterity happy for ever. Now if this
noble and accomplished creature knew not how to be faithful to her Maker, it is
no wonder if others, being far less perfect, are not the most virtuous toward
men. But the greatest misfortune that can befall a man, is, that she not only
glories in her treachery, but provokes and tempts others to the like
disloyalty. Of this there needs no other proof then that servant-maid of the
High Priest Caiaphas, who accosting and communing with the Prince of the
Apostles, discoursed with him with such artifice, and urged him with such
boldness that she made him deny his Savior. Therefore no way is a woman to be
trusted, especially for her tears, we must not be mollifi'd by them; for, as
Cato says, then is the time wherein they lay their ambuscadoes.

Dum foemina plorat, decipere laborat. Treacherous Dalilah is a proof likewise
of this, for being urgently desirous to understand and get from Samson the
meaning of his Riddle, to acquaint therewith his enemies of his happiness and
his fortunes, she wept in his presence, pretending to be exceedingly troubled;
by which dissimulation and cunning she gained the interpretation, and was the
means afterward of his destruction and ruin.

How great the fickleness of this creature is, there are so manifest proofs,
that he who denies them would attempt Truth it self; this Cato so well knew,
that he did use frequently to repent of three things; the first, that he ever
passed a day idly; the second, that he ever went by sea when he might have gone
by land; and the third, that he ever trusted a secret to a woman.

Plutarch says in his Opuscula, that Augustus Caesar having declared a secret
concerning the affairs of his own Estate and Empire to his good friend Fulvius,
he at his return home acquainted his wife with it, who reported it again to
Livia the wife of Caesar, who being therewith extremely troubled, went forthwith
to her husband to give him intelligence of it, and in such sharp and feeling
language repeated the story, that Augustus was very much incensed against
Fulvius, who had discovered his secret; and thereupon the next morning, when he
came according to custom to salute the Emperor with a, Salve Caesar, the gods
preserve thee; he instantly replied, The gods make thee wiser and better
advised another time. Which return sat so close to the spirit of Fulvius, that
departing home, he called his wife and said unto her, It is now necessary that
I die, and by my own hands bereave my self of my life, for that Caesar has cast
in my teeth that I have not kept secrecy of those things which he committed to
me. To which she rejoyned, You will do well to do so, it being your own fault;
for having lived so long with me, you could not but know the length of my
tongue, and therefore not able to contain this secret. But give me leave, since
I deem my self faulty, to kill my self first; which she performed in his
presence.

In the same place, the same Historian recites another no less remarkable, of a
certain Roman, who coming home from the Senate, was importuned by his wife to
tell her the concern of those affairs which were transacted that day in the
Court; and the sooner to over-perswade him, she seemed not only to be troubled
and discontented that her husband should have no more confidence in her, but
she also fell a weeping, protesting and swearing that she would faithfully
conceal it. The Roman, who partly knew the temper and humor of his wife,
bethought himself of a handsome wile, to prove the faithfulness of his wife,
and thereupon told her, We are much troubled in the Senate upon the relation,
the Pontifices and the Augures have assured us that they saw in the Air, to
wit, a Lark armed with a Pike and Corslet; and we are in pain while we know
whether this portends the State good or evil: But be you sure you speak of it
to no body. Having thus laid the design, he returned to the Palace; when
presently his wife calling one of her maids, weeping, and wailing, and clapping
her hands on her breast, and tearing her hair, by these lamentations and
gestures invited the wench to enquire of her what she ailed; whereupon she
incontinently rehearsed all that her husband had told her, not failing in a
title, (adding, as the custom is of all babbling persons, or the burden of a
song) But take heed (says she) you do not discover this to any person. She had
no sooner done speaking but out went the maid, who straight sought out, and
told it to one of her companions, and she immediately to a Sweetheart of hers,
who was come to give her a visit, and he with the like expedition to others; so
that in a very short space the news was come to the ears of the Senate, and
before the husband of the said Lady could arrive at the Palace, it was full of
the news. Being there arrived, a friend of his met him, and demanded of him if
he came newly from his house; to which he answered affirmatively. Then, quoth
the other, you know nothing of the news. Of what, says he, Is there any thing
happened since? Yes, said the other, for the Senators are to assemble to be
informed, what the Lark which has been seen in the air, armed with a Pike and
a golden Helmet, does signify. The Senator smiling, went directly into the
Senate, to satisfy them of this prodigy of the Lark, declaring unto them,
that it was a fable he had invented to try his wife; which having done, he went
thence home, and repairing to his wife said unto her, You have served me very
finely, your unbridled tongue is the cause why the secret of State is
discovered, and will also be the cause of my quitting my house and country. But
the woman wanted neither wit nor answer, for, quoth she, Are there not three
hundred Senators that heard it as well as you? and why then must you be the
Revealer? What three hundred do you mean replied he? I framed the story to see
how tacit you could be, to serve as an evidence of that little trust which is
to be reposed in women.

Aulus Gellius has a more pleasant story than this, of a young boy named
Papyrius, who coming from the Senate with his father, which was the custom of
the Patricii of Rome, was so importuned by his mother to relate what had passed
there, that he was forced, to content her, to feign this tale: Mother, says
he, this Question is now before the Senate, Whether it were more profitable for
the Commonwealth, that a man should have two wives, or that a woman should
have two husbands; this is to be resolved on to morrow morning. At which his
mother was so astonished and confounded, that she went to her neighbors and
some other Roman Matrons, and there declared to them what the Senators had
propounded; and so solicited the business, that the most noble and great women
of the City came the said morning in a lamentable plight to the Senate, and
there most earnestly beseeched the Fathers that they would decree and ordain,
that women should have two husbands, and not contrariwise. The Senators being
much amazed at this request, and not knowing what should be the cause, the Lad
rose up and related what had passed betwixt him and his mother; for which he
was very highly commended, and a Decree past the Senate, that thenceforward no
children should be admitted into the Senate with their fathers, save He alone,
in respect to his prudence and discretion.

I find also another story (which deserves our note) of a certain Abbess, who
entertaining Pope John the 22. then being in France upon certain occasions,
asked his permission, that Nuns might make Confession one to another, without
having recourse to others than of their own sex, not judging it necessary or
fit, that the imperfections which accompany it should be laid open to men. But
this holy Father, to rid himself handsomely of this request, gave unto her a
Box, desiring her to keep it warily and faithfully until such time as he could
advise with the Cardinals, and others of his Council, in a muter of so great
importance. But according to the manner of her sex, who naturally are curious
and nice to see and know all things, she could not refrain from opening it, to
see what was within, which she had no sooner done, but out flew a small Bird,
which took wing into the air beyond the possibility of her regaining it, which
made her extremely pensive. The Pope returning to her Convent, the first thing
of all he asked for was his Box, which she returning empty, he took occasion to
blame her in good earnest, and said to her, My friend, I see well that you have
no Cellar, and that the secret of Confession would be ill lodged with you,
since your curiosity knew not how to keep that, which with so much engagement
of trust I committed to you; and I well see, that it would be a very
misbecoming thing for you, to give to one another the Authority to hear
Confessions, and to absolve in cases of conscience, which ought so faithfully
to be concealed, and so diligently kept, it being a Sacrilege worthy of the
greatest punishment for a Confessor to reveal them. Being therefore no better
Secretaries than men, you must not take it strange at my hands that I cannot
allow of your request. The poor Abbess being all abashed, dared not to reply
further, her curiosity giving manifest proof of her levity and inconstancy.

The Father Delcio says, that he had read in certain Authors, that a certain
woman being pregnant with a little Demon, cried out diverse nights these words,
Light, Volatile, Foolish, Inconstant, which she reiterated often, being big
with the same inconstancy, which was known afterward when she was delivered of
it, it never ceasing to skip, and gambole, and tumble up and down; which
showed, that certainly it was the same inconstancy, by which you may perceive,
that Woman is the mother of it.

Desportes the Poet has several quaint Verses to this purpose, personating of
one who defied the sex, as follow.

She must he handsome, made of chastity,
And not too wise that shall my faith abuse.
But nothing more's unfaithful, nor so full
Of plots and stratagems than she thus disguised;
Who day and night talks naught but caution.
Mischief's her purpose, she is of little brain,
And lesser judgment, which inflates her mind.
To what misfortunes are we thus condemned?
She who is honestest would rathor have
A single eye than hut a single slave.
The same Poet again, where he searches the matter more to the bottom, which
follow likewise.

O ignorant wisdom, and diseased reason,
Glorious dishonor, and uncertain surely;
Rest full of labor, pleasure made of pain,
Damnifying profit, loyal treason,
Smiles bathed with tears, voluntary jail,
A Sea which to our ruin Sirens breeds,
A solid wind, foundation on the sand,
Winter disguised in the verdant spring.
Lightning, whose flashes wet our bones within,
Without appearance how it entered in!
Disloyal friendship, oath without faith or troth,
Gins, fire, snares, nets, which those are blind may lay.
Happy is he himself knows to defend;
But who is that? that grace to me God send.
My grief will never have an end.
This brave Poet had reason to conclude in this manner; for he is a Phoenix in
the world that can warrant himself against the arrows and disloyal revenges of
women, especially when their minds are possessed with malice, at what time they
whet the edge of their tongues against the worth of those whom they intend to
offend, being either justly or imaginably displeased, which I will show in this
their due Epithet, according to the order of the Alphabet.

G
Garrulum Guttur.
Garrulity of Tongue.
Women have such propensity to talk, that the greatest punishment they can
suffer, is hindering them from babbling; the proof hereof is evident in a certain
widow, who suing to a Judge on her knees, he no sooner began to speak, but she
as instantly replied, Sir, God has been so favorable to me, as to give me many
children, but I never had so much pain in bringing them into the world as this,
caused through the impatience of holding my tongue. A manifest testimony of the
grievousness of that punishment, being counted by her worse than childbearing.

I find out the secret of this imperfection in Genesis; for God forming the
woman of a Rib, hard and crackling, and the man of earth, importing his
indisposition to noise, it was a kind of fore-judging, that man by nature
should be silent and reserved, and the woman talkative and babbling. Aristotle
speaks much to the same purpose, affirming, That a magnanimous man is neither
bauler nor pratler, for that through his prudence, nothing is either new, or
rare, or great, or wonderful; and adds further, That it is a certain sign of a
loose ungoverned spirit, and of a frail and feeble nature.

We see also with Plutarch, that men teach the children of Kings and Princes to
speak low, as a discipline befitting their courage, and the gravity of such
personages. Princeps gravitate vocis monstrat imperium. Wise men have always
held it as a true Maxim, that a talking man is nearest of kin to a woman, and
that therefore he should wear the attire of them. Of this opinion was Plautus,
who says, That the most unalterable and certainest movables of a woman, are
her words and unnecessary clamours. To which purpose I remember one, who
thinking to hit the business, said, That they had two Quivers full of Arrows,
the one of Cries, and the other of Tears; but he might have better said, that
they were both filled with Clamours, for they hive this industry, that they can
weep without cause, and when words are not strong and passionate enough, use
sighs and tears.

The Prophet Jeremy notes it elegantly in these terms, Neque laceat pupilla
oculi, 1. am. 2.
thereby signifying, that tears are as expressive as words of the mouth.
Juvenal goes farther, for he affirms, That women surpasses in chatting and
babbling the Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Lawyers, nay, the very vulgar it self;
Cedunt Grammatici vincuntur Rhetores, omnis Turba clamat, nec causidicus, nec
praecoloquitur, altera nec mulier, verborum tanta cadit vis, tot pariter
pelves, tot ^intinnabula dices pulsari. But this which adds to their
imperfection, is, that they can hardly range or compote themselves to silence,
for which reason we say, That to mske a woman hold her tongue, there were but
two points, showing his fists, an ambiguity in the French Tongue, being an
Harmonying of words in the pronunciation. But however, to let pass that
equivocation, neither points nor reason can stop their talk, as we may see in
the wife of that man, who not being able longer to endure her contumelious
language, she having among other opprobrious words called him, Lousy fellow,
put her down into a well, where by degrees he sunk her, she still persisting in
this her raillery: at last he duckt her quite over head and ears, when to show
the obstinacy of her spirit, and virulency of her mind, being not able to
speak, she put her two thumbs above water, making sign with them of killing of
lice, her thumbs being Agent for her tongue.

From this imperfection I remarque two things, the first is, That there are few
women which are innocent, for being for the most part apt to prate, seldom are
they without sins, for that too much speech has always that misfortune
attending on it; Prove. 10.
In many words there is iniquity. The second is, for that very difficulty they
obtain salvation, and the grace of God, for that their confessions are for the
most part unfruitful, by being not entire and perfect, [This is a la mode
Roman.] The learned Vtinensis observes, that they are ordinarily defective in
three cases, That they seldom or never confess, their exceeding vanity in
habit, supposing it due to their sex; their Lusts either of will or effect,
according to the nature of the sin, or the circumstances of them; which happens
through shame or custom: And superfluous discourse and talk, which, as before
was said, is sinful, and for which an account must be given to God.

St. Gregory in his seventh Book of Morals, cap. 25. says, That all words are
idle when they are spoken without just necessity, or when they are not seasoned
with a godly and religious intention: and if God will not suffer such to go
unpunished, how will he away with perpetual and unbounded talk, the
blasphemies, the detractions, the murmurs, the lascivious tales and fictions,
which are frequent amongst impudent women.

You may see by experience, they will scold three weeks an end, and when all
comes before the Priest, Non 'est vox neque sensus, neither voice nor sense,
they are as mute as fishes. I knew an Hostess, worthy of belief (though she be
a woman as the rest) who protested in my company, that she would rather lodge
thirty soldiers or travelers, than four women together in the same chamber,
not only for the trouble of waiting on them, but for the stir and noise they
make, even to the not hearing of themselves: And that which is worse, often
they fall, de verbis ad verbera, from quarrelling to blows, with so much rage
and fury, that we may justly place them in the predicament of a Fury of Hell,
called by the Poets an Erinnys.

H
Hortis Horrenda.
Hateful Enemy.
I Well know that the Ancients, willing to extol the encomiums and praises of
virtuous women, gave to the Muses foeminine names, as Calliope, Clio, Euterpe,
Thalia, Polyhymnia, Terpsichore, Urania, and many others; and I as well know,
that to disgrace and impute to the bad, they have loaded them with the names
which they have allotted to the Parae, the fatal goddesses, as Cletho,
Lachesis, Atropos; and such as they give to the infernal Furies, viz. Alecto,
Megera, Tysiphone, and Erynnis, the last whereof being the most cruel, the
Poets fain to be the Deesse of discord and malice: To which a woman is very
fitly compared, for neither Lion, nor Tiger, nor Dragon, nor Panther, are so
cruel, so fell, so barbarous, as she in her malice, whereof both Divine and
Profane Histories have given such certain proofs, that no body but the
Partisans and accessors to such cruelties, dare deny them.

The holy Scripture in the first place shows us, that Daniel was more safe
among the hungry Lions, than just Naboth was by the practices of Jezabel, the
wife of King Ahab, who, by two false Witnesses, took possession of his
Vineyard, which, by right of inheritance, belonged to him, and afterward
caused him miserably to be put to death; having also butcherly murdered the
Prophets of God.

The same holy Writ gives us an example of the Prophet Jonas, in greater
security in the belly of a Whale, than poor Samson in the arms and embraces of
his Concubine Dalilah; for this treacherous She, knowing his strength to
consist in his hair, by her dissembled kindnesses and entreats, over-perswaded
him to rest, and lay his head in her bosom, where she wickedly despoiled him,
and cut off his hair, and then basely delivered him, feeble as he was, to the
merciless fury of his bloody enemies.

We see further in the same Scripture, St. John the Baptist in full liberty and
freedom in the fields and deserts, reverenced by Tigers, Lions, Dragons, and
other salvage beasts, not receiving the least hurt or damage from them; when
by and by the same Saint is persecuted, oppressed, and unjustly imprisoned, at
the instigation of lewd Herodias, who, to add to the full measure of her
wickedness, caused his head to be cut off; and not therewith satisfied,
demanded to have it brought before her in a platter in the midst of a Feast:
What fury, what passion, what rage, what cruelty was this? to conspire against
her Confessor, to design and devise the death of her Physician, to raise, as it
were, the world, against an innocent person; not to respect him whom men
Believed for the Messiah, to transgress the bounds of honor and modesty, to
scandalize holy men, to condemn to the dungeon and irons a person so renowned
and celebrated through the world, and to bring him to death, whom the Son of
God had Canonized for the greatest among men! Certainly this was the horriblest
cruelty ever exercised by any woman on Scripture-record.

But if we seek further into profane History, we shall find more detestable
examples of this, and which rather require our tears to deplore them, than pen
and inck to describe them, and transmit them to posterity; and lo, one of the
most tragical that ever I met with.

Dion of Perusa reports, that Mark Anthony having caused the head of Cicero,
the wonder of the Roman Orators, and his sworn enemy, to be brought before him,
laid it on a table to feed and glut his eyes with the sight of it, and having
so done, bad it be taken away; but his wife, to show the hatred she had
conceived against this Father of eloquence, taking his head between her hands,
spit upon the face, belching out a stomach full of imprecations and execrable
reproaches; and withal having pulled out his tongue, she pierced it through
with pins and needles, till she had satiated her cruelty.

But yet see a more detestable story. Baudel in his Tragical Histories reports,
that a Spanish Lady called Violenta (her name well suiting with her nature)
finding her self deceived (by her Enamorato, a Cavaliero of the same Nation
whose name was Diego) under the pretense of marriage, while he had espoused
another, did with her allurements so far prevail with him, as to draw him one
night to her house, pretending she would be at his discretion; only desired
him, that she might have the respite awhile for three or four hours to sleep
away that trouble, and the former discontent between them; and that in the mean
while he would be pleased also to repose himself. But no sooner was poor Diego
fallen asleep, but she, aided by her Chamber-maids, strangled him, and not
satisfied therewith, gave him five or six stabs with a poniard, as an addition
to her revenge; then she pulled out his eyes and his tongue, and having opened
his breast, she tore his heart out, and afterward so wounded and mutilated his
body, that no body could know one part from the other; and for a conclusion, to
fulfill her cruelty, she threw him out of her window upon the stones below. The
passengers were amazed and afraid at this pitiful and disfigured spectacle; but
recollecting themselves, examined this Lady, who confessed the crime; whereupon
Justice appointed a punishment worthy of her crime, which was executed in the
presence of the Duke of Calabria, son of King Frederick of Aragon.

I will not trouble you with more Histories, only add, That the Painters in
their figuring the Infernal Furies, represent them with the visages of women,
to show, that nothing better resembles a Tygress than a wicked woman, nay, the
devil himself cannot be worse, whom, if the Paintings and Statues show with
horns, the women are the same in their brooches, metamorphosing the heads of
Men into those of Rams.

If the devil appears in borrowed bodies, to seduce the most steadfast; women,
they paint, masque, and patch their faces, to attract and entice the slaves of
their pleasure. If the devil be the Tempter, women ^ore charming, more subtle,
more artificial, know as well to tempt men, so that they overthrow more than
Satan could do himself; and if the devil be so difficultly dispossessed of any
place, particularly it is out of the head of a woman, as we may see by that
handsome Ceremony used by the Church in Baptism, for therein the Priest
exorcising the devil, if it be a male child names Satan twenty times, but if it
be a female he repeats him thirty times; to intimate that it is more difficult
to conjure him out of that sex. A Poet jesting on the subtlety of women, said,
They are like the picture of St. Michael reversed, that has the devil at his
feet, and women at his head: But letting that pass, I say, That there is so
much agreement betwixt those two, as that they will accord in cruelty; see here
the verses.

Women and Devils are each others like
One, sinners tempts; the other, the fond lover:
This, charms our wishes; That, enchants our vows l
This, with paint pleases us; That, with appearance:
Both do deceive us with fair seeming hope:
This, pierces presently; That, keeps its fire.
Devils their hell about them always carry,
And women do the like in some respect:
The one's ill for the 'live, That, for the dead:
Of the one, the inside pleases; That, the out:
One pains the body; to other grieves the mind:
One for a time does burn, the other ever.
He that an equal full accord would see,
Must stay till this mad couple wedded be.
To sum up all their cruelty, take this; If the devil be malicious and envious
of the salvation of men's souls, the women are so, and more sollicitously of the
good and content of those whom they hate; which affords us good reason to say,
That they are the fire of Envy.

I
Invidiosus Ignis.
Ire and Despite.
OVid, that most famous Poet, says in his second Book of his Metamorphosis,
that the goddess Pallas desiring one day to see Envy, she went to the bottom of
an obscure valley, where she kept her residence, but not willing to enter into
so obscure a place, opened the door with the point of her Javelin, and there
espied her; which Fiction being most elegantly transcribed by Mr. Sandys, is
here inserted.

Forthwith to Envy's Cave her course she bent,
Furred with black filth within a deep descent,
Between two hills, where Phoebus never shows
His cheerful face, where no wind ever blows;
Replete with sadness and unactive cold,
Devoid of fire, yet still in smak inrol'd.
Whither when as the feared in battle came,
She staid before the house (that hateful frame
She might not enter) and the dark door struck
With her bright Lance, which straight in sunder broke:
There saw she Envy lapping Vipers blood,
And feeding on their flesh, her vices food:
And having seen her, turned away her eyes.
The Catiff slowly from the ground does rise,
Her half-devoured Serpents laid aside;
Viewing her form so fair, her arms so bright.
She groaned and sih't at such a cheerful sight, etc.
All this is but a Fable, but it handsomely intimates all the deformities of
this sin of Envy, and the wretchedness of the Envious.

The Poet feigns, that Pallas found her in the form and shape of an old woman,
to show, that Envy is a vice which has reigned from the beginning of the
world, for it was that which ruined Lucifer, and made him fall with his
accomplices from heaven, out of an emulation to be equal with God, and from an
envy of that felicity which was designed for man by the mystery of the
Incarnation; according to St. Bernard and diverse other Fathers. This was it
which fomented that mortal hatred betwixt Cain and his brother Abel, for seeing
that his works and his sacrifices were more acceptable to God than his own, he
was so displeased, that he was thereby instigated to Manslaughter. This was it
that made Joseph's brethren sell him to the Ishmaelites; which provoked and
exasperated the Sacred College of the Apostles against St. John and St. James,
for asking of our Savior the honorable places of his right and left hand in his
Kingdom. This is that which brought death into the world, according as the
wiseman says,

Invidia diaboli mors intravit in orbem terrarum. For the devil maligning the
happiness of our first parents, presently resorted to them in that earthly
Paradise, and prevailed so with his wiles and temptations, that he seduced them
from the obedience they ought to God; from whence ensued hunger, thirst,
poverty, misery, and sickness, which ever since convey us to our graves.

You see then, that not without reason Envy appeared to Minerva like an old
woman; she was also pale and wrinckled, to show, that the envious are
ordinarily sad, pensive, and of frowning aspects, by seeing their neighbors
prosper in goods, means, greatness, offices and riches.

She bad in her hand a staff of thorn, with a hook at the end, to signify,
that the envious never cease to vex, to carp, and examine, and disquiet any
person, either of honor, knowledge, or virtue; and if not by evil-speaking, her
madness will proceed to other means and ways, to render them infamous and
ridiculous to the eyes of the whole world.

Her heart was gnawed with Vipers, to intimate, that the envious seeing others
to prosper, has in his own breast those secret pincers which tear it in
pieces, and molest it perpetually. To which purpose St. Angustine says, That
he would rather have Vipers within his body, than Envy within his soul; for as
Vipers bite away the entrals of their mothers to make their way out of the
womb, so Envy bites and pricks the mind of such a person, that he knows not on
which side to turn to be at ease, and to find any rest.

She inhabited the bottom of an obscure Valley, where neither Sun nor Wind
could enter; to show, that envy lodges always in some base mind, and that the
envious diffiding in their own merit, are always in vexatious disquiet, till
they have tarnished and fullied the honor and repute of any person that is
esteemed by the world. But that which is most observable in the Fable, is, That
Minerva seeing the ugliness and deformity of Envy, would not enter into her
solitude, but only knocked at door with the Spear of her Lance, importing,
that nothing so much pierces the heart of the envious, as the prudence,
wisdom, and virtue of men of worth, nor that cuts them more to the quick.

In sum, Envy seeing the beauty excellency, and dignity of Pallas, was ready to
burst with despite, a further proof of that trouble which virtue causes in the
envious; which gave occasion to Themistocles to compare them to the Fly
Cantharides, that as those venomous Animals feed themselves of the best of the
Roses, and other the most fragrant Flowers; so the envious nourish their hate
by the heroic deeds and generous actions of others, endeavoring by all means
to extinguish their virtues, and to make them contemptible in the eyes of the
world.

St. Austin compares this unfortunate vice to the Plague and Contagion, for as
that drives men and women out of Cites and Towns, so envy not being able to
endure wise and virtuous men to abide either in their privacies, or in the
management of State Affairs, drives them into the world to seek their
adventures, where they usually meet with many adversities.

I observe moreover especially, That among all the Vices, there is none that is
at so great a feud with Virtue as Envy; for if any of them are at enmity with
virtue, it is that which is contrary and opposite to such a peculiar; as we see
in Gluttony, which directly opposes Abstinence; Lust, Chastity; Pride
Humility; and so all the rest: but Envy sets her self generally against all,
and attaques them also singly.

Envy is injustice in it self, for nothing is more unjust than to rejoice in
the evil that befalls another, and to be sad at h^s prosperity, although it
brings them not either contentment or profit, and often no prejudice to the
envied; for God, who knows how to draw evil out of good, does as much advance
and raise the good, as they endeavor to depress and undervalue them. This
appears plainly in Joseph, who being maligned by his brothers, who designed the
utter abolition of him in the affection and memory of his father and kindred,
was by them cast into a pit, and sold to strangers; then was the time that God
raised him, gaining him the favor of Pharaoh, who made him Viceroy of Egypt:
But that which I note especially in the ordering that Providence, is, That God
not only augments the goods and prosperity of those that are so envied, but
also makes it a motive to the envious, to become honest men, and to render
themselves worthy and capable of recovering the grace and blessing of God
bestowed on the envied. For it is the ordinary course of Divine Providence to
propose to sinners the virtues and and good examples of the just; howbeit, some
of them may be persons contemptible and abject, according to their outward
appearance, and in the worlds esteem, thereby to stir in them a holy jealousy
and emulation to follow their example, and to imitate them in those things
which are related to virtue and salvation.

We need no other proof hereof than the life of St. Austine, to whom God
proposing the singular virtues, and the good examples of the holy and austere
life of St. Anthony the Hermit, and others who lived in the same manner; the
holy Doctor was so taken with Devotion, that being yet wallowing in the filth
of sin, he cried out in a holy jealousy, Surgunt indocti, and rapiunt coelos,
nos antem in doctrinis nostris sine cord ecce ubi volutamur in carne and
sanguine: Are not we very miserable to continue in the filth of sin and
voluptuousness, while the simple, the idiots, and the ignorants ravish Heaven
of its evangelical perfection. This holy jealousy was in part the incentive to
his Conversion, and that good life he led afterward.

But to fall on my subject, I mark, that Ovid did not choose any thing in nature
better to express the deformity and loathsomeness of Envy, than the resemblance
or hieroglyphick of an old woman, described as before, intimating to us, that
woman more then any other creature, makes her self the slave of imperfection;
for if you make a narrower search, you shall find, that even the most virtuous
will appear defective.

All men know, that Sarah did so violently envy the good of her handmaid
Hagar, because she had conceived (though with her own consent) by Abraham, that
she compelled her shortly after to abandon her house. Rachel also envied the
fruitfulness of her sister Leah; Martha likewise murmured against Mary her
sister, because she sat at the feet of our Savior, hearing his words, while
she made ready his entertainment. To conclude, the envy of women is so
transcendent, that the only way to avoid it is to be possessed of nothing; for
what ever they see, that they covet; what ever they covet, they demand; and
that which is worst, if you refuse them, all is lost, their love is changed into
hatred, their hatred into detractions and injuries, with such a confusion of
chat and railing, that I may well call them

K
Kaos Calumniarum.
Confusion of Calumnies.
CAlumny is a vice so detestable, that God abhors it equally with the rest;
it is properly an envious detraction, woven with sinister and false
interpretations of the words and anions of ones neighbors, designing the ruin
of his honor, his life, and all his fortunes; it has the devil for its
grandsire, pride for its father, envy for its mother, a wicked mind for its
abode, and the virtue of another for its matter.

The devil being the author of this vice, it was very fit he should bear the
name of it, for Diabolus is as much as to say Calumniator, a railing accuser.
It was he who intending the ruin of the world in the persons of our first
parents, calumniated (in the delusion of the woman) the commandment of God,
persuading her, that he envied the contentment and felicity of man, and that he
willed not that he should be like unto Him; a lie as false as detestable; from
whence we infer, That Calumny is the devils Pensil, Baelzebub's stamp and mark,
the ruin of virtue, and a pattern or example of such as are graduates in the
school of ignorance.

For it is the custom of the foolish, wanting reason and truth, to have
recourse to biting words, to make use of such teeth and claws, to bite, and
scratch, and tear innocent souls, and such as thought not any way of offending
them. So that whosoever would embrace an innocent life, and be a lover of
virtue, must firmly resolve to arm himself against the battery of venomous
tongues, and to rest assured, that a world of enemies, whom he knows not, will
be knocking at the door of his conscience: For it is the portion of the
children of God to undergo the persecution of tongues, and extremely happy are
they that suffer it in patience: Blessed are you when men revile you, and speak
all evil of you. And indeed if you observe, you may see, that such tongues
meddle not with the wicked; for Calumny being the daughter of Envy, whose bent
is against Virtue, a stranger to them; it follows, that they are not subject to
reproaches. But that which aggravates most of all this vice, is, that it
measures others by the Ell of their demerits, reproving them of that wherein
themselves are guilty; without heeding that ancient Proverb,

Impudent is he that would cure a sore,
Not healing of himself having far more.
This is clearly to be seen in History; the lustful wife of Potiphar accused
chaste Joseph to have attempted her (but imaginary) honor; the same did those
filthy Elders to the chaste Susanna. The enraged Jews deemed the Apostles, the
sons of God, to be drunk with new wine, hearing them speak in all Languages, by
the assistance of the Spirit of Truth. But I shall not insist longer upon any
story, only repeat these verses.

Calumny lodges in the proud man's head,
Has in a troubled furious brain its bed;
Like to the Spider, (that what ere it takes,
To poison does convert) it virtue makes
A vice to be, and all brave actions counts
Evil to be, to r^ason wrong amounts.
Like to the Wasps, who in the heat appear,
Buzzing about, and stings for honey bear.
Or like a villain Hostler, that deceives
The wearied Horses, and them nothing leaves.
The bad don't this to th'bad, for no man hates
That which is like him, but what discrepates.
The woman questionless is the most subject to this vice, for handling her
tongue so nimbly, it is no marvel if very often it be injurious.

The Prince of Philosophers not only terms her in his Politics a babbling
creature, but adds also, That if at any time they happen to be eloquent, it is
not to appear virtuous and wise, but to give proof of their impatience in talk;
the clack of a mill is not so loud to the ears of passengers, as the prattling
detraction of women to the lovers of silence; they will have sooner framed and
reared a house full of injuries for the smallest thing in the world, than the
best workman in the earth could have contrived one; they bestow so much
industry, and have such a faculty of defaming those they hate, that their
enemies are soon oppressed, and are constrained to give way to their calumnies;
although their integrity might render them as unmovable and impregnable as a
Rock.

I find a signal History in the 13 of the Acts, the Sacred Text holds forth,
that the wicked Jews laying in wait for those two glorious Apostles, St. Paul
and Barnabas, to make them depart from among them, and to bring them into
disgrace with the people, advised, among other ways therein, this, as the most
expedient, to employ certain religious and precise women, who, with no other
weapons than their serpentine tongues, so effected their design, did so
strenuously by their forgeries and lies impose upon the people, that they drove
away those two Disciples out of the City with shame; and if women of fragrant
Devotion, breathing nothing outwardly but Religion, could so deceivingly abuse
the Apostles, the sons of God, being also blameless; no wonder if many others
do the same, especially to those, who have no participation with their
irregular affections.

St. Gregory the Great in the second book of his Dialogues, chap. 23. reports,
That St. Bennet having two religious Votresses near his Monastery, ordered one
of his Monks, that was the simplest and modestest of his Convent, to serve
them; and administer all things to them that should be necessary for the
maintenance of their life. But in as much as the nobility of worldly extraction
oftentimes puffs up the mind and courage of those that are so descended, and
are very rich withal: these Gentlewomen could not any long time dissemble,
under the habit of mortification, the vanity of their spirit, and the poison of
their venomous tongues, insomuch that they not only contemned and despised the
simplicity of the Monk that served them, but they vexed y injured, and scoffed
at him so often, and in such a manner, that the poor man not being longer able
to endure it, repaired to St. Bennet, complaining, and particularly enumerating
the injuries and reproaches which for a long time he had endured from them,
without replying a word again.

St. Bennet having heard his complaint, sent them word, that if they would not
refrain their tongues, amend from their course of speaking evil, and reform
their manners, that he would excommunicate them, and cut them off from the
participation of the Sacraments, and from the communion of the faithful.

This threatening not prevailing to reform these two Nuns, it happened soon after
they both died; at their obsequies, when according to their appointment Mass
was to be said, and the Deacon standing up according to the custom, commanded
all excommunicate persons to depart the Church; the Nurse of these two Nuns
going (as is used) for them to the offertory, see them come out of their graves
and to go out of the Church, at the same time that the Deacon spoke the
aforesaid words; at which being much amazed, but at last remembering her self of
the threatening St. Bennet had used to them when alive, that he would
excommunicate them if they desisted not from the aforesaid injuries, she went
to the said holy Father, and recounted to him her vision, who gave her with his
own hand an oblation to present for them, assuring her they should be bound no
longer by Excommunication, and that thereafter they should abide in their
Tombs, which happened accordingly.

From this story we collect these two things; first, That the reproaches used
by these two Nuns were so odious and abhorrent to the Divine Majesty, that this
eminent Father judged them worthy the major Excommunication, which is properly
a rescinding of them from the mystical Body of Christ, and the participation of
the Sacraments. The second is, That such contumelies, evil speakings, and the
like, are a thousand times more blameable in those, who have betook themselves
to the strictness and retirements of penitence, mortification, and evangelical
perfection, than others, and consequently worthy of greater punishments.

Now of all remedies, and to triumph gallantly over all these calumnies, and to
silence them, this is the best; Not to reply, but to give way to them glorying
and vaporing in the arrogance of their own conceit.

The wise Socrates found no better to wear the Trophies of having overcome his
two wives petulancy, as St. Jerome records, writing against that arch Heretic
Jovinian; the story imports, That Socrates not being able to suffer the noise
and tintamar of the opprobrious language they vomited out against him, went out
of his house, yielding them the place, and seated himself upon a bench just
over against the windows of the upper chamber: but these two women being ready
to burst with madness to see themselves thus defected, to revenge themselves,
took a chamberpot full of stinking water and threw it upon his head; at which
he moved not at all, to show them, that it was not in their power to shake his
constancy, but replied merrily to them, I well know, says he, that after
thunder comes rain and foul weather; intimating, that the best way to keep out
injuries, is, either to answer pleasantly, or nothing, especially to women in
rage.

This is taught us in a Christian Poem, as much to the purpose as the matter
can deserve.

In quarrels, contests, and in ill disputes,
It Is better quietly to submit and yield,
Than to engage too rash and keep the field,
For th'useless vanity of a repute.
As when to Duel men engaged come;
It Is not thought wisdom to make too much play.
Victory by retreating often is got,
An overthrow often the pursuers lot.
Better it is when, th'Ship is tempest tossed,
To lore the sails than let top-gallant fly,
And madly cast away both life and ship.
Great is the power of condescension, so
The Sun prevails, when boyst'rous Winds cannot do.
To which may be added these also,

Be not transported by a rash desire
Of having victory in all discourse;
Honestly to recede it greater glory,
Than to attempt unprofitable fame.
At wrestling, it is not manhood for to break
A joint of him that is thrown;for he that lay
The undermost, often rose and won the day.
See here how we ought to comport our selves amidst the fire of differences and
dissentions, and particularly when you see women make a coil, without offering
to smile, or to show any other pleasant gesture; for sometimes they make
themselves choleric and furious, to intimidate and make those afraid, whom
they purpose to shackle in their strong prisons; and yet they live so sweetly,
that we may proceed and call them

L
Lepida Lues.
Pleasant Contagion.
THe poison of an Asp does not sooner pierce into the inwards of a man, whom it
has secretly bitten, then an unchaste woman does sweetly fascinate the eyes
and, the heart of her lover: she has so many artifices to compass her
designs, that it would be an impossible attempt to write them down; for seeing
she is the seat of wanton love, and one of the partakers with our three
enemies, her glory is to show her self, and to be called, Mistress; yea, to
fetter with cords of vanity the most subtle and unconfined persons of the
world. This is discoverable by that admirable Hieroglyphick of Venus.

Pausanias making the Pourtract of this goddess of Love, represented her to be
extremely beautiful of face, placing under her right foot a Lion, a Hare, a
Bird, and a Fish; and under her left a Tortoise: her beauteous countenance, to
signify, that the woman by the attractions of her countenance drew into her
slavery true Herculeses and Sampsons; likewise Sardanapalusses and
Heliogabalus's Hares in feebleness and delicacy; Adams and David's, true Birds
in contemplation, Solomon's in learning and wisdom; as also all sorts of men
signified by the Fish swimming in the Sea of this great world. But that which
is most notable, is, Venus had a Tortois under her left foot, which is of that
side with the heart, to show, that as the Naturallists say, that creature
cease not to live although its heart should be pulled out; so the perishing
beauty of a Woman has such power over the slaves of her immodest impudicity,
that she takes from them their heart, understanding, and wisdom, leaving them
yet full of life, charming them in such a sort, that they remain blind, and
then exposes them to a thousand vanities, and to attempts very near impossible.

Tell me, I pray you, what would not a sensuate man do to gain the good grace
and favor of her whom he adores in his heart? If he be a man of quality, and
has wherewithal to maintain his pursuits, God knows the expense he is at in
courting his Lady; besides mimical apishness, cares, inquietudes, and
stratagems; he must also know what color she fancieth best, to clothe himself
in that Silk, and give his attendants Liveries; he must run at the Ring in
Tournament, must be seen at Balls, at Dances, and Masks; must salute their
windows with morning-musick; he must put the letters of her name diversifi'd
and enterlaced with yellow, green, gray, and black, upon the Cassocks,
Aparisons, etc. of his Lacqueys: he must quake four hours at the gate, relate
his griefs bare-headed in at a window; he must be resolved at all turns to
fight with his Rival, and give him the salute of a sword in his belly; must
contemn all manner of danger, even death it self; he must offer his blood and
his life to hallow and legitimate the sacrifice of his flame; must moreover
admire her eyes, her hands, her hair, and her whole body; to attribute to her
the name of goddess, darting, his sweet life, his dear soul, and such many like
Epithites, such alluring sweetnings, and attracting miniardises, that we must
use Pshyches's thousand to count them. But what do these good dames during this
exercise? they foment the fire of love by a thousand inventions that they have
in a readiness, fair speeches, protestations, promises, oaths, which carry the
ensigns of friendship: Their Balls, their Feasts, their Banquets, their Gates,
their Windows, the Streets, broad-places ^^d the very Churches (O impiety!
^erve them to lay their snares and gins, for to catch with those counterfeit
notes the idolaters of their impurities: They have a whole Arsenal of aspects,
gestures, actions, and idle looks; of gaudiness, ceremonies, full of
confidence, readiness, fear, grief, doubt, vexation, the better to get the
spoil of what they enterprise: They will wanton and play with the signs of
their eyes, head, hands, gloves, handkerchiefs: Those hours they have free to
greater designs, the posts, messengers and letters run charged and laden with
weepings, tears, sighs, hopes, griefs, sorrow, lamentations, afflictions,
racks, furies, torments, deaths, racks, fires, arrows, and flames; and if this
will not do, then they have recourse to despairs, revenges, impatiencies,
injuries, complaints; and to those names of cruel and barbarous, Scythian,
Tiger, Bear, Lion, perfidious, ungrateful, of no affection. With these
inventions and artifices they steal away the heart, and blind the spirit of the
idolaters of their vanity.

I will not run through the Divine and Humane Histories, to prove the power
that women have had over the ^^congest, wisest, and discreetest men of the
world; only say, that the Scripture, to show the danger of conversing with
this sort of women, and to teach us to fly them as a pestilence, though never
so seeming-pleasing and agreeable, has writ down this remarkable sentence,
Better is the iniquity of a man, than a woman that does well, intimating, that
it were safer to be in the company of a Robber, than with the most pious woman
in the world; tentat enim mulier, for a woman is tempting, whereas you may
continue a good space with a thief, without consenting or being accessory to
his wicked ways. How many do we see in all Histories that have repented, to
have only seen and spoke with women; David regretted the remaining part of his
life, the occasion and the time wherein he saw and knew Bathsheba. The
Scripture speaking of those Elders that attempted the honor of chaste Susanna,
says, That all their misery sprung from hence, that they saw her often washing
her self in a fountain. Videbant eam senes quotidie ingredientem and
deambulantem and exarserunt in concupiscentiam ejus.

The Poet Musaeus speaking of the unfortunate Leander, drowning in the billows
and boisterous waves of the Hellespont, in the performance of his Lady Hero's
command, makes him complain in this manner,

For having tasted Beauty's pleasant bait,
In these rough Seas I find my cruel fate.
So the prudent Ulysses stopped his ears with wax, that he might not hear the
voice of the Achelojan Nymphs, and carried the herb Moly about him, to get out
of the company of Circe. And if the company and frequenting of good and
virtuous women is an unevitable contagion, what think we of those who are so
miserably prodigal of their worth and honor, which should render them the most
esteemed, most constant, and most prudent? what shall we think of those
miserable women, who by their attracts, enticements, and artifices, destroy and
ruin so many souls destined for heaven?

St. Austin aggravating the sin which they commit, says, That it is more
enormous than the sacrilege of the Jews, who caused the Son of God to be put to
death; for they only shed his blood in taking away his life, these damn and
destroy those souls which he preferred before his own life, for to redeem and
save whom, he did diligently and kindly lay down what ever was dear to him;
Empti enimestis pretio magno, You are bought with a great price, says the
Apostle. Now forasmuch as they cannot practice the abovenamed artifices,
without making and telling a thousand lies, and and as many dissimulations, we
may not be coy in the following our Alphabetmethod, to all them.

M
Mendacium Monstruosum.
Monstrous Lies.
AMong all other things which makes the wisdom of good men to appear; constancy
in perplexities, and candor in affairs without hypocrisy, are the most
desirable. For as to the first, if it be a wonder in nature, to see the
Salamander an Aquatile, to refresh it self sometimes among burning live coals,
and that to the conservation also of its life, though the fire be the activest
of Elements; It is also a mavelous work of grace, to see a soul make to it
self a Paradise of comfort amidst the fire of quarrels and contention, and the
flames of a bloody persecution, which it does the more freely and courageously,
for that innocence has secured its defenses, and made it conceive of the world
as a thing indifferent.

For although the tempest of Serpentine tongues, and the snares of that
Tygress, Envy, compass it on all sides; so it happens, that in those straits
virtue fails not to beget in the heart a million of holy and heavenly thoughts,
who flying upwards, return with a pacifick calm, which commands the floods to
abate, and miseries to end in the sweet springtime of Angelical repose, making
it victorious over all those troubles which would any way disquiet it.

In the second place, Although worldly wise men glory in their plots, their
cunning and dissimulation, rendering double evil for evil, calling revenge,
courage; simplicity of heart, foolishness; innocence, brutishness; freedom of
mind, levity; forgiveness of mind, cowardliness and impertinence. And when
contrarily it is the wisdom of the just always to speak truth, as says St.
Gregory in his Tenth Book of Morals, chap. 27. when he disguiseth nothing, but
speaks sincerely, suffers injuries patiently, loves truth freely, flatters no
body, nor approves the vice of the insolent, abhors nothing more than to see
lying in credit, to be complaisant to those who feed themselves with vanity,
the praises, flatteries, and the good opinion of their imaginary excellency; I
wonder not that God so strictly forbids lying.

For there is nothing so particularly bolsters up the wisdom of worldlings, and
the vanity of their ambitions, than flattery, which is the daughter of lying,
and the abortive of that servile vice, as Plutarch calls it. And although it be
ordinary to all men in general, according to that saying of the Royal Prophet.
All men are liars; yet this hinders not, but that it is a sin against nature:
for a man being framed of a spiritual and corporal part, it was necessary, that
the Author of that nature, should give unto her exterior speech, to express
outwardly the veritable conceptions of the mind: and it appears, that nothing
makes such a difference between man and beasts, than this rare gift of Heaven.
For Man has his understanding alike the Angels, his being with the Stones, his
vigor with the Plants, his senses with the Beasts, and nothing does
distinguish them but speech.

But to proceed farther in this subject, we must observe, that to speak
distinctly, six things are necessary in the body; the Tongue, the Palate, the
Throat, the Teeth, the Lips, and the Lungs: And six faculties of the Soul; the
Imagination to form its conceptions, the Understanding to place them in order,
the Will to give motion to them, the Memory to retain what is taken, the Sight
to behold him attentively to whom the speech is directed, and the Hearing to
judge of its pronunciation, and to receive the reply from others. And although
all these things be effectually, or formally different among themselves, yet
they all concur together in the instantaneous forming of a word: and the
external word ought to be conformable to the inward conception of the spirit,
for to no other purpose did the Creator frame it. So that they that lie, sin
not only against the Divine Ordinance, but also against Nature her self, and
their own Conscience, as we may see in the etymology of the Latin word,
Mentiri est contra mentem ire. And although it be a vice common to humane
nature corrupted by sin, yet more especially are women prone to it; for being
naturally bablers, and subject to many evil speeches, and superfluous
discourses, it is very rare if they slip not with their tongue, in either
pernicious, officious, or mirthful lying.

But that which makes them more blameworthy, are not their exterior lies in
the utterance, but the interior, under the vail of fair appearances: as
pleasure oftentimes covers it self with the robe of virtue, so naughty women
conceal their dispositions under the enamel of piety, for the most part
counterfeited. You may see them in the Church sometimes two or three hours
together upon their knees, faining an ecstasy in meditation, turning up the
whites of their eyes to the roof of the Temples, without changing their brow;
and to give all the signs of a religious and devout soul, only to receive the
praises and honor of the world, hatching in the mean time a whole squadron of
lascivious desires, an army of wicked designs, and a battalion of folly, and
vanity, and impertinencies in affection: They are no sooner out of the Church,
but presently to dinner, where they eat and drink to excess, and after dinner
fall to dancing, galliarding and fooling, and sometimes engage very far in the
combats of Venus; not considering, that all these dances and lascivious
deportments, add the fuel and matter to maintain the flames of everlasting
fire: For God so much abhors them, that not being able to suffer them in his
people, he threatened them by the Prophet Ezekiel in these terms, Pro eo quod
plausisti manu and percussisti pede and gavisa es toto affettu super terram
Israel idcirco ego extendam manum meam super te and te tradam in direptionem
Gentium and interficiam te de populis: As if he should have said, Assure thy
self, unthankful Nation, that I will stretch out my hand against thee, and not
only deliver thee to the mercy of strange Nations, but I will also reprove
thee, and make thee most miserable, because thou have set thy heart and thy
affections in dances, and balls, and the clapping of the hands and feet.

St. Augustine speaking of this very place, says, It were better to till and
manure the earth on a Sunday, than to allow of dancing. The Scripture speaking
of Sara the wife of young Tobias, notes to us, That this young woman finding
her self maliciously injured by one of the maidservants of her father in law,
confined her self to prayer and supplication, fasting three days and three
nights without eating or drinking, to beg of God the reparation of the injury
she had received; and amongst other points of her justification she pleaded,
that she had never been present at Dances, as the most notable of all; Lord,
says she, speaking to God, I never lusted after any man in the world, but have
kept my self spotless and free from any impure pleasure; nor have made one in
the dances, and other levities of those my sex. Nunquam cum ludentibus ne
miscui neque cum iis qui in levitate ambulant. A manifest proof, that this
virtuous Dame did well know, that dances were displeasing to Almighty God; not
that that corporal exercise is in it self evil, but by reason of the lascivious
actions and beastly demeanor of ranting lewd women.

I shall speak no more of such here, but return to the preciser and
hypocritical Curtesans, among whom naughtiness and lying are more cunningly
cherished, which vice, foments their turpitudes and deformities, as the Toad
among Sage, or the Serpent at the foot of Alexander, and the Asp among the
Roses, whose superstition, hypocrisy and pleasure, drive away virtue, and
whose deceitful appearances are the original of our misfortunes, concealing
from us the cause of all those miseries which befall us, like to the Hyaena,
who hides a most fell and cruel heart under the sweet music of humane voice;
like to the Panther, which keeps a venomous and traitorous disposition under
those acceptable varieties of color in her sweet smelling skin; like to the
Lizard, which counterfeits it self dead, the better to seize upon the innocent
and miserable passenger. So that we proceed to call her

N
Naufragium Vitae.
The Shipwreck of Life.
SOlomon a most renowned Prince for riches and wisdom, says in his Proverbs,
that he who maintains a lewd woman destroys his substanee; where you are to
observe, that the word Substance signifies not only the goods of fortune, but
also the health, and what ever sustains life. So that this kind of women ruin
not only houses and families, but, as we see in the third Letter of the
Alphabet, the health and the life of men, that will not depart from them.

This the Romans signified, in ordering all things necessary to the funerals of
the dead to be carried into the Temple of Venus; for nothing sooner brings a
man to his grave then venereal pleasures. Wherefore Pythagoras being once
invited to the wedding of his friend, replied, That nothing was more regretful
to him than to assist at such Obsequies; meaning, that to marry a wife was to
commit himself to the Tomb.

That of Metellus is alike ingenious, this grave person being asked by Marius,
wherefore he would hot marry his daughter, being of a beautiful proportion,
very eloquent, of a noble race, rich in dower, of great honor, and as much
virtue; answered him thus, I would believe your daughter to be absolutely
accomplished, but I do rather prefer my self than her; intimating, that a
married man owes the greatest part of his life to his wife, not to himself, and
is to take more care for her contentment, than for his own affairs. As that
ancient Proverb, The rain, the smoke, and an unreasonable woman will often
drive a man out of his house.

Carendella was wont to say, That a woman was a Peacock in the streets, a
Parrot in the windows, an Ape in the bed, and a Devil in the house. There goes
a notable story of this Gentleman; the Duke of Urbin desiring to reward those
services which he had loyally and prudently done him, bid him choose out a wife
in his dominions, and he would give her him; but he not accepting the offer
gave this answer, May it please your Highness the truth is, that if I should
find a woman as honest as my breeches, I could not fairly refuse her; for may
be some such there are, but I have never seen any without faults. How now? said
the Duke. My Lord, quoth he, I have reason to speak in this manner, for if she
be tall, fair, or of handsome stature, she will be lazy, toyish, luxurious, and
proud, and imagine the whole world ought to humor and serve her: If she be
little and black, the parts of her body being so close joined and shrunck
together, one may easily judge her to be very expedite, variable, light,
perfidious, and proud: If she be somewhat aged, she will be a true Tisiphone:
If she be of competent age, and of red hair, or freckled, she will be very
frail and incontinent: If she be ugly and deformed, it is a shame, says he, but
to speak of her: If she be beautiful, she has that in gross which others have
in parcels, like another Pandora, who adorned with thirty excellencies of a
woman, was the means of the ruin of the happiness which man could enjoy upon
the earth: If such an one, as I said before, could be found, in whom were one
spark of virtue, I might espouse her, but finding none such, I have reason to
quit my self of them.

It is impossible to compute the troubles and the sorrows which men receive, in
recompense of their loves, through the perfidiousness of women; for without
mentioning the troubles of the spirit, the many jants, the re-iterated
complaints, the shedding of tears, the sighing and sobbing, and a hundred
thousand deaths without dying, in the gaining of a Mistress; even then when one
would think, that this death of amorous languishment was to be changed into a
life of celestial pleasures, then do men marry a wife like Megera her self, who
is never pleased but in crying, yauling, tempestuously complaining and
disturbing the whole house, which beget in the mind of her husband a thousand
displeasures, a thousand regrets, and as many repentances as incommodities; in
short, whole hundreds of an insupportable molestation. As to the conjugal
pleasure, and the sport of Venus, the effects thereof are so direful and
hurtful, that I wonder men will be such slaves to it; for it does not only
invalidate and infeeble the vigor of the spirit, but render the mind base and
cowardly, dull the vivacity of the understanding, brutalize the judgment, waste
the memory, occasion repentance, as says Aristotle, and as Demosthenes also in
this case answered.

For being tempted by lust to court that Corinthian Strumpet Lais, who set the
value of a 1000 Attick Drachms as price of her honor and favor; he hearing her
speak at this rate, and considering the enchantment of the pleasure, answered
gently thus, by way of retreat, Madam, I thank you, I will not buy repentance
at so dear a rate; Ego, inquit, tanti poenitere non emam. This Philosopher
spoke reason, for I cannot think, that any man inveigled with the pleasures of
Venus, and her deceitful sports, if he consider how dear they are sold him, and
what repentance will attend them, would not agree with Demosthenes in this his
farewell to the fatal goddesses.

Valerius Maximus confirms that which we are about to speak, by this notable
sentence, Quid luxuria foedus quidve ea damnosius, aequa virtus atteritur,
ratio languescit, sopita gloria in infamiam commutatur, and animi vires and
corporis expugnantur; as if he should say, Nothing is more filthy and base than
impure pleasure, more destructive to health, more contrary to the vigor and
strength of both body and mind, more altering reason, or that can sooner
metamorphose glory and honor into infamy. And if the conjugal actions are
exempted from those last effects, in part, they often produce and occasion
others, as troublesome and insupportable: for a woman being so insatiable as
the wise wise man describes her, and her husband not able to quench her raging
lust, she will soon make him bear the Arms of the Persians, make him heir to
the Ottoman Crescents; and inasmuch as she is a necessary evil, the poor
unfortunate man is constrained to eat many grains of Patience instead of
Succory, and to refresh himself in the water of dissimulation; and that which
is more, he must love her that has offended him, calling her his Darling, his
pretty one, and other Epithets of flatteries, to conform himself to her humors
and conditions, or else languish and be plunged in an Ocean of sorrow and grief.

I meddle not with other mischiefs which attend marriage, but refer you to
those elegant Verses, made by one who escaped the fetters and bands of a
certain Dame, who went about to drown him in the devouring gulphs and
shipwracks of all vice.

While thus I lived bewitched by your charms,
While beauty held me prisoner in your arms,
While my heart groaned under Venus Laws:
Vain contentation, and lascivious toys,
Complaints, and sighs, and tears alone did prove
Fuel and matter to the fire of love.
And thus tormented with a hell of spite,
This was my glory to be vanquished quite.
But since kind heaven did me notice give,
Vnvail'd sins horror wherein I did live,
And freed me from this thankless woman, by
A sentence passed on their treachery.
O wise repentance! I have found above
Full joy, and glory, and most perfect love.
The Cynick Diogenes, among other his moral sayings, had this often in his
mouth, Nothing so displeases me than to meet a woman, especially in the
morning when I am beginning my work; for being a sink and channel of all
imperfections, she can presage nothing to my good and contentment.

Socrates has another more excellent, for being one day in the plane Licaeum,
where they were treating of the imperfections of women, some saying, that they
were the causes of all the miseries in the world; others, that it was certain
that men without them would never be disquieted or molested. Socrates undertook
to defend their cause, and declared freely, that they ought not thus to vilify
women, for that there is something in them wherein they excel men. These words
(he promising to maintain them by reason) caused the Disputants to give
attention, and to desire an account thereof: which he willingly consented to,
and replied, My masters, That which prefers women before men, is, among other
things, their vivacity of spirit, and the subtlety of their understanding; I
speak knowingly, for my wife Xantippe cease not day nor night raising and
contriving against me such causes of displeasure, unconceivable to others, with
so much activity and artifice, that all the men in the world together cannot
invent the like, and less apparent: her alone brawlings, and froward looks, are
able to unsettle my constancy, and to overthrow my patience. This famous person
invented this device to deride the error of his companions, who spent their
time in disputing of the defers of women, which affront the Sun with their
light and clearness.

I shall need no more Philosophical sentences, which expressly forbid
acquaintance with evil women; nor also those Histories, which show the
misfortunes and ruins of several, by the means of that sex; there being not so
many perils, dangers, and shipwracks in the Ocean, than there are Charybdes,
Gulfs, Rocks, and Falls in the company of women. The holy Ghost speaking of
such, says, that she is a deep ditch, and a narrow well; words very
remarkable, for they import the difference that is betwixt whoredom and other
vices, in that though they are those ditches wherein so strangely men fall by
hundreds and thousands, yet they may happily recover themselves; but those that
are taken in the pit of fornication, and the sin of lechery with lewd women, do
very hardly get out again: This beastliness is a well so strait, that they who
throw themselves therein difficultly find the way out again, unless helped by
the cord of special and and particular grace.

There needs no History to confirm, but tears to deplore the truth hereof. And,
to conclude this Letter, a Philosopher meditating on the nature of women,
says, That they are the confusion of man, the enslaving of mankind, the
shipwreck of the incontinent, the destruction of the imprudent, the adversary
of the innocent; to which I add out of St. Chrysostom upon the 4th. of St.
John, That amongst all the salvage beasts, there is not a more malicious and
cruel than Woman; and therefore she shall further carry this Epithet on her
forehead,

O
Odii Opifex.
Contrivers of Malice.
AMong all the unruly passions of the soul, none more feelingly torments,
afflicts, pierces, and penetrates the heart of him, who will be a slave
thereunto, than hatred and revenge; for these two agree not only as mother and
daughter, to vex, tyrannize, and mattyrize the hated, but secretly to rack and
tear the hater and revengeful himself; and which is observable, such endure a
thousand times more pain and torment than the other, being the Patient rather
than the Agent, and do often undergo the evil which he intends another. The
revengeful sleeps neither day nor night, but suffers the quick pricks of a
thousand inquietudes, in the searching of means, occasions, and opportunities
to bring about his designs; and it often happens that he fails therein, and
thinking to put out the eyes of them he hates, by misadventure wounds himself
unwarily, and so coming under the reach of justice, and fearing punishment, he
chooses banishment, making flight the Sanctuary of his life and better fortune.

But to return to these two passions, I say, That they are not only
injustices, in that they afflict more the offender then offended, and more the
revengeful, than he that occasioned that hatred; (for while one goes about
contriving ways and means to draw reason for the injury received, the other
laughs, is merry and jocund) but that the manner of exercising the said passion
is very wicked and unjust, as by poisons, witchcrafts, treasons, and other
pernicious and deadly artifices, against the life and honor both of his
neighbor and himself.

These two passions are so smarting and stinging, that we may compare them to a
worm, which uncessantly gnaws the inwards and heart of an infant, who
languisheth and dies with the pain thereof: As the least entertainment of these
two Tyger-like imperfections is a base, cowardly, feeble, and wicked mind,
fallen below all magnanimity.

As hail^ thunder and lightning, tempests, trouble not nor molest the
heavenbodies, that beautiful diversly-coloured cieling and vault of heaven,
enameled with the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which are the ornament of this great
Universe; but only shake and trouble the things below, and the corruptible
parts of the sea and earth; so the insolences, the impertinencies, the disdain
of the ignorant and the unwise, of buffons, of dolts, and the like, do never
trouble the constancy, the prudence and discretion of generous minds, high and
sublimed in valor and courage.

I can produce examples of the greatest Saints which have appeared in the
world, and who now rejoice in the reward of their heroical faith, and noble
actions which they did on the earth; but at present it shall suffice to say,
that even among the Heathen, many have raised themselves to glory by not
harboring revenge, but pardoning their enemies, a greater victory than if they
were conquerors of all the Kingdoms and Nations of the world, and had taken by
force all the Cittadels and Fortresses thereof.

The holy Ghost learns us this in the 16th. Chapter of the Proverbs, Fortior
est qui dominatur animae suae, expugnatore urbium; he says, He is more valiant
who conquers his anger, and bridles his passions, and represses his hate, than
he that storms and subdues Cities.

Latius regnes avidum domando
Spiritum, quam si Lybiam remotis
Gadibus jmgas and uterque Paenus
Serviat uni.
The Prince of Philosophes irradiated only with the light of nature, saw this
very clearly, affirming, That the courage, valor, and worth of a generous mind
consists in mastering and commanding our anger, hatred, and revenge. Moderari
iram est vera generositas, which is verified by the testimony both of ancient
and modern Examples.

In Plutarch you shall find Alexander, the Cesars, Scipio's, and Epaminidas,
who made it their glory to pardon and forgive. Julius Caesar that great Monarch,
having vanquished Pompey in the Pharsalian fields, and understanding that Cato,
one of his partakers, had killed himself through fear of falling into his
hands, said thus to his Captains, Invidit Cato gloriae meae quam illi parcendo,
mihi paravissem; Cato has done me more displeasure by killing himself, than by
siding against me, for I should have had more honor in saving than in
destroying him.

Alexander the great duly weighing Pardon and Vengeance, confessed, that there
was more need of strength and greatness of mind to be clement and indulgent,
than to be revengeful.

Demosthenes that brave Orator, to show his courage, replied to one that braved
and defied him to fight; My friend, says he, I will use the rigor of that
combat against you, where the vanquished is a better man than the vanquisher;
intimating, that it is more glory, honor, and valor, to conquer one's self,
and his passions, than to trample upon his enemies.

Neither were the Pagans only of this opinion, for see a reason as cogent for
Christians to be like-minded, which no body dares contradict, or will doubt of,
that the Law of Grace does conduct us in the true path of justice, and directs
us in the right way of virtue. Now the Philosophers have avowed, that
Magnanimity is a virtue, and Cowardice vice; so that forgiveness coming under
the chief Commandment in the Gospel, is a manifest proof of the greatness of
mind, and contrarily that hate and revenge are the issues of a cowardly, base,
and abject mind.

And we experimentally see, that the most infirm, feeble, and weak creatures,
do more easily suffer themselves to be transported by these unruly inordinate
passions, as infants, sick people, and women, as we have seen in deciphering of
anger. And, to come to my subject, the hate of a woman rises to such a degree,
that it equals that of the devil: the least offense, stumbling but at a stone,
will cool her affections, will kindle her anger, awaken her contempts, inflame
her hatred, increase her rage, and bring up all the corrosions of a cruel
revenge.

But, what is most lamentable, if the original of her hate be from some
distaste of love, it will be so raging, hot, and violent, that the Sea cannot
quench it; this passion will so blind her, and make her so froward, that no man
can lenifie or appease her, no, not the most accomplished person living, having
once offended her, although he had the gravity of Cato, the persuasion of
Demosthenes, the elegancy and sweetness of Cicero, the gentleness of Crassus,
the fervency of Pericles, the emphatical periods of Isocrates, the fidelity of
Cleander, the constancy of Anacharsis, the beauty of Narcissus, the beautiful
face of Pallanta, the pace and gate, the gallant behavior of Roland, the
valor of Achilles, the prudence of Ulysses, and the feature of Aeneas:
although he was versed in the affairs of State as perfectly as Numa at Rome,
Charinondas at Carthage, Lycurgus in Sparta, Solon in Athens, Epaminondas in
Thebes, Minos in Crete, Rhodomanthus in Syria, Zamolris in Scythia, Oromasus in
Persia, Zoroaster in Babylon, and Osyris in Egypt: In sum, were he learned,
valiant, courageous, and excellent in all things.

Peter Ravenna speaking of the selfconceitedness of women in his Sermon of the
Resurrection, says, That as there is nothing so bold and courageous as a woman
in the pursuit of her love, so is there nothing more obstinate and inflexible
in the remission of injuries, nor more ready to manifest her hate by
unavoidable revenges, for if other humane artifices fail her, she will rather
prostrate her love, her chastity, and all her honor, than to rest vanquished
under the heavy load of her anger and indignation. Of this there needs no other
Proof than that lewd Pero daughter of Neleus, who extremely hating of Hercules,
proffered her body to Bias and Melampodius, provided they would rob and steal
from him his flocks.

I have read of another, who to revenge a box of the ear given her in dancing,
gave her self up a prey to a pitiful wretch to take his pleasure of her as long
as he would, for having returned the like, and espoused her quarrel; which
favor no other occasion or cause soever could have procured him. But setting
aside Histories, I remember to have seen an Epigram, which making an allusion
of women to sundry creatures, has these words; As the Ox is born to labor, the
Vulture to prey, the Hare to the chase, the Ass to the burden, the Horse to the
war, the Ape to make sport, the fat Hen for the Kitchen, and Man to virtue; so
the Woman seems to be born to work mischief, and to torment men.

I am silent in what might be said further; take this for all, The hatred of
the Devil is not so much to be feared as that of a wicked woman; when the devil
does mischief, he does it by himself alone, but woman is aided with that evil
spirit, and seconded by him, to the wreaking of her bloody revenge, while she,
wretched creature, considers not, that the wrath of God brandishes over her
head, and that for ever she must abide in his disfavour without any means of
recovery, according to that of the Apostle, who to this purpose uttered that
fearful sentence to those that fin wilfully, There remains no sacrifice for
their sins. Now of those that sin actually, the Usurers, Fornicators, and the
Revengeful, are the three chiefly that oppose the goodness of God, and resist
his grace, nor has he for them pardon or mercy, but they must expect from him,
if they amend not, a very severe chastisement.

But it is true, that of these three sorts, the last extremely displeases the
Divine Majesty, for that revenge and hatred of our neighbor does hinder, that
they be not children beloved; for this is that great quality and title which
forgiving and debonair persons wear on them, That ye may be like your Father
which in heaven. This is the testimony for the first, and behold another for
the second, Blessed are the peace makers, for they shall be called the children
of God.

There is therefore this difference in these terms, The debonair or peacemakers
carry only the title and name of the children of God, but the great forgivers
are so in effect: From whence it follows, that vindicative people are of the
devils family, and children of his cruelty; for if God be Charity it self,
Satan being infinitely contrary unto goodness, must be hatred and deadly
animosity: And as the Devil shall never find grace nor pardon, which confirms
him in his malice and hatred of God; Superbia eorum qui te oderunt ascendit
semper: So the vindicative, Psalm. 37.
true partakers of his misery shall never have the favor or pardon of God,
while they continue inveterate in their cursed and depraved anger against
those, who have really or pretendedly offended them.

See then, I pray, in what condition are those women which never will forgive,
or so seldom, that there is no certain proof thereof; as is especially
observable in those who have power to execute their revenge for displeasures
received; which wise men will understand how to avoid. If we should search
Histories, we should bless our selves from their attempts in this manner; for
as nothing is impossible to a woman that loves, so nothing is difficult to her
that hates in an intense degree; and therefore in some manner we may call her

P
Peccati Auctrix.
Increaser of Sin.
Aug. Sermon. 18. de Sanctif.
SO St. Austin calls the first Woman, in his second Sermon upon the Lords
Prayer, and upon a just occasion; for if we observe we shall find, that the
woman is not only the source and spring of sin and of death; Ecclus. 25.
a muliere initium factum est peccati, and per illam omnes morimur; but also
the forger of all the misery, and the encreaser of all the faults and errors of
men.

It is a good remarque of St. Chrysostom's, in his explication of the second of
Ginesis, It is not good for man to be alone, let us make him a help meet; For,
says he, God having made the woman to be the faithful companion of man, and to
assist him in the production of his like, she became the quite contrary, the
enemy of his happiness and his good fortune; Cujus facta est adjutrix ei facta
est insidiatrix. And in effect, we see in the place of those words, a help like
unto him, adjutorium simile sibi; according to the common version (the Hebrew
Text has a strange kind of Figure) which is as much as to say, against him,
adjutorium contra ipsum; that whereas a woman ought to procure the good of her
husband, she procures him hurt, loss, and damnation, as we see in the History
of the Creation: For the devil seeing nothing in the world more cunning, more
attractive, and more fit and proper to charm the eyes and heart of man, than
woman, he gained her first, the more easily by her to entrap him, whom in his
own person he durst not attaque, which he with such fineness accomplished. If
the first Citizen of the world rendered himself to her discretion, as not daring
to displease her, from whence came the heap of all our miseries?

For this reason the learned Origin has painted her out in this manner; Woman
is the head of sin, the weapons of the devil, the banishment out of Paradise,
the corruption of the first and ancient Law which God gave to men. To which
purpose Josephus says in his Jewish Antiquities, That the unfortunate Samson
seeing himself at the mercy of his enemies the Philistines, by the treachery of
his Concubine, said in a kind of astonishment, I know now to my danger, that
nothing in the world is more deceitful and cunning than a woman. Euripedes also
says, That women are the most exact workers and artizans of all wickednesses
inventable; which we see also in the History of the Prophet Elisah, who not
dreading the cruelty and tyranny of Ahab in the midst of his Kingdom, bravely
asserted his cause, by bringing to death four hundred of his false Prophets;
but seeing himself pursued by his Queen Jezabel, and knowing that those
attempts on his lise were the effects of the spleen and malice of that woman;
he presently abandoned the Cities, withdrew himself into the deserts, and hid
himself under Rocks, and was so apprehensive of his danger, that he desired
nothing more then death, and prayed God importunately to take him out of the
world; Obsecro, Domine, toll animam meam: A sufficient proof, that nothing is
more terrible or more malicious than a woman.

St. John in his 9th. of the Revelations speaks of his having seen Locusts,
whose bodies were like to Horses of war, their tails like to those of
Scorpions, their teeth like to the Lions, their mains like Women's hair, and
that power was given them to hurt men. Behold a strange vision, but this the
most remarkable, the holy Ghost to exagerate the malice of these beasts,
choosing out that which signified the greatest cruelty, as the fury of
War-horses, the poison of venomous Scorpions, the teeth and defenses of enraged
Lions, as the accumulation and sum of all inhumanity, adds to it the hairs of a
Woman, importing, that nothing is more dangerous or more malicious.

St. Gregory Nazianzen says, that she has the venom of an Asp, and the
malice of a Dragon; Malefica res est aspides, mala res est Dracores, duplex
malitia mulieris inter feras. And the wiseman says in the 25th. of
Ecclesiasticus, That all the malice in the world is short in compa ison to that
of the Woman. Brevis malitia super malitiam mulieris. But that which is worst,
she has a relentless and merciless heart; of this there needs no other proof,
than that in the first Chapter of the Prophet Hosea, where it is said, that
God, to give his people to understand the severity of his justice in the
punishments of their faults, commanded the Prophet to marry himself presently,
and to name his first daughter Merciless, as a certain Augury, that he would
show no more kindness to the house of Israel; Vocabis nomen ejus sine
misericordia, quia non addultria misereri domus Israel. By which we see God
judged equitably, when for an emblem of cruelty, and an hieroglyphick of
malice, he used no other but woman. But yet see a more strange passage, the
Prophet Zachary relating his visions, says, That he saw among other things a
monstrous woman sitting in the middle of a funnel, with a weight of lead in her
hand; and as he was troubled to know what this prodigy meant, an Angel serving
him for an interpreter, presently informed him, That it was the image of
impiety, -- and dixit, Hae est impietas; wherein we see, that Heaven, to paint
out malice and wickedness, would not represent them under any other symbol or
resemblance, than in the person of a woman; the funnel serving her for a seat,
signifies, that woman cannot keep secrets, no more then that, which has two
vents; and therefore I suppose for this reason the Prophet saw in the mouth a
lump of lead, to shut up her lips, and stop her babbling.

To conclude these Emblemes of holy Writ, St. John in the 7th. of his
Revelations saw a woman mounted on a beast, armed with seven heads and ten
horns, having names and titles full of blasphemies, being not only all over
most gorgeously attired, being clothed with Purple, and set with Jewels, but
moreover infinitely cruel, and drunk with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus
Christ: We have in part interpreted this Vision in the Epistle Dedicatory but I
must again speak of it here, being the true pourtraict of the malice of woman;
for in figuring her mounted upon a beast with seven heads, it seem to intimate,
that she will speak more than seven, there being as many tongues as heads; the
Horns fignifie her thousand tricks and artifices; her names and titles full of
blasphemy, her propensity to evil; her purple and jewels, her arrogance and
pride, and the innocent blood wherewith she is drunk, is the emblem of the
cruelty and malice of her mind, which has made her rejected of God, and
deprived her of his graces.

St. Cyril in his Third and Fourth Book of the Spirit and the Letter,
discoursing of God's allotment of the Land of Promise to the children of
Israel, would not have the women put into the List; and also upon the account
of that Passage, where Pharaoh commanded the Midwives of Egypt to preserve the
daughters, and destroy the male-issue, assumes, that God and the devil showed
themselves contrarily in this; for the devil would have the males put to death,
which were the better sort, reserving the females; and God rejected the
females, not willing that they should be enrolled amongst the men to share the
promised Land, as being imperfect and unworthy of that honor: See his own
words, -- rejicitur quod, est reprobare molle and imperfectum, and solis
maribus dividitur terra promissa. And Origin in his second Homily upon Exodus,
deriding Pharaoh says, He was ill advised to put the better sort to death,
(that is, the males) and preserve the worst, the females, who were sooner able
to destroy his Kingdom than the men.

Pythagoras being asked, Why he gave his daughter in marriage to one of his
greatest enemies, presently answered, Nihil illi poteram dare deterius -- I
could not give him a worse thing, or better revenge my self of him, woman being
the most wicked thing in the world. The Scripture declares this in the 25th. of
Ecclesiasticus, -- omnis plaga tristitia cordis est and omnis malitia nequitia
mulieris; as much as to say, That as the sickness of the heart, which is the
principal of life, surpasses the grief of all other corporal hurts, so the
malice of a woman, which is the principal of all evil, is beyond all the
wickednesses of the world. I desire the virtuous to excuse me, and do humbly
beg their pardon; I apply this only to the bad, whom again I call

Q
Quietis Quassatio.
Enemy of Quiet.
HE that would set before you all the characters and descriptions which the
Ancients have made of women, both time and age would fail him sooner then
matter; and so although we have said many things in the precedeing Letter, yet
is it nothing in regard of that which may be said.

For it seems, that heaven has so much the more inspired grace, and serious
Authors to write against them, by how much their wickedness has increased by
aiding that spirit of darkness in the ruin of those souls destined to
salvation and eternal glory. St. Chrysostom writing upon the 19th. chapter of
St. Matthew, says among other things, (to abridge that which he said in this
Homily) Mulier est janua diaboli, via iniquitatis, Scerpionis percussio,
nocivumque genus est foemina: Woman is the gate of hell, the way of iniquity,
the biting of a Scorpion, and a hurtful kind of creature in all things.

Valerius writing to Ruffinus, knew not better to describe a woman, than by the
Chimera who had the face of a Lion, the belly of a Goat, and the tail of a
Viper; For she has, says he, the fury and rage of a Lion, the lechery of a
Goat, and the poison of a Viper. The Philosopher Simonides, as Joseph Battus
reports, being asked what woman was, gave her this definition, Mulier est
hominis confusio, instabilis bestia, continua sollicitudo, indesinens pugna,
quotidianum damnum, solitudinis impedimentum, vitae continenti naufragium,
adulterii vas, perniciosum pretium, animal pessimum, pondus gravissimum, aspis
insanabilis, and humanum mancipum. Woman is the confusion of man, an inconstant
beast, a continual care, a combat without truce, a daily trouble, an impediment
of privacy, the shipwreck of a chaste life, a freight of adultery, etc. And for
these reasons the Ancients used this Proverb, Women is the vessel of the devil,
a stinking Rose, a sweet poison; for she is a vessel full of gall, which men
imagine to be delightful and pleasant St. Bernard in his 52d. Sermon, dares to
call them the Instrument of the devil. Read the Third Homily of Carthagena, the
Fourth Tome, and other the like descriptions; and what St. Jerome holds, that a
good woman is rarer than a Phoenix; concluding, that their number is so great,
that no body there is, who is ignorant of their malice.

The Sieur de Fieuville Philosophying of the nature of bad women, compares them
first to the Chamaeleon, which feeding it self with wind, loves no man longer
than the present; to the Salamander, who unagreeable to temperature, designs
no happier end than to expire in the flames; to the Locust, whose pleasure it
is to skip about and through the fading flowers of the worlds inveaglement; to
the Siren, which through its flattering charms feeds those devouring gulphs of
Sicily; to a continual Fire, which never goes out; to the ravenous putrid
Harpies, which seemed born in the world on purpose to torment man, to shorten
his life, to nullify his contentments, debase his grandeur, vilify his
perfections, to abate his valor, enfeeble his courage, unfortunate his
designs, redouble his pains, captivate his liberty, impede his enterprises,
sink his fortune, vex his quiet, and load upon his spirit a thousand
molestations, which shall day and night without intermission turmoil him. A
hell of noise, houlings, shreeks, and of so many torments, that men are forced
to give way by flying from them; a manifest proof of their wickedness,
lightness, and inconstancy.

And if we have recourse to Scripture, we shall find, that taciturnity and
silence is the distinction between the good and evil women, and that it is the
special gift and grace of God, Donum Dei mulier sensata and tacita; and joins
to that the 9th of the Proverbs, Mulier stulta and clamosa, woman is foolish
and full of noise; and moreover, that she is both ignorant and full of craft.

It is very true, that effemina e persons, wooers, buffons, and the gallants,
affect not silence in women, although it be a perfection worthy of a thousand
praises, but do desirously hear the prattle, the talk, and the iliads of
superfluous discourse, being thence able to judge, whether they be Ladies of
pleasure.

But wise and virtuous men, discerning the gift of God in bestowing of a wife,
and that silence is the most certain mark of virtue, cannot prize too much such
a happy match, nor be too thankful to God. For my part, as nothing is more
amiable in the world then peace and Quiet, so nothing is more detestable than
the fray and noise of women's tongues.

This made Cicero so handsomely retort it to those who upbraided him with
forsaking his wife, I cannot, says he, serve my wife and Philosophy, for
either of them take up the whole man; and it is as much trouble to attain to
the perfection of the latter, as to study the contentment of the former.

But that which renders a Philosopher incompatible with a woman, is, because
nothing is more proper to the advance of his study then silence and quiet,
which a woman cannot possibly indulge him, for she is always in action, crying,
wauling, or roaring, either against her domestics, or her neighbors, or
strangers, who come to visit the master of the household; finding a thousand
inventions to force words from those who refuse to speak conformable to their
will. The proof of this lies in the Bake-house, the market, the beating of the
Buck, where they meet in great numbers, those places being the only rendezvous
of that cackle and noise of women.

If you shall think this to be a small imperfection, you are deceived a hundred
Leagues, for this is the very condition of the damned, who without ceasing do
howl, cry, and blaspheme against the Divine Majesty, as also against those who
have been the occasion of their ruin; this we more visibly fee in those
Spectra, and other damned spirits, which come into certain houses, and in some
particular places make so much noise, and cause so much disturbance, even to
the most resolute, that they are glad to be gone. So we proceed to term her in
the next Letter (according to experience) as she has been to Houses and
Families

R
Regnorum Ruina.
Ruin of Realms.
IT were an impossible attempt, if I should think to write the several
misfortunes and miseries of men deceived by women unacquainted in the School of
wisdom and virtue; wherefore I shall omit those tears, plaints, regrets,
sorrows, griefs, torments, t^oubles, rage, languors, fury, death, and
punishments of millions of men, affronted and injured by the malicious industry
of women, whom they adored and honored as the Sovereign Lady's of their
affections.

I shall omit that degenerous Labor of Hercules in his service of Omphale,
where he submitted his invincible spirit and conquering hands to the sweeping
of her Chambers and Halls; and afterward his dying enraged and mad by the
poison and jealousy of Dejanira: And also Apollo, who kept sheep to please the
daughter of Admetus; together with Hippolitus, who was torn in pieces by the
means of his incestuous mother in Law; Absyrthes, who was also dismembered by
his cruel sister Medaea: Roland, that French Hercules, who languished to death
through the inconstancy of the lewd daughter of Galafrina, and dyed,
sacrificing himself to her: King Ipsis, who died for Anaxarete; Hemon for
Antigone, Ovid for Corynna, with many others: Who had no other satisfaction for
this excess and profuseness of life, than to see in the other world these
execrable women punished according to their demerits, becoming the pastime of
the Furies in their infernal Vaults. To omit the stories (with other profane
writings) of Adam, Samson, David, Solomon, and the most accomplished of the
Ancients, the most generous and brave courages that have been ruined by the
female sex, I resume my subject, and will prove, that whole Kingdoms,
Provinces, and Commonwealths, have fallen by misfortunes, occasioned by some
particular women.

Helena, once the Paragon of all humane beauty, fomented so bloody a war by the
excellent features of her face, between the Greeks and the Trojans, that the
last lost both their life and honor therein: She afterward remembering her self
of this fatal business, repented it sincerely; for being advanced in age, (as
is reported by James Bergonne in his Supplement of the Chronicles) and desirous
to see her face, she called for a Lookingglass, and beholding her face so
withered, and all the beauties thereof so tarnished, she fell a laughing, and
in that mood blamed the folly of those, who for her sake had endured so many
troubles: Alas, quoth she, is it possible that such acountenance should cause
the ruin of so many brave Cities, and the slaughter of so many thousand
gallant men, and noble warriors? These were the dying words of that most
excellent Beauty.

King Joram (after the death of his father Jehosaphat) succeeding in the
Kingdom, his brothers being killed, and himself fallen into Idolatry, and the
ruin both of him and his Kingdom thereupon ensuing; the Scripture gives this
account thereof, and imputes it wholly to his unhappy wife; Filia quippe Achab
uxor ejus; and fecit malum in conspectu Domini: He had Athaliah the daughter of
Ahab and Jezabel to his wife, importing, that it was no marvel this Prince was
so wicked and guilty of so great crimes, having so wicked a wife for his
companion. And in the Third of the Kings, the same Scripture searching the
cause of the miseries and abominations of Ahab, says after this manner,
Jezable his wife, etc. Concitavit enim eum Jezabel uxor sua, and abhominabilis
factus est, in tantum ut sequeretur idola quae fecerunt Amorhaei.

Philo Judaeus notes in the first Book of the life of Moses, that Balak King in
Asia, whose power extended it self throughout the greatest part of the East,
never durst enterprise upon the Israelites till he had consulted his Devines,
and particularly had sent for Balaam that false Prophet, who, though
constrained by the Spirit of God to speak truth, nevertheless not to lose the
savor of that Prince, he advised him, that the only way to effect his
designs, and ruin that people, was, by sending his women among them, whom he
should adorn and dress as lasciviously as could be: Which purpose the said
women effectually brought about by their allurements, so that the greatest part
of the youth subjected themselves to Idolatry, before they were or might be
permitted to fulfill their lusts on them; which so animated Phineas with the
zeal of God's glory, and the love of Continence, and some other with him, that
falling upon these abominable persons, they killed of them to the number of
four and twenty thousand, and so saving the Host from being contaminated with
those filthinesses, they gained the victory over that King, who by the counsel
of the foresaid Prophet had so in the gross corrupted the people.

I shall only add the example of Cleopatra, who, as Plutarch says, was that
rock on which Mark Anthony, that valiant and great Captain, dashed and broke
himself in pieces by his impure pleasures: But she not only ruined him, but
was the cause of a thousand troubles to the State of Rome. Marcus Aurelius,
that wise Prince, says, That the fire of Aetna was not so hurtful to Sicily,
as this wicked woman to every. Canton of that Empire. To conclude, As virtuous
women are given us from Heaven, to alleviate the miseries of our nature, so are
the bad born expressly to vex men, and to oppose and ruin all their desines and
good fortune.

Now although so many thousand imperfections combine in them, yet more
particularly Pride reigns and rages in them, which, in explication of this
next Epithet in in our Alphabetical order, shall be seen.

S
Silva Superbiae.
Forest of Pride.
PRide is a vice so detestable and pernicious, that it has made of an Angel a
Devil, Lucifer; of a Man a Beast, Nebuchadnezzar; of Adam, the subject and
object of all those miseries which encompass and thwart us. If you would fee
the description, the Divines hold, That it is properly a disorderly appetite of
its own excellence, or of its self, which causes contempt of God, and of those
whom he has made superior in Grace, Honor, and other prerogatives. All the
learned hold it for the chief of the other vices, and say, That it is she which
combats and assaults all the other virtues.

St. Austin said, That she is the Comrade of all sins, the guide and director
in all their deformities; the reason is, because she is often generated by a
love of justice and of virtue, and proceeds in the way of good works; whereas
other vices are cherished by bad actions, and are known by their works.

This abominable vice is as a pestilential wind, which blowing under the tree
of virtue, withers the beauty of a soul, as a Poet has expressed it,

Pride is the root and head of every vice.
The source and fountain of what ills befall us.
Who has this monster tamed, may freely say,
That he has shook the mighty Tower of sin.
By pride the devil full of cunning spite,
From Paradise our first Parents banished,
Subjected m to labor, griefs and pain;
The gulf and precipice of misery.
If then thou would breaks through sins Battalia,
Rout those Philistines; set thy courage to it,
Cut off thy vaunting proud Goliah's head:
For the whole Army seeing him to bleed,
And his head reared the Trophee of the field
Will quail, and their subdued powers yield.
As we see in war, that no sooner as the General is fallen in Battle, but the
adverse soldiers rush forward without looking behind them; so he that can
triumph over pride, and can drive it from its Empire, shall speedily dissipate
all other vices; for humility, its contrary, being the treasury of all other
virtues, and being strongly fortified within the soul; pride, though it were
accompanied with the strength of all other sins, shall never enter or prevail
against it.

But if you desire to know the ordinary retreat of this unhappy vice, I shall
without fear of a feathered brain tell you, that is the wicked noddle of a
woman, the idolater of her own irregular passions; for never was Lucifer so
proud in heaven, as suck women are on earth. You may see the proof of this in
the first woman, whom a feigned promise of the evil spirit so wrought upon,
that she desired to be equal with God, as the Schoolmen and St. Austin; an act
certainly of the greatest preemption in the world. And if she who received the
first favors of heaven, and so many proofs of the love of God, forgot her self
so much, what shall we think of others of her sex, which are not so perfect?
For my part I believe, that if there are any humble of the sex, they are like
the Sun among the Stars, or the Phoenix among other Birds; and so it is no
great marvel, that the humility of the blessed Virgin invited the Son of the
God of Heaven to descend into the earth, and that her merit accelerated the
great mystery of the Incarnation by sutableness and congruity, as the Doctors
hold; for her humility was so acceptable to the Divine Majesty, that knowing it
to be an extraordinary wonder in that sex, he forgot the pride of the first
woman, and without further delay sent the Word of the Father to be made Man.
Now except her, I know not any woman who may presume to boast of so much
humility, as to be reputed clear of affectation and vainglory.

Humility is so valuable in a woman, that showing it self upon occasions, no
man can tax her with any imperfections, so as to obscure that goodness which is
believed to be in her; her humility makes her to be such as men could know to
desire. The Prophet Nathan, in setting forth the quality of a good woman, found
nothing better to his purpose than the comparison of a sheep, the gentlest and
meekest of all the creatures, as we may see in his Parable to King David in the
matter of adultery which he had committed with Bathsheba: There was (says he)
a poor man who had nothing in the world but one poor sheep, etc. mark how he
calls the wife of Uriah a sheep, for so ought every good wife to be, pleasant,
humble, silent, and obedient to her husband, as a sheep to its shepherd: and
the husband ought to treat, keep, nourish, and maintain her as his sheep, and
love her as his darling. Whereunto I add with the Wiseman, that such a woman
is favor from heaven bestowed on man; Gratia super gratiam mulier sancta and
pudorata. And again, Mulieris bonae beatus vir. But of this before.

That which is further observable in the same place, is, That God oftentimes
recompenses the good works of a man by the offer of a virtuous wife; Pars bona
mulier bona in part timentium Deum dabitur viro profactis bonis.

Solomon says further in his Proverbs, that parents give unto children means
and riches, but it is God that gives unto them prudent and discreet women:
Domus and divitiae dantura parentibus, a Domino autem proprie uxor prudens; the
Hebrew Text is more emphatical, having these words, Domus and divitiae
haereditas patrum, signifying, that good and bad children succeed alike to the
goods and estates gained by their parents care and industry; but that women
being not the goods of fortune, God bestows the good one only to such as fear
him, and observe his commandments. The same is likewise set down by the Royal
Prophet, for having premised, Blessed are they which fear the Lord, and walk in
his trays, he adds p^esently the reward to follow, his wife shall be as a
fruitful vine (that is reclus'd or shut up in the most secret place of the
house, or) on the sides of his house, signified by these words, a lateribus
domus tuae. To which purpose St. Paul speaking of the aloneness of Virgins,
says, that they ought to be guardians of their houses, for in stead of what
our version has, having care of their house, the Hebrew reads it by a
Hieroglyphick of a wise and virtuous daughter, having a beast called the Once
at her feet, teaching us, that as the male of that creature is more feeble than
its female, which surpasses him in courage and valor; so ought a wise
daughter to appear more vigorous than a man, in resisting those flattering
courtesies, and deceitful wantonnesses, the impertinent and slippery feats of
heady youngsters, who make much of them to no other purpose than to destroy and
ruin their honor and reputation: And as that creature delights not in any
place but in thick groves, and inhabitable deserts, and departs not out of them
but to seek provision; so ought a wife and virtuous daughter to be a lover of
solitude, and not not to depart out of her house, but only to the Church, and
employ her self wholly in the service of God, and careful honest exercises.

But if you think that solitude is required only of Virgins, behold two other
Hieroglyphics, which make it appear, that it is well becoming women of
discretion; Eustac. lib. 2. de Ismeniis, says, that the Ancients represented
chastity two manner of ways, the first was, by pourtraying a women crowned with
a garland, woven with all sorts of flowers that nature produced, the Rose
excepted; she wore a net for her garment, which covered her face, her breast,
and her feet, signifying the pudicity of woman, to preserve which, all the
graces, perfections, and flowers of the world are requisite; except that which
smells of Venus and impudicity, signified by the Rose, which is dedicated to
that goddess, whose love is unchaste.

The second pourtrait represented a Lady, crowned with all sorts of precious
Stones and Jewels, Rubies, Diamonds, Emeralds, and other inestimable riches,
with a Carbuncle in the middle of her forehead, which glistered like the Sun,
being covered with a thick robe, all her care being to hide her feet;
signifying by this Emblem, that the riches wherewith a woman ought to adorn
her self, should not consist in clothes, but in spirit and virtue; and
although she be poor in raiment, it suffices if she be rich in head.

This is to show, that not to go often abroad, but to stay at home, is a great
sign of the loyalty of marriage, and an assured token of an excellent woman,
and obedient to her husband. But on the other side, if you desire to see the
marks of a proud and wicked woman, take notice of these; She will be disdainful
in her looks, lofty in her speech, supercilious in silence, dissolute in riots,
furious in sorrow, grave in her pace, honest in appearance, prone to offer in
juries, impatient to endure them, desirous to command, slow to obey, ready to
do ill, backward to do good, unmovable to pardon, easy enough to vengeance,
delicate in her diet, and ambitious to play the Lady in all things, of which,
see two examples for proof.

Pliny the great Naturalist reports, that Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, the most
proud and lascivious that ever was, observing Mark Anthony to exceed all men in
the sumptuousness of his feasts and banquets, entertaining his guests with the
most choice and exquisite Viands that could be had; out of ambition or
emulation uttered some words in disparagement of his treatments, giving out,
That they were nothing near the cost and value of those which she would provide
and prepare: Of which he being advertised, having taken Lucius Plancus for
judge in the difference, demanded of her what she could do more magnificently
than he? This proud Princess without any other reply, having two Pendants in
her ears set with two inestimable Pearls, which were doubtless the chief works
of Nature, took the one of them, and having dissolved it in Vinegar, she drunk
and swallowed it down in the presence of Mark Authony: Which Lucius seeing, and
regretting so great a waste, clap this hand upon the other, and prevented the
swallowing down of that; and the better to please and pacify her, gave
sentence of victory on her side, although Mark Anthony was much troubled
thereat. But Lucius forbore not to take the Pearl, and dividing it into two, he
made thereof two Ear-pendants for the Statue of Venus, which was in the Temple
of Pantheon at Rome.

The second History is of a wife of the Duke of Venice, named Dominica Sylvia,
whom he had taken in Constantinople. Anthon. Sabellicus in his First Decad.
Lib. 4 Tom. and the Mirror of Examples, Distinct. 1. Sect. 84. reports, that
this woman, puffed up with pride and arrogance, was so delicate in her meat and
drink, so curious of her body, and so nice to be served, that she had not only
the perfumes of Musk, Civet, Amber-gris, and other sweet Odors in every corner
and nook of her chamber, even to trouble the head of those that entered in; she
was so delicate, I say, that she would not only be served with common and
ordinary water to wash her self, but command her servants to take off every
morning the dew of heaven from the most odoriferous plants and herbs for her
use; and moreover she would not touch with her fingers the meat served on her
table, but taking it with golden forks, she would in that manner put it into
her mouth; though at last her prodigious delicacy cost her dear: For heaven not
able longer to endure the insolent pride of this Siren, not only inflicted
Fthisis or a Consumption on her in her whole body, that no one of her domestic
servants or grooms could endure to be near her, they flying from her bed as
phrantick and mad; but, as much as she had despised all things common to the
sustenance of life, so nothing now, what manner of washing soever that could be
invented, could remedy this stinking disease. Whereby we see, that the delicacy
of these fine and nice Dames, those dainty mouthed creatures, are no whit
pleasing to the Divine Majesty, and that at the end of their carrier, he knows
how severely to chastise them, according to the example of wicked Dives, whose
sentence of damnation was only grounded on his delicacy in habits, in wearing
fine linen and purple, his luxury in feasting, and his inhumanity toward the
poor.

In sum, the haughtiness of some women mounts to so high a degree, being once
advanced in office and authority, that it is a Martyrdom to obey them, and
extreme cruelty in them to command to the utmost extent of their passions and
wills: Wherefore behaving themselves in this manner, it will be nowrong done to
call them further

T
Truculenta Tyrannis.
Terrible Tyranny.
CIcero, the wonder of the Romans, says, That virtue has such a luster, so
much beauty, and perfection, and excellence, that if she could be seen, she
would ravish the eyes and hearts of all men, and that there would not one be
found who would not follow her, and become servant to her amiable looks: From
whence it easily follows, that nothing is more ugly and deformed, and horrible
to see (if it were visible) than its contrary, Vice and that as Virtue for its
excellent beauty ought to be esteemed and praised in every place where she is
to be found, so are we to disparage vice, her sworn enemy, where ever we meet
with her, without consideration of the persons that adore her, whether they be
small or great, poor or rich, Peasant or Noble, Lord or Vassal, Disciple or
Master, Man or Women; for herein we shall imitate the examples of many holy and
religious persons.

To my purpose. No man ought to account me rash, if I have been so bold as to
attaque the vice of women, offering themselves to my mine eyes as the most
obnoxious to the Law of God, and destructive to the salvation of souls, that I
meet with in the humane species of this age. It is true, that men for the most
part are come to the utmost period of their wickedness, but they are therefore
beholding to women, who foment, maintain, and cherish them in those abominable
courses. St. Chrysostom expounding that passage of the 19 Chapter of St.
Matthew, Hom. 32. Non expedit nubere, etc. If you would know, says he, what a
woman is, I answer you, that she is the sworn enemy of friendship, an
inevitable pain, a natural temptation, a desirable calamity, and domestique
danger.

Tertullian gives her not so many Epithets, but they are not therefore the less
important; Thou art, O woman, (says he) the gate of the devil, thou art he who
shewedst that unhappy Tree, the deserter of the Divine Law, etc.

Origin says no less in that Sermon which he made of the Chananaean woman, The
woman is the head of sin, the weapons of the devil, the cause of our expulsion
out of Paradise, the mother of delinquency, and corruption of the Law: and
adds, that the devil left her to Job to afflict him the more, and to provoke
him to curse God in those terms; Maledic Deo, and morere, I could cite St.
Cyprian in his Book of the singularity of women; and the Sermon St. Epiphanius
made against them: but I think it satisfaction enough to name but their
authorities against them, especially being to the same purpose with the former.

But that which is more particularly blamable in a wicked woman, is, their
tyranny and cruelty, which they practice toward those whom they keep under the
key of their obedience, having an absolute power and full mastery over them to
whom they are particularly obliged.

Plutarch has a story handsomely to this purpose; Ninus the Monarch of the
Assyrians was so taken with the beauty of a Maiden-slave, named Semiramis, and
was so furiously enamoured on her, that he married her, and chose her before
all the Ladies of his Kingdom; but in stead of cherishing, valuing, or
esteeming the goodness and favor of the King, she no sooner became Mistress of
his heart and affections, but having obtained by her female devices his
authority, to command throughout his Empire, and manage for one whole day the
affairs of State: She no sooner was vested therewith, with, but she instantly
deprived him not only of his Royal Greatness, but also of his Life, with
others of his familiar friends, to the intent to reign more securely, and
exercise her cruel tyranny.

The other of Medea is no less cruel, for having got from Jason all that a
woman outragioufly could snatch from a man, to whom she had abandoned her self,
she contrived against his prosperity, and against the quiet of his family; and
to act her part the better, she learned the Magic Art, to be subservient to
her, in the ruin of her whom she deemed to be her rival, and to displease him
whom so passionately she loved. Her cruelty was so great, that she murdered
her brother as a pledge of her impudicity.

Atalanta the daughter of Scheneus glorying and triumphing in her beauty,
(surpassing all of her age and sex) and swiftness in running, resolved with the
consent of her father, never to marry any one but him who should outrun her in
the race: Giving this answer to all her suitors, I will not refuse to be the
wife of the Victor, and to be the Laurel of his victory, on condition
nevertheless, that the vanquished die by my own hand, to expiate their
temerity; which bloody condition she so strictly observed, that Hippomene, son
of Megare and grandchild of Neptune, a most beautiful young man, coming to the
course, and seeing the rivolets of blood at the end of the Career, was
exceedingly astonished, saying within himself, Is it possible that men should
be so blind, to seek a woman among so many dangers? but while he thus deplored
the sad fate of his miserable corrivals, Atalanta past by (whom yet he had not
seen) whom when he saw glittering like the Sun in beauty, he lift up his hands
to heaven and cried out, being dazzled with so many miracles, Pardon me,
courageous Lovers, that I have accused yon of folly; excuse my indiscretion,
which has wrongfully condemned you before I knew the price of your race, the
merits of that rich recommence which animated your hopes. Hippomene being thus
ravished with the beauty of Atalanta, and being jealous that some o her would
present himself before him, resolved immediately to hazard his life as the
others, and to enter the lists, to gather the fruits of love. Atalanta in the
interim not regarding but affranchising and setting at random the
considerations of the beauty, nobility, courage, and love of Hippomene, who
exposed himself to death for her sake, said with an inflexible heart to mercy.
Wherefore should I care for his life, having made so many to die already? he
must die since he deserves it, since he will destroy himself, the death of my
other Suitors not serving him for a warning: But shall he die for having
desired to live with me? shall he receive no other reward of his love than an
unjust fate? Wherefore (for the aggravation of her cruelty) shall I have a
heart so basely inhumane to desire a victory, which shall charge me with the
reproaches of his blood? But amidst these suspences of Atalanta, Venus
favoring Hippomenes, gave him three beautiful golden Apples, which, having got
a little way before her, he let fall one after another, and while she,
surprised with the luster of them, stoopt to take them up, he came first to the
Goal, and married her. But this good fortune was not lasting for Atalanta
continuing her pride, and being so notoriously ambitious, drew upon her the
fierce anger of Cybele the mother of the gods, (whose Temple she had profaned
by carnal pollution) who strangely metamorphosed them both, changing Hippomene
into a Lion, and Atalanta into a Lioness, to live thereafter in woods and
forests amongst the beasts.

I will recite no more Histories, fearing to offend the goodness of wise and
discreet women, who cannot without much horror hear so much discourse of the
cruelty of those who dishonor their sex. It shall suffice to say, that there
are women so rigid in authority, so exact in their commandments, so punctual
in their ordinances, so jealous of their power, and so imperious in their
behavior, that as it is requisite for a woman to know how to command women
wifely; so must she be a woman that knows readily how to obey the laws and
ordinances of women. I leave themselves to be their own judges in this, and
only add, that these naughty packs have a heart so vain, a mind so haughty,
and a port so proud and stately, that we may well firname them.

V
Vanitas Vanitaris.
Vanity of Vanities.
FOr three or four good reasons parents did anciently sorrow at the birth of
their daughters; the fi st was, for that if they were handsome and comely, a
great deal of care, trouble and vigilance was required to keep them so, which
was well signified in that Hieroglyphick of a woman who was represented armed
cap a pe with a Dragon at her feet, to show, that chaste maidens need all manner
of arms and defenses to resist the assaults and suggestions of the devil, and
the cunning insinuations of sensual men, and who have no government over
themselves. The second was, That if they were ugly, or deformed, or ill-shaped,
a great deal of money was required to set them off in marriage. The third, That
being unapt to Sciences and Mechanic Arts, they were of no use either to
private or public good. The fourth is, The natural vanity and custom of
women, who give the reins to their unbridled passions; for proof whereof, if
you observe their words, their actions, their enterprises and designs, and all
their behavior, you shall find so much vanity and vainglory, that the braved
Orator in the world could better deplore then express them. This vanity makes
them disdainful, lofty, curious, desirous of praise and honor, to the vaunting
of their extraction, of their nobility, that they came from out the thigh of
Jove; this makes them pleasant and attentive to the cogging and flattering
courtships, even to the contempt of candor and ingenuous freeness, which is one
of the most noble qualities they could be possessed of; wedding, as it were,
dissimulation, so that hypocrisy, and that seeming good which appears in them
as by instinct of nature, is merely a disguise; they force their deportments,
and draw in their mouth, the more artificially to grace their words, which are
those Lime-twigs whereby they catch those, whom they would metamorphose into
their humors and qualities.

It Is this vanity also which makes them pompous vainglorious, nice, and and to
be wantonly habited, for which they search all manner of stately bravery and
gaudiness; the Moenian Pactolus and Portugal Tagus must be despoiled of their
rich gold Sands, to content their luxury in Rings and Jewels; the Odors of
Musk, Amber-gris, Civet, Iris, and Abdanon are not spared, to perfume those
stinking and unsavory exhalations which come from beneath them: and further,
to reform the wisdom of God, (O vanity insupportable!) they content not
themselves with Neck-handkerchiefs, Corgets, with false Perruques, white,
flaxen, frizel'd, auborn, and brown; with Bracelets, Neck-laces, Carknets, and
a thousand other lesser trinkums, but they use also paintings, false colors to
dissemble the ugliness of their face, their neck, and their breasts, whose
dugs, without this artifice, would rather look like two horn-pipes than pipes
of milk; where love's foolish passion lays his Nets to catch those Swans of
Meander, without considering, that these things are abnominable before God, and
forbidden by the Divine Laws, as also by profane.

Lycurgus by his Laws forbad the superfluity in apparel; and the Romans seeing
the excess and luxury in them, especially by women, made a Law, that they
should never wear any dressings of gold, nor any garments of diverse colors,
or powdered with gold and silver: Which Law continued, till the effeminateness
of Asia became Mistress of that glorious City.

But, may some Finical Dame say, men are as guilty in this vanity as women.
Grant them to be so, yet are they more excusable, because the most part thereof
is in expense upon Arms, Horses, Clothes, and other equipage, commonly upon
design to raise their fortune, to appear splendid in Courts and Camps well
accoutred to the service of their Princes. But women with all these
looking-glasses at their side, their Fans and Muffs, etc. and other trim
niceties, have no other aim, but make use of them for the most part to draw in
the slaves of their lewd pleasure, with so much excess, such change, and such
curiosity, that the poor Tailor knows not of what wood to make his arrow, with
what new fashion to please them.

And though the mode now be easier to be found than the stuff, yet is there a
certain sort of women, that, if they could, would wear the whole world on their
backs. To which purpose he that writ, The means of making the Turks sworn
enemies of Christendom, in his book has this passage, I saw a Turkish woman,
who belonged but to a private person, wear about her in clothes to the value of
3000 Ducats: If a simple Damosel was so vain, what think you of the wives of
the Bashaws, the Viziers, and the Grand Seigniors. But to leave the Turkish
women, we have so bad here in France, that we may not well blame them there.

St. Cyprian says, That women which go thus attired, wear the stamp and image
of the Devil, St. Austin terms such garments, the signs and interpretation of
an adulterous heart, and lascivious and inconstant mind; Impudicus habitus
signum est adulterini cordis.

St. Paul writing to his Disciple Timothy, would not have women to be adorned
with so many precious stones, carkenets, curled hair, and rich habits; but to
wear only such as were decent, honest, and agreeable to their quality, walking
always in modesty and sobriety: Cum verecundia and modestia ornantes se.

Theodoret reports a pretty story in his History of the Fathers, which deserves
reading: His mother being aged twenty three years, and troubled with a fore
eye, went to St. Peter the Hermit in a silk gown, and adorned with rich
pendants in her ears, to obtain a remedy. That holy person seeing her in such a
habit, which she thought suitable to her youth and quality, took occasion to
speak familiarly to her about it, and to reprove her vanity in this manner:
What would you say, Madam, if you should see a dull and unskilful Painter take
up the Pencil to mend a Picture, which had been drawn by the best workman in
the world, and wherein, according to his judgment, nothing could be faulted;
would you not take that man for a rash and ignorant fellow, and worthy of
punishment? and this excellent Painter, would not he have cause to complain of
this boldness, and to cause him to be severely chastised? She thereupon
replying, that he had just cause to do so. He then rejoyned, Consider in the
same manner, (Madam) that God, that great heavenly Maker, has created you to
his own image and likeness and by the same power he created you has made you
perfect and accomplished; and think you, that you have not luster, beauty, and
perfection enough to please his Divine Majesty, without borrowing from the
creatures (the works of his hands) an addition of ornament, reforming thereby
his infinite power, and sovereign wisdom? If you have recourse to paintings,
patching to strange colors, to borrowed hairs, and other vanities, will not
this show, that you believe God to be ignorant, wanting of power, and
inconsiderate, in not having made you according to your desire? May you not be
charged with boldness and presumption by that Divine Majesty, who made you no
other then you are? His words struck such a fear into her, that having her eye
cured by him, she came home and disroab'd her self of her gay attire, laid
aside her pendants and her other fineries, in the most flourishing age of her
life, habiting her self ever afterward as plainly and modestly as she could.

I wish our fine Dames would do the like, that there were no such she reformers
of the wisdom of God in the world, remembering that terrible sentence of the
Prophet Zephaniah, Visitabo super omnes qui induti sunt vest peregrina; by
which God threatens, that in the last day he will make inquisition of those who
wear strange garments and other gauderies, which make up an artificial beauty.
To which purpose I wish those plaistered fine Dames, which will not amend, were
as handsomely affronted as those Curtesans were once by the means of Phryne
(the beautifullest ha lot in her time) in a full feast.

Erasmus says in the sixth of his Apophthegms, that she being one day at Table
with a great number of her sisters of the same Trade, seeing them
all-to-be-painted, to put a trick upon those wenches (it being a custom and
mannerly for guests to do that which others do out of civility and good
carriage) she wetted her hands in the water, and therewith rubbed her forehead:
the others straight doing the same in imitation of her who was a Sun in beauty
without paint or other artifice; the fucus was apparent, the wrinckles were
seen, and they looked like old withered hags, which made them the laughter of
the whole company, who dismissed them with as much shame and disgrace, as they
came full of mirth, pride, and arrogance.

To say all in a word, if this be blameworthy in secular women and Courtesans,
a thousand times more detestable it is in those, who in all their ways and
actions, ought to give testimony of their contempt of the world, and the lusts
and vain pomp thereof; who are obliged to please none but their celestial
Spouse, who delights in those souls which perfect themselves in the race of
mortification, and in the exercise of patience under all the severity and heat
of those afflictions which it pleases God to send them toward their
advancement in the way of salvation, and the attainment of glory.

If as St. Peter speaking of women, says, They ought rather to go in a decent
habit, and be rather adorned with virtue than with gold, silver, or jewels;
that her clothes ought to be of the same value, simplicity, and modesty as fits
such who have a Husband so divine and heavenly, and who pleases not himself
with those minds which are taken up among their wardrobes, and furrs, and
corruptible earthly riches, and who relish nothing but wanton Venery: And if
the wife of Philo the Jew could reply to those who blamed her, for not wearing
a Crown on her head, and other ornaments, as the women of her time did, I am
adorned, says she, already with the singular virtues and perfections of him,
whom God has given me to be my husband: If women are to take up the resolution
of daughters consecrated to God, and who by the vow of their profession have
espoused a perpetual Cloister, to live conformably to the actions and virtues
of him, who has redeemed them by the effusion of his blood, endued them with
his g ace, bestowed on them his love, taken them for his most dear and loving
Spouse; should they have any other felicity, or glory, or contentment, than in
the Cross? laying with St. Paul, Mihi autem absit gloriari nisi in cruce, etc.

Beautiful Esther long since said to God, Thou know that I abhor the sign of
my high estate which is upon my head, in the day wherein I show my self, and
that I abhor it as a menstruous rag, and wear it not when I am private by my
self.

Livy in his Fourth Book of the Roman History, observes, That the Senate having
set at liberty one of the Vestal Virgins, falsely accused of incest, the
Pontifex Maximus, to take off any suspicion which afterward might fall upon
her, and to show her the manner of that life which she was to observe according
to her profession, forbad her ever afterward to be trimly dressed, and that above
all she should not give her self to scurrilous talk, or any kind of merry
discourse; but that she should behave her self as becomes a serious, sage,
discreet, silent, and modest women in all her actions. And if this were
required as necessary in a Vestal Virgin, who worshipped Idols, how much more
is this requisite in Chrian Maidens, who adore the true God, and are his
Spouses?

St. Jerome showing Laeta how she should instruct her daughter, whom she had
devoted to Christ by the vow of her Virginity, among other excellent
instructions these are very remarkable; Have a care, says he, that your
daughter frequent not the company of secular and worldly women; beware you bore
not her ears, paint not her face, curl or powder her hair, vermillion her
cheeks, encircle her neck with pearls, adorn her head with Rubies or chains of
gold, or her body with precious garments, which are already the beginning of
the fire of hell; remember that Pretexta, that noble Lady attiring the Virgin
Eustochium a-la-mode the rimes, at the command of her husband Hymetitus, to
break and frustrate the good purpose and desire of the mother of the said
Virgin, was menaced by an Angel from heaven, who appearing to her in the night,
said thus; Miserable as thou art, how have thou dared to prefer the command of
a husband to the Son of God? who made thee so hardy as to touch his Spouse with
thy sacrilegious hands? were thou not afraid to profane by such uncleanness a
Virgin of God? Now that you may bear the punishment of this sin, I declare unto
thee, that thy hands shall wither, and thou shall suffer extreme pain, and at
the end of five months Hell shall swallow thee up; and I assure thee further,
if thou perseverest in thy wickedness, and in thy naughty courses, God shall
take away thy husband and children. A terrible threatening, but I tremble at the
effect; she delayed her repentance, and God hastened his judgment, causing her
to die suddenly: an example to others to forbear corrupting of such, who are
dedicated to the service of God.

From whence I infer, That not only the Votaries themselves offend in triming
and dressing themselves, but also those that give them advice and counsel so to
do: For the blessed Bridegroom enquires not of the ornament of the body, but of
the soul; not the nobility of birth, but virtue; not the beauty of the face,
but of the mind; not the good condition of the body, but the health of the
mind; not prudence or other worldly bravery, but Faith, Hope, Charity,
Humility, and other virtues, which keep us right in the way of salvation. Those
that live contrarily, and to the guise of the world, and of the looser fort, I
shall not be afraid in stead of the Spouse of Christ to call them Harpies,
Sirens, inanimated by evil Angels, Sprites bearing the image of the Devil, and
meriting to be compared to the conditions of Xerxes the Monarch of Persia and
that we paint upon her forehead, according to the order of the Alphabet, this
Epithet

X
Xanxia Xerxis.
Xerxes's Ambition.
XErxes was a Prince so inflated with arrogance, and puffed up with ambition, and
tainted with vanity, that he had not his like, and therefore is a fit
comparison for women, by his conformity to them, and theirs to him.

The pride and ambition of this Prince mounted to the high imagination of
conquering the terrestrial Paradise, having an Army of 1200000 men, as
Palbertus reports; but God, that resists the proud, withstood his design,
afflicting him with so terrible a famine, that through mere hunger he and his
Army was constrained to retreat the same way again. This was a vast
haughtiness, but if we consider that haughty transgression of the first woman,
we shall find it to surpass this in every point.

Men further report two things of this Prince, more remarkable then all the
other; the first, his luxury and excesses in pleasure; the second, his extreme
choler, and furious vengeance. Cicero says, in the Fifth Book of his Tusculan
Questions, about the beginning, That this lascivious and wasteful Prince
contented not himself in the tasting the known debauched pleasures of the age,
but to fill his depraved concupiscence, promised by his Edict great rewards to
such as should invent new and extraordinary ones; the most scelerate action in
the world.

To the second, his rage; Herodotus says, That coming with his Army to the
straits of the Hellespont, over which he designed to build a Bridge, to march
his men over from Asia into Greece, it happened, that during this labor in vain,
a storm arose and broke down his Bridge so much as he had done. At this he was
so madly incensed, that he commanded three hundred blows with a Rod to be given
this Sea, and threw Chains into it thinking to shackle it; he bad also so many
bangs to be inflicted on it, adding all sorts of threatening and mischief. This
not appeasing his fury, in the last place he gave order to cut off the heads of
all those, who were appointed to the custody of all his Waters and Bridges, as
if they had been the cause of this unfortunate adventure; this was a wild sally
of the maddest and inconsideratest person in the world. But if we search
History, we shall find women more brutish, wanton, and audacious than this
proud Prince; for to the first, his luxury, I abhor to think there should be
found women so dissolute and bestial, that not content with the most lustful
perdite sort of men of their own species, but that abusing their nature, they
should prostrate and abandon themselves not only to beasts, but to the devil
himself, who enjoy and mix with them (though without any pleasure) in borrowed
bodies. As an example for the first, see Philo the Jew, in his tract of
particular Laws, where you shall find Pasiphae the wife of King Minos in love
with a Bull, seeking by all means to have carnal knowledge of that Beast.

The learned Apuleius says, That a certain woman called Meroes on a time fell
into such a fit of rage, that she highly menaced the provokers of her
displeasure; in fury she vaunted, that she would displace Heaven it self, she
would dry up the Springs and the Sea, put out the Stars, illuminate Hell, cast
to the ground even the Creator of this great Universe. Behold, if this be not
the most unparalled audacious boldness in the world, far above and beyond the
pride of the devil, who attempted no more then to be equal with God: this woman
would make God less mighty then her self, and be superior to him.

Orosius that famous person says, That during the Consulship of Claudius
Marcellus, Titus, and Valerius, there were put to death 380 Roman Ladies
convicted of Witchcraft; and in his list of the Sorceresses, he puts in the
first place Hecate; then Circe and Medea, fince which, the world by incestuous
copulation, according to the custom of Sorceresses, has been still
replenished, and hell filled; and this goddess did not only preside over
Charmers, Incantators, etc. but also over Veneficiaries, and all sorts of
poison, and to whom they addressed themselves for success upon those mischiefs
and maleficia, which other Sorcerers should do.

I shall mention one story, which deserves to be transmitted, you shall see it
in the Daemonomanie of D. Bodin, and more clearly in the Table of the
Inconstancy of Demons and evil Spirits.

The story relates, that a young Girl named Magdalena de la Croix, native of
Cordoua in Spain, being descended of a mean family and parentage, resolved to
collect some alms to help forward the re-building and restoration of the
Convent of St. Clare, which then went to ruin; and managed the business so
well, that the Monastery was finished. This gave occasion to me Nuns to receive
her into their company, where a certain black Demon, like an Ethiopian, came
into acquaintance with her, being then aged betwixt ten and twelve years, and
wrought so by his devilish policies, that he made her a slave to his will;
making her seem also in a short time the wisest and holiest of her age; and the
better to captivate her entirely to his obedience, she was no sooner twelve
years old but he demanded her in marriage; whereto giving her consent, he
married her upon this condition, that for the space of thirty years and more he
should make her to equal, yea, to surpass in holiness, all of her profession,
whether Monks or Nuns; which succeeded according to her desire: Thereby there
grew such a familiarity between them, that this Demon forced sometimes to go
to other places, which he made her believe were of great repute, he gave her a
Servitour in his place, which assisted her in all things; and taking the form
of the said Magdalen, did imitate her in all things, doing that which she ought
to do for her ease; and when her Demon returned, he told her all things worthy
of notice that had passed in the world.

Among other things he told her one day, of the the taking of Francis the
First, prisoner, and the spoil that was soon after committed at Rome; which she
relating to the Nuns, they thought she knew it by revelation of some good
Angel. To make short the story, this Magdalene doing admirable signs, and
strange wonders, which passed for miracles, together with the holiness of life
which outwardly appeared, she was chosen Abbess of the Monastery, to the
satisfaction of all the Religious therein, and behaved her self so well in this
charge, that nothing was to be complained of in her: On Festivals she was so
fervently devout, that the has been lifted three cubits high from the ground,
having often in her hands the image of our Lord, showing at times a head of
hair reaching to her ancles, which disappeared presently: Being at Mass, the
partition wall of the Choir would open of it self, sometimes to give a more
commodious sight of the holy Hostia; and those days wherein she failed to
communicate, (which is very strange) the Priest having consecrated the Hosts to
the number of the Nuns present, found that he had one to say, thinking that
some good Angel had reserved it to give it her himself; and indeed some of the
Religious did sometimes see the Host come to her in the air, and this very
Host did leap into her mouth, which she showed them publicly.

This so augmented her credit and reputation of holiness, that Popes, Emperors,
Kings, Princes, sent their Letters, recommending themselves to her prayers. The
Spanish Princesses were first deceived; for the wife of Charles the Fifth sent
her swadling-cloaths to wrap her son Philip the Second with, that she would
bless them with her hand. But she did so many wonderful things, that at last
the Nuns began to take her for a Witch; which she perceiving, and God touching
her by degrees by his grace, the thirty years of her Covenant being expired,
about the year 1546 she accused her self, and confessed to the Visitors of the
Order, that she had known this Demon from the age of twelve years, continuing
them to thirty onward; and having made a general confession, desired their
assistance: When, the Demon who had so long bewitched her, seeing her
resolution, endeavored by all means to dissuade her, but not able to effect it
was constrained to leave her; who, the better to expiate her sin, was put in
prison, where she underwent a hard and austere penance, till at last she
obtained pardon of it from Pope Paul the Fourth.

There is another sin more odious to God and man, yea, to little children,
which is drunkenness, the most infamous name can be given them.

Y
Yperanoposis Effrons.
Shameless Drunkenness.
OF all the Vices none is more stupid, gross, and brutish than this; we see
that it reigns chiefly among the Germans, who are the grossest Nation in the
world. In other vices we an descry some lineament of diligence, valor, good
menage, prudence and policy; but in this there is nothing but what is heavy and
earthly, and alike hurtful to the body and the spirit.

You shall see in Plutarch, St. Ambrose, Tertullian, Arnobius, and Aulus
Gellius, that drunkenness wastes the memory, dulls the spirits, corrupts the
blood, troubles the brain, debilitates the senses, stammers the tongue, shakes
the body, enfeebles the nerves, makes all the members to tremble, burns up the
lungs, rots them, and makes the breath stink like a dead carcass, dimns the
sight, fumes into the head, extinguisheth heat, enflames the breast, blows up
the stomach, stirs up luxury, provokes wrath, disorders the steps, causes
babbling, discovers secrets, consumes wealth, defames the honor, enervates the
strength of generation, shortens life, confounds nature, and, which is worst,
steals away time, robs us of day, drives away the fear of God and his
judgments, destroys grace, occasions the enmity of the Creator, and obliges men
to everlasting punishment.

The first example is of a widow woman, reported by the Sieur de Montaign in
his Essays, of a woman; who lying on her hearth by the fire side drunk, was
found by her servant in such a posture, that he carnally knew her without
waking of her, by whom being gotten with child, and perceiving it some few days
after, she acquainted a neighbor, that she should think her self to be
impregnated, but that the had no husband; nevertheless nature by degrees
showing the truth of her conjecture, she caused it to be published by the Crier
of the Town, that she would forgive any person that had done it, and would avow
it, and marry him to boot: Her servant culpable of the fact, believing her
promises, declared all that had passed, and his mistress married him, and made
him her husband. In this we see the strength of wine, and the evil it brings
men in; that it stupifies people, and renders them unsensible of pleasure, even
of the pleasures of Venery.

The Romans made Laws against women drinking of wine, under pain of great
punishments; St. Austin citing the Law, says, That nature has justly
forbidden women the power of commanding; and I second it, That it is not
without reason, that the Laws and customs of the world have inhibited the
manages of Empire, and the use of wine to them: For these two Laws are the main
Buttresses and Defenses, which can stop that rage and madness which so
transports them, as Juvenal says,.

Et rabie jecur incendente feruntur Praecipites. Women were the first at Thebes
that sacrificed to Bacchus the god of Drunkenness, and the wine being once in
their head, there was no manner of cruelty and insolence which they did not
exercise, as we see in the death of Pentheus, Orpheus, and many others. To
which purpose Pindar and Virgil describing a furious person, void of judgment
and reason, they only used a Metonomy, adapting them into the names of some
drunken terms taken from women, called Bacchantes and Maenades, one whereof
called Agave being drunk, killed her own son the King of Thebes.

Not to enquire further into History, I say, as in Ecclesiasticus, that a
drunken woman, and a gadder abroad, causes great anger, and she will not cover
her own shame, intimating, that she is then a perfect fury; which makes him
also to say, That he would rather dwell in the deserts among wild beasts, than
to sojourn with a froward woman, enflamed with rage and anger; which wine
redoubles.

I must say, That indeed it is a great punishment to dwell with such; but
following the order of our Alphabet, we shall find another kind of women less
sufferable then those, and these are such who seem furiously transported with
love, that the least thing in the world is capable to make them jealous, even
of a shadow, concerning that they love; and therefore deserve to be called.

Z
Zelus Zelotypus.
Zeal of Jealousy.
Jealousy differs not much from Envy, they are both the most irregular
passions Envy regards the good of another with extreme regret, that it cannot
possess and obtain it; Jealousy considers the good of another, with fear, that
any one else should partake of it. Now how much more men cherish what they
themselves then others have, by so much is it not to be wondered at, if the fear
of losing that which one possesses does more disquiet the spirit, than the
good of another; and if so, by consequence, that Jealousy is a passion more
troublesome to be undergone than Envy, it is a disease which lodges only in
weak, sottish, and distrustful minds, for properly it is no other than a
distrust of ones self, and an infallible testimony of its little merit; it
changes moreover perfect love into hatred, respect into disdain, honor into
contempt, trust into distrust, the sweetness of life into the bitterment of a
perpetual torment, and the most pleasant and delightful recreations into the
most sharp and disquieting perturbations imaginable.

It is a rage which troubles and wearies without any intermission a mind
therewith possessed, it is a tyranny which like a cunning Serpent winds it self
into base and low minds under the title of love, wherein soothing others, it
turns to a mortal hatred, upon the same foundations of good will: virtue,
merit, favor; valor and reputation are the incentives of this Spite and
jealous rage, though they should be the motives and inducements to affection
and love.

The holy Scripture compares it to two things, which show its terribleness;
first to the formidable Majesty, and the dreadful fury which the sons of God
shall make to appear, when they are to judge the world, Accipiet armaturam
Zelus illius; and secondly, to the frightful pains of hell; for it not only
savageth the sweetest natures, but so over-bears them, that they are incapable
of patience and pardon.

The Naturallists tells us, that a certain Bird called Porphyrion is so jealous
of her companion, that knowing her to be disloyal he will kill himself. It is
reported also, that the Shepherd Cratis falling in love with a she-goat, her
mate became so jealous, that finding him asleep he choked him with his horns,
with so much force also, that he broke his skull, and so brought him to his
death.

The like may be instanced in Lions, Elephants, and other beasts, and
innumerable examples of men and women, in whom it reigns especially, because
they are less magnanimous and courageous then men, who engage and oblige the
good will of others by a confidence of their own deserts, and which renders
them worthy of that which they desire and possess, through their benevolences
and singular virtues.

It is well to the purpose that jealousy is compared to hell, particularly
that of a woman; for if there be a thousand sorts of punishments to afflict the
damned, women have also a thousand inventions to afflict those, who cannot or
will not comply with their wills; and if that which they love seriously be not
complaisant enough to their purpose, their love is turned into hatred, which
ends in poisons, treasons, conspirations, and other attemptt, upon the honor
and life of those, who have nothing so dear to them as their innocence.

Of many Tragical Histories, take this.

Lucitia so passionately loved her husband, that to bring him to her desire she
gave him Aconite, a deadly poison, mistaking it for a love-potion, of which he
died instantly. The same Author says also, that Cyanippe was so extremely
jealous of her husband, that she suspecting his custom of hunting was a
pretense to his courting of other Ladies, went out into the Forest to, espy it
out; but she could not so well conceal her self, but the Dogs bearing a
brusling of the leaves, ran upon her and tore her in pieces; at which her
husband was so grieved that he killed himself in the place. In these two
stories there is more of indiscretion than cruelty, but that of Ariadne is more
doleful and Tragical, because the Emperor Zeno Isauricus her husband was not so
serviceable to her as she desired, she caused him to be buried alive, a most
horrible cruelty.

I hope and firmly believe, that the wise and discreet will bear me no ill-wil;
for as contraries set together do make one another show the better, so these
Satyrs and Anatomies of vice, will make the nobleness, the excellency, the
virtues of good women (whom I will maintain to be equal in number with the bad)
to be more illustrious. For though the wise man says, He could find, none,
'twas not that he would absolutely deny there was none, but he would express,
that when a woman does well, she is not to be considered in the quality of a
woman, or according to the inclination of her sex, but as having a Masculine
spirit, a martial courage, and the heart of a man; for as there are effeminate
men, so are there masculine women, and of a more magnanimous mind than many
men; and indeed, the greatest contumely that can be cast upon debaucht and
loose men, is to call them effeminate; and the greatest praise that can be
given to women is to name them virile and martial. To which purpose Erasmus
says, That Ennius in blaming the inconstancy and lightness of some young men,
could find no better words to his purpose then to tell them, that they had the
spirit of women; Vos etenim juvenes animos geritis muliebres. For as the Poet
says in the Fourth of the Aeneids, Women are changeable every hour.

Laertius observes in the Sixth Book of the lives of Philosophers, that
Diogenes finding a young youth delicately trimmed curled, and a la mode the
Madam, said unto him, I marvel that thou art not ashamed of thy shame,
counterfeiting and disguising thy nature; she made thee a man, and thou make
thy self a woman by this female trimming, and feminine delicacies.

Philo the Jew, in his Book of Strength and Courage, says. That God intending
the man should show himself courageous in his actions, in his deportments, and
in his habit, forbad him expressly, as we may see in Deuteronomy. 22. that he should
never wear the habit of women; Vir non utetur vest foeminea, nec mulier vest
virili: Whereupon this learned Hebrew infers, That God forbids men the garments
of a woman, because he ought not to have the lead feminine thing in or about
him, but that he should be vigorous in all his actions; and so contrarily to
the woman: However the case be now, most certain it is, that God made her for
an ornament of human kind, for a comfort to our nature, and to sweeten the
miseries of our life, for the contentment of men, and to People the heavenly
Paradise; to which, the blessed TRINITY conduct and bring us All.

Advice of the Author to Virtuous WOMEN.
My LADIES,
IT is reported, that the invincible Hercules being one day upon an adventure,
found in the open field Vice and Virtue in the guise of two women of different
age and habit, and easy to be known by their outward behavior: Both of these
seeing this young man in search of some delightful good, to perpetuate the
contentment of his mind during the course of his life, not deeming himself
happy enough in his excelling Lions, Tigers, Centaurs, and Giants in strength,
presented themselves before him with all sorts of recompenses and promises.
Vice, to draw him the sooner to her discretion, and charm more feelingly and
forcibly his will and affections, offered her self to his eyes in the shape of
a young and fair Damsel, ennobled with all the Beauties, enriched with all the
Pearls, Diamonds and Jewels imaginable to be found in the East, or in the
bosom of Nature; clothed with the most precious raiment that can be had from
the Merchants, made fit to her goodly and exact stature, with so much neatness,
modishness, and sutablenese, that it was enough to make heaven amorous of her
beauty, and the Sun himself jealous of all those, who thenceforward should
think themselves worthy of her affections. She addressing her self thus to
Hercules in this goodly array, promised him, That if he would partake of her
favors, and follow her in all things, she would lead him through a way strewed
with Roses, with Lillies, and Aromatic flowers, unto the safe Haven of extreme
Content, which he should receive in the enjoyment of honors, grandeurs,
pleasures, estate, and riches, in the grace and favor of all the great
Monarchs of the Earth: But that at the end of that pleasant race, and at taking
his leave of this to go into the other world, he could hope for nothing but an
accumulation of misery, grief, pain, and suffering.

Vice having finished her Oration, and the tender of her promises, Virtue being
desirous to gain to her so brave a courage, went another way to work, appearing
to him in the form of an old Matron, all wrinckled, disheveled, deformed, and
bended, clothed as poorly and simply as might be; in which posture, seeing
Hercules disgusted at her, and to turn away his eyes, she bespoke him in this
manner; Hercules, I am not a finikin, spruce, beautiful woman, nor so richly
adorned as that woman which just now spoke with you, and gave you those sweet
and pleasing words, therewith to bait your affections, charm, your will, and
render thee her slave. I will not promise thee riches, nor the pleasures of the
world, nor the favors of Princes, nor to lead thee a way diversifi'd with
sports and pastims: But I dare assure thee, that if thou will follow me in a
way full of briers, thorns, flints, rough and abrupt, difficult and hard to
climb, to the top of a Mountain, I will give thee to taste all sorts of
delicacies, pleasures, and contentments, not for a few days or years, but for
eternity, and for ever.

Hercules having heard Virtue, began to disdain Vice with all her caresses and
temporary pleasures, and consider with himself, that it were better for a
little time to endure the asperity of a difficult way, and worldly passage, to
be afterward eternally happy, then being intoxicated with vain and perishable
pleasures, be for ever miserable.

I pass from the moral application of Fable to that which concerns the two
ways, which are proposed to man at his birth by Jesus Christ, represented by
Virtue; and by the Devil, figured by Vice; the one conducing to heaven by
pains, miseries, and the cross, gibbets, punishments, affronts, injuries, and
troubles; and the other to hell by pleasures, riots, vanities, and delicacies,
I would therefore only observe in favor of you, virtuous women, that as Vice
found no readier means to deprive Hercules of his attainment to eternal
happiness, than by the pompous spoils of your sex, as likewise does the devil
to destroy the whole world; so virtue judges nothing more expedient to save
and make happy this young man, than the shape of a woman, to intimate, that
your sex is as susceptible of that royal quality, which ennobles souls destined
for heaven, as that detestable deformed monster of Vice, which appears so
amiable, is to entrap, and sink, and drown her slaves in the abyss of an
eternity of miseries.

I discover this by the admirable invention of the ancient Poets and
Philosophers, who showing of one side the good and favors which men partake
of, say, That they are communicated to us under a feminine signification; for
Juno gives riches, Pallas science, Ceres fruits of the earth, Diana chastity,
Chloris flow s, and so the other goddesses, who, according to them, were the
honor and ornament of heaven and earth. On the other side, the said
Philosophers speaking of the miseries and troubles of humane life, say, That
men have suffered them through the means of women, and under feminine names, as
Persephone, Proserpina, the Furies, the Fates, the Harpies, the Gorgon, the
Eumenides, Sirens, Pandora, etc. and as many, or more, destructive, as there
were good and virtuous: For we find among the Poets, that Jupiter the chief
Pagan god, he could find among all the women that were in the world but nine
virtuous ones, whom he named Muses, whom he lodged upon the Hill Parnassus, of
a great height, separating them thereby from the company of others, that they
might not partake of their bad education, and of their vices, which made them
the lees of the world, the scum of nature, the seminary of misery, the scourge
of the insensible, the damm of all the filth and ordure in the world. As virtue
has made you (wise women) according to the same praises of the Philosophers,
the honor of the world, the enamel of the earth, the beauty of the universe,
the flourishing plat, where nature has placed her greatness, and heaven does
influence it with the rich treasures of his inexhaustible stores, the Nectar
and the Ambrosia of the living, and the Springtime of all humane things, the
glory of man, and the comfort of our times and age.

I confess ingenuously, that all these noble Epithets, and millions more, are
due to your merits, in consideration of (...) that virtue which shines within
your minds, embellisheth your actions, ennobles your thoughts, raises your
designs, accompanies your enterprises, leads the way to your desires, gives
that grace to your discourse, gives reputation to your silence, makes all your
deportments acceptable, and renders you capital enemies to the vices and
infamous actions of your sex, who endeavor by their imperfection to blemish
the perfection of your merits, and are the occasion, that the indiscreet and
the ignorant of the other sex do not honor and dearly esteem you as is
necessary. As for me, it is my intention to make every day a new Panegyric of
your praises, provided I find not my self ill paid for having published this
Anatomy of Vices, on purpose to make the luster of your virtues more
resplendent in the Temple of Memory, and in the Firmament of future ages. For
it is the duty of every discreet person to blame Vice, and praise Virtue,
without fear of scandalous and poisoned tongues, or of men born for nothing but
themselves, and to censure, defame, reprove, and rashly judge the actions of
another.

Do not believe, My Ladies, that I designed this at leisure times for any
displeasure received from any one in particular of your sex; for I cannot
believe there is at least a mind so basely made, that would revenge a
particular injury upon the general, or to use such a cowardly Pen, as not to
dare freely to address it against her who did offend him, as well as against
others that have done him no displeasure.

Live then in hope to see those praises and encomiums (which are due to your
merits quickened by your virtue) one day published; and believe me, as I have
composed this Alphabet to cause an amendment in the bad, so is it my design to
write your Elogies, to make virtue increase in you more and more: Virtus enim
laudata crescit; and to protest to you, that there is no person in the world
who more ardently desires the furtherance of your salvation, and the approaches
of glory and happiness which you hope for with me in heaven, whether the
Blessed TRINITY conduct us All.

FINIS.

