THE DIVINE RIGHT AND IRRESISTIBILITY OF KINGS, AND SVPREME MAGISTRATES:
Clearly evidenced, not from any private Authority, but from the Public
Confessions of the Reformed Churches, and the Homilies of the Church of ENGLAND.

MATH. 18.17. If he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen man, and a Publican.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, 1645.

To the READER.
Reader,
I Have cited the Confessions of the Reformed Churches as they were Printed at
Cambridge, 1586.

And I have quoted the Homilies, according to their late Impression, 1633. And
from the Confessions and Homilies thou may learn; That God is the Author of
Political Order; And that himself is the first in that Order; And that Kings
and Princes are in that Rank and Order next under him, as his Lievtenants and
Deputies, having their Authority and power from him, and so to give an Account
of their Ministration to him. And that by reason of their rank and place they
must not be Resisted by us; much less may we wring their Authority from them,
or Rebel against them, or endeavor (upon any pretenses) to shake off the yoke
of Subjection under them. Now Resisting and Rebelling are a rising up against,
and opposing of the Higher Power; and Resisting properly, is in respect of that
Order which God has constituted in all Government: And Rebellion, is against
the special Order and Constitutions in several Kingdoms and Commonwealths:
That contrary to the Subjection which the Law of God requires, This contrary to
the Subjection and Obedience required by the Laws of Men.

And where these are accompanied with Civil War (as amongst us at this day)
they produce far greater miseries to the People, and mischiefs far more
fatal to the Commonwealth, then Tyranny and Oppression; Under Tyranny there
being some Order, not only the Divine, but the Humane also, in respect of
matters between Subject and Subject: but Resisting and Rebellion and such War
overthrow all Order: Divine, (and so infer damnation, Romans 13.) Humane, even
to Anarchy and Confusion, which God avert from us.

Besides (says Mr Calvin in his Com: upon Romans 13. v. 3.) an evil Prince is
the scourge of God to punish the sins of the People: And that excellent and
wholesome Institution of Magistracy is never corrupted (by Tyranny) but upon our
default: wherefore we must impute to our selves and to our sins, the evil that
is in it, and evermore Reverence the Ordination it self. And (lib. 4.
Institut. Cap. 20. Art. 29.) If we be persecuted for Godliness, by an impious
and Sacrilegious Prince, let us first of all remember our sins, which no
doubt are corrected by God with such Scourges; This will bridle our impatience
with humility: Then let us entertain this thought, that it is not our part to
heal such distempers; but our only remedy is, to implore the help of God, in
whose hands are the hearts of Kings, and the Inclinations of Kingdoms.

O Consider this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50 22. As in this case most men,
both in their writings and proceedings, forget him: his first Ordinance of
Political power for Government: and his second Ordination of the power
sometime to Judgment; and especially do they forget him, who make the People
the Author of that power, and maintain their Right of reassuming it at
pleasure, and Preach and Press Resistance of the power, and consequently of
God himself in his Ordinance and Judgments.

Consider what I say, etc. 2. Tim. 2.7. THE DIVINE RIGHT AND Irresistibility of
KINGS and Supreme MAGISTRATES.
The HELVETIAN Confession.
THe Magistrate of what sort soever it be, In Syntag. confession. Genev. An.
1612. page 85.
is ordained of God himself, for the Peace and quietness of Mankind, and so
that he ought to have the chiefest place in the World. (And) God does work the
safety of his People by the Magistrate, whom as he has given to be as a Father
of the World; so all the Subjects are commanded to acknowledge this benefit of
God in the Magistrate, and honor him as the Minist^r of God. And if the common
safety of the Country and Justice require it, and the Magistrate do of
necessity make War, let them lay down their life and spend their blood for
the common safety and defense of the Magistrate, and that in the name of God
willingly, valiantly, and cheerfully, for that he that opposes himself
against the Magistrate does procure the wrath of God against him. We know that
though we be free, we ought wholly in a true Faith, holily to submit our selves
to the Magistrate, both with our body, and with our goods, and endeavors of
mind, so far forth as his government is not evidently repugnant to him for
whose sake we reverence the Magistrate.

The Confession of BOHEMIA.
IT is taught out of the holy Scriptures, In Syntag. Confess. edit. Genev. An.
1612. page 264. part 2.
that the Civil Magistrate is the Ordinance of God, and appointed by God, who
both takes his original from God, and by the effectual power of his
presence, and continual aid, is maintained to govern the People, in those
things which appertain to the life of this body here upon earth, whereof is
that of St Paul, Romans 13.1. There is no Power etc. And Magistrates must know
and remember this, that they are Gods Deputies, and in his stead, and that God
is the Sovereign Lord and King, even of them all as well as of other men, to
whom they must give an account at the last day, of the degree wherein they were
placed, and of their dominion, and of the whole administration of their
government, whereof it is expressly written in the book of Wisdom, Cap. 6.1.
The people also are taught of their duty, and by the word of God are
effectually thereto enforced, that all, and every of them in all things, so
that they be not contrary to God, perform their obedience to the superior
power, first to the King's Majesty, then to all other Magistrates, and such as
are in Authority, in what charge soever they be placed, whether they be of
themselves good men or evil.

The FRENCH Confession.
In Corpor. Confession. Genevae. An. 1612. p. 110. Art. 39. Confess. Gallican.
WE believe that God would have the world to be governed by Laws, and by
Civil Government, that there may be certain bridles, whereby the immoderate
desires of the world may be restrained, and that therefore he appointed,
Kingdoms, Commonwealths, and other kind of Principalities, whether they come
by Inheritance or otherwise. (And) Therefore because of the author of this
order, we must not only suffer them to rule whom he has set over us, but also
give unto them all honor and reverence, as unto his Ambassadors and Ministers
assigned of him to execute a Lawful and Holy Function. We affirm also, That
we must obey the Laws and Statutes, that Tribute must be paid, and we must
patiently endure the other burdens; to conclude, That we must willingly suffer
the yoke of subjection, although the Magistrates be infidells, so that the
sovereign power of God do remain whole or entire, and nothing be diminished.

The Confession of BELGIA.
WE believe that the most gracious and mighty God, did appoint Kings, Princes,
Ibid. page 183. Confess. Belg. Artic. 36.
and Magistrates, because of the depravation of mankind, and that it is his
will, that this World should be governed by Laws, and by a certain civil
government to punish the faults of men, and that all things may be done in good
order among men: Therefore he has armed the Magistrate with a sword, to punish
the wicked and defend the good.

The Confession of AUSPURGE.
WE are sure that seeing the Godly must obey the Magistrates that be over
them, Ibid. page 17. vid. Confession. August. Art. 16. part. 2.
they must not wring their authority out of their hands, nor overthrow
Governments by Sedition, for as much as Paul wishes every soul to be subject
to the Magistrates. We know also that the Church in this life, is subject to
the Cross, as St Paul says, We must be made like to the image of the Son of
God.

The Confession of SAXONY.
WE teach that in the whole Doctrine of God delivered by the Apostles and
Prophets, Conf. Sax. Art. 23. In Edit. Genesis 1612. part. 2. page 128.
the degrees of the civil State are avouched, and that Magistrates, Laws,
order in judgment, and the lawful society of mankind, are not by chance
sprung up among men. And although there be many horrible confusions which grow
from the devil, and madness of men, yet the lawful Government and society of
men is ordained of God, and whatsoever order is yet left by the exceeding
goodness of God, it is preserved for the Churches sake. (And) Subjects owe to
the Civil Magistrate obedience, as Paul says, not only because of Wrath,
(i.e.) for fear of Corporal punishment, wherewith the Rebellious are rewarded
by the Magistrate, but also for Conscience sake. (i.e.) Rebellion is a sin
that offends God; and with-draweth the Conscience from God. (And again) God
would have all men to be ruled and kept in order by civil government, even
those that are not regenerate; and in this government the Wisdom, Justice, and
goodness of God toward us is most clearly to be seen,

1 Wisdom, by Order, and the societies of mankind under lawful government.

2 Justice, in that he will have open sins to be punished by the Magistrates,
and when they that are in authority do not take punishment on offenders, God
himself does miraculously draw them unto punishment, and proportionably does
lay upon grievous sins, grievous punishments in this life, Mat. 26 52. Heb.
13.4.

3. Goodness toward mankind, in that he preserves the societies of mankind
after this order: and for that cause does he maintain it, that from thence his
Church may be gathered, and he will have Commonwealths to be places for the
maintenance of his Church.

The confession of SCOTLAND.
Confess. Scot. Artic. 24. in Corp. Conf. Genesis An. 1612. p. 156. part. 1.
WE confess and acknowledge Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions, and Cities to be
distincted and ordained by God: the Powers and Authorities in the same, be it
of Emperors in their Empires, Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in
their Dominions, and of other Magistrates in their C^ties to be Gods holy
ordinance, ordained for manifestation of his own glory, and for the singular
profit and Commodity of mankind: so that whosoever goes about to take away, or
confound the whole state of Civil policies now long established, we affirm
the same men, not only to be Enemies to mankind, but also wickedly fight
against Gods expressed will.

The sum of these confessions.
THe sum is; All power is originally in God himself, who is Solus potens, 1.
Tim. 6.15.
the only King, and independent potentate. 2. He has (for the good of
mankind) communicated some of his power immediately to Kings, and by them 1.
Pet. 2.13.
to inferior Magistrates. So that a King is Gods immediate Vicegerent and
Deputy, and therefore His Authority, and Person are both Sacred, and should be
inviolable. He is, Minister Romans 13.4.
Dei, and Vnctus Domini, not the Peoples, but the Lords Deputy, the Lords
Anointed; and therefore none can stretch out his hand against him 1. Sam. 26:
9.
(though he be a Saul, a Tyrant) and be guiltless. And if the Kirk of
Scotland may be judge, they that go about to take away, or confound Monarchy,
-- Those men are not only Enemies to mankind, but also wickedly fight against
Gods express will. I would to God the practice of that Nation, were any way
suitable to the piety, and truth of this profession.

And because of the Author of this order, we must both suffer those whom he
has set over us for to rule, and also honor them in their place and office,
as his Ambassadors and Ministers, of which their Ministration they must give
an account at the last day. And in all things that be not contrary to God we
must perform obedience to the Superior power; First to the Kings Majesty,
then to all other Magistrates, whether they be of themselves good men or evil:
yea we must patiently suffer the yoke of Subjection, though they be Infidells.

And if the common safety of the Country and Justice require it, and the
Magistrate do of necessity make War, they must lay down their lives, and
spend their blood, for the common safety and defense of the Magistrate, and
that in the name of God willingly, valiantly and cheerfully; for that he that
opposes himself against the Magistrate, does procure the wrath of God against
him.

Lastly, we must not wring their Authority out of their hands, nor overthrow
Government by Sedition: and they that go about to take away Civil policies
established, are Enemies to mankind; and they that Resist and Rebel against
their Prince, resist God himself, whose Deputy and Ambassador and Minister he
is; and they who teach such Doctrine, withdraw the Consciences of men from God.

And Reader, see the Harmony between the Confessions of the Reformed Churches,
and the Doctrine of the Church of England* delivered in the Books of Homilies,
concerning Civil Obedience and Subjection.

The Authority of which Books is declared and confirmed, by the 35 Article of
our Religion.

The second Book of Homilies does contain a godly and wholesome Doctrine, and
necessary for these times, as does the former Book of Homilies, which were set
forth in the time of King Edward the sixth, and therefore we judge them to be
read in Churches by the Minister diligently and distinctly, that they may be
understood of the People.

And now I shall present unto thee, the sum of the Doctrine of those Books
concerning the Premises.

GOD.
God is the universal Monarch of the world, lib. 2. p. 278. l. 7.

ORDER.
God has appointed all things in a most excellent Order, lib. 1. page 69. lin.
1.

Where there is no order, nor Magistrate, there is Confusion, lin. 31.

KINGS.
Kings are from God, 1. 70. 81. 2. 276. 39. 45. 278. 1. 10. 23. Kings have
their power from God only, 1. 71. 31.

They are the Chief and Supreme Rulers next under God, 1. 76. 15.

They only have the use of the Sword, 1. 74. 19.

Evil KINGS.
Evil Kings are from God, 2. 276. 45.

God places them over a Country for the sins thereof, 2. 278. 31. They are
reserved for Gods punishment, and judgment, 1. 74. 10.

OBEDIENCE.
We learn by the word of God to yield to our King, that is due to our King;
that is, honor, obedience, payments of due taxes, customs, tributes,
subsidies, fear and love, 1. 77. 7.

This is gods ordinance, gods Commandment, and gods holy will, that all the
whole body of every Realm, and all the members and parts thereof should be
subject to their Head their King, 1. 77. 2.

They that live in true obedience to god and the King, please god, and have
peace of Conscience, and having god on their side, let them not fear what man
can do against them, ibid. 37.

We must obey sharp and rigorous Princes. 2. 277. 46. and patiently suffer
under them 289. 32. 42. and pray for their prosperity. 2. 280. 46. 288. 3. 6.

If the King command any thing contrary to Gods Word, we must rather obey God
then man: yet in that case, we may not in any wise withstand violently, or make
any insurrection, sedition, or Tumults by force of Arms, or otherwise against
the Lords Anointed, or any of his Officers. 1. 74. 44.

If God give a heathen tyrant to reign over us, we must obey him and pray for
him. 2. 282. 13.

Where is obedience there is the figure of heaven. 2. 296. 46. Heaven is the
place of good Subjects, ibid. 44.

JVDGING.
We must not judge of the King his government or Councillors. Yea it is a
perilous thing to commit unto Subjects the judgment, which Prince is wise and
Godly, and his government good, and which is otherwise; as though the foot must
judge of the head, an enterprise very heinous, and must needs breed Rebellion.
2. 279. 23.

MVRMVRING.
We may not murmr against the King, or speak evil of him. 2. 299. 12. 31.
34. 300. 3.

RESISTING.
We may not in any case resist or stand against the superior powers, though
they be wicked, because they have their power from God. 1. 72. 12. 29. 30. 2.
280. 5. 33. 285. 6. 28. Though we have great numbers of men (2. 286. 40.) yet
we must not attempt any thing against the King; though hated of god, and gods
enemy, and so likely to be pernicious to the Commonwealth. 287. 2. 16. though
he does not consider our faithful service, or safeguard of our Posterity. 22.
and lastly though he be our known mortal deadly enemy, and that he seeks our
lives. 26.

They that resist, resist not man but God. 1. 71. 35.

REBELLION.
The sink of all sin, both of the first and second table. 2. 292. 29.

Lucifer the first author of Rebellion, 2. 276. 7.

The two Principal causes of Rebellion are, 1 Ambition, and restless desire
in some men to be of higher Estate then God has given them. 2. Ignorance in
the people, and lack of knowledge of Gods blessed will, declared in his holy
word concerning their obedience. 2. 307. 16. 28. 313. 14.


Rebels no true Christians. 2. 289. 45.

Rebels a wicked example against all Christendom, and whole mankind, etc. 2.
282. 24.

Rebels pretenses vain, viz. redress of the Commonwealth, and reformation
of Religion. 2. 301. 19. 302. 2. 22. 25. 29.

Rebellion no good means of Reformation. 2. 279. 34.

Miseries following Rebellion; viz. Pestilence, Famine, the calamities of War
extraordinary. 2. 294. 29.

Gods judgment on Rebels. 2. 300. 9.

Rebels never prospered long. 2. 300. 45.

Hell the place of Rebels. 2. 296. 45.

Unless we do what we are able to stay Rebellion, we are most wicked, etc. 2.
282. 36.

The CLERGY.
The Clergy ought both themselves especially to be obedient to their Prince,
and also to exhort others to the same. 2. 308. 27.

ALmighty God, whose Kingdom is everlasting and power infinite, have mercy
upon the whole Congregation, and so rule the heart of thy chosen servant
Charles our King and Governor, that He knowing whose Minister He is, may above
all things seek thy honor and glory, and that we His Subjects, duly
considering whose authority He has, may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly
obey him, in thee, and for thee, according to thy blessed Word and Ordinance,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. AMEN.

FINIS.

