THE DISTRACTIONS of our Times.

Wherein is discovered the General discontent of all Estates throughout the
whole Land.

Whereunto is added the Roundheads Race.

Nemo sort sua contentus. IN DOMINO CONFIDO printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London. 1643.

The distractions of these Times.
PLato says, that every Commonwealth then runs into ruin and decay. Cum
numerus quinarius ternario junctus duas efficit Harmonias: This is a Musical
Theoreme, and Plato's meaning was not in many hundred years (till of late
times Melanthon and some of our late Writers resolved this Riddle) well
understood the meaning is that State cannot subsist where the number of five,
joined to the number of three, makes a dissonant or a discordant Harmony.
Every Kingdom (generally consists of three Estates, viz. The King or Prince,
the Nobility, and the Commons.

All States may understand the benefit and sweetness of Unity, but I come to
particular distractions, and divisions among our selves at this present,
wherein Nemo sua sort contentus vivit. And to begin with the present estate of
Church, the Coat of our blessed Savior was without scame, schism or rent;
woven all whole; which is or ought to be the Emblem of the true Catholiqe and
Apostolic Church, but if our Saviors Coat had had as many seames and rents
as we have among our selves at this present, he would I am persuaded have
vouchsafed never to have worn it, they that have torn this seamlesse Garment
are not the Jews who played for it, by casting Lots (though the Text says in
the Psalm, they divided my Garments, etc. for our Savior ware more Garments
than one) but our Modern Schismatics and Sectuaries, who in every place like
Pharaohs Frogs infect the whole Land, that there is scarce a City or Town nay
private house wherein they have not a part or party, so that the common people
in the general, and his Majesty's best Subjects, hardly know what to beleeeve
(some of them having published a new Creed) what book to serve God withal,
the book of Common Prayer, and whole Liturgy being cried down amongst them
for I dolatrous, profane, and (as I have heard some of them affirm) an
invention of the Devil, so that all the time of King Edward the sixth Q.
Elizabeth K. James, and of our Sovereign K. Charles we have served the Devil
by their reckoning and we must say, Iam nova progenies caelo demittitur alto. A
new race (of Roundheads) are dropped from Heaven to set us in the right way of
serving God. But some will tell me they are Saints, they live holily and keep
the Sabbath duly etc. I confess they do and very strictly (as one an
ale-house-keeper) in Southwark, had brewed a Barrel of strong Ale and upon a
Sunday morning he saw it working as ale will when it is new tunn'd which he
seeing and in a great rage, called for a hammer, and saying what do you work
upon the Lords day, I will none of this, so beating out the head of the barrel
he let all the Ale run upon the ground. Another using Marshall Law hanged up
his cat for killing a mouse upon the Sabbath day I could cloy my Reader with
the like ridiculous actions of these fellows, so distracted and giddy as if
they had lived with Caine in the Land of Nod (or rather in the Land of Noddy.
But the Honorable Horse of Parliament has taken an order for putting an end
to these Divisions amongst us, that much danger yea mischief will heerby be
prevented which otherwise, doubtless, might have ensued, and this course took
Constantine in that horrible division and ^ent between the Orthodoxe
Christians and the Arrians that is by a Counsel he settled the true says, and
in the mean time caused them both to remain quiet without disturbance eitheir
of the Church or Commonwealth, for never more bloody war among Nations or more
bitter distencion and quarrels have arose, between Church and Church, City
and City, nay friend and friend brother and brother, then through difference
in Religion; did not Diazivs a Spaniard ride 300. miles to murder his own
brother, cleaving his head in two because he was a Protestant, how many Fathers
disinherit their own children because they profess a contrary Religion to
theirs? and how many children forsake their own fathers and mothers for
Religion-sake? how many Treasons were plotted and undertaken against our late
Queen Elizabeth (of famous and Eternal memory) but for matter of Religion (as
was pretended at least) how many Emperors, Kings and Princes, have been
murdered for the Religion they professed, as Thomas Emperor of Constantinople
by the Arrians, Henry the third of France, and Henry the fourth also (as was
thought) for favoring of the Protestants; over much difference of Religion
divided in opinion Asia from Africa, which after gave way to blasphemous
Mahomet, the other being reconciled by the sword of the Turk) to bring in his
hellish and ridiculous inventions in their room, but hereof sufficient, I only
show the danger of delay, in leaving the State of Religion, in a State
unordered and unsettled, Scholars in the Universities at this day are
distracted or in a maze not knowing how or what course they should take to live
hereafter, their breeeding there has been very chargeable to their friends,
and if they come to obtain Schollerships or fellowships (such is our golden
times) the sauce of obtaining them will cost almost as much as the meat is
worth, and when they have taken their degrees by much study and expense, they
are never the nearer to preferment, for whereas one addicting himself to the
study of divinity) comes by money or friends to get a living forty go
without and are fain to turn Schoolemasters country Physicians, and some (I
have known) Solicitors in the Law, being discouraged by the unsetlednesse of
Religion, and liberty of the times when every Hatdresser, Ironmonger, Cobbler
and Horse-collar-maker shall pass among the multitude for as sound a Divine as
an University can afford, and every known dunce and Ignoramus shall possess
2. or 3. great Benefices, by means of his fathers purse, or perhaps of a match
the Patrons Chambermaid (rid lately of her green sickness by lying at his beds
feet) When Civilians must turn common Atturneys and Solicitors, and in a word
we find almost a general hate and loathing of leaning the Arts and all
excellency of knowledge throughout the Land.

Gentlemen and inhabitants of the Country possess themselves and their
Estates in distraction and fear of worse and more tumultious times every where
readier to sell then to purchase, the want of money is such a disease reigning
amongst them that some are scarce able to buy them horses to come to petition
for their grievances.

The City and Citizens know not well what to do or trust to, as first, what
Religion to profess, it self being as it were the conduit head of Sects and
opinions which (as in pipes under ground, and in a close manner) it deriveth
into the whole Land, they dare hardly venture their ships at Sea, they have so
many false friends and open enemies, nay among themselves they know not (like
Ioshuah) who are with them, or who against them, doubtless the City
nourishes many Vipers within her own bosom, beside other Serpents that are
nested in her Suburbs ready upon any uprore or rebellious tumult to devour
her, therefore she is not to be blamed if she strengthens her Carrison
fortifieth her gates in the best manner she may, she has now little return
of trade, her excellent Artisans cannot get employment, or find where to show
their skill, her Mechannicks walk work-lesse up and down, or going into the
Country to visit their friends, some of them can hardly ever find the way
back again.

What a distraction was amongst that Rabble in the uproare at Westminster, when
the Bishop of Yorkes servants attending about the Abbey Church to defend the
same, and the Deanes House belonging to his Lordship, at which time they were
forced to come forth with weapons, and diverse of them were hurt: amongst all
the rest Sir Richard Wiseman (whether by chance, or of set purpose is unknown)
but being there present, and saying to the rude Rabble openly. Gentlemen, I
will be your Leader, was with a brick or stone from over the Abbey door, and
(not in Westminster Hall, neither was he a member of a House of Commons as in
an Elegy, dedicated to his memory is most lyingly reported) of which wound he
dyed, and afterward his Corpse was carried to St. Stephens Church in
Coleman-steet, and buried according to a new Church Government, lately enacted
in a Conventicle of Scismaticks, being accompanied with at least five hundred
Antic Bishops, consisting of all sorts with their Swords, mourning Cloakes,
and black Ribands.

The strong Town of Kingston upon Hull, has bin distracted a long time, as
fearing in pleasing one she offends another.

And was not Kingston upon Thames distracted, not knowing what to do when
Co^anell Lunsford arose there with so many men.

And I believe my Lord Major, and the Bishop of Chichester were much amazed
when the round party came about them, reviling my Lord Major most vilely, and
telling him the Bishop was his Pope. For the Bishop Preaching at the Old Jewry,
at my Lord Majors Parish Church, when the Rounds saw him in his Rochet, they
fell on humming and hissing, then being put out of the Church-doore, they gat
up to the windows, and brake down the glass, still continuing their railing,
and revising, to the disturbance of the whole Church.

And were not these Roundheads themselves distracted, when one of their
companions, a Cooper, after he had broken off a leg of the Statue of Christ,
upon Cheape-side Cross, fell upon the Iron Pikes, standing about the Cross,
where receiving his deadly wound he dyed shortly after, under the hands of a
Chyrurgeon dwelling in Roode Lane.

Physicians are mightily distracted, and out of patience, because their whole
College knows not how to cure this Epidemicall disease (that like the
sweating Sickness in times past) reigns over the whole Land, that is, want
of money.

And I believe Abel, and Kilvert are not yet cured of this common Disease,
since they played their projecting prankes. Also our Clergy in general are
distracted, till the Synod be past.

Proctors, Apparitors, and all other Officers of the spiritual Court, are
likewise distracted, as now wanting work and except Hay-time, and Harvest
releeves them they are like to be utterly undone.

In the City the Usurer is distracted, not knowing where or to whom to let out
his money, where he may be sure of it again, or being already out of his hands
how to come by it again; a witty Gallant comes to one of them in Moorefields
and desires he might borrow 100. pounds of him, quoth Mr. Foxcraft the Usurer,
to the Gentleman. Sir you are a mere stranger unto me, I never knew or saw you
before, that is the only reason quoth the other that I come to borrow it, for
if you knew me you would never lend me a penny.

The Courtier is discontented finding his journey's long, so little money in
the Exchequer, and the absence of his Mr. from White Hall and the Parliament,

The followers of Nobles and Gentlemen, who hold their Tenures only at the will
of their Lords and Masters are now a days distracted and know not what they
shall trust to, if giving the least distaste, or by committing the least
offense they shall incur their displeasures, and so be cast off, for these
times are not like the forepassed, when for their honest Service they had
extraordinary favors, or Annual Pensions given them during their lives, yea
though they in time of their Service had committed some gross errors and
highly displeased their Masters.

A worthy ancient Gentleman in the time of Q. Eliz. dwelling in Barkshire
whose name was Mr. Young, a great housekeeper living a Bachelor all his life,
against a Christmas sent up a man he had with forty pounds to London to bestow
in fruit, spice and other commodities (for at that time he ever kept open
house,) his man at London lighting among cheaters, lost all his Masters money
at cards, and not knowing what to do, by the advice of a chamberlain of an
Inn in Holborne, was persuaded to join himself with two or three good
fellows, who were resolved to take a purse upon the high way beyond Higate, he
consented, and they meeting with fourscore and od pounds, the other thieves
went clear away with die money; and left him to be taken, not getting a penny
or it, howsoever he was carried to Newgate, where arraigned and condemned was
(a little before Christmas) to be executed, which his Mr. hearing of, upon the
very morning when the carts were come to Tiburn, came thither with his man's
pardon, which the Queen (with whom he was very gracious) had granted and
coming to the Sheriff said, Mr. Sheriff have I not a man among your company
here to be executed, I know not quoth the Sheriff, oh yes, I see him there
quoth Mr. Young, (for he was piniond making his confession with a psalm book
in his hand) Sirrah quoth he you rascal do I send you about my business and
you stand preaching there, come down, or I Will fetch you down with a mischief,
and get you home about your business, his Mr, not only entertained him again,
but at his death gave him an annuitie to maintain him while he lived.

HIs Majesty's ship Carpenters are in a distraction and know not of whom, nor
where to get timber for the building of ships to furnish and increase his Navy
Royal, since the forest of Deane was cut down, and other of the best timber
woods in England (without especial order taken by the Honorable Parliament)
are like to run the same fortune,

The Inhabitants near and about the Fennes in Lincolnshire, as about Boston,
Marcham, Sibsey, Stickney and other places are distracted and know not what to
do or how to recover their Commons and Fennes again out of the projectors
hands, beside their Cattle this Summer it is thought will run mad for want of
water.

If I should describe the several distractions of the world I should exceed to
a volume, but I content me with these the most eminent of our times.

Wishing heartily I might not at any time hereafter have occasion to write more
or this or the same substance.

The Roundheads Race.
KNow then my Brethren, Heaven is clear,
the Eclipsed Clouds are gone,
The righteous now shall flourish, and
good days are coming on.
Come then my Brethren and be glad,
and eke rejoice with me,
Lawne sleeves and Rotchets shall go down,
and Hey then up go we.
We Will I break the windows which the whore
of Babylon has painted,
And when the Popish Saints go down
then Burton shall be sainted.
Then neither Cross, nor Crucifix
shall stand, for now I see
Romes Trash and trumpery shall go down,
and Hey then up go we.
What ere the Popish hands have built
Our Hammers shall undo,
We Will break the Pipes, and burn the Coapes,
and pull down Churches too.
We Will exercise within a Grove,
and teach beneath a Tree,
And make a Pulpit of a Cart,
and Hey then up go we.
We Will down with Universities,
where Learning is professed
Because they prattle and maintain
the Language of the Beast.
We Will drive the Doct^^s out of doors,
and all what ere they be;
We Will cry all Arts and Learning down,
and Hey then up go we.
We Will down with Deanes, and Prebends too,
and I rejoice to tell ye,
How that we will eat fat Piggs our fill,
and Capons by the belly.
We Will I burn the fathers with their Toomes,
and make the Schoolmen flee,
We Will down with all that smells of wit,
and Hey then up go we.
Since then the Anti Christian crew
be pressed and over-throwne,
We Will teach the Nobles how to crouch,
and keep the Gentry down.
Good manners has an ill report,
and turns to pr^de we see;
We Will therefore cry all manners down,
and Hey then up go we.
The name of Lord, shall be abhord,
for each man is a brother,
No reason why in Church, or State,
one man should rule another.
But when the change of Government
shall set our fingers free,
We Will lay the wanton Sisters down,
and Hey then, up go we.
FINIS.

