A DISCOURSE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT, His Workings and Impressions ON THE SOULS of
MEN.

With large Additionals.

(...). Rectum est Index sui and obliqui. London, Printed by E. Cotes for R.
Royston at the Angel in Ivie-Lane, 1656.

To the truly virtuous The Lady Rebecca Bindlosse.
Madam,
THis following Discourse of the Holy Ghost, his impressions and workings on
the soul of man, was first intended only for private satisfaction to your
Ladyships pious desires; That being well grounded in the Orthodox Doctrine, and
having a right understanding of the true Spirit of God, it might be as an
impregnable bulwark against so many suggestions and temptations of the false
and deceitful spirit: For the mind of man, being either devoid of the Spirit
of Grace and Holiness; or else of a right understanding of the things of Gods
Spirit, who is the Fountain both of Grace and Truth; is too apt and prone to
close with the suggestions of the evil spirit, who is the author and promoter
of sinfulness and error: Never Age produced so many spiritual Monsters, as
this wherein we live. And I think few parts of England be so much infected with
them, as these Northern parts be. They were very impudent and daring, when they
adventured to tempt your virtuous mind, and by enticing words to allure your
good opinion of them; as full well knowing, if they could but have effected
thus much, to have made you not an enemy to their proceedings, though you did
not close with them, it would have given much luster and credit to their
erroneous Sect: But God be praised that you are better grounded, then to be
proselyted by such Ignoramo's; better resolved then to be taken with such
shallow delusions, which a good Christian with half an eye unprejudiced, may
easily see through.

It is your goodness (for, Bonum quo melius eo communius) to desire the
public communication of this short Discourse of the Spirit, as a Doctrine
both seasonable in respect of the many spreading infectious Errors, so much
prevailing amongst us; and also necessary, as an antidote against that
contagion which issuing out of the mouth of Hell presumes most impudently and
impiously to hide its venom under the name and title of the Holy Spirit: I
could wish the Doctrine were for this end, more fully and satisfactorily
cleared to the minds of men by the Pen of some more Judicious Writer; This
mean Tract the Author in all humility acknowledges to be guilty of many defects
and impertinencies, and himself one of the meanest of the faithful and obedient
sons of the Church: The small acceptance it shall find in the world, will be
derived from your white Name and Virtue: in which Sanctuary it may escape the
black-mouthed Detractions of the Censorious, and rest secure of the good
acceptance, if not benefit of others.

May you be every day more happy in the increase of all Christian virtues,
growing up in the knowledge of God, and persevering in the constant Profession
of his holy Truth, and conscientious practice of the same, till you arrive at
the Haven of true Happiness. This (Madam) shall be the constant endeavor, and
is the daily prayer

Of your most faithful and affectionate Servant in Christ, R. Sherlock.

ERRATA'S.
Page Lin. Read. 1 9 what 7 9 substance 21 20 pastionis 58 9 conservation 74 5
a voice 9 the wind 10 His will into their hearts 88 2 15 chapter 91 17 to be
offered 95 13 unlawful 96 17 to become 98 31 world 101 3 when 102 25 recites
104 5 our 106 4 unlearned 8 learning 14 who were honored 107 5 (...) 124 14
watchings 124 35 enmity 127 18 acts 128 11 conscious 145 8 Maximilla 148 5 no
need of teaching 156 11 these. 158 3 to 171 9 I 8 Levit. 173 22 not necessary
179 19 thus 193 1 to be contentious 30 sick 201 32 Photinus. 212 13 by our 18
our 213 5 even 225 34 these 231 15 from 234 18 your

The Introduction and general Heads of the ensuing Discourse.
NO Age has ever brought forth more pretenders to the Spirit of God, then this
wherein we live: And amongst this Generation, there be many so ignorant, that
they know not what they mean by that Spirit, whereunto they so much pretend:
but blindfolded suffer themselves to be led by they know not whom, and with the
hoodwinckt Samaritans, they worship they know not whom. Joh. 4.32.
Whose ignorance accompanied with excessive pride of heart, which makes their
ignorance the greater, that through pride they will not know, or acknowledge
it: upon this ground the Devil has sown his crop and reapt his Harvest, even
the cursed tares of many and strong delusions: for that subtle Serpent full
well knows how both easily and powerfully to insinuate his Lies and Errors into
minds unsettled, and not grounded in the knowledge of the Truth; So that most
truly is that complaint of the Lord by his Prophet Hosea verified of this
people, Hos. 4.6. Hos. 4.6.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge; even for lack of what they so
much boast of; That grand Enemy the Prince of Lies, has taken them in the very
Net themselves have made, even in the snare of self-conceited knowledge, and
holiness, whilst supposing themselves wise they became fools. Romans 1.22.
And pretending to the Spirit of God, whom they rightly know not, they are
intrapt by the Spirit of Error: and miserably seduced to the ruin of their
souls.

Hence it is (chiefly, though not only hence) through ignorance intermixed with
pride, that the Devil has made so great a harvest of tares overgrowing and
choking the pure wheat of Truth: Mat. 13.25
No Age of the Church having ever been so fruitful in Heresies and Errors;
whilst the ever blessed Name of the Spirit of God is abused, by persons most
impudently pretending to him, that yet remain ignorant of him; for had they
known this Lord of life, it had not been possible the spirit of Delusion could
have prevailed so far with them, as to infix so many Lies, Impostures and
Blasphemies upon his score; as therefore Saint Paul directed the Athenians to
the knowledge of the true God, Act. 17.23.
whom they ignorantly worshipped, and so their pious intentions through
ignorance degenerated into gross Idolatries; so it cannot but be an office
both seasonable and charitable, as also of great benefit, and present
necessity, plainly to set down and deliver the true Orthodoxal Doctrine of the
Holy Ghost, his Impressions and Workings on the souls of man, that so men may
have a right understanding of this ever Blessed Person of the the Godhead so
much mistaken, and his Sacred Name (to the high offense of his Majesty) so much
profaned by impudent and false pretenses.

The Doctrine of the Holy Ghost in respect both of his Person and Office, is by
the Nicene Creed thus clearly and fully set down, I believe in the Holy Ghost,
the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds both from the Father and the Son,
who together with the Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, who spoke
by the Prophets. To give you my Comment upon this Text, were but to hold a
candle to the Sun, the Doctrine delivered is so clear and perspicuous. All that
can be said upon this Article of our Christian Faith is reducible to four
heads. 1. Of the Person of the Holy Ghost in himself. 2. Of his Office or
Workings on the minds of men. 3. Of the trial of the true from false spirits.
4. Of the means to be made partakers of the Spirit of Truth.


The two first are doctrinal and speculative points, for the rectifying and
fitting the understanding rightly to conceive and believe aright this Article
of Christian Faith.

The two last are practical and applicatory for the guidance of our actions and
Christian performances according to this belief.

And may this ever blessed Spirit of God inspire and direct me to write, and
all that read to understand, the divine, and celestial Doctrine both of his
Person, and Office, to the illumination, and sanctification of our souls here,
as the way to eternal salvation hereafter.

A DISCOURSE OF THE Holy Spirit.
CHAP. I. Of the Person of the Holy Ghost in himself.
THE more clearly to understand the Doctrine of the Spirit of God, it will be
necessary to use the light of some distinctions, for so the naked and plain
truth of any thing is most clearly and distinctly seen, when namely, it is
divided and distinguished from its conjunction with other things of the same or
the like name and nature; which is the ground of that old Maxim, Qui been
distinguit been docet, The way to teach well, or clearly to deliver any truth,
is rightly to distinguish that truth from other truths that are of near
affinity thereunto either in name or nature; or in the words of the Apostle,
which is the language of the Spirit of Truth, Rightly to divide the word of
Truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.15.
which was one of those many qualifications of the Apostles of Christ,
wherewithal they were immediately inspired by this Spirit of Truth, for the
propagation of the Gospel; intimated in that he descended from heaven upon
them, in cloven or divided Tongues.

And first that we mistake not the creature for the Creator, 1. Distinct.
God over all blessed for ever, we must remember that a Spirit is either Create
or Increate: or more plainly, sometimes the word Spirit is in holy Scripture
applied to the creature, sometimes to the Creator.

Heb. 1.14.
Are they not all ministering spirits, etc. Heb. 1.14. Ephesians. 6.12. Ephesians. 6.12.
Spiritual wickednesses, or wicked spirits. Genesis 2.7.
or flesh and spirit. Genesis 2.7. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the
earth, meaning his body, and breathed into his Nosthrils the breath of life,
meaning his soul, and so man became a living soul, or living by his soul or
spirit, created, or infused by God, into his earthly body. Psalm. 150.6. Let
every thing that has breath, Psalm. 150.6.
or spirit, praise the Lord: All these are several kinds of created spirits,
some more, some less pure, fine and spiritual.

But there is an increated Spirit also, who being neither made nor created in
himself, is the great Maker and Creator of all spirits, and of all things; who
being the prime Fountain and Original of all beeings, is so eminent and
transcendent a Being, that as he is in himself he only knows himself; nor is
it possible for us, or any creatures, who derive their being from him, to
attain the perfect knowledge of him; and therefore is he pleased in his holy
Word, wherein he reveals himself unto us, to describe himself by the names and
properties of his excellent and most eminent kind of creatures, which are
spirits, so that God is termed a Spirit Analogically, because Angels or Spirits
are the purest, finest, quickest, and most active and intelligent beeings. But
that we may not rank God with Angels or Spirits: (for he has no match or
equal) we must learn this one general rule in Divinity: Whatsoever is spoken of
God in the Scriptures, and withal is applyable to any creature, must be
understood of God eminenter, by way of eminency and transcendency, as the
Prototype and grand Exemplar of that perfection which is applied to the
creature: As here Angels are Spirits, and the souls of men are spirits, but God
is not a Spirit as they are spirits, for he is the Fountain, the Original and
all perfect pattern of the Perfection and Purity of all created spirits:
therefore termed the God of the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 22 16. Heb. 12.9
Numb. 22.16. and the Father of spirits, Heb. 12.9.

That we may according to the Catholic Faith worship one God in Trinity, and
the Trinity in Unity, 2. Distinct.
neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance; we must rightly
distinguish betwixt the Subsistence and the Persons, or betwixt the Essence and
Substance of God: which is necessarily to be remembered and observed in relation
to the Article of Faith in hand: for sometimes God is termed a Spirit
Essentially, in respect of his essence, nature, or Godhead: Sometimes
Personally, the term being applied to this or that particular person of the
Godhead: 1. Joh. 4.24.
Essentially, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, (that is, he is such a God whose
essence, nature, or being is eminently and transcendently pure and spiritual).
2. Personally, Mat. 3.16. Mat. 4.1. Ephesians. 4.30. so here and in many other
places the term is peculiarly appropriated and applied to the third Person of
the Trinity, who is termed (...), the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, for
Ghost and Spirit is the same, the one an old English word, the other a Latin.

This Name and Attribute the Holy Spirit, as it is particularly applied to the
third Person of the Trinity, expresses and sets forth unto us his Person and
Office, his Personal subsistence in himself, and his Office or working in
relation to us.

1. His Person in the term Spirit.

2. His Office in the Attribute Holy; Sanctus dicitur, quiae sanctificat, and
Spiritus, quia spiratus. He is called the Holy Ghost from his Office, which is
to sanctify, or make holy, and the Spirit from his Person, which is spired or
proceeding.

First, the Holy] not holy only in respect of his Person, as is also the Father
and the Son, which is employed in that celestial Trisagion perpetually sung by
the Quire of Heaven, to the glory of this ever blessed Trinity, Esai. 6.3.
Holy, holy, holy Lord God of hosts, etc. Holy three times to denote the
holiness of all the three Persons of the Godhead, Holy Father, Holy Son, Holy
Ghost: But the Holy particularly and peculiarly in respect of his Office, which
is to sanctify and hallow most especially the hearts of men; as to God the
Father is appropriate the Work of Creation, who is therefore called the
Almighty; the Omnipotence or Almightiness of God being most apparent in the
Creation of all things: And as to God the Son is appropriate the work of
Redemption, who is therefore called the word of God, Joh. 1.1. and the wisdom
of the Father, 1 Cor. 1.24. Gods manifold Wisdom being made apparent in the
Redemption of mankind: for it is a mystery which the very Angels themselves
desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.12. Even so the work of Sanctification is
appropriated to the Holy Ghost, who is therefore called the Holy One: Gods
holiness being most apparent in purifying and sanctifying the unhallowed souls
of men. Isai. 10.17. And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy
One for a flame: Spiritus Sanctus est lumen illuminans, sanctus sanctificans,
^onav.
flammaque inflammans, The holy Ghost is that Divine light which illuminates
our darkened understandings; that Holy One who sanctifies our souls, and
polluted hearts; that sacred and celestial fire, which inflames our cold
earthly affections, even as of old he enlightened, sanctified, and enflamed the
minds of the Apostles of Christ, which was signified by his Descension, not
only with a rushing wind, which purifies and cleanses, but also in Tongues of
fire, which warms and enlightens, Act. 2.23.

The Spirit] not only (...), of a spiritual Nature, but (...), the Spirit,
expressing his Personal Essence received from the Father, and from the Son, by
spiration and procession: Even as the second Person of the Trinity, receives
his personal Essence from the Father only, (...), by Generation, and is
therefore called the Son of God. The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor
created, but begotten: So the Holy Ghost receives his Personal Essence from the
Father and from the Son (...), by procession or spiration; and is therefore
termed the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is from the Father and from the Son,
not made, nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding; proceeding from the
Father, Joh. 15.26. Gal. 2.6. Romans 8.14.
and therefore often termed the Spirit of the Father: proceeding from the Son,
and therefore often termed the Spirit of the Son: proceeding both from the
Father and the Son, and therefore termed the Spirit of God.

And yet further in either of these terms, the Holy, and the Spirit, both the
Personal Essence, and also the Office of the Holy Ghost is employed: For 1. he
is therefore called the Holy, not only in respect of his Office, as before,
Lib. 2. cap. 3.
but also in respect of his Personal Essence; for therefore says Isidore in
his Originals is he called the Holy, because he is the Coessential and
Consubstantial holiness of the Father and the Son. 2. He is therefore termed
the Spirit not only in respect of his personal Essence as before: but also in
respect of his Office, which is to inspire and infuse his divine and celestial
blessings into the souls of men.

And from the name also of this divine Person, [the Spirit] we are to take
notice, and firmly believe: That the Holy Ghost is of the same essence, and
consubstantial with the Father, and the Son, and in all respects coaequal, and
coaeternal: so that as the Father is God, and the Son is God, so the Holy Ghost
is God; and as the Father is Almighty, and the Son Almighty, so is the Holy
Ghost Almighty: and so of all the other Attributes of the Godhead: whereupon
all acts of divine worship also are aequally due to the Holy Ghost as to the
Father, and the Son: Who together with the Father and the Son, is worshipped
and glorified.

The difference betwixt this Holy Spirit, and the other sacred Persons of the
Godhead consists in 3 particulars.

1. That he is the third or last person of the Godhead: the third not in
dignity, but in order only; not in diversity of essence, or inaequality of
majesty, but in order of subsisting: which against Arrians, Socinians, etc. is
firmly to be believed according to that Decree of the third Toletan Council,
Quicunque Spiritum sanctum non credit, aut non crediderit a Patre and Filio
procedere, eumque non dixerit Patri and Filio coaeternum esse, and
coessentialem, anathema sit: that is, whosoever does not believe the Holy Ghost
( viz. to be a real true subsisting person) and does not believe him also to
proceed from the Father, and the Son, and to be with the Father, and the Son
coaeternal, and consubstantial: Let him be accursed.

2. The second Difference, is the way of this holy Persons subsisting, viz. By
spiration from the Father, and the Son: Touching the manner whereof, we must
say as the Prophet Isaiah does of the Sons generation from the Father, Isai.
53.8. Who shall declare his generation? It Is not only ineffable, not to be
declared, but unconceivable also: The heart of man conceives it not, neither
can the tongue of men or Angels express it.

Inter illam generationem and hanc processionem distinguere nescio, non valeo,
Aug.
non sufficio, quia and illa, and ista est ineffabilis, (that is) to
distinguish betwixt the Generation of God the Son, and the Procession of God
the Holy Ghost is impossible, because both the one and other be for the manner
thereof unspeakable.

3. But thirdly, Isid. ibid.
Hoc autem interest, says Isidore, inter nascentem filium, etc. betwixt the
Son of Gods generation, and the Spirit of Gods procession, there is this
difference indeed, That the Son is from the Father alone; but the Holy Ghost is
both from the Father and the Son; prooedens, non genitus, etc. proceeding, not
begotten, to distinguish him from the Son; proceeding, not unbegotten, to
distinguish him from the Father; the which we are to observe, lest contrary to
the true Catholic Faith, we should admit either of two Sons, or two Fathers in
the ever blessed Trinity; or any way confound the several Persons therein, as
if they were not distinct each from other really, but nominally only, and in
relation to us, which was the error of the Patripassians and others, struck at
by that clause of the Athanasian Creed; so there is one Father, not three
Fathers, one Son, not three Sons, one Holy Gh^st, not three Holy Ghosts.

Thirdly, 3. Distinct.
that we may not confound the Person, and the Office of this ever blessed
Spirit of God, but rightly understand what is meant, by receiving the holy
Ghost, being filled with the Holy Ghost; Act. 9.2. Psalm. 2.4. Heb. 6.4.
and made partakers of the Holy Ghost; and all Scriptures which speak of having
the Spirit, being endued with the Spirit, and the like, we must in the third
place rightly distinguish betwixt the Personal Essence of the Spirit, and the
impressions or workings of this Spirit upon the minds of men. Rac. catec.
It was the error of the Macedonians, Samosatenians of old, and of Socinians of
late: that by the Spirit of God is meant no other but virtus seu efficacia, qua
homines fideles sanctificantur and divinis usibus consecrantur, i. e. That
virtue or efficacy, whereby faithful men are sanctified, and consecrate to
divine offices. And opposite to this extreme, many now a days run into the
other, mistaking, and misterming the efficacies, and virtues of the Spirit, for
the person of the Spirit himself: the holy orthodox truth lies coucht up
betwixt these two extremes, whilst neither on the one hand we presume to
annihilate the personal being of the Spirit, as if he were no more but a
virtue, or influence upon the creature: nor yet on the other hand mistake the
influences of the Spirit, for his essential subsisting person.

And when you read in holy Scriptures of being filled with the Holy Ghost, or
made partakers of the Spirit of God, Act. 8.17. Ephesians. 5.18. Wisd. 1. Psalm. 139.
is not to be understood of the Spirit in respect of his Personal Essence; for
thus he fills the world, and contains all things, being really existent and
present in, and with all things and creatures, giving unto all their life and
breath, and all things: In whom we live, and move, Act. 17.
and have our being, viz. by his inexisting presence, and this in respect of
his Personal Essence. If we should say then, that the Spirit of God is in his
Saints and servants here upon earth in a greater measure then in other men,
Personally, and in respect of his Essence, we should so divide and consequently
define, and limit the Essence of God, which is undivided, infinite and
unlimited, see Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand, and not a God a far off? Can any
hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him, for do not I fill
Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? Thus then those Scripture phrases of
receiviag the Holy Ghost, etc. are not to be understood of the Spirit in
respect of his Personal Essence, which is undivided, unlimited and fills all
things, and so not one man more then another. But 2. In respect of his
impressions and workings on the souls of men, in respect of his gifts and
graces, which are various and diverse, and carry their name from the cause or
Author of them; There are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4.
where the Spirit is plainly distinguished from his gifts, as the cause from the
effect, the workman from the work of his hands; or as the body of the Sun is
distinguished from the light and heat which is darted and displayed from it.
And whereas it is said the Spirit is but one, but his gifts are diverse, we may
hence observe; that if we should confound the Spirit of God with the gifts and
qualifications dispensed from him, we should be so far from acknowledging and
worshipping the true God, which is but one, that we should fall into that
gross Idolatry of the Heathens of old, making as many Spirits of God, as they
made gods, who deified the moral virtues, and worshipped their several virtuous
qualifications as gods.

The unwary neglect of this distinction, betwixt the person and qualifications
of Gods Spirit, is that very rock whereupon many a misguided and unstable soul,
has suffered the shipwreck of the true Christian Faith; for being by the
cunning suggestion of the spirit of Lies once persuaded in their hearts, that
they have the Spirit of God, and that personally abiding in them, they are
hereupon puffed up with such an excessive spiritual pride, and self-conceited
eminence, as not only to exalt themselves above, and despise their Christian
brethren, who are better qualified, then themselves: but even to extol
themselves above the heavens, and most blasphemously to profess and boast of
an equality with God; a blasphemy however it is salved and minc't, that cannot
be paralleld, but with that original pride of the Devil, He said in his heart,
Genesis 3.
I will be like the most High: and to this he tempted our first Parents,
persuading them to rebel against their Maker, and become as Gods themselves,
knowing good and evil; this was the very sin, that hurled Lucifer like
Lightning from Heaven, his pride and presumption to be like the most High, and
therefore with all his Apostate crew he is now reserved in everlasting chains
under darkness, Jude 6.
to the judgment of the Great day. And for our new Sect of Enthusiasts, had
they the Spirit of God, as they pretend, abiding in them, and speaking in them
Personally and Essentially, this blasphemy must necessarily follow, that they
are equal with God, in respect of the Spirit in them, as themselves affirm it,
though not as George Robert, etc. To avoid which blasphemy and many other
absurd and wicked opinions of the like nature, which would follow thereupon,
and wherewith too many unstable souls are now infected, we must remember that to
have the Spirit in the language of the Scripture, is not to be understood of
his personal Essence, but of his qualifications.

And because this distinction is very material, as to the many present
delusions, under pretense of the Spirit: 'twill be necessary therefore to clear
it by some Scripture expressions, in this kind: it is an ordinary piece of
Rhetoric, and an usual figure in the dialect of the Scripture, to call the
gifts and qualifications of Gods holy Spirit, by the name of the Spirit, as
Exodus 31.2, 3. Behold, I have called by name Bezaleel, the son of Uri, Exodus
31.2, 3.
etc. whom I have filled with the Spirit of God, (that is) with the gifts of
the Spirit, for it follows, in all wisdom and understanding and knowledge, and
in all workmanship: so Numb. 11.17. I will come down and talk with thee, and
take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and put upon them, Numb. 11.17.
and they shall bear the burden with thee: where what else can possibly be
meant, by the Spirit which was upon Moses to be put upon the Elders, but that
they should partake of the same spiritual gifts with Moses, enfitting them to
bear the burden with him, as to the administration of justice amongst the
people, even the gifts of wisdom, understanding and knowledge, impartially, and
without respect of persons to execute justice and judgment: so the Spirit of
the Lord shall rest upon him, Isai. 11.2. the gifts of the Spirit, for so it
follows, The spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and
strength, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. He then that is
a wise man may be said in the language of the Spirit which is the Scripture, to
have the Spirit of the Lord upon him, or to have the Spirit of God; because the
wisdom he has is from Gods Spirit, it comes down from above, and the means to
fetch it thence is holy prayer: If any man lacks wisdom, let him ask of God
who gives, etc. Jam. 1.5. So the wisest of men obtained wisdom, 1 King. 3.9.
His prayer which brought her down from Heaven is recorded, Wisd. 9. And the
same may be said of counsel, godliness, etc. therefore these graces are termed
from the cause and Author of them, The spirit of wisdom, the spirit of
godliness, etc. So Zach. 12.10. I will pour upon the house of David, and
inhabitants of Jerusalem the spirit of grace and supplication, (that is) by my
Spirit I will enrich their souls, with the grace of piety and devotion, to be
frequent and fervent in prayers and supplications, according to the Apostles
admonition, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying with all manner of prayer and supplication in
the spirit: (that is) not only in the fervency and godly zeal of our own souls,
or spirits; but also praying thus in, or from the powerful influence of Gods
Spirit, who inflames our own cold frosty devotions, and assists our frailties
in prayer; we pray in the spirit, when both our prayers are the voice of our
spirits, and our spirits are also taught and sanctified by Gods Spirit, as Romans
8.15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage unto fear, but ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father: Clamamus nos,
says Augustine, we cry, not the Spirit; Aug. lib. de cor. and great.
but Gal. 4.6. it is said the Spirit within us, And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts which cries Abba
Father: Nos clamamus, sed in spiritu, ipso scil. diffundente charitatem in
cordibus nostris, sine qua quicunque clamat, inaniter clamat. Aug. de verbis
Dom. sec. Matt ser. 11.
Non hic ait, etc. says the Father, he says not here as in the former place,
by whom we cry, but the Spirit himself cries, quo efficitur ut clamemus nos;
for what else is clamans spiritus in nobis, but clamantes nos faciens? The
Spirit crying in our hearts is no other, but that he makes us by the virtue of
his grace to cry unto God the Father, and pour forth our souls before him in
prayer: which is also the meaning of that misapplyed text against forms of
prayer, Romans 8.26. The Spirit likewise helps our infirmities, for we know not
what we should pray for as we ought: but the Spirit it self makes intercession
for us, with groanings which cannot be expressed: We know not what we ought to
pray, he could not be ignorant, says the Father, of the Lords Prayer, Aug.
neither could they be ignorant of it, to whom he said thus, but such and so
pressing are our infirmities, that first many times we know not what to ask
for in relation to our bodies and outward estates, sometimes even praying for
what is harmful, or at least not at all profitable for us; and this infirmity
of ours the Holy Ghost helps, by the precepts and promises and forms of Prayer
recorded in the word of God, which are the dictates of the Spirit: And many
times 2. We know not How to ask, for what is needful, by reason of the dullness
and deadness, and frosty coldness of our hearts; and this infirmity the Spirit
helps, by quickening our devotion, as it follows, The Spirit makes request for
us, Aug. epist. ad Sixth. presb.
Quid est enim interpellat, nisi interpellare nos facit? what else can be the
meaning of this, The Spirit makes intercession for us, but that he makes us to
intercede for our selves, by his grace secretly and unspeakably enlivening our
devotions; so that even with penitent and fervent sighs and holy breathings
after God we pour forth our prayers before him: so Mat. 10.20. It is not you
that speaks, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in you. Where the
assistance of Gods holy Spirit with us, is so expressed, says Augustine, Vt ipse
facere dicitur, quod ut faciamus facit, He is said to do that himself in us
which by his grace he stirs us up to do. As therefore no man can be wise,
without the spirit of wisdom, nor knowing without the Spirit of knowledge, nor
godly without the spirit of goldiness, nor charitable without the spirit of
love; so no man can pray as he ought, without the spirit of prayer and
supplication, not that there are so many kinds of spirits as these, but all
these works one and the same spirit dividing to every man severally as he
will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

From the meaning of all which places, and many more which might be alleged,
it is manifest that by the Spirit in us, is not meant the Spirit of God in
himself, but in his graces: for how can the Spirit of God, who is (says the
Father) one perfect and eternal beatitude with the Father and the Son, Aug.
be said in himself, or according to himself, personally to speak, to sigh, to
cry, to pray in us? no otherwise surely but as by his gifts and graces we are
enabled to speak the truth, to sigh and breath after God, to cry unto him in
the fervency of our souls, and devoutly to pour forth our prayers before him.

CHAP. II. Of the workings of the holy Spirit upon the minds of men.
THE impressions or workings of the Spirit of God upon the souls of men, 2
General.
are various and diverse; Every thought, motion, and desire; every aptitude,
pronenesse and inclination; every faculty, power and ability, conducing either
to the good of our selves, or others, is from the Spirit of God, who
distributes his several qualifications, to several persons, and that severally,
even in several ways and kinds; to some in one kind, to others in another,
to some more, to some less. Unto every one of us is given grace according to
the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. 4.7. or according to the measure of
the Spirit, Per hoc tollitur error attribuentium diversitatem donorum Fato, vel
constellationibus, vel humano merito, and non divinae voluntati sicut primae
causae. Lyr. in Loc.
who is the gift of Christ. And this measure whereby he distributes his gifts,
is no other but the counsel of his own will; for men are not wise, virtuous,
charitable, etc. by necessity of Fate, or by the influence of stars, nor yet
for any their merits, or deserts, but of Gods good pleasure, by the influence
of his holy Spirit, who divides to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11.

As he will] under this (...), 4 particulars are implied: (...), To whom, what,
when, and where, he will: in all these respects the influences of Gods Spirit
are free: The wind blows where it lists; so is every one that is born of
the Sporit, Joh. 3.8. But yet as the wind though it blow upon all places alike
within its circuit, yet are not all places alike aired, and filled with the
wind, because all places are not alike capable of it: so the holy Spirit
distributes to every one his measure of gifts, but yet not to all alike, but to
some more plentifully, to others with a smaller scantling: and this according
as he finds the hearts of men, more or less soft and pliable, capable and
enfitted to receive his impressions; In quo quis animum intendit, Ambr.
in eo accipit donum, according to the intention and pliableness of the mind
to this or that study, or employment, whether divine or moral; accordingly so
does the holy Ghost communicate his gifts and blessings thereupon.

All these several workings of the Spirit, though they be so numerous as that
they cannot be easily reckoned up; (there being more points of this heavenly
wind, then there is in the Compass which is set and ordered by the wind which
blows in the air) yet unto two general heads they are all reducible: 1.
Graces. 2. Gifts. (...).



There are two principal faculties of the reasonable soul, the Understanding,
and the Will: Both which are naturally maimed by the fall of Adam: ignorance
and error invading the understanding: disobedience and rebellion the will. To
rectify this twofold disorder by nature, the supernatural assistance of the
holy Ghost, is required: who by his celestial Gifts illuminates and clears the
understanding; and by his holy Graces subdues the rebellion of the will, and
purifies the uncleanness of the affections.

The one more immediately relates to the service of God, the other to the
benefit of man: For,

1. By the Graces of Gods Spirit we are sanctified, and enabled rightly to
serve God. And,

2. By his Gifts we are qualified, and enabled to edify one another. By the
first we are made good Christians: by the second we are made good and
profitable Ministers. Both of these are called Habits, either because they make
us habile, and fit to discern and taste things divine, and heavenly: or 2.
Because as Habits clothe, and adorn the body; so these divine Gifts and Graces
do polish, adorn and enrich the soul.

And these two kinds of the holy Spirits qualifications are represented unto
us by those two types or figures of the Spirits descension upon the Apostles of
Christ; the one of the wind, Act. 2.2. and the other of the fire, verse. 3. By
the wind were represented those divine and celestial graces, wherewithal the
Apostles were endued, and whereby the souls of men are air'd, cleans'd, and
purified, and so sanctified to the sacred service of God; and by the fire was
represented the gifts they were enriched withal, for the enlightening of the
minds, and enflaming the affections of others.

CHAP. III. Of the Graces of the holy Spirit.
THE first kind of the holy Spirits impressions, are his graces represented by
the wind, Joh. 3.8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou know not
whence it comes, nor whither it goes, so is every one that is born of the
spirit. As the wind being a pure, fine, thin, subtle nature, is invisible, we
perceive it not; neither can we conceive whence it comes, or whither it goes;
all the perception we have of the wind is by its effects and operations; when
it moves the air, tosses the clouds, shakes the trees, raises the dust of the
earth, etc. nay so active and subtle a thing is the wind, that if it act not,
we say, it is not: when nothing is moved or stirred by the wind; we say, there
is no wind: so is every one that is born of the Spirit; (that is) every one
whose soul is animated and actuated by the graces of Gods Spirit: For 1. the
workings of the Spirit of grace within us, are quick and insensible, it is
unconceivable, how, and in what manner he works upon our hearts: Only, 2. we
know him by his effects and workings: as when he moves and enclines the soul to
what is holy, just, and good; or when he shakes the heart into contrition,
compunction, and godly sorrow for sin; or when he raises the mind out of the
dust, and rubbish of earthly vanities, and mounts it upon the wings of heavenly
desires and meditations, etc. And 3. as when we see no stirring, no moving of
the air, but all is calm and still, we say there is no wind: so when there is
no good motions or desires within us, no inclinations to piety, or charity, no
godly contrition for sin, no rising of the mind toward heaven, nor breathing
after things divine and heavenly; we may well say, that soul is becalmed, the
Spirit of God is not there, neither has the heavenly wind of the Almighty
breathed therein.

These graces of Gods Spirit, represented by the wind, are the very
essentials, the very life and being, the very spirit and soul of true
Christianity; and are as necessary to the being of a good Christian, in the
life of grace, as is the natural wind, or breath of his Nosthrils to his
being, and living the life of nature; therefore we are termed the Body of
Christ, the soul that animates us, being the grace of his Spirit; Romans 12.5.
and every man therefore that has the name of Christ called upon him, is but
nominis Christiani extrinsecus superficies, an empty outside superficial
christian, that is not in some measure endued with his graces: To all persons
it necessarily belongs to be partakers of them; whether Pastor or people, Lay
or Clergy, gifted or ungifted men; whether we have the gifts of the Spirit or
no, we must not be destitute of his graces; but upon all hearts this heavenly
wind must blow, to purify and cleanse, to air and dry up the superfluous
naughtiness of our natures, that so our souls and bodies may be the temples of
the holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 6.16.
even by the grace of Gods Spirit devoted and consecrated to the sacred service
of his heavenly Majesty.

A Catalogue of these spiritual graces we have recorded, Gal. 5.22. for they
are the same which are there termed [the fruits of the Spirit] The fruit of the
Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith,
meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law. These are called the
fruits of the Spirit for two reasons.

1. Because as material fruits grow not, but upon trees; neither do these
graces grow in the soul, but upon the tree of life, Joh. 14.4, 5. As the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can ye
except ye abide in me; I am the vine, ye are the branches; he that abides in
me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do
nothing.

2. As material fruits are to the body and corporal taste, so are the fruits of
the Spirit to the soul, they are both pleasant and delightsome, and also
satisfy and feed the soul unto life eternal; therefore it is said, against
such there is no Law; there is no law can condemn such, as bring forth these
fruits in their lives and conversations, as Romans 8.1. Now then there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh
but after the spirit.

CHAP. IV. Of the Gifts of the holy Spirit.
THE second kind of the holy Spirits impressions on humane souls, are his
gifts: represented by the fire, Mat. 3.11. He shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire, (that is) he shall endow and sprinkle the souls of men,
with such gifts of the holy Ghost, as are by fire represented, viz. gifts which
like unto fire, shall be effectual and powerful to enlighten the
understandings, melt the hearts, and inflame the affections and desires of men.

And as the fire burns not for it self, but for the light and warmth of others;
so the gifts of the Spirit are imparted to the sons of men, Mat. 5.15.
not to be hidden like a lighted candle under a bushel, not to be wrapped up in a
retired obscurity, Luke 19.20.
with the talent of the unprofitable servant in a napkin; but to be employed to
appear, to shine forth and manifest themselves for the profit, benefit, and
edification of others: Qui remiunt dona spiritus imperi^i aliis, quae non pro
se sed pro aliis acceper^^^, ipsa sibi plerumq. dona adimunt; ^tunque sua and
non aliorum lucra cogitant, ipsis se quae privata hab re appetunt bonis
privant. Greg. de cur. past p. 1. c. 5.
He therefore who has received the gifts of the Spirit, which are given, says
the Father, not for himself only, but for the benefit of others also, by
refusing to impart them unto others, he deprives himself of the use and
efficacy of them: For whilst he meditates his own private benefit only, and
not the good of others also, it is just with God to rob him of what he covets
to enjoy in private, since he ought to have communicated the same: so the
unprogitable servant, which laid up his talent in a napkin, had the same justly
taken from him, Luke 19.24. For it is a manifest sign, that there is no true
love of God in that heart, who imploys not the gifts he has received from God,
to the advancement of his service and benefit of his people according to his
command: therefore said our Lord unto Peter, Joh. 21.15. Simon son of Jonas
love thou me? he answered, Yea Lord, thou know that I love thee: he says
unto him, Feed my lambs. Whereupon, says the Father, Is. Ibid.
Si cura passionis est dilectionis testimonium, etc. If our feeding, or
teaching the people of Christ, be a sign of our love unto Christ, then he who
is qualified for this office by the gifts of the Spirit, and neglects the
feeding the flock of Christ himself, the chief shepherd of our souls: For the
love of Christ constrains us, that since Christ dyed for all, that they which
live should not henceforth live to themselves, etc. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15.

These Gifts of the Spirit are therefore called the manifestations of the
Spirit, as showing what the end and intent of their donation from the Spirit
is; viz. to profit withal, In ipsa corporis positione accipimus quod in
action servemus: nimisitaque turpe est non imitari quod sumus. Greg. de. cur.
past. p. 3.
1 Cor. 11.7. But the manifestation of the Spirit, is given to every man to
profit withal: As the end and use of the several parts of the body, is neither
to be idle, nor yet to be employed for it self only, as the eye is to see, and
yet not for it self only, but for the direction of the hands, feet, etc. the
feet are to walk, and yet not for themselves only, but also for the eyes,
hands, etc. Even so the end and use of the several gifts of Gods Spirit, to
several members of Christ's body, severally, is both that they should be
employed, and employed too, not only for private use, but for the mutual
benefit and edification each of other; 1 Cor. 12.
as Saint Paul at large in the same chapter: the main subject whereof is the
gifts of the Spirit; a catalogue whereof you have verse. 9, 10, 11. To one is
given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by
the same Spirit, to another faith by the same Spirit, etc. where by the way
observe, Note.
In that Faith is in this place reckoned amongst the gifts of the Spirit, and
in the former place, Gal. 5.22. amongst the fruits or graces of the Spirit,
that we may not confound the graces of God for sanctification, with his gifts
for edification, we must remember that there is a twofold Faith, the one
doctrinal, speculative, and notionary, viz. a right understanding and firm
belief of the several Articles of the Christian Faith, and so it is a gift of
Gods Spirit, and in this place rankt amongst them.

The other kind of Faith is practical and obediential, viz. the squaring,
regulating, and ordering of our lives and actions, according to the principles,
precepts, and commands of the Doctrinal Faith of Christ, and so it is a grace
of Gods Spirit, and rankt amongst them in the former place.

The gifts of the Spirit being principally and chiefly intended for the benefit
and profit of others; though every man therefore, whether Lay or Clergy,
Minister or People, may and ought to use all means to be in some good measure
made partakers of them, for his own private direction, in the ways of wisdom
and true godliness; yet for the public instruction of others, after an
especial and peculiar manner, they concern the Ministry of the Gospel, viz.
such persons whom God first extraordinarily and miraculously, since ordinarily,
and in the use of means has ordianed for the guidance and direction of his
people, in the ways of his service, and their own salvation: and this I
suppose is clear from S. Paul, Ephesians. 4.8.
Ephesians. 4.8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men, not unto all men, Exodus 4.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
but unto some only; these words (...) restrain these gifts to some few whom he
selected from the rest of mankind, as conveyances of the Gospels light unto
others; for so it follows immediately (only a parenthesis betwixt, which
breaks not the sense) He therefore gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ;
implying a manifest and clear distinction betwixt some, whom he has ordained
for the work of the Ministry, and endued with gifts after an especial manner
for that end; and some others who are not of that society, yea though they be
Saints, and of the Body of Christ; a like difference is clearly employed, 2 Cor.
12 28.
1 Cor. 12.28. where having through the whole chapter discourst of the gifts of
the Spirit, to be employed for the mutual good and benefit of each others, as
members of the same body; lest we should think that these gifts are equally
common to all persons as for public use and edification, he adds, and God has
ordained some in the Church, 1. Apostles, 2. Prophets, 3. Teachers, etc. Some
for the Office of Public instruction, he has ordained; not all that list, as
in the days of Jeroboam, 1 King. 13.33.
when every man that would, became a Priest unto Lord, which the Apostle cuts
off by this pathetical Interrogation, immediately following, verse. 29. Are all
Apostles, are all Prophets, are all Teachers? q. d. not so surely, this is as
if all the body were but one member; not all then, but some only: even that
some whom God has ordained, and manifested this his ordination, by the
spiritual gifts of wisdom, knowledge, faith, tongues and the rest before in
the chapter remembered.

Should all men, who own the name of Christians, be endued with spiritual
gifts, for the public instruction of others, two grand inconveniences would
necessarily follow.

1. The gifts of the Spirit would be thereby made contemptible, for who would
care for that which every man has?

2. The end of the Spirit in distributing his gifts would be frustrate: for how
shall one member profit another, which is the end of these gifts, when all men
have the same gifts? The most wise God therefore in ordaining some to the
Ministry, and not others, and distributing his gifts accordingly, provides, 1.
That his gift be magis augustum, more reverend. 2. That the body of his Church,
be magis ordinatum, better proportioned.

For the same reasons also, the spiritual gifts are various and diverse, and not
given to all, no not of the Ministry, alike, but discretely, Ephesians. 4 7.
and (...) according to the measure of Christ; Christ keeps a measure in his
gifts; himself indeed the Head, received the Spirit without measure, Joh 3.^4.
Ephesians. 1.11.
but none of his members ever received it but in measure, and this measure, is
according to the counsel of his own will, who respects in the distribution of
his gifts, (...), what is good and profitable, and most tending to edification:
as it is in the natural body, in every part and member of the body, God has
joined beauty and convenience together, so that every limb has such a
proportion, as is both comely and useful; So it is in the mystical Body of
Christ, the Church; it is una, Ephesians. 4.4.
but varia, a Body consisting of many members, and all quickened by one Spirit;
there is but one body, and one spirit, but many members; and in each member the
gifts of the Spirit do vary; 1 Cor. 12.
There are diversity of gifts, but the same Spirit: There are diversity of
gifts, because diversity of offices, but one Spirit; and therefore as they all
flow from one Fountain, so they are all of one nature, and tend all to one
common end, The beauty and benefit of the Church; so S. Ambrose, In donis,
officiorum est diversitas, non naturae: 1 Cor. 12. 11, 12, 13.
all the members are therefore quickened with the same Spirit; aeque, but not
aequaliter, all drink of the same Spirit, but not the same draught, for
fullness of measure, which makes each one useful in his way, but not in the
same degree; Verse. 21.
all contributing to the beauty and benefit of the whole: As therefore the eye
cannot say unto the hand, I have no need of thee, nor, etc. so neither is any
member of the Church (...), sufficient of himself, but is necessarily engaged
to desire the benefit of the Communion of the Saints.

CHAP. V. Of the Gift, and calling of the Ministry.
IT is confessed that the same spiritual gifts and graces, which dispose select
and separate persons, for the work of the Ministry, may also rest upon the
hearts, and minds of lay and secular persons: But abilities to perform an
office, is only a fair disposition, which puts such persons in a capacity of
receiving it orderly; not an actual investiture therein: as every wise man is
not a counselor of State, nor every good Lawyer a Judge; so neither is every
man who is endued with the wisdom of the Spirit, publicly to dispense the the
counsels of the most High, nor every man skild in the Divine Law, may be a
public Steward and administrator thereof; all natural and artificial
abilities, nay Divine qualifications before Ordination, are silenc't by that
question of the Apostle, How shall they preach except they be sent? Romans 10.15.
It was a mutinous speech of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, who said unto Moses,
You take too much upon you, Numb. 16.^.
since all the congregation is holy, Numb. 16.3. Their Divine qualification did
not license them to invade Moses's chair, Verse. 32.35.
or sacrilegiously usurp the Priesthood; they paid dear for that usurpation;
when the sire came out from the Lord, and consumed the most forward of them, Vt
posteris daretur exemplum, nequie praesumptione superbi spiritus, non sibi a
deo datum pontificatus munus invaderet. Quod enim pertulerunt superbi illi
Levitae, qui Deo non jubente sacerdotium vendicabant, hoc patientur quicunque
se ad episcopatus, presbyteratus vel Diaconatus officium vel muneribus, vel
adulationibus impudentur conantur ingerere: quomodo combusti sunt isti in
corpore, sic isti exurentur in cord. Aug. de Temp. Ser. 98.
and the Earth opened her mouth and swallowed Corah and all his company: a fair
warning (any man would think) for lay persons to beware how they intermeddle
with the Ministerial Function; if they do it maliciously, let them remember the
curse of Corah; if they have more fair, but mistaken purposes, let them
remember what was the sad portion of Vzzah, for his overbold approach to the
Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7.
which belonged to the Priests Office.

All Offices, Arts, and profitable Sciences; all great and public things and
employments, are distinguished in the societies of men by proper and peculiar
Professors, Artists and Ministers: How then should we think that Religion,
which is the Art of Arts, may lie in common, and be exposed to the profanation
of every rude illiterate and unskilful mechanic; to be unhallowed by the rude
intermedlings of undiscerning persons, and not rather separate from profane and
vulgar touch, by select, distinct, and qualified persons, for that end by God
ordained? Who dares take upon him to raise forces, to impose taxes, to levy
contributions, to punish offenders, or the like, but such only who are designed
thereunto, and have commission for it? And yet in the matters of God, in the
dispensation of his holy mysteries, every man will be a Priest, and a Prophet,
as if it were pardonable only to be disorderly in Religion, or as if God would
accept a lawless liberty in those things wherein the frailty of man is most
apt, and too likely to miscarry, and wherein also the miscarriage is most
fatal, and ruinous to the soul for ever.

In Religion it is true, that all have a common interest, and so they have in
the Laws also: and by the same reason, that the one, by the same the other
also, may be dispensed by all men promiscuously without order, without
distinction, which must necessarily end in confusion. It Is true that under the
Gospel all true believers are Priests unto the Lord, and have spiritual
sacrifices to offer: 1. Pet. 2.5, 9.
But it is one thing for a man to be a Priest to himself, another thing to be
so to the whole Church: Revel. 1.6. Romans 12.1.
It is one thing to offer up our selves a living sacrifice acceptable unto God:
another thing to represent the Congregation unto God: All ordinary and private
devotions may and are to be done by private persons; but the solemn, ritual and
public Worship of God, must be left to the public Minister. There is no good
man but wishes with Moses; I would all the Lords people were Prophets, and
that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them, Numb. 11.29.
Numb. 11.29. But it is one thing to be qualified as the Prophets of the Lord;
another thing sacrilegiously to invade their Office: Being qualified, they may
do the Office of Prophets privately, to themselves and their family, both by
prayers for, and with them, and also by teaching and instructing them: But in
Gods house and in the presence of the whole Congregation, to dispense the
sacred mysteries of Salvation, is only peculiar to the Stewards of his house,
nor may others presume to intermeddle therewithal. Ac primo quidam a statu
ante legem, a statu sub lege, a statu sub gratia. semperenim reperio certa
hominum genera fuisse a deo ad hoc officium delecta, non autem licuisse cuiquam
se obtrudere. Zanch, in 4. Praec. Card. Polus l. 1. ad H. 8.
If we search into the state and condition of the Church from the beginning of
the world to this very instant of time, we shall find, That both before the
Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel also, there were ever a certain select
chosen sort of men, (says the learned Zanchy) designed for the office of the
Priesthood, and that it was not lawful for every one that list to thrust
himself into the execution of this sacred function: The first priest we read of
that is so called is Melchisedech; of whom the holy Scriptures affirm, that he
was without father, without mother, etc. Heb. 7.3. His original being unknown
by reason of his antiquity: And so says a learned man of the Priesthood, The
antiquity of this great calling, is so great, that it cannot be found out, nor
can we find its offspring, but with the first rising and being of a Church
upon the face of the earth.

No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was
Aaron, Heb. 5.4.
who was called of God, but consecrated by Moses; agitatus a Deo,
consecrationis principe, says Dionysius, Exodus 28.1, 2.
God was the principal Author, and Moses the Minister of his Consecration; Heb.
5.5.
so likewise Christ did not glorify himself to become High Priest, but be was
personally chosen and sent, or in his own language sealed of the Father, Joh.
6.27.
and sent into the world (that is) ordained to be Priest and Prophet of the
world.

The Apostles of Christ received their Commission from him, Mat. 28.19. Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations, Mat. 28.19.
baptizing, etc. And that we might understand, that they had by virtue of this
Commission power to Commissionate others, to be their successors in all
succeeding Generations of the Church; it follows, And lo, I am with you until
the end of the world; with you your selves, until you have fulfilled your
course, and served your own Generation, and with you in your successors, until
the end of the world: and more plainly in those other words of their
Commission, Joh. 20.21, Joh. 20.21, 22, 23.
22, 23. As my Father has sent me, so send I you: and when he had said this,
he breathed on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: whose
soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained: which spiritual power, and spiritual gifts
communicated to the Apostles was not sure to expire with them, except ye will
also say, all Ecclesiastical Discipline and Government ended with the
Apostles, and that all scandals and offenses, heresies and errors, sins and
vices are left remediless and without cure, or at least without a Physician to
prescribe, administer, and apply to wounded Consciences, and sin-sick souls,
their proper salve and medicine: As my Father has sent me, so send I you] and
as I have sent you, Act. 14.23 Titus 1.5.
so you are to send others; and this we read they did, They ordained Elders in
all Churches: and gave Commission to whom they ordained, to Ordain others: The
Ordination was theirs, but the power was from above, and so the Apostles
themselves acknowledged in the very first instance of Ordination, when they
chose Matthias in the room of Judas: They prayed, saying, Thou Lord show
whether of these two thou have chosen, Act 2.24:
Act. 2.24. God chooses, and man ordains; God calls the person to the Office,
and man instals him therein: The power is Originally from God, as the Fountain,
but conveyed through the Ministry of man as the Conduit.

All power is given unto me, Mat. 28.18, 19.
both in Heaven and in Earth, Go ye therefore, etc. But because there is no man
how sacrilegiously soever he invaded the Ministerial Office, but will pretend a
call and a power from God thereunto; and he that is most bold and forward to
publish his follies in this kind, is also apt to mistake his boldness, for a
call from God: he may fancy a call from above, when it is only a noise in his
own head, or a deceitful echo of his own heart; therefore we must know this
call from God to so high and honorable an Office, as to be ordained for men in
things pertaining to God, is either extraordinary, o^ ordinary; the first
beginning of a lasting necessity is extraordinary, and it is made ordinary in
succession, and by the lasting continuation of a fixed and determinate
Ministry; as Adam at the first was extraordinarily formed, immediately created
by God himself, but all mankind since ordinarily by the mediation of parents;
so the Apostles of Christ who received the first issues of Evangelical
Ministry, were extraordinarily called; but all that have succeeded them, have
been admitted by an ordinary vocation, because the succession is but of
ordinary necessity; now for any man to pretend an extraordinary calling and
immediate from God without the Ministry of man, is to pretend also to a new
Gospel, and new Revelations, distinct from what Christ and his Apostles have
delivered, and such can be no other then the dictates of seducing spirits and
doctrines of Devils: and indeed such a pretense of immediate and extraordinary
power and commission from above, can (in a fixed and settled Ministry by
ordinary means) have no other end and issue but to belie the Spirit of Truth,
and cosen the too credulous souls of the people, when ever they have a mind
to it; nor is it any other but a mere pretense of folly to expect or rely upon
an extraordinary calling, or abilities, by immediate infusion from heaven,
without the use of means, as to the Ministerial Function, since by ordinary and
common means they may be supplied; for it is all one, as if we should expect
men to be created, and by the hands of God immediately, as Adam was at the
first; or being so formed, to be fed and nourished with food from heaven,
without any care or industry for provision here upon earth.

CHAP. VI. Of ministerial Gifis; ordinary and extraordinary.
THis call to the Ministerial Office under the Gospel, both extraordinary in
the Apostles, and ordinary in their successors, as it is in it self a grand
inestimable gift of the Holy Ghost, and the prime of them conferred by our Lord
in his triumph over our ghostly foes, and victorious ascension into to Heaven;
for then he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, etc. So it has also other
gifts of the Spirit attending, Ephesians. 4.11.
as necessary contributaries to the accomplishment thereof, that this gift may
be completed and fitted for the edification of the body of Christ, Verse. 12.
through the work of the Ministry, which proportionable to the twofold calling
are either extraordinary, or ordinary also; extraordinary they were, even
plentiful and miraculous in the persons of the Apostles, viz. in such a
measure, and after such a manner, as no mortal men could ever hope for since;
and very good reason there is that it should be so: For the Apostles charge was
much greater, and their task more difficult then any man's either was or can be
since. They had all mankind to instruct and principle in the doctrine of
Christ; the stiff obdurate and incredulous Jews to convert; the fullness of
the Gentiles to bring in, both the rude Barbarians and learned Graecians to
master and subdue. The whole world was their Diocese, the world sitting in
darkness, and in the shadow of death; devoted to the service of sin and Satan,
the Prince of darkness: Now to master and subdue the whole world, and to turn
all men from darkness to light, Act. 26.18.
and from the power of Satan to the living God; required, sure, gifts and
endowments more then ordinarily powerful and effectual, even such as were
extraordinary and miraculous: and whereof none of their successors, none that
ever followed them since in the Ministerial Office, could possibly hope to be
partakers; for all Ministers since have but an handful of men in comparison to
deal withal, and these broken to their hands, being born and brought up in the
holy Christian Religion; As therefore there is no need of any such
extraordinary qualifications; so neither do we, the best of us do not, dare not
pretend, either to such sublime and eminent gifts of the Spirit, or to any such
immediate and extraordinary infusion of spiritual gifts.

The spiritual gifts of the Apostles, differ from those of their successors in
two respects. 1. In respect of the measure or extent of them. 2. In respect of
the manner of acquisition. First for the measure, the Apostles were filled with
the holy Ghost, Act. 2.4. filled as full as they could hold, 2.4.
they were endued with as many eminent gifts for the execution of the
Apostolical Function as they were capable of; but we, even the best and ablest
of the Sons of men, are not so full, but they could hold much more; their's was
a Baptism with the holy Ghost, ours, is at the best, Act. 1.5.
but a Rantism; they were washed, washed as it were all all over with the
Spirit; we but sprinkled with his gifts: they had the anointing of the holy One
more plentifully, we in a smaller scantling; they were anointed above, far
above all their fellows and successors, who received ordinarily but an Hin to
their Epha. Psalm. 133.2.
Their Unction was like the Ointment poured upon the head that ran down to the
beard; and all others since but like the thin droppings upon the skirts of the
garment. And from hence we may observe with S. Hierome: Scio me aliter habere
Apestolos, aliter reliquos tracta^or^s; illos semper vera di^^re, istos ut
hemines in quib^sdam aberrare. Hier. ad Theo.
That the Apostles excelled all other Ministers in this respect also, that they
were so guided and directed by the holy Spirit of God, that all truths, and
nothing but truth, did at all times flow from them in the execution of their
Function, but all other Ministers must confess in all humility, that as men
they have their failings and mistakes in one respect or other.

Secondly, for the manner, the Apostles were endued with their fullness of
spiritual gifts miraculously; their Inspiration did publicly and visibly
appear to be by miracle and immediate from Heaven, Act. 2. But we, as we can
pretend unto no such extraordinary gifts; so neither do we pretend unto, or
depend upon any such extraordinary and immediate infusion of spiritual gifts;
but ordinarily and in the use of means, even by much study, labor, and
industry in the ways of wisdom, learning and knowledge, we do acquire our
qualifications: according to the command of the Apostle to Timothy, we study
for them, 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved, 2. Tim. 2.15.
a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth;
and yet Timothy sure had less need to study for his gifts, then any of us, as
having more of immediate Inspiration then the best of men can hope for since.

And yet though we study to be qualified for the work of the Ministry; our
qualifications are full the gifts of the Spirit; all our wisdom and knowledge
is from above: even as of Daniel and the three children, it is recorded that
God gave them knowledge and understanding in all learning and wisdom, Dan.
1.17.4.
Dan. 1.17. And yet it is said before verse. the 4. that they were brought up
and instructed in knowledge (and that by and among the Heathen too) and were
taught the learning and tongue of the Caldaeans; So our humane learning,
tongues and languages (so much declaimed against by the ignorant) are the
Handmaids to spiritual and Divine wisdom and knowledge, and both the one and
other, though acquired by instruction and study in the Schools of the Prophets,
are yet of Gods merciful donation, they are still the gifts of the Spirit.

And that first, because from the Spirit of God it is that we have minds
capable, and minds inclinable to use the means, for the attainment of such
gifts: for even our natural endowments, and moral qualifications are gifts of
the Spirit; perspicacity, quickness of wit, ripeness of judgment, together
with a studious, diligent and industrious mind in the search and dexterity, in
the discovery of the several ways of learning and knowledge, even all of them
are the gifts of God; for every good and perfect gift, whether natural, moral,
or divine, Jam. 1.17. Joh. 3.27.
comes down from above, Jam. 1.17. for a man can receive nothing except it be
given from above, Joh. 3.27. The very speaking of an ordinary revealed Truth is
called a speaking by the Spirit, for no man can say, that Jesus is the Christ,
but by the Spirit of God; because the revelation of this, as of every truth, is
from the Spirit originally, and from him also is both the power and the act of
this confession.

Secondly, our qualifications though acquired by study, are yet the gifts of
the Spirit, because it is by Gods blessing and the influence of his good Spirit
upon our studies and endeavors, that we do acquire these qualifications: and it
is generally, and for the most part, that God distributes his gifts and
blessings according to men's inclinations, aptness and endeavors for the
reception of his gifts. Habitus infusi infunduntur per modum acquisitorum: All
infused or inspired gifts, are infused after the manner of gifts acquired, i.e.
as we are more or less industrious to acquire the gifts of the Spirit,
accordingly so they are more or less given, and communicated to us by the
Spirit: which is signified unto us by the parable of the hidden Treasure, Mat.
13.4. The Kingdom of heaven is like unto a treasure hid in a field, the which
when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof, goes and sells all
that he has and buyeth that field: The treasure found without search, denotes
Gods free and gratuitous revelation of himself unto us: and the selling of all
to buy that field, signifies a man's utmost endeavors, and labors to be made
partaker of these divine Revelations.

Thirdly, because the qualifications acquired by study, are by the Spirit of
God himself directed to the ends of the Spirit, which are to profit withal;
and then is Gods blessing the greater, and the influence of his Spirit upon our
studies, the more effectual and powerful, when we have in them no other aim or
intention, but to be thereby enfitted and enabled to become useful instruments
of Gods service, and his peoples edification. And both in that we do direct our
studies to this end, and also employ our gifts acquired by study to this end
also, it is from the Spirit of God: who works in us to will and to do of his
own God pleasure, Phil. 2.15.

And lastly, all this is acknowledged, Phil. 2.15.
that our gifts in all these respects are from the Spirit of God, though
studied for; In that together with those means that are outward and moral, we
use the Divine means also, viz. prayer and devotion, commanded Jam. 1.15. If
any man lacks wisdom, let him ask it of God, Jam. 1.5.
who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

That the Ministers of the Gospel notwithstanding their gifts are from the
Spirit, are yet bound to use all means, both Moral and Divine, for the
acquiring thereof; is manifest even from Gods own example in the use of their
Ministry: In that God himself who is not tied to means, neither has need of
any, is yet pleased to use the means and Ministry of some men for the
instruction and conversion of others: There is no question, but he who at the
first created man after his own Image, could without the Ministry of man, have
again repaired the decays of his blessed Image in man: But yet in all ages it
has seemed good to his infinite wisdom to use the mediation and Ministry of
men herein; And this he does out of his tender respect to men's infirmities,
considering the vast distance betwixt God and man; which moved the Israelites
to Petition for a Minister betwixt God and them, Exodus ^0.19. Deuteronomy. 5.27. and
18.16. Heb. 12 19.
Exodus 20.19. Talk thou with us and we will hear, but let not God talk with us
lest we die.

As therefore no Minister of God may think that God uses his Ministry because
he needs it: so neither may the people think there is no need of Ministers,
because God uses them: and he uses them as subordinate fellow laborers in the
whole course of man's salvation; Gal. 4.19. 2 Cor. 3.2. Mat. 16.19. 1 Timothy 4.16.
the Ministers are said to beget men unto Christ; to nourish them in Christ; to
bind and loose their souls; to open and shut heaven, and in a word, to save;
because all these things Christ does by them: they are causa conjuncta, 2 Cor.
3.2, 3.
cooperating with and under Christ; so Paul compares his Corinthians to a
written Epistle, the Authors whereof were himself and the Spirit: the external
writing was his; the internal seal upon their hearts was the Spirits. These two
then may not be severed; Neither 1. may we look for Inspirations from heaven
without the Ministry of man upon earth: Nor yet 2. may we imagine, that the
Ministry of man upon earth can be effectual without inspiration from Heaven.

CHAP. VII. Of those operations and impressions that are opposite to the Spirit
of Truth.
ANd because it is not enough for us to know the truth; but also by that right
and straight line to observe and discover what is repugnant and contrary
thereunto: Let us remember, what by sad and lamentable experience, we daily see
and hear; that as there is a holy and a good Spirit of God by his gifts and
graces working on the minds of men: so there is also an evil and a bad
spirit, even the spirit of error and uncleanness, the Devil, who has his
secret workings and continual countermines opposing hereunto: which evil spirit
working also by the frail and deceivable spirit of man, does by many subtle
ways, obscure, corrupt, poison, and belie the sacred qualifications of the
Spirit of Truth; nor does the Devil that grand enemy of man's salvation in any
kind of way, so much cosen and cheat the souls of men into ruin, as by
putting false glosses and counterfeit vizars on vices, errors, and distempers;
that so they may be mistaken for holy virtues, and divine qualifications. To
instance in some particulars;

First, It is a truth by the Spirit of God both foretold, promised, and
performed, That the actings and impressions of Gods Spirit upon the minds of
men, are both more strong and frequent, as also more general and common under
the Gospel then they were under the Law: That the gift of the Ministry it self
is dilated, being not limited to the single Tribe of Levi; but all men of what
quality soever have a title thereunto, meaning Genera singulorum, not singula
generum (that is) men of all sorts and kinds, not all of all kinds; but
hereupon to make void, pull down, and level with the undistinguisht multitude,
the high and solemn order and offices of the Priesthood instituted by God
himself, both under the Law and under the Gospel; for a people to snatch the
Divine Oracles from the lips of the Priest, and presume to teach their
Teachers; to invade the chair of Moses, and offer incense with unhallowed
censors; for private persons to assume the public administration of
Ministerial Offices, without a lawful Call and due Ordination thereunto; though
they may be otherwise qualified with knowledge and piety: These are false
glosses imposed upon the former truths, by the Spirit of lies; Tares fowed by
the Enemy of mankind amidst the purer wheat: And that,

1. To the high dishonor of God, and profanation of all that is religious and
sacred.

2. To involve the Church of Christ, and bury it in the rubbish of confusion
and disorder.

3. To take away those bounds and limits, distinguishing Priest from people,
which all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, all Ages of the Church, both Ancient and
Modern, have kept firm and inviolable.

4. To pull down heavy judgments upon the heads of all such sacrilegious
Usurpers and Invaders of Divine Rites. 2 Samuel 6 6, 7. 2 Chronicles. 26. 16, etc.


2. It is an impression of Gods Spirit upon the soul of man to wait and depend
upon God for spiritual wisdom, knowledge, Prove. 3.5.
etc. and not to lean to our own understanding, or trust too much to our own
wit, judgment, reading, learning, Prove. 2.6.
or the like; as knowing full well, That the Lord gives wisdom, and from him
comes knowledge and understanding; But hereupon either to despise or neglect
those ways and means, and helps, which God in his merciful providence has
afforded us for to attain wisdom, etc. as the study of Tongues and Languages,
Arts and Sciences, the reading and distinctly weighing the Discourses of the
learned; and to depend upon immediate Revelation and Infusion of such gifts
from Heaven, as if they should drop upon our barren hearts, as did the Manna in
the Wilderness upon the Tents of Israel, out of the clouds, and by miracle;
this is a false gloss which the spirit of delusion puts upon the former truth,
thereby to inveigle us. 1. 2. 3. Ignorance again as the Mother of Devotion,
which all men know, (but who are blinded with ignorance) to be the Dam of
superstitions, errors, and confusions.


3. Rightly to believe in the Son of God, as the mean of our justification
here, and ground of our hope of salvation hereafter, this is an impression of
Gods Spirit on the soul of man; and in respect hereof we are said to have the
Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13.
2 Cor. 4.13. We having the same spirit of faith according as it is written, I
believed, therefore have I spoken; faith as it is doctrinal, being a spiritual
gift, and reckoned amongst them, 1 Cor. 12.9. And as it is practical, 1 Cor.
12.9.
being a grace or fruit of the Spirit, and reckoned amongst them also, Gal.
5.22.
Gal. 5. 22. But now to mingle and divide, and as it were to cut asunder, this
true Evangelical Faith, as it stands full and entire in all its integral parts,
both of doctrine and practice, so as to be vainly pust up with a conceit of
being ingraffed into Christ, and thereby to be justified here, and sure of
heaven hereafter; whether we live according to the rule of Faith, and in
obedience unto the Gospel of Christ, or no: to define and measure our Faith,
not by the sacred acts thereof commanded, which is called the righteousness of
Faith: but by our own too too credulous fancies, and apprehensions, Rom 10.6.
as if it were no more to be in Christ, but presumptuously to pretend unto it,
and impudently without just ground to believe it: This surely cannot be that
true Evangelical Faith, whereunto so many promises are annexed; but a false
gloss which the spirit of Error has put thereupon; thereby,

1. To puff up the hearts of too too credulous men, with spiritual pride and
presumption, and make them swell with the empty conceit and airy fancy of their
own happy and eminent state and condition, when there is no such matter. And,

2. To inveigle men to neglect the use and practice of Christian graces, those
fruits of the Spirit, which are, as it is already said, the very life and soul
of Christianity, and consequently the way to heaven, if ever we mean to arrive
there.

4. It is an impression of Gods Spirit on the soul of man, To be zealous for
the Lord of Hosts, (that is) to be exceedingly fervent and forward, 1 King
19.1^.
earnest and desirous by all possible ways and means to advance the religious
worship and service of God: but to be so factions and forward, so fiery and
furious as by any illegal, extravagant and disorderly means to advance the
truth it self, much less to set up any private opinions in relation to Gods
Service, which have not been, semper and ubique and ab omnibus, Vincen^^.
the three rules of Catholic Doctrine and Worship, to be generally, and for
the most part of the Primitive times at least, of all persons, at all times,
and in all places received, and not now and then, here and there, by heretics
and schismatics only introduced; I say to be zealous for such pieces of
Religion, Doctrine and Worship: and that per fas nefasque through just or
unjust means, by right or by wrong, to endeavor the advancement thereof: this
is not true zeal, but a false gloss which the Devil puts thereupon, even
through the violence of this distempered heat.





The like may be observed of zeal for the conversion of a sinner, and bringing
souls into the obedience of Christ, the more zealous and active, diligent and
industrious any man is herein, with the more fire of Gods Spirit, no question,
he is endued: But withal observe, that to be active and zealous to seduce and
deceive, to inveigle and draw men aside into false and erroneous opinions in
Religion, is not a heat cast forth from the fire of Gods Spirit; but it arises
rather from the fire of hell; it comes from our adversary the Devil, who also
continually goes about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour: 1 Pet.
5.8.
And his Disciples they be, and consequently in the same woeful state and
condition with him, who take pains to proselyte persons unto the ways of error
and perdition. Mat. 23.15.
Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, and hypocrites, for ye compass Sea and land
to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child
of hell then your selves.

5. It Is an impression of Gods Spirit on the mind of man, to be apt and ready,
active and forward, to counsel, advise, admonish, Mat. 18.15.
and in some cases, and at some times to reprove one another, Prove. 12.1.
and tell men of their faults, and He that hates reproof is a fool: but to
rail and revile, censure and judge, and condemn our brethren; and say it is only
a telling them of their faults, and telling them what they are, or to meddle
with other men's matters that concern us not, or to reprove other men's faults,
whilst our selves are guilty of greater; these are no true parts of Christian
fraternal admonition, but false glosses that the Devil puts hereupon,





And as into erroneous opinions on the one hand; so into sinful actions on the
other, are we allured and inveigled by the same subtle wile of Satan, obtruding
his false counterfeit coin of wickedness under the show and semblance of the
impressions of the Spirit of holiness; gilding, painting, and setting out
sinfulness and vice, with the title, show and flourish of godliness and virtue;
thus covetousness on the one hand wears the painted mask and flourish of
providence and good husbandry: and prodigal profuseness on the other hand, of
nobleness and generosity: Thus riot and excess, drunkenness and gluttony carry
the fair flourishing titles of bountifulness, good fellowship, and freedom of
spirit; Thus wantonness and uncleanness are painted over with the specious
terms of amorous kindness, and Courtship; and pride, and haughtiness, of
magnanimity, greatness of spirit, superiority of rank. I might instance in most
of sins and vices, how men are inveigled and consened into them by the Devil,
under the shows and false glosses of pretended virtues: For full well that
subtle Serpent knows, that there is nothing so beautiful and comely, nothing
that has so much power to win upon the hearts and affections of men, as virtue
and holiness; and therefore in their habits and attire, does he dress his
deformed strumpet vices, puts them in their colors, and sends them forth under
their names and titles; and hence it comes to pass, that the silly souls of men
are so often cheated with the baneful poison of sinfulness, whilst vicious
dispositions undiscernibly insinuate themselves into our affections, under the
attire and dress of virtuous qualifications: But thus the Devil transforms
himself into an Angel of light, 2 Cor. 11.24.
whilst baiting his suggestions either with counterfeit revelations on the one
hand, or with false glosses of spiritual graces on the other; he entraps the
souls of men in the snares of sinfulness and error, and leads them captivity
captive to his pit destruction.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Spirit of Man; and the Spirit of the World.
THere are two Familiars, whereby the Devil does ordinarily work, and lay his
secret and subtle snares, to catch, cosen, and delude our souls thus into
sinfulness and error; and these are either 1. the spirit of man; or 2. the
spirit of the world: The dictates and workings of both which kind of spirits,
being stirred and quickened by the evil spirit, diametrally oppose the
impressions and workings of the Spirit of truth.

Mat. 16.17.
Mat. 16.17. Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee, but my Father
which is in Heaven. So that flesh and blood has their Revelations (that is)
private men have their opinions and conceits, which oppose the truth that is
revealed from heaven. The same opposition of private resolution to holy
inspiration, does St. Peter observe, 2 Pet. 1. ult. For prophesies of old time
came not by the will of Man: 2 Pet. 1. ult.
but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost, not as they
were moved by their own private will, wit, judgment, reason and resolution;
but as they were moved by the holy Ghost; Et haec ideo dicuntur, etc. These
things are therefore said by the Apostle, Clos. o^d.
that no man should presume to interpret the holy Scripture after his own
private mind or fancy; as too often, opposing and thwarting, perverting and
wresting the same, and the meaning of the holy Ghost therein. There were many
such persons in S. Chrysostomes days, which (says he) boast of the holy
Spirit, Chrysostom. reference Juello in Apolog. eccl. Anglic.
but whilst they speak of their own they falsely boast to have the Spirit of
God: For (says he) as Christ did deny that he spoke of himself, when he spoke
cut of the Law and the Prophets, even even so now if any thing besides the
Gospel (and this rightly understood) be obtruded under the name of the Spirit,
it is not to be believed: For as Christ is the fulfilling of the Law and the
Prophets; so the holy Spirit is the fulfilling of the Gospel.

The Church of Christ has in all ages been infested, and in these last times,
more then ever, with such kind of persons, who pretending to be holy men of
God, to have the Gift of prophecy, and interpretation of Scripture, even to
speak by the holy Ghost; and yet are led by their own ghost only, following
their own private will and desires, imaginations and opinions, as their only
guide and dictator; who pretend to the Spirt of God, and yet will not admit at
any hand of other spirit then their own, of other truth then the vision of
their own heads, or of other directions then the motions of their own hearts;
rejecting, renouncing, and crying down all but what themselves call holy; with
the Donatists of old, Quod volumus, sanctum est, that they will have to be
holy, right and true, shall be so, and nothing else: it is the very ground
whereupon this last upstart crew of Quakers build all their resolutions, and
strange fanatic opinions, and heresies; even that which they call the light
within us; This (say they) is the only Judge we must follow, the Pilot we must
steer by, the voice whereunto we must give ear, the only Sanctuary to which we
must fly for resolution; never remembering how this sanctuary is profaned, by
continual acts of spiritual fornication or idolatry therein committed; whilst
in stead, and even in opposition to God and Spirit of all truth, they enshrine
and idolize their own fond, vain, and lying imaginations, which the Lord by his
Prophet calls the vanity and deceitfulness of their own heart. Jer. 14.4.
Jer 14.14. The Lord said unto me, The Prophets prophecy lies in my Name, I
have not sent them, neither did I command them, neither spoke I unto them, but
they prophecy unto you a false vision, and divination, and vanity, and the
deceitfulness of their own heart. It Is undoubtedly necessary for every man to
be persuaded in his own conscience both of the truth of what he believes, and
of the justice and equity of what he undertakes: but yet this persuasion of the
conscience, or the following the light within us, or the dictates of our own
spirit, is not the first ground, and prime rule either of our faith, or of our
works. For the conscience it self must be regulated, or else it will often
prove a false witness, and most especially in the things of God: for as
conscience is is set betwixt God and us, so it must speak from God unto us. And
our spirit or the light within us must be guided by the light of Gods Spirit
shining in his word: S. Paul thought verily he ought to do many things against
the name of Jesus: This persuasion arose from the light within him, Act. 16.9,
11.
and hereupon he made havoc of the Church, which no man that is not infatuate
will say, was either fit, or lawful to be done. 'Twas first in the heart of
Judas to betray his Master, Joh. 13.2. Such was the light within him, and
according to this light he walked, till at last he hanged himself.

And this delusion of man's own spirit, following the deceitful dictates of his
own heart, is seldom mentioned in holy Scripture, without heavy threats
denounced both against such deluders, and all that suffer themselves to be
deluded by them: as you may read, Jer. 14.15, 16. And again, Ezekiel. 13.3. Woe
unto the foolish Prophets, Ezekiel. 13.3.
which follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing; Nothing but what their
own foolish spirit dictates to them.

Such are noted by the Apostle also, Col. 2.18. Who intrude into those things
which they have not seen, Col. 2.18.
(or, which they understand not) being vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind,
Closs.
Sensualitatis, non rationis; following the dictates of sense, rather then of
right reason; and in this place, the word (...) is remarkable; for even by that
it is easy to distinguish betwixt the dictates of a man's own carnal and sensual
spirit, and the impressions of Gods holy Spirit, for the guidance of the mind:
The dictate of the fleshly spirit is (...), inflatio, a puffing up; but the
impression of the holy Spirit is (...), afflatio, an inspiration indeed, but
without inflation, or puffing up: The heavenly wind of Gods Spirit may fill,
but it never puffs up, or swells the heart, but rather humbles and abaseth the
Spirit of man, which is most conformable to the Spirit of Christ, according to
his own command, Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart;
Mat. 11.29.
the mind that is either puffed up with pride, vainglory, and false conceited
excellency in it self; or that swells with malice, hatred, or envy toward
others, is not inspired with the celestial Breath or Spirit of the holy Jesus,
but follows its own carnal and corrupt dictates and conceits; being thereunto
raised and moved, by that grand Impostor, the spirit of Delusion.

Besides man's own carnal spirit, there is also A spirit of the World, opposing
and poisoning the truths of Gods Spirit: The Apostle distinguishes and
opposes these each to other, 1 Cor. 2.12. 1 Cor. 2.12.
Now we have not received the spirit which is of the world, but the Spirit
which is of God: which spirit of the world, he calls a little before, the
wisdom of the world, and of the Princes thereof, verse. 6. and opposes the
same to the wisdom of God, verse. 7. And what else can be this wisdom of the
world, but those humane policies, so frequent in the world, whereby men steer
their actions to their worldly ends and interests? with this spirit of the
world are all such possessed, who having set up and enshrined the world in their
hearts, do thereupon ground their Religion, and thence deduce all their
reasons, arguments and religious conclusions; so that they can find in their
hearts to be thus far religious, and to close with this or that sect, society,
and opinion in Religion, as it stands with their worldly profit, pleasure,
credit, preferment, or the like: It was from the dictates of this spirit that
Jeroboam the Son of Nebat made Israel to sin; pulling down the holy and true
Religion established amongst the people by the Laws of God, and erecting two
golden Calves at Dan and Bethel, which became a snare unto the people, who were
thereby inveigled into idolatry, the cause of their utter ruin and extirpation
in the end: And what other Spirit was it that moved this wicked Usurper
thereunto, 1 King. 12.28, 29.
but that of his own worldly respects and interests; there was no other way as
this worldly spirit dictated to him, to uphold his present estate, and new
gotten Monarchy? so we read, 1 King. 12.26.
1 King. 12.26, etc. And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now shall the kingdom
return to the house of David, etc. Rather then the people should return to
their obedience to their liege Lord and Sovereign, religion must down, and the
true worship of God be laid in the dust, to make way for superstition and
idolatry to be set up; the Priests of the Lord shall be discarded, and the
lowest of the people exaltted to that dignity, and to make the office more
contemptible, every one that list, may take up the trade, and consecrate
himself to be a Priest of the high places, 2 King. 13.33.
1 King. 13.33.

It was this very spirit also that stirred up the Highpriests and Pharisees to
take counsel against our Savior to put him to death; for say they, If we let
him alone, all men will believe on him, (...), The Romans will come and take
away our place and Nation, Joh. 11.48.

It was this spirit also that stirred up Demetrius the Silversmith, with the
rest of the Crafts-men of the like occupation, against St. Paul and his
companions, and the holy Christian Religion preached by them; his Pretense was
Religion (such a kind Religion as it was) viz. Lest the Temple of the great
goddess Diana should be nothing esteemed, and her magnificence, whom Asia and
all the world worshipped, should be destroyed; but this Religion was blown by the
wind of his own worldly ends; his profit, his gain which he got by making
silver shrines for Diana, was in danger to be lost, and therefore it was now
time for to stir, not so much for the maintenance of her honor, Act. 19.27.
as his own profit, Act. 19.27.

And it is this spirit of the world, that possesses the greatest part of the
world; generally, and for the most part, men measure and square out their
Religion by the rule of their profit, or pleasure, or preferment, or credit and
esteem amongst men; or indeed at the best, by the rule of self-preservation; so
far perhaps they will sail by the wind of Gods Spirit as the Sea of this world
is calm, peaceable, pleasant, and the navigation gainful, or at least not
chargeable; but if any tempest arise, any gusts of trouble or opposition
against the truth blow in the face of its professors; if any damages or
dangers pursue them in their course, they presently tack about, and will sail
no longer by the heavenly wind of God, but by the earthly wind of their own
worldly ends and interests; not by the wind which blows from heaven, but by
that which arises out of the caves and hollows of an earthly mind; Jam. 1.6.
suffering themselves by this wind to be tossed to and fro, and driven to be of
this, or that, 2 Samuel 24.24.
or any Religion, that shall cost them nothing, nothing of charge, trouble, or
danger; ebbing and flowing in this worlds vast sea, as the tide either of
prosperity or adversity, danger or security makes for or against them. But this
surely is such a spirit as blows quite cross and contrary to the spirit which
guided and directed the Apostles, for they finished their course over the
troublous sea of this world, to the celestial Canaan, by sailing in all
weathers, encountering all oppositions, and passing through all storms that met
and opposed them: In afflictions, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in
prisons, in tumults, in labors, by watchings, by fastings, etc. 1 Cor. 6.4, 5,
6. And yet in all these difficulties, still says the father, The yoke of
Christ is easy, and his burden light; 1 Cor. 6, 4, 5, 6. Aug.
nay, there is ease, peace, and comfort to the soul in the midst of all the
troubles, dangers, wants or necessities that can in this life encounter us,
whilst the holy Ghost secretly by his comforts both cheers our spirits, and
fills the sails of our desires with the hopes of arriving safe in the end at the
harbor of eternal peace and felicity.

CHAP. IX. Of the Trial of Spirits.
SInce then that grand malignant Spirit, the enemy of our salvation, 3. Genesis
working by these two Familiars, man's own deceivable spirit, and the spirit of
the world, does thus many ways counterfeit, poison, pervert, and consequently
obstruct, impede, and overthrow the workings of the Spirit of grace; as an
Antidote against this poison of the serpent, and that his countermines prevail
not to the subversion of our souls; we must make use of that friendly
admonition of the Apostle, never so necessary to be observed and practiced as
now; 1 John 4.1.
Dearly beloved, believe not every Spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be
of God, or no; for many false Prophets are gone out into the world.

The admonition is twofold:

First, negative, Believe not every spirit.

Secondly, positive, Try the spirits; and there is one general reason given for
both, because many false prophets are gone out into the world. He then that
shall be so credulous, as to give heed to every one that pretends to the Spirit
of truth, and under that pretense treats of holy and spiritual things; and
shall not first by the rule of truth examine and try such things and persons;
shall be sure to have lies and errors obtruded upon him, under the dress and
attire of Truth; because there ever was, and ever shall be by Gods permission
and the Devils suggestion, false Prophets or false Teachers in the world, and
yet as fair and great pretenders to the truth, as the very true patrons and
promoters thereof; such there were ever in the Church of God, both under the
Law of old, 2 Pet. 2.1.
and under the Gospel anew. 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false Prophets also
among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you; which
privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought
them; and shall bring upon themselves swift destruction: And 'twere well if the
poison spread no further, so that others were not infected therewith also: but
so nauseous is Truth to the minds of men for its age, and antiquity, and so
acceptable are Lies and Errors for their novelty, that these false Teachers
never fail of many disciples and followers; 2 Pet. 2.2.
so it follows verse. 2. And many shall follow their destructions, by whom the
way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

First, then believe them not, follow them not, be not cousen'd by their fair
pretenses, so as to be infected with their false doctrines: It Is our Saviors
own command, Mat. ^4.23.
Mat. 24.23. If any man shall say unto you, Lee here is Christ, or, Lo there,
believe it not; for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, so that if it were possible they should
deceive the very elect. (But that being forewarned, ye may be armed against
their delusions) Behold I have told you before. Wherefore, if they shall say
unto you, Behold, he is in the desert, go not forth; Behold, he is in the
secret places, believe it not.

The same care and caution was commanded by God to his people under the Law:
Deuteronomy. 13 1.
If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, (and give thee a
sign or a wonder, and the sign and the wonder which he has told thee, come to
pass) saying, For the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the
Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul: From whence it is
also further observable, The reason why God suffers false Prophets to arise,
viz. for the probation and trial of our proficiency and integrity in the love
and service of God; for so says the Father upon those words, Aug.
[for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God
with all your heart, and with all your soul]: Tentat nos Dominus, non ut sciat
ipse, quem nihil latet, sed ut scire nos faciat, quantum in ejus dilectione
profecerimus: God suffers us to be tempted, tried, and proved by the lying
wonders of false Peophets arising amongst us, not that he himself may know what
is in us, to whom the hearts of all men are naked and bare; but that we may
thereby know our selves, and our own proficiency, and constancy to the
principles of truth and integrity.

The very same reason is given by the Apostle for the necessity of heresies, 1
Cor 11.19.
1 Cor. 11.19. For there must be heresies among you, Aug. de civ Dei lib. 18.
that they which are approved among you may be known: Quolibet errore
caecentur, etc. With what error soever our enemies are blinded, or with what
wickedness soever they are depraved, it is for the proof, trial and exercise of
the graces of Gods Spirit within us: Have they received power to afflict,
persecute, imprison, etc. It Is for the trial of our patience in suffering, and
charity in loving our enemies, and praying for our persecutors, as becomes the
Disciples of Christ, Mat. 5.44.
Mat. 5.44. Do they only by fair words and cunning speeches distill their false
and poisonous Doctrines? It Is for the trial of our wisdom in resisting, Gal.
6.1.
and beneficence in persuading and endeavoring to restore them with the spirit
of meekness; proving whether God will give them repentance to the
acknowledgement of the truth; that they may escape the snare of the Devil, of
whom they are taken captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

Secondly, Try the spirits, whether they be of God or no] Try them, how? but by
the revelations of the Spirit, which is of God, who being the Spirit of truth,
must necessarily therefore in all his qualifications and impressions, be
consentaneous and agreeable to himself; Aug.
Veritas veritati congrua, one truth ever holds proportion with another; nay,
all truths are as it were the images and resemblances one of another; they are
all links of the same golden chain, which affixt to the throne of heaven,
displayes 'its radiant luster unto the minds of men upon earth: They are all
but streams flowing from one and the same fountain, the God of truth. There is
nothing then that we are to receive for truth, but what is consonant and agrees
with the Spirit of truth; which ever blessed Spirit speaking in the Word, has
thereby prescribed and given us a sure and infallible rule of truth.

What the Apostle calls a being filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18, 19. he also
calls the dwelling of the word of Christ in us richly: which any one that will
compare the places may perceive: whence it is easy to observe that the Apostle
means no other by being filled with the Spirit, then to be full of the Word of
Christ, or to be mighty in the Scriptures: and the reason is, because the holy
Spirit is not only the great Dictator of the Scriptures unto us, but also our
guide in several respects, as to the right understanding of them.

Though we, Gal. 1.^.
or an Angel from Heaven should preach unto you another Gospel. besides that
you have received, let him be accursed.

Though we] preferring authority of the Gospel they had preached, before their
own authority the Preachers thereof; nay before the authority of celestial
spirits; Though an Angel from Heaven, etc.] He saw, says the Father, Aug.
that it might so come to pass, that Satan transforming himself into an angel
of light, and working by his mediators and instruments, those deceitful workers
who transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, 2 Cor. 11, 13, 14.
might so cosen and deceive them, if they did not keep close to the Gospel
received; which is the true rule of faith: therefore he says another Gospel
besides, etc.] praeter, any thing that is besides, that holds not square, and
is not level to that rule: Qui praetergreditur fid^i regulam, non procedit in
via, sed recedit a via; he that goes besides, and not according to the rule of
faith, goes not forward in the way, but backward from the way of truth; so 1 John 4.8. We are of God, (speaking of himself, and the rest of his fellow
Apostles) He that knows God hears us, (acquiescendo doctrinae nostrae)
cleaves to our doctrine, and he that is not of God, hears us not, Lyra.
neither is obedient to our word: And hereby know we the Spirit of truth, and
the spirit of error, q. d. He that cleaves to our doctrine is guided by the
Spirit of truth, and he that does not so, by the spirit of error.

But the spirit of error will come with his scriptum est likewise, as he did
against our Lord himself, Mat. 4. And all heretics and schismatics do
generally allege Scriptures, and wrest the very sayings of the Spirit of truth
against himself, to insinuate thereby their lies and errors. For as Tertullian
observes of the writings of Ovid, Virgil, Homer, both the matter of them has
been transferred unto other uses, and the verses applied to other matter: Even
so do heretics deal with the holy writings of inspired men: De Praeser. adv.
Haer. cap. 39.
Nec periclitor dicere, etc. I fear not to say, that the Scriptures were so
disposed by the wisdom of God, that they might accidentaliter, and by the by,
even administer matter to Heresies; since I read that heresies must come, and
without the Scriptures they cannot come. For it is in the production of
heresies, as of natural things, Corruption unius est generatio alterius; the
corruption of truth is the generation of heresy; all heretical opinions being
generally grounded upon, and flowing from the fountain of truth, the Scripture;
not as they are in themselves rightly interpreted and understood, but as they
are wrested and perverted either in the words, or in the sense, either by
additions or diminutions; or by not considering them together, but divided into
parts, and taken up by shreds and pieces; for the avoiding whereof these
following rules must be observed in the trial of spirits by the Scriptures.









form of sound words, in faith, we must, 2 Timothy 2.13. Jude v. 3.
hold fast; that model of faith once given to the Saints, for which we must
contend, and consequently receive no private sense or interpretation of
Scripture that is contrary thereunto; 2 Pet. 1.20.
remembering that no Scripture is of any private interpretation, 1 Cor. 14.32.
but that even the Spirits of the Prophets themselves are subject to the
Prophets.

Charity, Romans 13.1^.
which is the fulfilling of the Law, is an infallible rule of trial of the
spirits, whether they be of God or no; Hereby (says the Apostle) we are sure
we know God, if we keep his Commandments; he that says, I know God, and
keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John
2.34.
1 John 2.34. It is not the Spirit of truth, but the spirit of error, if it
oppose, or deny, or any way impede and hinder our obedience to the Laws of God:
For says the same Apostle again, He that keeps his Commandments dwells in
him, 2 John 3.24.
and he in him; and hereby we know that he abides in us, even by that Spirit
which he has given us; even by the spirit of obedience to the Commandments of
God: So that even from hence it is clear, that both to have the Spirit abiding
in us, and the way to know we have him also, and not a false counterfeit lying
spirit, is, if thereby we be moved and enabled to keep Gods Commandments: This
is the very rule our Savior himself prescribes to examine his own doctrine
thereby, Joh. 7.17.
Joh. 7.17. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether
it be of God, or whether I speak of my self: And this is the first general rule
of trial of the Spirits, even the Word of God.

A second rule, according to which to try the spirits, whether they be of God,
or no, is by the fruits of the Spirit; and it is the rule our Lord himself has
given us to know them by, Mat. 7.15.
Mat. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening wolves: Beware of false Prophets] for many such
are gone out into the world, who in respect of their exterior dress and
outward appearance, so plausible are their pretenses, so spiritual are their
expresions, so much of the language of the Spirit, and Scripture phrases flow
from them, that you would take them for the true sheep of Christ, and
undoubtedly to belong to his fold; and yet for all this, inwardly, really, and
truly they are wolves in sheeps clothing, limbs of Satan, deceiving and
devouring the souls of the simple. But by their fruits you shall know them]
which is confirmed by an apt similitude, Mat. 7.16.
verse. 16. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? q. d. No man
can be so foolish as to expect this, every good tree brings forth good fruit,
and a corrupt tree brings forth evil fruit; nor is it possible it should be
otherwise. A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit, neither can a corrupt tree
bring forth good fruit; even so false Prophets cannot bring forth the fruit of
good, true, wholesome, sound doctrines, and religious manners: So Menander,
(...), No man being good in himself produces evil actions: on the other side,
says Antoninus, (...), etc. He that will not have a wicked man to commit
wickedness, is like unto him that will not have a fig tree to bring forth figs:
It Is then an infallible trial of the spirits, whether they be of God, or no, by
the fruits they bring forth.

The fruit of the Spirit (viz.) which is of God, Gal. 5.22, 23.
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness,
temperance: The first of these fruits, and the fairest too, even of largest
extent, and most lasting, which this tree of life brings forth, is Love, even
the love of God above all, and of our neighbor as our selves: This therefore
must needs be an infallible touchstone to try the spirit of truth, from the
spirit of error; for the spirit of truth is the very spirit of love; and that
first in respect of himself, being that essential love, and love-knot of the
Father and the Son: And secondly, in respect of us, being that sacred vinculum,
that invisible chain which unites us unto God by faith, which works by love,
Gal. 5 6.
and which unites one to another by charity, peace, amity, the inseparable
fruits of a true faith. So that the Spirit of God is vinculum unitatis, both in
respect of his person and office; and that 3 ways: First, he is the bond of
unity betwixt God and God: Secondly, betwixt God and man: and, Thirdly, betwixt
man and man: therefore called the unity of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.3. The devil on
the other side, Ephesians. 4.3.
is of a quite contrary nature; as being the author, fautor, and fomentor of
all division: He divides and separates man from God by sinfulness and error;
and man from man by envy, malice, hatred, strife, and variance; therefore is
he so well known amongst the vulgar by his cloven foot, the emblem of division.

Now our love to God above all, is manifested and expressed by our love to our
neighbor, 1 John 4.20. If any man say, I love God, 1. Joh. 4.20.
and hates his Brother, he is a liar; for he that loves not his Brother whom
he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? Joh 14 23, 24.
For, if any man love me (says the Lord) he will keep my words, and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him; And he
that loves me not, keeps not my Words; and the Word which you hear, is not
mine, but the Fathers which sent me: And what is the Word he means, and so
often particularly commands, but to love one another? This is my commandment,
that ye love one another, as I have loved you, Joh. 15.12. And this is the
fruit he gives us in charge to bring forth, verse. 16, 17. even to love one
another: So that then, where there is malice, hatred, strife, variance, bitter
envyings, railings, revilings, etc. for such kind of persons to lay claim to
the Spirit of unity, is a piece of impudent vanity, and a false suggestion,
either from their own corrupt erring spirit, or from the spirit of error
himself, the Devil, who is a hater, a reviler, and the accuser of the brethren:
And on the other side, where there is peace, Rev. 12.10.
love, unity, amity, etc. they are unquestionable marks and tokens of the
Spirit of truth and unity: Therefore St. John in the forecited place, having
told us, that hereby know we the Spirit of truth from the spirit of error; adds
immediately, 1 John 4.6, 7, 8.
Beloved, let us love one another; for love comes of God, and every one that
loves is born of God, and knows God; and he that loves not, knows not
God, for God is love.

It would be needless to instance in the rest of the fruits of the Spirit,
because love is not only the first and chiefest of them, even the Mistress, or
rather the Queen of graces, and by the Apostle extolled above them all, 1 Cor.
13. but also, because it is the sum, brief, abridgement, and epitome of all
grace: All the fruits of the Spirits are contained in and derived from this
one, as streams from the fountain head; Aug.
Vnde caetera tanquam ex capite exorta, and religata contexuit, says the
Father of the fruits of the Spirit, as they are reckoned by the Apostle, They
all arise from, and are summed up in this one; therefore it is called the bond
of perfection, Col. 3.14. because, says Lyra, Sicut vi^tutes pol^ticae
connectuntur in prudentia, sic insusae in charitate, Lyr. in Loc.
as all Philosophical virtues are bound up in that one of Prudence, so all
infused virtues, or the graces of the Spirit are bound up in this one of
Charity: and therefore also is love the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. It Is
the fulfilling of the Law in three respects:

1. Reductive, in that the whole Law is reducible to this one command of Love;
and like Homer's Iliads in a nutshel, the whole volume of the Law is contained
in this short precept, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
Mat. 22.37, 39, 40.
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self.

2, Formaliter, the very essential form of our obedience to the Laws of God,
being our love to God: That Is the very form, life, soul, spirit of a truly holy
and acceptable obedience, both in piety toward God, and charity toward man,
when it proceeds from the love we owe to God himself, and to our neighbor for
Gods sake; and therefore is Love also styled the end of the Commandment, 1 Timothy 1.5. For, 1 Timothy 1.5.
finis in moralibus habet rationem formae, the end why we do this or that moral
action is the very essential form of the action done.

3. Effective, obedience is the effect, the issue, the product of our love to
God, flowing from it as an effect from the cause; therefore it is said as
before, Joh. 1^.23.
If ye love me keep my Commandments.

Love then is, and needs must be an exact, true, and infallible touchstone or
trial of the truth of Spirits, since it is the chief, the fountain, the
abridgement of all the fruits thereof. And by the same rule may every man try
and examine himself, whether he be adopted and reconciled unto God through
Christ, or not: For the Spirit bears witness with our spirits that we are
the Sons of God, Romans 8.16. bears witness, how? but by the scale of
sanctification upon our hearts: And this seal is Love, Set me as a seal upon
thine heart -- for Love is strong as death, Cant. 8.6. Whosoever sindes his
self enricht with this precious jewel, the love of God above all, and of his
neighbor as himself, may thence assure himself of his regeneration, and
adoption, that he is the child of God, for love is of God, and every one that
loves is born of God, and knows God; and he that loves not knows not God,
for God is Love, 1 John 4.7, 8. And this love betwixt God and every true
faithful soul, is mutual, no man can love God, but he that is beloved of God;
for our love to God is but the reflection of Gods love upon our hearts, whereby
our desires are inflamed toward him, and our endeavors quickened to serve him
in righteousness, and true holiness: Quis justus nisi qui dilectus a Deo, Bern.
ep. 107.
Deum redamat, quod in nobis spiritus Dei efficit: who is, or can be a
righteous man, but only he, who being beloved of God, loves God again, and
expresses this love of his heart, by the righteousness of his life; which love,
and obedience the holy Spirit of God works in us.

A third rule for the trial of the Spirits, is by the properties of the Spirit
of truth, which are observable in the manner of his descension upon the
Apostles of Christ, Act. 2.2.
recorded Act. 2.2. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a mighty
rushing wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.

This heavenly wind or breath of the Almighty, wherewith all the Apostles were
filled, is expressed here to have four properties. 1. 'Twas Sudden. 2. Vehement.
3. From heaven, 4. It filled the place where they were sitting.


All these are the properties of Gods Spirit, whose motions and inspirations
are,

First, sudden, and unexpected, neither admitting of any delays nor put-offs:
Ambr.
For, nescit tarda molimina Spiritus sancti gratia.

Secondly, vehement, for the conversion and quite turning over of the soul he
blows upon; 2 Cor. 10.4.
casting down of strong holds, (the fortifications of sin and Satan) and
bringing into subjection every thought that exalts it self.

Thirdly, from heaven, as being the Spirit of God, who dwells in the heavens,
and to heavenward wings and raises the soul which he inspires.

Fourthly, it filled the house where they were sitting: ever tends to the good
of the Church, 1 Pet. 2 5.
which is the household of faith: This heavenly wind never blows, but for the
good of Gods household; therefore are his people called a spiritual house.

By the two first of these qualities, 'twill be a hard matter to distinguish a
false spirit from the Spirit of truth: For as it is ordinary and common to
every wind, to be both sudden and vehement; so it is common to every spirit
also, both true and false; nay, commonly false and feigned spirits are more
violent and vehement, and make a greater noise and stir in the world then the
true Spirit does; and there is good reason for it: for the false spirit wanting
the native strength and genuine efficacy of the truth to support it, flies
therefore to force and violence, earnest zeal and forwardness to bear up in the
minds and good opinions of the world.

For the trial of spirits then, according to this rule, we must look upon the
two other properties of this divine wind, which are not ordinary, and common,
and not natural to that wind which blows in the air.

it came from heaven] Winds do not naturally come from heaven, but out of the
caves and hollowes of the earth,or out of the middle region of the air; neither
do they blow desursum, downwards, as this wind did, but laterally, from one
coast or climate to another; but this wind came directly downwards, and de
coelo, from heaven it self.

filled the house where they were sitting, and no house but that: The wind
naturally blows upon all places alike, within its circuit; but this wind blew
electively as it were, and by discretion, making choice of one place only to
blow upon, and no other; so that in both these respects it is manifest it was a
wind extraordinary and supernatural.

And by these two properties we may try and examine, both the truth of our own,
and of the spirits of others.

de coelo, from heaven; so that they tend to make us heavenly minded, to wean
our hearts from the world, to elevate and raise up our affections to things
above, to form and frame our conversations toward heaven. Col. 3.2.




etc. If either they smell rank of the world, or taste of any fruits of the
flesh, recorded Gal. 5.19. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
these, adultery, fornication, etc. Then this wind comes surely not from
heaven, there is nothing in it but what is either natural, or worse, suggested
by the spirit of error: It Is either a revelation of flesh and blood, arising
out of the caves and hollowes of an earthly mind; or else it is inspired and
blown from those regions of the air which are the habitation of unclean
spirits: It Is not defluxus coeli, a divine breath inspired from heaven, but
either exhalatio terrae, a terrene exhalation drawn from the hollows of a
corrupt heart, or a blast from the spiritual powers of the air, a suggestion of
Satan.

And by this rule also, every man may try himself, whether he be truly
sanctified by the Spirit of God, or not. He that shall find his soul possessed
with motions, and desires, weaned from all the pomps, and vanities, profits*
pleasures, and cares of the world, hungring, and thirsting, and breathing after
heaven, whose soul dwells more in heaven, then on earth, whose affections are
set on things above, and not on things below, may be well assured of the Spirit
of God dwelling in him. For all such motions, and desires are but sparks of
that heavenly fire, the flame whereof is mindful of its own original, ever
mounts the soul aloft, works toward its own center, and tends to the place
from whence it comes: To denote which ascending quality of the Spirit of Grace,
is one reason more why the holy Ghost is represented by fire, Mat. 3.11.
Because it is the property of fire, both flame and smoke, to mount upward: so
it is the property of every heavenly inspired soul, to ascend both in
contemplation, and desires: neither the more pure, nor yet the more drossie
part of the soul cleaves unto the dust, and continually dwells below, that is
endued with power from above, or with the Spirit of God. And for the same
reason, amongst others also, the holy Ghost is represented by water, Joh. 7.38,
39. because, as it is the property of water, even against its own nature, to
ascend as high, as is the place from whence it descends; so, even against the
stream of natural corruption, the soul is mounted to heaven by the influence of
Gods spirit, who comes down from heaven. And the wings which the holy Spirit
has for this ascension and slight, are devout and fervent prayers, divine and
celestial meditations and desires.

CHAP. X. Of the means to obtain the true Spirit of God.
THE holy Spirit of God, which in the shape of a dove, 4. Genesis
the emblem of the Spirit of love, descended upon Christ our Lord; Mat. 3.16.
and which afterward both visibly and publicly also came down from heaven, and
filled the Apostles of Christ extraordinarily and miraculously with his
heavenly Act. 2.
gifts and graces, does daily descend still upon the members of Christ's
mystical body, though not in such a plentiful measure, nor yet after such a
visible miraculous manner; yet ordinarily and invisibly in the use of means he
comes still, and by his secret celestial influence, visits, enlightens, and
sanctifies the souls of men. In every good thought, in every good motion and
pious desire of the soul, in every devout sigh and sorrowful groan under the
weight and burden of sin, in every striving and raising of the soul from under
that weight; in every elevation of the soul from the dust and rubbish of
worldly vanities, and aspiring toward heaven; in every beam of holy truth, and
divine grace, whether relating to piety or charity, the holy Ghost descends
from heaven: Thus he daily comes unto us, and thus he will ever come and be
with his Church and people, unto the end of the world, according to that
promise of our Lord, Mat. 28.20. Mat. 28.20.
And lo, I am with you always unto the end of the world: He will be with us, if
we will be with him, and not neglect the means he has ordained to be made
partakers of his ever blessed presence with us.

The means to fetch down this holy Spirit from heaven to sanctify our souls by
his grace here, that he may exalt us to his glory in the heavens hereafter;
besides those natural and moral means for the attainment of spiritual gifts
before remembered, which are also dispensed from the Spirit of God; the divine
means or conveyances of the Spirit are either, 1. Outward, 2. Inward.


The outward means are no other but those three essential parts of divine
worship: 1. Holy Prayer. 2. The holy Word. 3. The holy Sacraments.


The most holy God commanding us nothing but what are the means and ways of
our own happiness; viz. the means of grace and sanctification here, Quod homini
proficit, Deo servit. Tert. de ^o^n. c. 2.
as the way to our glorification hereafter: For there is nothing that we poor,
frail, mortal dust and ashes can perform, that may any way add, really add to
the glory or happiness of the most high, most glorious, and ever blessed God:
And in that he lays his commands upon us, and enjoins us several ways of
acknowledging our obedience to him, it is of his tender care and respect to
usward, even for our guidance and direction in the ways of our own felicity:
The Laws of God are no other then the rules of man's perfection, even the sacred
paths we must tread to attain that pitch of perfection, whereunto we are
created, being instampt after the blessed image of our Maker: So that the parts
of Gods service commanded, are to us the means of grace and salvation sincerely
obeyed.

1. Holy prayer in all the parts and species thereof, is a means to fetch down
the holy Spirit of God in his gifts and grace: So says our Lord positively and
clearly, Luke 11.13.
Luke 11.13. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts unto your children,
how much more shall your heavenly Father give his holy Spirit to them that ask
him? And that we might know what is here meant by the Spirit, St. Matthew
records the words of our Lord thus, Mat. 7.11.
How much more shall your heavenly Father give good things to them that ask
him? [All good things] being comprised under the name of the Spirit, as the
fountain from whence they flow: And Joh. 14.14. Joh. 14 14.
If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it; and presently after he
promises, as the sum of all that they could ask for, I will pray the Father,
and he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of truth, etc. God is
in himself the fountain of all perfection; every good and every perfect gift,
every divine, celestial, soul-sanctifying grace is in God, as the original,
prototype, and grand examplar; as the root from whence the sap of every grace,
as the Sun from whence the beam of every gift for illumination is derived unto
us; Jam. 1.17.
from the holy heavens they must come, for there is their proper seat and
habitation; as the Wise man confesses, Wisd. 9.
when he petitioned the God of heaven for the wisdom of the Spirit: And the
same means must we use to fetch down both wisdom and the rest of the graces of
the Spirit, even by prayer, commanded Jam. 1.5. Prayer is the blessed mean that
unites God and man, brings heaven and earth together: It Is that golden chain
(says Basil) that ties the gracious ears of God to the hearts and tongues of
men: It Is the hand which reaches from earth to heaven, and takes forth every
good thing out of the Lords treasury: Mat. 7.7.
Therefore it is said, Mat. 7.7. Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall
find, knock and it shall be opened unto you; so that it is also the ring or
hammer wherewithal we knock at the gates of heaven, and beg a blessing from the
great Lord that dwells there: Nay, it is the key of heaven, says Aug. which
opens unto us those everlasting doors of glory: It Is the blessed engine
wherewithal we storm the heavenly Jerusalem, and (as it were) by force and
violence make our entrance into the holy City, which is full of wealth and
never fading treasures. Mat. 11.12.
The Kingdom of heaven (says our Lord) suffers violence, and the violent take
it by force: fervent importunate prayers being the scaling ladders, Genesis 28.
represented by Jacobs ladder, which being set upon the earth, the top thereof
reaches to the heavens; our several prayers upon all occasions, wants, and
opportunities, are as it were the several rounds of this celestial ladder,
whereupon the desires and affections of our souls ascend from earth to heaven;
and leaving these frail earthy tabernacles of clay, make their way unto the
most high God which sits in the heavens. Or it may be represented by that fiery
chariot of Elijah, 2 King. 2.11.
wherein he was wrapped from earth to heaven, for so by fervent prayers and
devotions are the souls of holy and religious men; they are thereby enwrapt and
mount from the earth to have their conversation in heaven with God on high;
whence they again descend enricht with celestial blessings, or with the Spirit
of God. This is also further proved by the example of the Apostles, who after
they had prayed, the holy Ghost descended on them, Act. 4.31. And when they had
prayed, the place was shaken where they assembled together; and they were all
filled with the holy Ghost, and the spoke the Word of God with boldness.

2. The holy Word of God in general, but the Gospel of Christ in special, in
the preaching, or reading, hearing and understanding thereof, is an effectual
means for the obtaining of the Spirit; 2 Timothy 3 16.
for all Scripture is given by inspiration; they are the very dictates, the
breathings of the Spirit upon the souls of men, and are therefore profitable
for doctrine, or to teach the truth; for reproof, to convince what is false and
erroneous; for correction of the negligent and delinquent, and for instruction
in righteousness to the proficient: That the man of God, Gloss. Lyra.
he who is ordained to divine offices, as Timothy was, may be to that end
perfected and thoroughly furnished to every good work, 2 Timothy 3.16. And of the
Scriptures in the verse before it is said, they are sufficient to make us wise
to salvation, viz. being spiritually understood, says the Inter. Gloss. That
they are the means both of our illumination and sanctification, which are the
ends of the Spirit, is clear from the prayer of our Lord, Joh. 17.17. Joh.
17.17.
Sanctify them with thy truth, thy Word is truth: The Word of God, is the Word
of truth for our illumination, and the Word of grace for our sanctification;
and this prayer of our Lord was granted, says Lyra, in behalf of his Apostles,
when the holy Spirit descended on them at the feast of Pentecost: Regeneration,
which is the same with sanctification, and to be born of God, and to be born of
the Spirit, is ascribed to the Word of God, as the conveyance of the Spirit in
this respect; or as the means of our new birth. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will
begat he us, Jam. 1.18. Joh. 1.17.
by the Word of truth. And Joh. 1.17. The Law was given by Moses, but grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ: Now, what else are the gifts of the Spirit, or at
least, whereunto do they tend, but to the clear understanding of the truth of
God revealed by Jesus Christ, which revelations are the sum of his Gospel? and
what else are the graces of Gods Spirit, but accumulative, an obedience to this
truth, even an obedience to the Gospel of Christ? 1 Cor ^ ^4.
Hence it is termed the power of God, and the wisdom of God. And his Gospel,
the law of the Spirit of life, Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 3.6.
Romans 8.2. 2 Cor. 3.6. So that the preaching, reading, hearing, or in a word,
the clearing of this Gospel unto the minds of men, is the conveyance of the
Spirit thereinto: An example whereof, see Act 18.44. Whilst Peter yet spoke
these words, Act. 10.14.
the words of the Gospel, the holy Ghost fell on them all that heard the Word.

3. The Holy Sacraments, both Baptism and the Supper of the Lord, are effectual
means also for the conveyance of the holy Spirit: It Is promised upon our
Baptism, with repentance, Act. 2.38. Act. 2.38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost: And this is
also verified from the example of Christ our head, upon whose Baptism in
Jordan, the heavens were opened, and the holy Ghost descended in shape of a
dove, and lighted on him, Mat. 3.16. denoting unto us, Mat. 3.16. Remig.
that by the virtue and power of Baptism not only the heavens are opened, but
also the gift of the holy Ghost is received; therefore are we said to be born
again of water, and of the holy Ghost, and without that the heavens are shut
against us: There is no admission into the celestial Kingdom. Joh. 3 5.
Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and the holy Ghost, he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven: The Apostle St. Paul couples both Sacraments
together, as the conveyances of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.
1 Cor. 12.13. By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, and are all
made to drink of one Spirit; where we have the Spirit joined with Baptism, and
with the Lords Supper also; for what else can be meant by drinking of one
Spirit, but an allusion to the eating and drinking of the holy body and blood
of our Lord? whereof himself testifies, Joh. 6.55, 56. My flesh is meat indeed,
and my blood is drink indeed; Joh. 6.55.
He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him;
that is, is make partaker of my Spirit, or of my gifts and graces: For in such
a spiritual sense we must needs understand the words; except we admit them in
the gross, carnal, and corporal sense of the Romanists: Hence Christ is termed
by the Apostle, a spiritual meat, and a spiritual drink, 1 Cor. 10.3.4. 1 Cor.
10.^.
And they did all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same
spiritual drink; for they drank of the same spiritual rock that followed them,
and that rock was Christ: A spiritual meat and and spiritual drink Christ was
to the Israelites of old, in those Sacramental Symbols of his presence with
them, the Rock and the Manna, and the like, but in a more full measure, and
clear manner he is to us, in those consecrated elements of his holy Supper,
which being rightly administered, and rightly received, are spiritual food
indeed; for we eat and drink the very Spirit of Christ therewithal; that is,
are made partakers of his gifts and graces.

But how comes it to pass then, that these blessed means of grace, these
conveyances of the Spirit are so often ineffectual? Many men do daily pray,
often hear and read the Word of God, have been engraffed into the body of
Christ by Baptism, and many times receive the blessed Eucharist, and yet little
or no news do they hear of the Spirit, very little stirrings of the heart, few
good motions do they feel within, they are never the better, nor a whit the
more enricht, either with spiritual gifts, or graces, for the use of these
means: The cause whereof is the hardness of man's heart, which receives not the
impressions of the Spirit; the corruption of man's nature, which quenches the
sacred fires of Piety and Charity, before they be well inkindled in the soul;
the exorbitant and unruly lusts of the flesh, and of the world, which resist
the good motions, lustings, and strivings of the Spirit of God. Intus existens
prohibet alienum; when the fruits of the flesh have overgrown the soul, there is
no room for the fruits of the Spirit to take rooting there: These two kinds of
fruits cannot grow both in one heart, but the one will choke, overgrow, and
destroy the other.

To this outward means of grace then, and of the Spirit, the inward
qualifications, the infitting of the soul to receive the impressions of the
Spirit, must be added; Actus. aclivorum in patiente disposito; as the patient
is disposed and fitted to be wrought upon, accordingly so is the power and
efficacy of the Agent; so that according as the hearts of men are more or less
perspirable and pliable to the impressions of the Spirit, accordingly so are
his workings and inspirations upon the heart.

The holy Spirit is compared in Scripture to water, Joh. 7.38 39.
and as the water is of a diffusive nature, and knows no bounds but as it is
limited by the channel or vessel that holds it; so the Spirit is in himself of
a spreading quality, and is only straightened by the narrowness of the hearts
whereinto he flows, 2 Cor. 6.12.
as 2 Cor. 6.12. Ye are not straightened in us, that is, in our Ministry, we
preach abundance of grace unto you; but you are straightened in your own bowels,
through the hardness of your hearts, being not capable of the graces of the
Spirit.

And the heart is made soft and pliable for the impressions of the Spirit, by
repentance and mortification: the good seed of Gods Spirit will not take root
amongst the thorns of impiety: Jer. 4.4.
therefore says the Lord, Jer. 4.4. Break up the fallow ground of your hearts,
and sow not amongst thorns, be circumcised to the Lord, and take away the
foreskin of your hearts, (that is) hardness of your hearts, Deuteronomy. 10.16. called
also the circumcision of the Spirit, Deuteronomy. 10.16. Col. 2.11.
Act. 2.29. because it makes way for the Spirit; and Col. 2.11. A circumcision
made without hands: even the putting off the sinful body of the flesh, meaning
the sinful crop of fleshly lusts, which infest and infect the soul, of these
the soul must be disarayed and divested by repentance and mortification; Romans
8.13, 14. Romans 8.13, 14.
If ye live after the flesh, etc. The coherence of which verses imply, before
we can be led by the Spirit of God, we must mortify the deeds of the flesh,
the sordid rags of the old man must be put off before the soul can be clothed
with the splendid garments of the Spirit of grace. In vain is it to pray unto
God for any spiritual grace or mercy while we continue in our sins, for God
hears not sinners, Joh. 9.31. In vain to hear or read the Gospel of grace,
Ephesians. 6.15.
except our feet be shod with the preparation of repentance, whereby we forsake
our sins; Therefore before the Gospel it self was published, this was first
proclaimed both by Christ and his forerunner, Repent, Mat. 3.2 and 4.17. 1 Cor.
11.28.
for the kingdom of God is at hand: In vain to participate of those mysteries
of our salvation, the body and blood of our Lord, till first by
self-examination we have cast out the venom of our sinful doings by repentance
and steadfast purposes of amendment. In a word, Deus gratiam pollicius qui in
extremita^jbus temporum per spiritum suum universo orbi illuminaturus esset,
prae^re intinctionem poenitentiae jussl^, ut quos per gratiam vocaret ad
promissionem per poenitentiae subsignationem ante compoueret. Tert. de poen. c.
2.
it is our sins unrepented that make void and ineffectual all the blessed means
of Grace and of the Spirit; by those it is we quench the Spirit, we grieve the
Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30.
we resist the Spirit, we provoke the Spirit, and poison the blessed waters of
life; so that all the conveyances of the Spirit are barren and unfruitful
whilst they reflect upon hardened and impenitent hearts. See therefore
repentance enjoined as to the receiving of the holy Ghost, Act. 2.38. and 8.19.
And I would to God that all who pretend to the holy Spirit of God, or to any
the fruits and graces of the Spirit, would first learn before they make their
boast of the Spirit, truly to repent them of their sins, and to root out of the
ground of their hearts all the fruits of the flesh, which are, adultery,
fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21.
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions,
heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, etc. When these, all of
these sinful fruits are extirpated out of the ground of the heart, there may be
then some hopes, that our prayers and other divine acts and offices performed
in the sincerity of our souls, may prevail with God for the direction and
comfort of his Spirit of grace and truth.

God, which have taught the hearts of thy faithful people, by the sending to
them the light of thy holy Spirit; grant us by the same Spirit to have a right
judgment in all things, and evermore to rejoice in his holy comfort, through
the merits of Jesus Christ our Savior, who lives and reigns with thee in
the unity of the same Spirit, one God, world without end, Amen.

The Introduction and general Heads.
GOD as he is in himself, only knows himself, and consequently those ways of
his worship, Coeli mystarium me doceat Deus qui condidit, non homo quis^ipsum
ignoravit. Amb.
which are holy, and acceptable to himself: Man who knows not himself aright,
cannot of himself know God, nor those divine and celestial mysteries, which are
the ways of Gods service and man's salvation: For what man is he, that can know
the counsel of God? Or, who can think what the will of the Lord is? Wisd. 9.13.
Veritas, Lactant. lib. 1. c. 1.
i. e. arcanum summi Dei, qui fecit omnia, ingenio ac propriis sensibus non
potest comprehendi: Alioqui, etc. Truth which is the secret of the most high
God who has formed all things, cannot by our own wit and proper senses be
comprehended; for otherwise there would be little distance betwixt God and man,
if man's cogitations could dive into the counsels and dispositions of Gods
e^ernal Majesty. Can thou by searching find out God, can thou find out
the Almighty unto perfection? it is as high as heaven, what can thou do?
deeper then hell, what can thou know? the measure thereof is longer then the
earth, and broader then the sea, Job 11.7, etc.

2. This therefore must be granted as the ground of all divine truth, that
nothing either of God, or of his sacred service is to be believed, and received
by us, but what from God is revealed, or by revelation from heaven derived to
us: Secret things belong to the Lord our God, but those things which are
revealed belong unto us and to our children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this Law, Hilar. de Trin. lib. 5.
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Non potest Deus nisi per Deum intelligi, sicut nec. honorem a
nobis Deus, nisi per Deum accipit, A Deo discendum est, quid de Deo
intelligendum sit. quia non nisi se authore cognoscitur. Id.
namque honorandus, etc. God cannot be known but by himself, neither does he
receive honor from us, but by himself: For that he is to be honored we
understand not, but that himself has taught and commanded himself to be
honored. The honor of God we are taught by God: nor may we entertain any such
thoughts of God as our own frail humane judgments suggest unto us: our nature
is not so sublime and piercing, as by its own innate force, and virtue to be
raised up, and enrapt with celestial knowledge: Wisd. 9 15.
For the corruptible body presses down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle
weighs down the mind that museth upon many things, and hardly do we guess
aright at things that are upon earth, and with labor do we find the things
that are before us, but the things that are in heaven who has searched out?
and thy counsel who has known, except thou give wisdom and send thy holy
Spirit from above? For so the ways of them that lived upon earth were
reformed, and men were taught the things that are pleasing unto thee, and were
saved through wisdom.

3. The first and fundamental act of faith, then (which is to believe this or
that Article of holy Religion to be a divine truth, and the subject matter of
our obedience) depends upon Divine Revelation, and command from God: He has
showed thee O man what is good, Micah 6.8. What thing so ever I command thee,
observe to do it. Holy Religion is not of an earthly but of a heavenly descent:
It is a beam displayed from that light of truth, which is eternal, and
immutable, her dwelling is in the holy heavens, Wisd. 9 10.
where she waits upon the throne of glory: And to earth she descends not by any
natural investigation, but by supernatural revelation: Mirand^de sid. and and.
cred.
Omnis religio supernis revelationibus nititur, aut niti praesumitur. All
religion depends upon revelation from above: Flesh and blood has not revealed
it, but my Father which is in heaven, Mat. 16.17.

4. That there is a general knowledge of God and some notions of that religious
worship we owe unto him, imprinted in the hearts of all men by nature, and is
legible in the book of the creatures, the Apostle affirms Romans 1.20. For the
invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead. But
this sight of God being not clear enough to bring us to the beatifical vision
and fruition of God, which is that perfection and felicity whereunto (by being
enstampt after the image of God) he has created, etc. therefore it has
pleased him more clearly to reveal himself and the ways of his religious
worship to his Church and people in all ages: And this either 1.
extrardinarily, and immediately; or 2. ordinarily, and in the use of means.

5. The first revelation of divine truth was immediate, i. e. without the
mediation, or ministry of man intervening. But yet so, as that 1. All those
holy persons to whom God immediately revealed himself, by certain infallible
signs, did themselves know, and make known to others, that the revelations they
received were no delusions, but from God himself the fountain of truth
proceeding: God never speaks so extraordinarily, but by the same act, he both
makes known the things spoken, and himself to be the speaker. 2. That all
immediate revelation was generally confirmed by miracle, therefore the Jews
required signs of Christ, as the means to confirm every new, and immediate
revelation, Joh. 2.18. and 6.30. 1 Cor. 1.22.

3. That not all, nay nor all holy persons, but only some few, choice, select
vessels had the honor of this immediate revelation: the main body of the
people still received the knowledge of God by mediation, i. e. from their hands
in whom the office of Priesthood was in all ages enstated. For the Priests lips
should keep knowledge, and they, i.e. the people, should seek the Law at his
mouth, for he is the messenger of the Lord of hosts, Mal. 2.7.

6. The truth whereof, as also what we are to believe concerning divine
revelation will appear, if we do impartially consider and weigh, 1. To what
persons and after what manner God revealed himself from Adam unto Christ. 2.
That by Christ and his Apostles, the whole mind of God is so fully revealed,
that we must not now look for the revelation of any new truths. 3. That the
right understanding of what is already revealed, depends not upon Gods
immediate inspiration, or revelation from heaven, but is to be acquired by Gods
blessing in the use of means: And that in order hereunto, the knowledge of
tongues and sciences is both useful and necessary. 4. That to depend upon
immediate revelation is not only dangerous, but destructive to the truth
already revealed. 5. That all those texts of holy Scripture commonly alleged
for the proof of immediate revelation, are misunderstood and wrested.


OF DIVINE REVELATION, Mediate and Immediate.
CHAP. I. Of divine Revelation from Adam unto Christ.
1. MAn being created after the Image of God, was undoubtedly at the first
endued with such a perfect knowledge of divine truth, as was necessary to the
attainment of that felicity, whereunto God created him (viz.) the beatifical
vision and fruition of his Creator for ever: For as Philosophers do affirm, If
it were possible that the invisible and all spiritual God, could be represented
under any visible or compounded shape, and being: His body then must needs be
composed of Light, and his soul of Truth: So essential to the very being of
God, is knowledge and truth: and so consequently, to the being of man after the
image of God.

2. But this light of divine knowledge, was by man's disobedience too soon
eclipst, and his soul involved in the darkness of sinfulness, ignorance, and
error: our first parents out of a saucy ambitious affectation, to know what
they ought not, engulft themselves, and all their posterity, into a natural
blindness and ignorance of what they ought to know; so that ever since, hoc
tantum scimus, quod nihil scimus: the most knowing man, knows best his own
ignorance, and want of knowledge: For if any man think he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know, 1 Cor. 8.2.

3. But since without the knowledge of God, and of his most holy will, that
perfection of our being whereunto God has created us, cannot be attained, Joh.
17.3. therefore it pleased God to restore our first fallen parents in some
measure to the knowledge of himself, and of his will in the ways of his
worship: and this he did either immediately by himself, or by the mediation of
intervening Angels, by the voice from heaven conveyed upon the wings of the
wind, for so we read Genesis 3.8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God,
Junins in lec.
walking in the garden in the cool, or in the wind of the day: wind conveying
his voice into their ears, and thereby his into their hearts.

4. By virtue of this divine Revelation, or some others not recorded in holy
Writ, Adam received from God both the knowledge of that religious service and
obedience which God then required from man, and therewithal the honor of the
Priesthood also: being as the first man, so the first Priest in the world.

5. For the proof of the first, those Laws of divine worship, which were given
by God to Adam, and from Adam transferred to his Sons and posterity, though
they be not clearly expressed in holy Scripture (because as the worship of God
grew up with time to more perfection, so the less perfect was the less
regarded) yet in many places of holy Scripture these Laws are, though but
obscurely, intimated: and by the Jews with one common consent they are reduced
to six heads. The first against false worship. The second, of the worship of
the true God. The third, of the appointing of Magistrates, and administration
of Justice. The fourth, against the discovery of nakedness, and setting bounds
to the lusts of the flesh. The fifth against homicide, and shedding of blood.
The sixth against theft, and of doing to others as we would be done unto our
selves.


And to these commands, does that edict of the Apostolical council of
Jerusalem relate, Act. 15.29. which being directed to such of the Gentiles as
were converted to the faith of Christ, puts them in mind of those precepts,
which were given to the first parents of mankind.

6. For the second, the Priesthood of Adam, this is observed from Genesis 4.3, 4.
Cain and Abel brought their offerings to the Lord. Mount. Acts and Mon. c. 1.
sect. 16.
They brought their offerings] this was no will worship, no act of divine
service derived out of their own brains, or by immediate revelation enjoined,
but by direction, and command from Adam: who doubtless was so instructed by
God: himself receiving by immediate revelation what his sons and posterity
received mediately and ministerially from him. And they brought their offerings
to the Lord] i.e. to be offered to the Lord by their father Adam, Beat. Pol.
Jud. c. 2.
who was as well their Priest, as their Parent, both their bodily and ghostly
father: which is manifest from the examples of Noah, who offered sacrifices,
Genesis 8.20. not his sons: and of Abraham the like, Genesis 17.23. and of Job also,
who sacrificed for his sons, Job 1.5.

7. From Adam the several Patriarchs in their respective families derived their
right to the sacred function of Priesthood, which for many ages was enstated in
the first born, and heads of families: until God was pleased to accept of the
tribe of Levi, for all the first born of Israel, Numb. 3.41.

8. Thus then in the first age of the world, the knowledge of God in the ways
of his worship, together with the office of Priesthood, was transmitted from
Adam to his sons, and so from Patriarch to Patriarch in all generations: The
several bodies of respective families being not by immediate revelation, but by
the indoctrination and instruction of the heads of families taught the ways of
Gods service, and their own salvation: nor do we read of any divine truths
immediately revealed, or any divine laws by immediate revelation prescribed
from Adam to Noah which was the space of 1500 years. The Prophecy of Enoch
remembered of S. Jude, being not of the nature of any new truths revealed, but a
denuntiation of judgment to be inflicted.

In all this long tract of time, the world being drowned in sinfulness and
iniquity, it was revealed to Noah, that the earth should be drowned by a flood
also, and the sinful pollutions thereof washed away by an universal deluge of
waters, Genesis 6.12, 13. And God locked upon the earth, and behold it was
corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth: And God said unto
Noah, the end of all flesh is come before me, for the earth is filled with
violence through them, and behold I will destroy them with the earth.

10. 'Twas not all the people, 'twas not any we read of but Noah only, had this
truth immediately revealed unto him: Josephus indeed tells us, that the sons of
Seth received by tradition from Adam, (not by immediate revelation) that the
world should be twice destroyed, once by water, and once by fire: and therefore
they erected two pillars, the one of wood, and the other of stone, Jos. Antiq.
Jud. l. 1. c. 3.
wherein they engraved the principles of those humane arts, and sciences
invented by them, that the one might stand against the violence of the water,
and the other against the violence of the fire: And of this nature (it is most
probable) was the prophecy of Enoch, Jude verse. 14, 15. And Enoch also the
seventh from Adam prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes, (...),
with his holy Myriads, not so properly rendered 10000 Saints, to execute
judgment, etc.

11. But the time when the first of these universal destructions should happen,
Noah only had the honor to receive immediately from God: And for this end
'twas revealed to him, that by his mediation and ministry the people might
have the knowledge of it, and be stirred up by his preaching (not by immediate
revelation) to repentance, and amendment of life; who is therefore called a
preacher of righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. And thus say the Hebrew Doctors, Pirke
R. ^liezer, c. 22.
he preached, saying, Turn you from your ways, and from your evil works, that
the waters of the flood come not upon you and cut off the whole seed of the
sons of Adam.

12. Unto Noah, after the flood was dried up, the foresaid Laws of holy
living, given unto Adam were now renewed: adding thereunto a prohibition
against eating of blood, to deter them from the sin of murder before
prohibited, Genesis 9.4. But flesh with the life thereof, i.e. the blood thereof,
shall thou not eat. And this with the six former commands are commonly called
and known by the name of the seven precepts of Noah.

13. From Noah the Priesthood descended upon his son Shem, who was the first of
all men that had God as 'twere entayled upon himself in a more special reserved
sort of peculiar personal appropriation: For until the days of Abraham, the
great Lord of the world, and of all things therein, was peculiarly styled, the
Lord God of Shem, Genesis 9.26.

14. Abraham the seventh from Noah, was the next person we read of that was
honored with immediate revelation; Antiq. Jud. l. 1. c. 8.
who first by the way of Philosophy, says Josephus, attained the knowledge of
Divinity: by observing the motions of the heavens, the cause, nature, order of
creatures, he aspired to the knowledge of the Creator, but not so perfectly as
afterward he received it by revelation. Clem. Recogn. lib. 1.
And thus the Author of the Recognitions records the words of St. Peter
speaking of Abraham, whilst he seriously pondered in his mind, the causes of
things, Christ the true Prophet, who only knows the desires, and purposes of
all hearts, appeared unto him, opening unto him the things he desired, teaching
him the knowledge of the Divinity, the beginning and end of the world, the
immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the dead, and the last judgment,
with the rewards of the just, and the punishment of the wicked, and withal
prescribed him such rules of holy living, whereby he might please God.

The authority of this revelation I shall not put to question, but thus much
out of holy Writ we are assured, that God immediately revealed himself to
Abraham, calling, and commanding him out of the land of Chaldea, into the land
of Canaan, promising to him, and his posterity this land as a type of Paradise,
or celestial Canaan, entayling upon him, and his posterity the privileges and
peculiar interests of Gods people, (...), as Chrysostom. God making himself who
is common to all, to be Abraham's, and his feed, by peculiar interest and
appropriation, I will be thy God, Genesis 17.7.
and the God of thy seed after thee: and withal, revealing unto him, that out
of his loins should come the promised Messiah, the desire of all nations, and
blessed Savior of the world, Genesis 22.18. In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed.

16. These, and what other revelations soever Abraham received immediately from
God, were upon this condition delivered to him, that he should instruct his
family, who not immediately by revelation, or inspiration from God, but by the
mediation and ministerial instruction of Abraham, were to be taught the
knowledge of God, and of his holy Laws: upon this very ground God himself
affirms himself to have revealed his will unto him: Genesis 18.17, etc. And God
said, Shall I hide from Abraham the things that I do, etc. For I know him, that
he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep
the way of the Lord.

17. From Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the knowledge of God was by tradition
transmitted from Patriarch to Patriarch, and the Church or people of God, now
confined to the seed of Israel, was by the several heads of their respective
families instructed in the service of God, till turning away after the Idols of
Egypt, God gave them up to a cruel bondage and slavery under the tyranny of
Pharaoh: In which great affliction, when they besought the Lord, he sent
redemption to his people by the hands of Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he
had chosen, Psalm. 105.25, 26.

18. Moses the seventh from Abraham, was selected, and immediately called by
God, as to be the leader and deliverer of his people, so his Lawgiver also,
who receiving the mind of God by immediate revelation, made it known unto the
people: The sum whereof was engraven in tables of stone, and commanded to be
kept as the standing rule of Gods worship, and man's obedience to all posterity:
and the people were herein so far from depending upon immediate revelation,
that they petitioned to receive the mind of God by the mediation and ministry
of Moses, Exodus 20.19. Speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God
speak with us lest we die.

19. The Law of God thus published and standing upon record, there was now
less need of immediate revelation, then before: the people of God had now a
more sure word of prophecy, then what formerly, 1. By revelation from heaven,
2. By tradition from Patriarch to Patriarch was delivered. To these sacred
writings therefore they were commanded to have recourse: by them to be guided
and directed, and not to swerve from what was contained therein, either to the
right hand, or to the left, Josh. 1.7. To the Law, to the testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is not light in them, Isa.
8.20. Where all pretense to new lights is cut off, and that pronounced to be no
true light, which is not grounded on the Laws of God.

20. For the preservation of this law pure, and inviolate, a ministry or
priesthood was ordained, and by Gods special command transferred from the first
born of every Tribe upon the Tribe of Levi. To them belonged the interpretation
of the Law, and the performance of all the sacred rites therein contained,
neither were the people either presumptuously to depend upon immediate
revelation in respect of the one, or sacrilegiously entermeddle with any part
of the sacordotal function in the other respect. But as to the first 'twas
ordained, that the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they, i. e. the
people, should seek the Law at his mouth, Mal. 2.7. And as to the second, that
no stranger that is not of the house of Aaron come near to offer incense before
the Lord, that he be not as Corah and his company, Numb. 16.40.

21. But because there is nothing amongst men so well established, but through
the Devils suggestion, and man's corruption, it is liable to depravation and
abuse: God was pleased the better to restrain both his Priests and people from
the violation of his written Law, to stir up in every age some choice and
select persons whom he enabled more immediately, and extraordinarily, some to
understand, and clear the Truth, and true meaning of his divine Law, when 'twas
corrupted, or obscured by mis-interpretations, and false glosses: others to
foretell, and pronounce both judgments to come upon the transgressors, and
mercies upon such as observed and kept his commandments: whose inspired
writings, both by way of History, and Prophecy, Doctrine, and Example,
Praying, and Preaching, are as so many commentaries of the Divine Law, and
complete the Canon of the Old Testament, which is reduced by our Lord himself
to these two general heads, the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.40.

22. Thus from Adam unto Christ, there is no pretense or color for a people to
depend upon immediate revelation; the will of God being made known to his
people, generally and ordinarily by the mediation and ministry of man, and but
seldom, and by a few choice persons, and upon extraordinary occasions, by
immediate revelation: The truth whereof will further appear, and the weak
grounds whereupon immediate revelation depends, will be discovered in the
succeeding chapters.

CHAP. II. Of the several manners of extraordinary and more immediate
Revelation.
1. GOD at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past to our
fathers, Heb. 1. The diverse manners of Gods extraordinary revelation of himself
to his people of old, are reducible to six heads.

1. By the ministry of Angels, who frequently appeared in humane shape, and
revealed the mind of God to some of his choice extraordinary servants: as Genesis
32.1, 2. Zach. 1.9. Mat. 28.2.5. Act. 23.9. and many of those Texts, wherein
it is said, the Lord appeared unto such and such, are to be understood of the
appearance of Angels: Ob honorem sc. mittentis, ut plena sit ejus authoritas,
hoc dr. isti qui missus est, quod est illi qui misit, ut saepius factum est de
Angelis. Clem. Rec. lib. 2.
see for this Exodus 3.2. compared with Act. 7.30. where in one place it is said,
the Lord appeared unto Moses: in the other, an Angel of the Lord: and Exodus
29.20. chapter compared with Act. 7.53. and Exodus 23.20, 21. Not that any Angel
presumed to be called by the name of the Lord, or to be worshipped as God: but
to add the greater weight and authority to the message he brought from the
Lord, the messenger was called by the name of the Lord that sent him.

2. By Dreams, as Numb. 12.6. Is there a Prophet among you? I the Lord will
make my self known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream:
and Job. 33.24, etc. For God speaks in a dream in the vision of the night,
then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction: Quia anima
clousis sensibus exterioribus ad recipiendam revelationem magis est apta, quia
tunc non est per occupationem sensuum exteriorum impedita. Lyr. in Mat. 1.
And the reason hereof is, because when the outward senses are shut, the inward
soul is more apt to receive the impression of divine revelation being no way
then hindered by the working of the exterior senses upon outward sensible
objects. Thus the Lord revealed himself to Jacob, Genesis 28.12. To Daniel, Chap.
7.1. To Joseph, Mat. 2.13, 19.

3. By external representations, and appearances when awake: as Jer. 1.11, 12,
13. Ezekiel. 1.4, etc. and this was accompanied sometime with the ecstasy, and
entrancing of the person, who received such visions, as Dan. 10.8, 9. St. Paul
was in an ecstasy when he was caught up into the third heaven, so that he knew
not for that time, whether his soul was clothed with humane flesh, or
separated from it, 2 Cor. 12.2.

4. By internal inspiration of the holy Ghost, without any such ecstasy or
abolition of sense: as Job, David, and many others were inspired, and yet we
read not that they were extasied or entranced, as 2 Pet. 1.21. Holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. There is an ordinary moving by the
holy Ghost, for every good motion, every spark of celestial fire, whether for
illumination, or sanctification, is from him. And there is an extraordinary
motion of the Spirit, in the Prophets of the Old, and Apostles of the New
Testament: (...): they were acted or carried by the holy Ghost, and spoke, as
they were thus incited by God. And those under the New Testament were also
honored with this extraordinary manner of divine revelation* upon whom (...)
the holy Ghost fell, Act. 10.44. and they spoke with tongues, and of whom it is
said, by imposition of the Apostles hands, they received the holy Ghost, Act.
8.17.

5. By Vrim and Thummim, the one signifying light, and the other perfection:
they were two ornaments in the Highpriests breast plate: but how, and after
what manner they gave their answer, is diversely delivered. The learned Jews
say that the names of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the twelve Patriarchs,
with this addition: All these are the Tribes of Israel: In which names and
words, all the letters of the Alphabet are contained: And by the prominency and
shining of those letters, the answers were received, and communicated to the
people.

6. By a voice from heaven, called by the Hebrews Bath-col: the daughter of a
voice, or the production of thunder: and this was usually conveyed into the
ears of the persons that heard it, upon the wings of the wind, as before is
remembered, to Adam, Genesis 3.8. So also to Elias, 1 King. 19.11, 12. To Christ,
Mat. 3.17. And his Apostles received the holy Ghost in a mighty rushing wind,
Act. 2.

These were the diverse ways of more immediate revelation of old, which were
not ordinary, and common, but at sundry times, and upon special, and
extraordinary occasions either upon some great work of Judgment or mercy from
God to his people: or of repentance, and now obedience from the people unto
God: All which ways of divine revelation are long since ceased in the Church
of Christ; as being furnished with sufficient means of instruction in
righteousness, and saving knowledge, without any such manners of extraordinary
revelation: for as the judicious Hocker observes: Since God himself has
therefore revealed his will, Ece. polit. l. 1. sect. 14.
because men could not otherwise have known so much as is necessary; his
surceasing to speak unto the world since the publishing of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, and the delivery of the same in writing, is to us a manifest token that
the way of salvation is now sufficiently opened, and that we need no other
means for our full instruction, then God has already furnished us withal.

There are 3. Reasons amongst others, why God was pleased in such diverse
manners to reveal himself of old, but in these last days to surcease the use
of any such revelations.

1. Because the people of God had either, 1. No Scripture at all, as from Adam
to Moses. Or, 2. The written Law only, as from Moses to Samuel. Or, 3. The
Laws and the Prophets only, as from Samuel to Christ: but we have both Law and
Gospel; Prophets, and Apostles; the revelations of God both new and old, fully
and sufficiently delivering the will of God unto us.

2. Gods people of old looked unto Christ for to come, and waited for that
light which was yet to be revealed: but we believe in Christ already come: and
are made partakers of that true light, which displayed from Christ the Sun of
righteousness does fully discover unto us, the ways of Gods service, and of
our own salvation, so that it is as needless for us now to depend upon new
revelations, or set up new lights, as to hold candles to the sun, when it
shines in its fullness of splendor.

3. The Jews being curious of knowing things to come, and withal prone to
Idolatry, that therefore they might not have recourse to soothsayers, and
sorcerers, nor run a whoring after Idols, God frequently sent them Prophets
extraordinary: and then they had most such Prophets sent* when they were most
Idolatrous. But now all idol-temples are broken down, and their Oracles long
since ceased: so that there is no such danger among Christians of other
Idolatry or Image Worship, as that Idolatry which is too usual, and common; to
worship the imaginations of their own hearts: whereunto those of all others are
most prone, who most depend upon new revelations.

CHAP. III. Of an ecstasy, natural and supernatural, and the difference between
Divine Ecstasies of old, and Diabolical Entrancings, and Inspirations.
1. AS God is the fountain of Truth, which is derived unto us by revelation
from him: so the Devil is the father of Falsehood and lies, which deduce their
original from his secret and subtle inspirations. And herein the Devil is Gods
Ape, cunningly following the same ways of seduction, and deceit, observed by
God for the conveyance of his saving Truth. So that where God has his Church,
the Devil has his Chapel, and where God has his true Prophets, the Devil has
his false Prophets also. And the several ways of Divine Revelation observed by
the one, are imitated by the other, viz. by Dreams, and Visions, Ecstasies, and
Entrancings. I will go forth and I will be a lying spirit in the mouths of his
Prophets, 1 King. 22.22. Thus the heavenly Doctrine and miracles of Christ are
confronted by the devilish doctrines and lying: wonders of Autichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. And a departure from the true says, there ever was and ever will
be in the Church, whilst militant here upon earth, even by giving heed to
seducing spirits, and doctrines of Devils, 2 Timothy 4.1.

2. Nor does this evil spirit work his deceits, and inspire his damnable
doctrines, but by Gods permission, 1 King. 22.22. and therefore the evil spirit
is said to be from the Lord. Because, 1. He is licensed by the Lord. And
because, 2. His actings upon, and by his seduced instruments, are like the
actings of the Spirit of the Lord upon his servants: so we read, 1 Samuel 18.10.
An evil spirit from the Lord came upon Saul, and he prophesied, i: e. was
entranced, and demeaned himself as did the Prophets of the Lord, when
extraordinarily moved with the Spirit of Truth.

3. Because therefore some persons amongst us, that pretend to immediate
Revelation, have their trances and pretended ecstasies also in order hereunto:
'twill be pertinent here to add some notes of difference betwixt the
extraordinary actings of the good Spirit, and those agitations, and turbulent
motions of the evil spirit, that the one may be the better distinguished from
the other. But first 'twill be necessary to understand what an Ecstasy is, and
the kinds thereof.

4. And rightly to understand the nature of an Ecstasy, we must remember, that
man is of a middle nature betwixt Angels and Beasts, and this in respect of the
two parts or regions of his soul, the superior and inferior. The first is called
the reasonable, and the second the sensitive soul. The first, man has in
common with the Angels of heaven, and the second with the Beasts of the earth:
now these two being combined into one soul, there follows hereupon such a
combination betwixt the faculties of each, that the working of the one without
the other is preternatural, and called an Ecstasy.

4. So that from hence does necessarily flow two general kinds of Ecstasies:
the one of the Reasonable soul, when that either works, or is wrought upon
without the instrumental mediation of the senses: being for the time enwrapt,
and separate from the use thereof. And the other of the Sensitive soul, when
that either acts, or is wrought upon by sensible objects, without the guidance,
or direction of reason. The first Ecstasy is above us, as we are men, for it
renders us like to the Angels of heaven, which act not by any organs of sense.
The second Ecstasy is below us, as we are reasonable men, for it renders us
like unto the beasts that perish. And the greater that either of these Ecstasies
be, the harder it is for the soul to return to her self, or produce contrary
operations to the Ecstasy wherein she is. Hence some holy, and Angelical souls,
have been so enwrapt with divine and heavenly contemplations, that their
outward senses have been for the time useless unto them, whilst they have not
minded any earthly thing. And on the other side, some sensual and carnal
persons, (which is the far greater number) are so taken up, and pleased with
their sensual and worldly lusts, as if they had not an immortal soul to be
cared for, nor were endued with reason to be the guide of their actions.

5. But withal we must know, that all the former kinds or all the Ecstasies of
the Reasonable soul, are not holy, heavenly, and Angelical: but some are
natural, and some supernatural.

1. By natural Ecstasies, I mean such as proceed from natural causes. As,

1. The serious intention of the mind, which in some deep study or
contemplation, whether the object be good or evil, true or false, may be
abstracted for the time from its operation by the external senses, upon outward
sensible objects; which is no other but an ordinary natural Ecstasy.

2. The strange Relations of Angels, and Devils, visions and revelations,
together with the indoctrinations, strange demeanor, ghastly looks, and other
mystical ways of persons desirous to deceive, may produce in others not only
belief in them, but a secret transportation besides themselves, and strong
fancies of having the like visions, revelations, etc.

3. There are many bodily distempers, as Fevers, Epilepsies, Melancholy,
Hypochondriacal, and Religious; the which as they are more or less violent,
and intense, accordingly do make greater or less impressions in the brain, and
fancy, and so produce either more ordinary, or extraordinary conceited visions,
and fancied Revelations.

Too many of such Revelations as these, have in all ages, since divine
Revelations are completed, been made use of, by the subtilty of the Devil, and
cunning craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; that they may
be esteemed by the vulgar for inspired persons, and obtrude their distempered
imaginations upon the credulous, for holy, and divine inspirations from above.
The several kinds whereof have been observed by Dr. Casaubon in his late
Treatise of Enthusiasm, wither I refer the Reader for further satisfaction
herein.

2. Supernatural Ecstasies, are those only that are pertinent to our present
discourse: meaning also by supernatural not those holy, divine, and ravishing
contemplations, wherewithal, all truly and fervently pious, and heavenly
minded men are ordinarily extasied, and transported (which are also undoubtedly
the influences of a supernatural power) but the extraordinary, and supernatural
actings either of the holy and good Spirit of God of old, or of the false and
evil spirit in all ages: For both the Divine and Diabolical spirit, have not
only their ordinary, but also their extraordinary workings, and entrancings of
the minds of men which distinguishes the persons so wrought upon, either into
true or false Prophets.

6. And the differences betwixt the one, and the other will appear as in many
other, so in these ensuing Particulars:

1. The Ecstasies of the Lords Prophets, though their senses were bound up, that
the intellectual soul might more immediately receive the impression of those
celestial truths, which were at such times revealed: yet their gestures, and
demeanor in such ecstasies, were notwithstanding, grave, sober, and modest. But
the entrancings of false Prophets are accompanied with wild, exotique, and
uncivil gestures, being by the evil spirit (whose delight it is to torment and
vex whom he inspires, and possesses) haled, and tumbled, tanquam furiis
perciti, as if they were pricked, provoked, and spurred up by Furies, swelling,
foming, frothing at the mouth, throwing themselves upon the ground, rending
their flesh, tearing their hair, wallowing sometimes like drunkards in their
vomit, and raving like men distracted, Vid. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 12. Hem. 29.
as Chrysostom observes of the Pythonesse of Apollo: and is observable also of
many Daemoniacks in the Gospel, as Luke 9.39. A spirit takes him, and he
suddenly cries out, and it tearoth him that he fometh again, and bruising him
hardly departs from him.

2. The Lords Prophets, when abstracted from the use of sense in their
ecstasies, were so far from losing the use of their Reason and Understanding,
that the very end why they were deprived of the use of their senses for the
time, was, that their understanding being more intense, might more clearly,
because more immediately, receive the Truths revealed. But false Prophets, when
entranced by the evil spirit, were deprived of their understanding as well as
of their senses: so that oftentimes themselves understood not their own
Prophesies, and pretended Revelations, as Chrysostom. out of Plato alleges: Ibid.
They say many things, and good, but they know not themselves what they say.
And this is ordinary with most Enthusiasticks, confusedly to talk much of holy
things, and to heap together Scripture phrases so much, without order, and
right application to the clearing of any truth they would seem to affirm, that
as they themselves know not well what they say, nor whereof they affirm, so is
it very unlikely, that any man else should rightly understand their meanings.

3. The Prophets of the Lord had never any motions from the good Spirit, but
what tended unto good, and not to the least harm, either of themselves, or
others. But such as were entranced by the evil spirit, had motions to do harm
and mischief both to themselves, and to others also. As Saul would have killed
David in his Prophet-like trances, 1 Samuel 18.11. And Prisca, and Maximilla, two
heretical Prophetesses, and great pretenders to immediate revelation, hanged
themselves in one of their counterfeit Rovelation Ecstasies: which will further
appear in the 16. chapter of this Discourse.

4. All that was delivered unto, or uttered by the true Prophets of God, in any
of their Ecstasies, were for the good and edification of the Church, and people
of God. But all the revelations of false Prophets, are at the best
unprofitable, useless, and vain, if not destructive to the Truth. The lies,
errors, and deceits; the blasphemies, and devilish doctrines, which these
counterfeit ecstasies and revelations have brought forth, are both manifold and
notoriously manifest also. But that ever any saving truth either not known
before, or nor understood, has in these last days, been by immediate
revelation discovered, cannot I believe by the greatest Enthusiast of the Age
be made to appear. Chrysostom. in Mat. c. 7. Hom. 19.
S. Chrysostom. gives us two rules whereby to know true Miracles, and
consequently true Revelations also from such as are false, and counterfeit. 1.
If necessary as to the time, and occasion of them: 2. If useful and profitable
as to the issue, and fruits thereof; but if neither of these concur in a
Miracle, or Revelation, they are false and illusive, and to be ascribed rather
to the cunning of Satan, then to the power of God.

5. The Visions and Prophesyings of the Lords Prophets were at all times, and
altogether true, having not the least mixture of error, or falsehood therein:
But those of the false Prophets, are sometimes true, and sometimes false, and
sometimes neither true nor false, but of such a dubious nature, as to be
seemingly true not only in several, but even in contrary senses, Et est
evidentis judicii, etc. It Is evident enough, that those things are not from the
true God, wherein there is the least mixture of falsehood, or of a lie in any
particular: Et in his qui mentiuntur, Iren. proem. advers. Haer.
says Irenaeus, Even in lying vanities, and doctrines of Devils, there is ever
some truths enter mixed, that under the covert thereof, the falsehood and deceit
may unperceivably pass, and be entertained.

Thus though the Diabolical spirit appear in the likeness of holy Samuel, and
the Ecstasies, and entrancings of false Prophets, be like unto those of the
Lords Prophets, yet 1. By their wild exotique gestures and vexatious
agitations: 2. By their loss of the use of their reason, and understanding for
the time. 3. By their harmful motions, and mischievous incitements. 4. By the
uselesnesse, and unprofitableness of their revelations. And, 5. though they may
speak much truth, yet by the least intermixture of falsehood, and of a lie
therewith, they may easily be distinguished the one from the other.

But to leave these extraordinary means of divine Revelation, so long ceased in
the Church of God, and not of late pretended unto, but by Impostors and seduced
persons: which will appear yet further by considering in the next place, the
ordinary means of divine Revelation before Christ, and their Schools of the
Prophets.

CHAP. IV. Of the ordinary ways of Divine Revelation before Christ.
1. THE ordinary means, whereby God revealed and made known his will unto his
people, were in the firster ages, the Tradition or delivery of divine Truths
from Patriarch to Patriarch, together with the Catechetical instructions of the
first born, and heads of families, in whom the several offices of King, Priest,
and Prophet were pro tempore enstated.

These divine truths, were not at the first committed to writing, because the
years of the first Patriarchs were so many, that their memories might well
serve them in stead of books: Hook. eccl. pol. l. 1. ser. 13.
the imperfections and defects whereof God mercifully relieved, by often
putting them in mind, of what was most necessary to be remembered by them. In
which respect it is easy to observe, how many times one thing has been
iterated, even to sundry of the best, and wisest amongst them.

And thus it continued in the Church of God: which was governed and instructed
by a traditionary, and unwritten Law from Adam to Moses.

2. When the lives of men upon earth were shortened. The written Law of God, as
a surer and more durable means of divine Revelation, was commanded to be the
Rule of their actions. But yet not so, as that 'twas permitted to each man to
give his own sense, and make his own interpretation of this divine Law at will
and pleasure; but 'twas to be expounded to them by the consecrated Priests, and
lawfully called Prophets of God in all ages, Neh. 8.4, 5, etc. Mal. 1.7. Luke
4.17. Act. 8.30.37.

3. And this way of revealing the will of God in the exposition of his holy
Laws did differ much in the time of the first, and of the second Temple. For
under the second Temple Prophecy by extraordinary Revelation generally ceased,
and hereupon came in a multitude of other Expositors, Scribes, and Pharisees,
Wisemen, and Disputers, 1 Cor. 1.20. to all whom the people were commanded to
give ear, and to seek the Law at their mouth, Mat. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and
Pharisees (says our Lord) sit in Moses chair, whatsoever they say unto you,
observe and do it.

4. God ordinarily revealed himself as by his Word, and the interpretations
thereof: so by his Works in several instances of his providence, and acts of
his service commanded. E.G. The delivery of his people out of Egypt was a
revelation of Christ's flight, and return thence; and of our deliverance by him
from the bondage of spiritual Pharaoh, the Prince of darkness, and from that
worse then Egyptian darkness of sin, Mat. 1.15.
and ignorance here, and blackness of darkness for ever hereafter.

Gods command to Abraham, to offer up his only Son Isaac, Genesis 22.
was a Revelation of his gracious purpose, to offer his only son a sacrifice
for the sins of the world, in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed.

The erection of the brazen Serpent in the wilderness, Joh 3.19.
was a Revelation of the son of man's elevation on the Cross.

The Passover, or eating of the Paschal Lamb, a Revelation of Christ our
Passover, 1 Cor. 9.7.
that Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the word.

The very place where Adam was created, being the same where Cain and Abel
sacrificed, Genesis 4. where Noah built an Altar, Genesis 8.20. And where Abraham did
the like, Genesis 22.9. Where David also built an Altar, 1 Chronicles. 21.22. And where
Solomon built a Temple unto the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 3.1. was a typical Revelation of
Christ to be sacrificed in the same place for our Reconciliation with God;
Maym. in Misa. book 8. Treat. of the Temp.
which some of the Jewish Rabbis themselves, (says Maym) have observed:
saying, Our wise men have say, that Adam was created out of the place of his
atonement. The raising up of Jonah from the dead, who is conceived by some of
the Ancients to be the widows son of Zarephath who was raised by Elijah, 1
King. 17. Mat. 12.40.
And the swallowing of the same Jonah by the Whale, with his deliverance out of
the belly of that fish after three days and three nights; was a
praesignification of Christ's Christ's Resurrection for us on the third day. Heb.
9.9, 10, etc.
All the sacrifices for sin under the Law, were as so many ocular Rovelations
of great sacrifice of Gods Son offered up on the Altar of the Cross. And so
their difference of meats, and drinks, and diverse washings; their new Moons,
and Sabbaths were shadows of things to come, the body whereof is Christ, Col.
2.16, 17. All these were as so many mystical Revelations or shadows of Christ
the Son of righteousness, as so many praesignations of Christ, who is the
truth, and in whom all these several ways of divine Revelation both ordinary,
and extraordinary were completed.

CHAP. V. Of their Schools of the Prophets.
1. FOR the better ensitting of persons both in an ordinary way to interpret
the Law of God: as also to be capable of extraordinary, and immediate
Revelations upon extraordinary occasions; as also for the propagation of
learning, and increase of wisdom in order hereunto: there were diverse
Colleges, and Schools of the Prophets in several places of the land of
Israel, the portion of Gods inheritance erected.

And although it be not positively in holy writ affirmed, that in such or such
a place, there was a College or School, where the gift of Prophecy was
studied for (which is the objection of the present pretenders to immediate
Revelation) yet is it clearly enough implied in many places, and by the current
of all interpreters of holy Scriptures; by many Chorographers, and other
learned persons, who have described unto us the customs and manners of the
Hebrews, and this from the Hebrew Doctors themselves, who best knew the state
of their own Commonwealth, it is sufficiently, and fully evidenced unto us.

To instance in some places, and passages of holy Scripture, from whence both
the being, and some orders also of these Colleges are observed.

We read Josh. 15.15. of the city of Kiriath-sepher, which being interpreted is
civitas literarum, the City of Learning: for here says Adrichomius there was
an Academy.

And in Judge. 7.1. of the hill Moreh, which is by interpretation the hill of
the Teacher, receiving its denomination from the School there erected.

In 1 Samuel 10.5.10. we read of the hill of God, so called from the Prophets of
the Lord who had there their School, and the company of Prophets here
mentioned, as also 1 Samuel 19.20. were Students in those ways of learning which
ensitted them for the gift of Prophecy: Studiosorum operam Prophetiae dantium,
Junius in loc.
And that these Prophets prophesied not by immediate Revelation (as our present
Enthusiasts affirm) is manifest, in that Samuel, says the Text, was standing
as appointed over them. Had they been immediately taught by God, why was Samuel
appointed to be their guide and Teacher? And whereas it is further said, The
Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they also Prophesied:
Prophetabant. i.e. prophetico more agebant, Jun.
The meaning is no other, but that God by his holy Spirit, so changed their
minds that they did not now so much think of apprehending David, (who was fled
to this college as to a Sanctuary, and place of refuge) as to hear and
discourse with the Prophets of the Lord; and accordingly they put off their
military habit, and behaved themselves after the manner of the Prophets, quite
forgetting to seize upon David, which was the errand they came about. And thus
Saul himself is said to prophecy as well as his messengers, verse. 24.

The sens of the Prophets mentioned to be at Bethel, 2 King. 2.3. and at
Jericho, verse. 5. at Naioth, and many other places do appear to be no other but
students of several Colleges in such several places. Huldah the Prophetess is
said to dwell in a College in Jerusalem, 2 King. 22.14. And in this city
alone there were no less then 200 Colleges and Schools. The Master and the
Scholar mentioned Mal. 2.12. And the School of one Tyrannus, Act. 19.9. with
several more particular intimations are evident testimonies of these Schools.

We read Psalm. 84.7. They go from strength to strength: Chald. paraph.
interpreted by the Hebrews themselves, who best knew their own customs, to be
a kind of promotion or degree, in removing from their Sanctuary to their
School: For in their Sanctuary and Synagogues, points of Divinity were more
plainly delivered, their teachings there being ad populum: But in their Schools
deep points were handled, and more exactly, and profoundly discussed, their
teachings there being ad clerum: So that 'twas a degree to be removed from the
Teaching of the Sanctuary to that of the School.

There were three Degrees in these Schools. 1. Scholars, Disciples, or
Juniors. 2. Proficients, who were by imposition of hands made Graduates, and
thereby companions to the Rabbi: which ceremony of imposing hands they used in
imitation of Moses to Joshua, Numb. 27.18. 3. Rabbis such as were worthy to
teach others. The name Rabbi being derived from the Heb. (...) Multiplicatus
fuit: Goodw. antiq. upon the title Rabbi.
such a one whom the Greeks style (...), A Master or Doctor eminently gifted
with variety of knowledge.

The Scholars sat upon the ground at the feet of their Teachers: St. Paul was
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, Act. 22.3. Mary sat at Jesus feet, and
heard his word, Luke 10.39. The Graduates, or companions sat upon benches,
somewhat higher: And the Rabbis in elevated reserved chaires, which are those
chief seats in the Synagogues, the Scribes, and Pharisees so much affected,
Mat. 23.6.

The chief Prophets, or Heads of these Colleges, were not only termed Rabbis,
or Masters, but also Fathers: and the Scholars or Students the Sons, and
children of the Prophets, whereunto that saying of our Lord alludes: Wisdom is
justified of her children, Mat. 11.19. Elisha cried to Elijah, My Father, My
Father, 2 King 2.12. The Targum upon the place reads Rabbi, Rabbi, my Master,
my Master, or my teaching Father: which by the wise man, are styled the Masters
of the Assemblies, Eccl. 12.11.

CHAP. VI. Of being called Master.
1. GReat was the pride and ambition of the Teachers of Israel in the days of
our Savior, both in affecting of the chief Seats, or Doctors Chair in their
Synagogues, and Schools, and also the title of Rabbi, Master or Father: which
was the cause of those sharp reproofs, Mat. 23.6. etc. They love the uppermost
rooms at Feasts, and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and greetings in the
markets, and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi: whereupon he infers these
prohibitions, verse. 8, etc. But be not ye called Rabbi, for one is your Master,
even Christ; and call no man Father upon earth, for one is your Father which is
in heaven; and be not ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ.

2. The true meaning of which prohibitions is worthy examination, because some
weak and unlearned persons falsely conclude from hence, that it is unlawful to be
called Master, or to mount the pulpit to preach, which they call the uppermost
room in the Synagogue.

And the first for the proof of the negative, That it is not unlawful, nor a
transgression of Christ's command in this place, to be called Master, does
appear, 1. Because then 'twere unlawful also to call any man Father, for both
titles are here prohibited upon the same ground. 2. These titles are used by
the holy Ghost. in other places of Scripture, both bodily Fathers, Ephesians. 6.2.4.
And ghostly Fathers* also, or the fathers of our souls, 1 Cor. 4.15. 2 Cor.
12.14. Both civil Masters, Ephesians. 6.5 and Ecclesiastical Masters, Eccl. 12.11.
The Disciples of John styled him Rabbi or Master, Joh. 3.16. and so they styled
Christ, Joh. 1.38. And 3. It Is not a fault either to affect the wisdom and
learning of a Rabbi, or Master in Israel. Nor, 2. is it a fault being endued
with wisdom and abilities of knowledge to be apt and desirous to teach others.
Neither, 3. is it lawful for this end, to mount the pulpit or highest place in
the Church for the more convenience of being heard. Nor 4. is it a fault to
assume the title of Master or Doctor, for the gaining of the greater credit and
authority to the doctrine delivered: If we go no further then this, both the
uppermost seat in the Synagogue, or the Pulpit; and the title or Master also,
are not only lawful, Si desid^retur nomen and authoritas magisterii ad hoc,
quod scientia jam habita aliquis melius possit uti, non est malum, sed bonum:
qua bonu^ Doctor deb^t quae^er^ illa quae faciunt ad efficaciam doctrinae sus.
Gloss. ord. in loc.
but in these respects desirable: Because 1. Every good, and profitable
Teacher, ought to desire, and seek those things which help to make his doctrine
effectual and taking. 2. Every Minister of Christ is properly called Master,
Magistri: ex consortio very magist^i, tanquam nuntii ejus and pro reverentia
ejus a quo mittuntur, honorantur, Lyr. in loc.
ex consortio very magistri, etc. as the under-master, or usher unto Christ,
and as he is Christ's messenger, and accordingly to be reverenced, and
respected, out of that reverence and respect we owe to that great Master and
Doctor of his Church, whose minister and messenger he is. Desiderare scientiam
vel actum docendi non est malum, sed desid^rare nommem hoc ^st malum, and
p^ccatum superbiae, Ibid.


But then in the second place as to the affirmative, these commands of Christ
are transgressed three ways.

1. When out of pride and ambition, the place and title of Master, or Teacher
is affected: They love, says the text, to be called of men Rabbi: where not
the title, but the love, or ambitious affection of it is reproved: to affect
the name more then the thing; the place, more then the charge; the title, more
then the duty of a Master or Teacher: is one way, whereby all these divine
prohibitions are transgressed.

2. To give up our faith, and obedience to the sole will, and command of any
Rabbi or humane Doctor whatsoever, any further then the word and doctrine of
God the Father does warrant, and direct us, is a breach of this particular
prohibition, Call no man Father upon earth, for one is your Father which is in
heaven

3. Now that the Messiah was exhibited, to look upon any other save Christ
alone, as the great Prophet of the Lord and Doctor of his Church, is a
transgression of both these particular commands: Be not ye called Rabbi, for
one is your Master, even Christ. Neither be ye called Master, for one is your
Master, even Christ* All Masters of Scholars, were now become learners of
Christ; And the Apostles themselves to whom these commands were directed,
though under Christ they were the greatest Masters or Teachers of all the
world, nevertheless were the Disciples, or Scholars of Christ, and in this
respect not to be called Masters, i. e. not chiefly, primarily, and
principally, but secondarily, and instrumentally only.

CHAP. VII. That all Revelation is completed in Christ and his Apostles.
1. WHen amongst the Jews, their latter Prophets Haggai, Zachary, and Malachy
were dead, The holy Ghost went up, say the Hebrew Doctors, and departed from
Israel, i. e. All extraordinary ways of divine Revelation had an end, save
only the voice from heaven. And this was a prologue, or praesignification of
the coming of the true voice from heaven, or rather of the eternal Word
himself, in whom all immediate Revelations, and voices from heaven were to
cease, as having in him, their perfection and accomplishment.

2. All the Law, and the Prophets prophesied until John, Mat. 11.13. i. e. The
Law, and the Prophets spoke of Christ to come. The Law in types, and sigures,
the Prophets in predictions, and promises. And this was all the light the
Church enjoyed until John came: and he more clearly pointed out the Messiah
already come in the flesh, saying, This is he, Joh. 1.15. and behold the Lamb
of God, verse. 29. The types and figurative services of the Law, were as so many
dumb shows, and the predictions of the Prophets as so many inarticulate sounds
of the word Christ. But John was vox verbi the very voice of the Word: that is
his style, Mat. 3.3. The voice of one crying in the wilderness. The Law, and
the Prophets, were as dim glimmering tapers; but John was a burning, and a
shining light, Joh. 5.35. And this because he was nearest unto Christ the Sun
of righteousness, and fountain of all divine illuminations, from whom all the
Prophets derive their light, as the Moon and the Stars do from the body of the
Sun, which is the fountain of light material.

3. And as the light of the Moon, and of the Stars, gives way to the light of
the Sun, when it arises: Moses and Elias significam legis, and prophetarum
oracula in Domino compl^ta. Gloss. ord.
so the light of the Law, and of the Prophets gave way unto Christ, when he who
is the Light of the world appeared: we read therefore that in the
transfiguration of Christ upon the mount, Moses and Elias appeared to him, Mat.
17.3. Moses for the Law, and Elias for the Prophets, acknowledging their
Oracles to be completed in Christ, which was ratified by a voice from heaven,
verse. 5. This is my beloved Son, hear him.

4. Not that the Law and the Prophets are by or in Christ abolished, but
completed, and perfected rather: Christ is the end of the Law, Romans 10.4. but
it is finis proficiens, non interficiens, says the Father, not the end to
abolish, but to finish and perfect the Law, and sic perficiendo confirmare, Aug.
and so by completing the Law, to establish it as a standing Rule of
righteousness to all posterity. To think therefore that Christ has made void
the Law is a great sin, Christ himself having forbidden us to harbor any such
thought, or erroneous opinion of him, Mat. 5 17.
Mat. 5.17. Think not that I came to destroy the Law, or the Prophets, I came
not to destroy, but to fulfill, the word is (...), to fill up: and signifies not
only Christ's personal perfect obedience to the Law: but also the filling up,
with his clear, and full light of Revelation, what was wanting, or but
obscurely revealed by the Law, and the Prophets.

5. Nor is it here unworthy observation, that as that material light, which is
displayed from the body of the Sun arises by degrees, and shines more and
more unto the perfect day: For 1. the day breaks, wherein there is more night
then day; 2. The day dawns, when it is not yet fully nor clearly day; 3. The
light is diffused through the air, and the beams are spread upon the mountains,
but yet the Sun is under the Horizon; 4. The Sun appears upon the earth, and
rises by degrees till it mount up to the vertical point: even so has the light
of divine Truth been revealed from heaven to the Church of God: 1. 'Twas but a
dark, obscure, and glimmering light in the first period of time from Adam to
Moses; 2. 'Twas more lightsome, but yet not clear, and full upon the
promulgation of the Law. 3. It increased still upon the rising of the Prophets,
as so many Luminaries in the Church: by whom line after line, and precept after
precept, as so many beams of the increasing light of divine Revelation were
displayed; till 4. The day of the Lord came, and the Sun of righteousness
appeared upon the earth. So that as time grew up, so did the Revelation of Gods
will, and when Fullness of Time was come, we received a fullness of divine
revelation, from him in whom all fullness dwells, Col. 1.19. When fullness of time
was come, God sent his Son, Gal. 4.4.

6. So that notwithstanding all the several ways, and manners of divine
Revelation both mediate, and immediate before remembered: yet the word
comparatively was still as 'twere benighted with ignorance, until Christ
appeared to give light to them that sat in darkness and in the shadow of
death, and to guide our feet in the way of peace, Luke 1.79. Hence Christ is
termed the morning Star, Numb. 24.17. and the dayspring from on high, Luke
1.78. And the light of his Revelations, the dawning of the day: and the
illumination of our souls therewith, the rising of the Day Star in our hearts,
2 Pet. 1.20.

7. The great difference betwixt the light of divine Revelation by the Law, and
the Prophets in the Old Testament, and by the Gospel of Christ in the New
Testament, is in four respects observable from Heb. 1.1. God who at sundry
times and in diverse manners spoke in time past to our fathers: has in these
last days spoken unto us by his Son.

1. God revealed himself to the Patriarchs, and prophets of old, at sundry
times: the word is (...), i. e. in sundry parts, now a piece, and then a piece
of divine Truth, as seemed best to his divine wisdom: But to us under the
Gospel, he has revealed himself entirely, fully, and wholly by his Son: For it
pleased God that in him should all fullness dwell: Col. 1.19. Joh. 1.16.
and of his fullness we all receive: in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.3.

2, God spoke to them of old in diverse manners: By Dreams, Visions, Angels,
Voices, etc. but to us under the Gospel uniformly, and without variation, by
Christ, and his Ministers, which is one respect amongst others, why the
Priesthood of Christ is said to be unchangeable, and eternal: and this
manifests the imperfection of their light of old, and the perfection of ours
now: as there are variety of lights for the night, and these lights also are
changeable in their courses: but one Sun only for the light of the day, which
is the light too that changes not.

3. God spoke to them of old by his Prophets, who were but mere men: but to us,
by his Son, who is God as well as man. And herein is that Prophecy
accomplished, Isa. 54.13. And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord: A
text which is too much abused, and wrested to patronize new Revelations, and an
immediate teaching from God, without the ministry of man: whereas the
Prophecy was fulfilled in the person of Christ, and by Christ himself it is
applied to himself, Joh. 6.45. So that we are all taught of God, in that we
have the Doctrine or Teaching of Christ, who is God: whose Doctrine is
therefore termed a Gospel, i. e. The Speech of God.

4. God spoke to our Fathers (...), of old; which implies some new way of
speaking to follow: But to us (...), in these last days, Gal^i. in Heb. 1.1.
to denote that this is his last way of speaking by his Son: that we must not
now expect any new lights or depend upon any new Revelations after this: So
Calvin upon the words: Hereby expressly declaring that God would not now add
Prophesies to Prophesies, and Revelation to Revelation, but that all parts of
divine Teaching were so completed in the Son of God, that this should be the
last, and unchangeable testimony we should receive from God: whose heavenly
Doctrine delivered unto us is therefore termed (...) an eternal Gospel, Rev.
14.6.

8. It were an opinion very much unworthy the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of
the great God of heaven, that he should send his only begotten Son into the
world to reveal, and make known his will unto his people, himself expressing
this to be the last time of his sending also: But last of all he sent his Son,
Mat. 21.37. And yet that his Revelation of himself should be still defective,
and incomplete. Wherefore is Christ termed the Light of the world, Quia
imp^ssibile erat D^um si^e Deo discere; ^deo per v^^^um suum d^^^l homin^s
s^ire Deum. Iren. l. 4. c. 10. Joh. 1. 1. Cor. 1.24. Joh. 14*6.
Joh. 1.5. and the sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. The storehouse of wisdom
and knowledge, Col. 1.19. The only mean of discovering unto us the knowledge of
God, without whom it is impossible to know God: For no man has seen God at any
time, the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him, Joh. 1.18. Wherefore is he termed the Word of God, and the
Wisdom of the Father, the Way, the Truth and the Life: but by these and many
more expressions besides these, to signify unto us, that the knowledge of God,
and of his holy will is so fully by Christ revealed, that here we must now six,
and not expect any further Revelations or new Lights to be discovered? He looks
beyond the Moon, that looks for Revelations beyond Christ, and what already
stands upon record to be revealed by him. There is no need to be curious after
knowledge, N^bis ^uri^sitate opus ^^n est p^st Christ^^ Jesum, nec inqu^sitione
p^st ^^angeli^^n: Cum ^^^d^^^^, nil desider amus ult^a^^de^^. He n. prius
^^dmus non esse quod ul^ra ^redere de^^amus. Tert. de prae. advers. Haer. c. 8.
since the Revelation of Jesus Christ, says Tertul. nor is there need of
further search after Truth, since we have found the Gospel: where we believe in
Christ, we desire not to believe any thing beyond this belief, for this we
believe first of Christ, and his Gospel, that beyond this there is nothing
ought to be believed.

9. The Apostles of Christ had the honor after him to receive by immediate
Revelation, not any new Gospel, but the right understanding, firm remembrance,
and powerful publication of the Gospel of Christ. All whose epistles and
writings, are as so many Commentaries and illustrations of the Gospel, as the
Prophets of old were of the Law: And as Moses and the Prophets complete the
old, so Christ, and his Apostles complete the canon of the new Testament: which
was ever received in all ages by the Church of Christ, Qu^d prople^ae
praec^^az^ve^unt, p^rs^^^a. Christus, Apostoli tradideru^n: a quibus ^eel^sia
accipiens per universu^ mundum sela been cust^d^ as tradidit filiis, Iren. l.
5. advers. Haer.
as the Rule of Faith, and summary of divine Revelation. So Irenaeus, What the
Prophets foretold, Christ has perfected, and his Apostles have delivered, from
whom the Church through the whole world dispersed receiving the same, has
delivered it to her sons, the true Members of the Church Catholic, all which
must undoubtedly believe and profess with the rest of the family: we are built
upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the head corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20.

And here it cannot be either impertinent, or unprofitable to observe in what
respects sometimes Christ, and sometimes his Apostles are said to be the
foundation we are built upon.

1. Christ is called the Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.11. Primarily as he is the
fountain of all Revealed Truths, originally they flow from him, for no man has
seen the Father but the Son, Joh. 1.18.
and he to whom the Son has revealed him.

The prophets and Apostles are the soundation too Secondarily, from, and under
Christ, as his Stewards, 1 Cor. 4.1. Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. Workmen together
with, but under Christ, 2 Cor. 6.1.

2. Christ is the Foundation as upon whose doctrine, and example, life and
death the faith of the whole Church is settled, and their salvation fixed: for
there is no other name under heaven in whom there is salvation but the name of
Jesus, Act. 4.12.

The Prophets and Apostles are the foundation ministerially as they are the
Administrators of this faith, and salvation which is in Christ, the Prophets
more obscurely, the Apostles more clearly delivering it unto us: Christ is as
'twere the acceptable year of the Lord, Clem. Rec. l. 4.
having his twelve Apostles as the twelve months, which complete and fill up
the year: Christ is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and end of all divine
Revelation: the end of the Law, the beginning of the Gospel, the Supplement of
the Prophets, and the whole Tenor of the Apostles preaching: even the corner
stone in whom both Law and Gospel, Prophets and Apostles meet, or the center in
whom they are conjoined.

And in this center we must fix our faith, having found Christ, as by his
Prophets and Apostles he has revealed himself unto us, Joh. 14.6.
we must seek no further; He is the way, the truth, and the life: Let us not
seek any new ways or new Truths, lest being misled by the Spirit of Error, we
wander in the by-waies of death and ruin: Tert. de virg. v^land.
The canon, or Rule of our faith, says Tertullian, is one alone, immovable,
and not possible to be better framed anew: And what Rule this is, he shows by
rehearsing the Articles of the Christian Faith: and Irenaeus before his time:
Pren. advers. Haeres. l. 1, 2. and 3.
The Church though scattered through the whole world unto the uttermost borders
of the earth, has received from the Apostles, and their Disciples what to
believe. The parts of which belief he also writes, the same in substance with
Tertullian, and thereupon infers, This Faith, the Church spread far and wide,
preserves as if one house did contain them, Similiter n. fides nostra
Revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis factae qui canenicos libros scripserunt,
non a. revelationi, si qua suit, alits doctoribus factae. Aquin. 1 p. sum. q.
2. Art. 8. ad s^cund.
These things it equally embraces, as though it had one common soul, one
heart, and no more: It publishes, teaches, and delivers these things with
uniform consent, as if God had given it but one only tongue, wherewith to
speak. He which amongst the Guides of the Church is best able to speak utters
no more then this, and less then this the most simple does not utter, i.e.
when they make profession of their Faith.

And to conclude this second General, Our Faith, says the Schoolman, depends
and is grounded upon that divine Revelation, which those Prophets and Apostles
received, which wrote the canonical books of holy Scripture, and not upon any
other Revelation (if ever there were any such) received by any other learned,
or holy persons whatsoever. Non n. novis Revelationibus, nunc regitur, etc. The
Chuch is not now guided by any Revelations, but persists and perseveres in
those things which the Prophets and Apostles have revealed, and delivered unto
us, who were the Ministers of the word revealed.

CHAP. VIII. Of the necessity of learning as to the understanding of Gods
revealed will in his word.
AS God has graciously pleased in his holy Word to reveal himself unto us, The
2. General. Deuteronomy. 17.19. 1 Timothy 4.13. Rev. 1.3. 2 Timothy 2.15. 1 Timothy 5.17.
so he has commanded us to read, study, and labor in this word, that the
light of divine Revelation therein, may shine into our hearts and guide us in
the sacred paths of life eternal.

But as unto every thing of price, and value there is art and skill required
rightly to make use thereof: and also there are means and instruments fitted
for the acquiring of this skill, so rightly to use this precious jewel of Gods
holy Word for the illumination of our souls, there is much art and skill
required: and this skill must be attained in the use of all those instruments,
and helps which God has for this end graciously afforded unto us: it being
most agreeable to the wisdom and goodness of God, to work upon humane
understanding by humane means and helps, And according as we are more or less
industrious in the use of these means, God imparts a more or less treasure of
understanding unto us.

Not as if the holy Spirit of God could not without means communicate his gifts
of wisdom, and open our understanding to understand the Scriptures: Luk 24.45.
But that ordinarily he does not do this, but commands us not lazily to sit
still, Prove. 2.4.
and wait upon his immediate Revelations, but to seck for knowledge, and search
for wisdom as for hid treasures: and how shall we seek for it, but in the use
of those means, he has sitted for this search? And these means are either
outward or inward. The outward and humane helps are the knowledge and
understanding of tongues, and sciences. The inward or divine means, are the
purity, and holiness, of the hearts and life.

The first are necessary, as to the formale externum, to understand the outward
letter of the word in its proper and genuine sense.

The second as to the formale internum, rightly to apply the word, according to
the mind of the holy Spirit therein: And experimentally to feel those sacred
truths accomplished in our selves.

As to the former whereupon this controversy depends, the knowledge of tongues
and languages, arts and sciences; herewithall the holy Scripture does
presuppose those men to be furnished, that will dive into the secret and hidden
mysteries therein contained; for all kinds of knowledge have their certain
bounds and limits, and each of them presupposes many necessary things, learned
in other sciences, before we can know the secrets of this; as the Art of
Rhetoric presupposes the understanding of words: as the cabinet must be first
opened before the jewel therein can be found out.

There is a threefold knowledge of things, natural, moral, and divine. By the
first we are guided to live as men. By the second, as reasonable men, and
members of a civil society. By the third, as Christian men, and parts of
Christ's body the Church. And each of these presupposes the other, as moral
wisdom presupposes that which is natural, and divine wisdom presupposes both:
to this end God has endued us not only, 1. With sense to know the things that
concern our present life and being; (...), Phil. de. Mos.
And 2. with reason to know what concerns our well being, in the peace,
contentment, and happiness of the soul. But 3. He has added also the heavenly
revelations of his holy Word, whereby what sense and reason could never sinde
out, as conducible to eternal happiness, is made known unto us: And as reason
does imply, and presuppose a man to be endued with sense; so Religion and
divine Revelation presupposes as to endued with sense and reason.

2. Divinity, which is the body of divine Revolation, is the Art of arts, and
comprehends with it what ever other Arts do teach. And the holy Scriptures, the
contents whereof are the precepts of this Art, both contains all kinds of
knowledge und relates to all sorts of truth both natural. Ephesians. 5.20. Civil,
Romans 13.4. Historical, 2 Timothy 3.8. Foreign, Tit. 1.12. And consequently to the
understanding thereof, the knowledge of such Truths are necessarily subservient
to the supernatural, and divine assistance.

Humane Arts are the Handmaids of Religion, which they serve and wait upon as
their Queen and Sovereign. And as great Fersons are not approached unto,
without the mediation of servants: and great Houses have their through-fare
before you come to rooms of state: and great Cities have their suburbs, before
you come to the high streets; So the great and sacred body of Divinity is not
approached unto ordinarily (...) she sits in the height and perfection of
understanding, but by the mediation of her Handmaids, or through the several
passages of Tongues, and Sciences.

3. Though many things in holy Scripture be plain and easy to be understood,
without the help of much learning or art, yet there are also many things
obscure, dark, and mysterious, which too many men for want of learning and
sobriety do misconster, pervert, and abuse to their own ruin, which is
expressly affirmed both of St. Paul's Epistles, and of other Scriptures also, 2
Pet 3.16. As also in all his Epistles speaking in them of those things, in
which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable, wrest as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own
destruction. In which (meaning St. Paul's Epistles) are somethings hard. Non
temere a Spiritu Sto. Scripturas esse tectas, sed eb id me^ime ne v^leseam: and
exerceant u^ pascant, Aug.
And the holy Ghost has therefore left Gods word in many places veiled and
obscure: says St. August, 1. Novileseat, that we might not undervalue it. 2.
Vt exerceat, to keep us in the exercise of prayers and meditations, studies and
labors; for all kind of knowledge, the more hardly it is attained, the more
we esteem it, and the more also it does feed and nourish the soul, as making a
deeper impression therein.

4. Such is the height, and sublime perfection of those holy mysteries in
sacred Scripture contained, that vulgar and learned men have need of an
interpreter, as Act. 8.31. Learned Guides therefore God has in all ages raised
up, both Priests and Prophets under the Law, and under the Gospel, whom he has
appointed the treasurers of knowledge, and unlearning, in the sound and sincere
Expasition of holy Scripture, and instruction of his people.

5. The necessity and honor of humane learning as to the reception and right
understanding of divine Revelations does appear from the antiquity: for those
first Patriarchs of the world, who honored with immediate Revelation, and
invested with the sacred office of the Priesthood, were all of them learned
men, either so found or so made by the God of wisdom and knowledge when he
spoke unto them.

Adam as the first man, so the first to whom God revealed himself, and first
Priest or Prophet of the Lord, was not a ^ovice in Philosophy, nor ignorant of
any part of what we call humane learning: he knew undoubtedly the nature,
properties, virtues, effects, and workings of all creatures: and therefore God
permitted him to give them names according to their natures, Genesis 2.19.20. And
out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl
of the air, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would call them, and
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof: and
Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast
of the field.

Noah the Preacher of righteousness was much given to the study of arts and
sciences, Jos adtiq l. 1. c. 4.
both he and his sons: And it is one reason remembered by Josephus, why God
blessed him, and those firster Fathers of the world with so long a life, that
they might bring to some perfection their studies of moral virtues, and
invention of profitable sciences, as Astronomy, Geography, etc.

Abraham the father of the faithful, Idem. cap. 8.
was a wise man and very eloquent and of a piercing Judgment, says the same
Author of him, He both learned himself, and preached to others, the knowledge
of the true God, which he learned by study and contemplation of Gods works by
observing the sea and the land, the sun, the moon, and the stars: Whereupon the
Caldeans conspiring against him being warned of God he came into the land of
Canaan. Philo calls him, (...), Philo de Ab^.
A man much skilled in natural Philosophy.

Moses, Deuteronomy. 31.10.
who of all persons is said to have the nearest and most immediate converse
with God, and was honored as Gods instrument for the publication of his own
Laws: was learned in all the learning of the Egyptians, Act. 7.22. And Philo
brings him in exhorting all men to the study of Philosophy who desire to enrich
their minds with true knowledge and wisdom. Phi de septenaerio and fest.


Daniel who was greatly beloved of God, and honored with manifold visions, and
revelations, Dan. 1.4.17.20.
was bred up and well skilled in the Loarning, and Tongue of the Chaldeans. And
generally all the Prophets of the Lord both ordinary and extraordinary, some
few excepted, were bred up in the Schools of the Prophets. The Hebrews
themselves say, that where the holy Scripture adds to the name of a Prophet,
the name of his father, that such a one was always the son of a Prophet, as
Isaiah the son of Amos, Hosea the son of Buri etc. but withal confess that
when the Prophet is named, and not his father, that such a one was a Prophet,
but not the son of a Prophet.

When Samuel had anointed Saul King over Israel, and the Lord gave him another
heart, 1 Samuel 10.9. so that he prophesied according to the word of Samuel
amongst the rest of the Prophets, verse. 10. The people were astonished hereat,
as a thing unusual, and extraordinary, that any one should prophecy, who was
not the son of a Prophet, therefore one demanding of another, but who is their
father? verse. 12. which being not known, it grew into a proverb, Is Saul also
amongst the Prophets?

6. The great necessity of learning and learned men will appear, if we will
consider how in all ages they have been what Cyril of Alexandria styles them,
Sanctos, mystagagos, pulchritudine intelligentiae resplendescentes tanquam
propugnacula, etc. Such as stand against Sects like Bulwarks: and are the
Rescuers of Truth from the captivity of Heretics, and the bold intrusions of
their fallacies and deceits: The multitude of the wise, is the welfare of the
world; says the wisest of men, Wisd. 6.24. Both Religion, and the true use of
Reason: both Church and Commonwealth; Law, and Gospel, all societies both
Civil and Ecclesiastic, are upheld and maintained in peace and prosperity by
the hands and heads of learned men, and power of learning: And the more any
people or nation are estranged from the knowledge of liberal arts and sciences,
the further they are off from that dignity, whereby men do excel beasts, and
irrational creatures. The end of learning, being no other but the rectifying of
depraved Reason, the strengthening of the weakened judgment, and the clearing of
that eye of the soul, the understanding, whereby man is stamped to the image of
the most understanding, and all knowing God.

And when the natural light of the soul is thus cleared by learning, the lives
and manners of men are thereby raised to the perfection of virtue, and civility
of conversation, beyond the rudeness of salvages, and beasts:

Ex quo intelligimus, quando doctrina non sucrit in Ecclesius, perire
pudicitiam, castitatem mori, and omnes abire v^rtutes, Hier. in loc.
-- Didicisse fideliter arts
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.
The Prophet Amos threatening a famine of the word, chapter 8.11. adds verse. 13. In
that day shall the fair virgins, and young men faint for thirst: meaning not a
corporal, but a spiritual thirst: The Hebrews (says Hier.) interpret the fair
virgins, to be their Synagogues, and Schools of learning, and the young men to
be the choice Doctors, and Masters of Israel, for the word (...) signifies
both: And when these shall faint, and fail, and learned teaching cease in the
Church, then chastity, purity and integrity shall perish, and all virtues shall
decay amongst men.

CHAP. IX. Some vulgar Objections against Universities, and humane learning
considered.
LEarning and knowledge, knows no other enemies, but the ignorant and
unlearned; And it is ever the nature of Pride, and an essential property of
Heretics, to decry and seemingly to contemn those gifts, whereof themselves
are destitute: they are thus characterized by S. Jude verse. 10. But these speak
evil of those things which they know not: and for no other reason, but to exalt
themselves above those, who have that knowledge which they want; upon this very
ground, many now a days cry down Universities and humane learning; and why?
only that they may lift up themselves above their brethren, upon the fancied
wings of counterfeit Revelations, who so much flag, and fall below them in the
gifts of knowledge, understanding and wisdom. And to support this destructive
principle of pride, they want not some seemingly probable arguments.

The grand Objection of all ^^thusiasts against Colleges, and humane learning,
and all studying for the knowledge of Gods revealed will in his word, is drawn
from the examples of Elisha called from the plow, and Amos who was an herdman,
in the Old Testament: And the Apostles, who were unlearned simple fishermen, in
the New.

For Answer whereunto: consider,

extraordinary, but singular and unusual: For usually all the Prophets of the
Lord both ordinary, and extraordinary were bred up in the Schools of the
Prophets, as has been already intimated: so that this is no warrant for any
Shepherd, Ploughman, Fisherman, or other ordinary person whatsoever to hope,
or wait for the like call.

2. There is a great difference betwixt Elisha the ploughman, and Elisha the
Prophet; betwixt Peter a Fisherman, and St. Peter an Apostle; every
extraordinary calling from God is both confirmed by miracles, and accompanied
also with extraordinary gifts, to execute the duties of this calling, it being
as easy with God, when he pleases to make men learned as to find them so.

And to descend to particulars,

1. Elisha, though he was at the first called from the plough, yet was he so
instructed by the Prophet Elijah, and upon his prayers so extraordinarily
endued with the spiritual gifts of wisdom and knowledge, that he became Master
of one of the Schools of the Prophets, whose College was so full, that the
Students desired him to have it enlarged. 2 King. 6.1. And 'twas one of his own
College, no stranger, or illiterate person, that he sent upon the Lords
message, to anoint Jehu King over Israel, 2 King. 9.1.

2. Amos indeed professes of himself, Amos 7.14. I was no Prophet, neither was
I Prophets son, but I was an Herdman and gatherer of Sycomore fruits, and the
Lord said unto me, Go, and prophecy to this people: But then this is noted
withal as a thing singular, and rare, that such a one should be called a
Prophet, who was not the Son of a prophet, nor bred up in their Schools,
whereby he might be enfitted for so great a calling. And undoubtedly the mouth
of this Prophet would soon have been stopped, and severe punishment inflicted on
him for presuming to prophecy in the name of the Lord, had he not by miracles,
or some infallible signs proved his calling to be extraordinary, and divine.
And although no miracle be recorded for the confirmation of this Prophets
extraordinary calling; yet of Elisha who was called from the plough, we read,
that he made Iron to swim, raised the dead, revealed the secret counsels of the
King of Syria, being many miles distant. And of the Apostles, that they spoke
diverse languages, healed all diseases, etc. If therefore any of these persons
who pretend to immediate Revelation, and consequently to be extraordinarily
called to preach the Gospel, can confirm the same by any such miracle, 'twould
be a very great sin against the good Spirit of God, to deny that he were in
them of a truth: but since this they cannot do, they speak not with tongues,
but against them rather; they cure no diseases, but increase them the more,
those especially of melancholy, frenzy, etc. you may know their disciples by
their pale complexions, lean cheeks, wild distorted looks: In a word, since
they pretend to extraordinary matters, and yet can by no extraordinary means,
or miracle confirm the same; it is too evident, that their pretended Revelations
are the delusions of their own hearts, and not the inspirations of the Spirit
of truth.

3. For the Apostles of Christ, though they were but ignorant and unlearned
persons, when first called, yet through the instructions of Christ himself in
person for three years together, and the extraordinary inspirations of his holy
Spirit, they were afterward endued with the gifts of learning, both divine and
humane: whereof the very appearances of the holy Ghost descending upon them may
put us in mind, 1. In tongues, enabling them to understand, and speak all
languages. 2. In cloven Tongues, enduing them with ithe Art of Rhetorical
elocution, and Logical Analyze, to divide, distinguish, and resolve Gods word
into its proper parts and portions. 3. In fiery Tongues, that by the knowledge
of things both natural, and moral, they might illustrate, clear and make
manifest things divine. All which parts of learning evidently appear, both in
their Sermons, and Epistles included in the sacred canon of Scripture, and
those also that stand upon record in other Ecclesiastical writings.

Such persons then as from the example of the Apostles, pretend to the
knowledge of Gods will by immediate Revelation, must also be assured, that they
have the gifts of learning by immediate inspiration also: For Learning, and
Religion, are two inseparable twins, no rude and illiterrate Ignoramo's, being
capable whilst they so continue, of the sublime and celestial mysteries of
godliness.

And undoubtedly it had been a very unfitting thing, that the Apostles of
Christ at first, or any of his Ministers since, should be an ignorant and
illiterate generation: Greg. in 1 Kin.
Sinoe our Redeemer himself (as a Father observes) as he is the Word of the
eternal Father, is the Master of all Arts and Sciences: He professes himself to
have received the Tongue of the learned, Isa. 50.4. And therefore it is not to
be neglected by any of his members, much less of his Ministers. And they to
whom learning is offensive, wherewithal Christ himself was enriched, to them,
Christ is become a stumbling block and a stone of offense: For Christ cannot be
against himself, neither can any true member of Christ either be against what
was eminent in him, or against those gifts that were bestowed by him. He gave
the gifts of Tongues and Sciences, and he both will own them, and does require
them. For as under the Law, a lame and a blind sacrifice was hateful unto God:
so both under Law and Gospel he requires that the Priests and Prophets, which
are the portion of his inheritance, should be sound, and seeing persons,
neither lame through negligence, nor blind through ignorance: Mal. 2 7. 1 Timothy
5.17. 2 Timothy 2.15. 2 Timothy 3.17.
but such whose lips preserve knowledge: and also labor in the Word and
Doctrine Such, who study to show themselves approved, and are thoroughly
furnished unto every good work.

But do not we hear many unlearned men preach the Word, expound Scriptures, and
the most difficult parts of them, even hard Prophesies, and the mystical
Revelation it self, and this to the great liking and almost admiration of the
hearers? Do not we hear them dispute with their Ministers, and write books
against all that oppose them, and shall we yet doubt of their inspiration, and
the uselesnesse of humane learning, since these persons can do all this without
it?

unlearned men, and make a great noise in the world, and bear sway with the
vulgar very much: but when these Sermons, discourses, and books come to the
scanning of judicious ears, and such who have the gift of discerning spirits,
all their preachments prove but unprofitable prattle, if not profanations of
Gods holy word: Their discourses of Religion unreasonable, and endless
brabbles, and their books fraught with impertinencies, railings, and lies: For
the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips, they shall be taken in
their pride; for why? their preaching is of cursing, and lies, Ps. 59.12.

But do not we hear many good things come from them, and many sweet truths, to
the great contentment, and edification of the hearers?

There are many sentences and sayings in holy Scripture, Answ.
and other good English books, which are so plain and convincing, that they
cannot be wrested, or perverted: but when these come to be formed into a
Sermon, or into a continued discourse by rude and illiterate persons, they are
generally so disorderly and confusedly delivered, so maimed and obscured by
insignificant, impertinent and erroneous expressions, which like dirt or poison
intermixed with wholesome food, does choke, and kill, rather then nourish and
edify the souls of the hearers. The word of God, which is the sword of the
Spirit, in the mouth of an ignorant blind zelot is like a sword in a mad man's
hand, wherewith he wounds both himself and others for want of judgment to use
it aright: or as an unskilful Physician, though he have very good books of
Physic, and excellent physical receipts, if yet he do not fully understand
these books, and the nature and working of these receipts, and the several
tempers withal to whom severally they are appliable, he shall more often kill
then cure his Patients: Even so it is with the unskilful Physicians of the
soul, when they understand not the holy Word of God aright, nor yet how, where,
when, and to whom the several divine receipts therein are appliable, they
convert the soul-saving Physic thereof to a soul-killing poison: And the Word
which is in it self the fountain of holy truths, becomes through the
misunderstanding and misapplication of ignorant interpreters, and deceitful
workers, the nursery of Haeresies and errors. And as in natural things,
corruption optimi est pessima, The best things corrupted are of all corruptions
the worst: so in supernatural and divine mysteries, when the word of Truth it
self is corrupted, and deceitfully handled by ignorant, and misguided persons,
there is nothing more baneful to the truth of Religion, nor to the souls of
men, whereof true Religion is the Physician and Guide.

But has not God expressly and plainly told us in his holy Word, that he makes
choice of such whom you call ignorant, and illiterate persons, to be the
instruments of his grace, and salvation unto men? as Mat. 11.25. I thank thee O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things from the
wise, and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: and 1 Cor. 1.26. Not many
wise men after the flesh, etc.

Non sapientes etc Ne traduxisse prudentia, Ambr. in Luc. 6.
ne redemisse divitiis, ne potentiae nobilitatisque authoritate traxisse
aliquos videretur: 1. Not many wise, lest any might seem to have been
inveigled, and seduc't to Christianity by the enticing words of man's wisdom.
2. Not many Rich, lest our redemption might seem to be purchased with gold or
silver; or that worldly gain should become the motive to godliness. 3. Not many
Noble, lest the authority of earthly powers, and dignities, rather then the
authority of Christ, and the convincing power of his truth, might seem the
allurement of our conversion: therefore God has chosen the foolish -- even
Fishermen to confound the Philosophers; Publicans, and sinners to reprove the
most rigid Stoics, and morally virtuous; poor, weak, and unarmed men to make
conquest of all nations, to dissolve the armed powers of the world, and without
any carnal weapons to be mighty through God, 2 Cor. 10 4.
for the pulling down of strong holds -- that so all the world might
acknowledge the work of grace and salvation in Christ, to be his Revelation,
not man's invention, and that no flesh might glory in his presence, presuming to
ascribe to his own power, wisdom, wealth, dignity, etc. what is the sole work
of Gods grace and goodness.

But 2. It does not hence follow, that all vulgar and unlearned persons may
understand, and expound the Scriptures as well as the wise and learned, for the
reasons already alleged in answer to the first objection. And because further
under the notion of babes, little ones, foolish, and weak things of the world,
Quid est parvos etc. elegit, i.e. non superbos, and elatos, sed humiles, and
mites, Aug.
is not meant so much the ignorant and unlearned, as the meek, lowly, humble,
whom no spirit of pride and self-conceited knowledge, and holiness had puffed
up: For it is not ignorance and want of learning, but humility, and
self-dejection, that enfits the soul for the impressions of Grace and Truth. So
that those unlearned persons who have so good an esteem of themselves, as to
prefer their own sense and judgment in spiritual things, before that of the
learned, and of their Teachers; cannot be of the number of those babes and
little ones to whom the mysteries of Christ are revealed, but rather to be
rankt amongst those wise men after the flesh, who are rejected.

But against humane learning we are admonisht to take heed of it as dangerous,
Col. 2.8. Let no man spoil you through Philosophy --

holy Scriptures themselves, which are given by divine inspiration for our
guidance to eternal happiness, have been and daily are by Heretics and
Schismatics wrested to their own condemnation. And so it fares with Philosophy
and all the parts of humane learning. It Is confessed, that many Philosophers
opposed holy Christian Religion at the first, as contradictory to some of their
false erroneous positions: and many Heretics arose in the Church being
seduced, and seducing others, with principles taken out of the heathenish
Pythagorean Philosophy: from the knowledge whereof they were called Gnostics:
But true Philosophy is not therefore to be condemned because Heathen
Philosophers held many false tenants, no more then true Religion is to be
condemned, because some seduced professors thereof hold many Heretical and
false opinions therein. And herein the necessary use of Philosophy is apparent,
in that though many Heresies sprung from Philosophers, Erasm. in praefat. ad
Irenae.
yet by Philosophers they have been suppressed, and the truth maintained: witness
Moses skilled in all the learning of the Egyptians, against Jannes and Jambres,
with the rest of the Egyptian Magicians and Philosophers. And S. Paul by the
help of his great learning and judgment, Act. 17.
confuted the Stoic Philosophers, and Epicureans, and maintained the truth of
Christ's resurrection, which they denied: witness also Justin Martyr a
Philosopher, maintaining the truth against that Philosopher and grand Heretic
Valentinus: so Tertulliama Philosophers against Marcion a Philosopher: Origin
against Celsus: Chnysostome against Libanius: Prudentius against Symmachus: And
many of the Fathers more by the help of Philosophy and humane Bearing, confuted
the false positions of Heathen Philosophy, and the many errors that from thence
crept in, and infested the holy Christian Religion: So that it is not against
Philosophy and humane learning, but the abuse of it to the forging, and
maintaining of false opinions, that the Apostles admonition is directed.

But against the present way of breeding up Ministers in Colleges, it is yet
further objected by the Enthusiasts, that the very end of all such breeding, is
merely to make a trade of the Ministry; that they may get livings and
preferments in the world: The Scholars study for Benefices, and Tithes, and
Degrees, and the Priests teach for hire, and the Prophets prophecy for money:
thus the holy Ghost is bought, and sold, and the office of the Ministry it
self being Simoniacal, is thereby unlawful.

Colleges, and Schools: nor yet secondly any way impugn the use and necessity
of the Ministerial office.

As to the first: not only under the Law, the Prophets of the Lord, both
ordinary and extraordinary, were generally such as were bred up in the Schools
of the Prophets, as before, but under the Gospel, we read of Christ himself,
that he had recourse unto the Temple, where he sat amongst the Doctors,
hearing them, and asking them questions, Ex^mplo ejus nobis estendem, ne
infirmus docere quis ^udeat si ille puer doceri interrogando voluit, qui per
divinitat^ potentiam ve^bam scientiae ipsis doctoribus m^n^stravit. Lyra.
Luke 2.46. not that he who was the wisdom of the Father had need of any
instruction from men; but to give us an example by this gracious act of
condescension, first to hear and learn from them, whom God and public order
has plac't^ over us, before we presume to be the teachers of others: As in
temporal and civil affairs, He to whom all things in heaven, and ca^th do bow
and obey, was notwithstanding obedient to his parents, and to Caesar; that he
might be unto us a patter most the like obedience: so in spiritual and divine
things, He who is the fountain of wisdom and truth; vouchsafe notwithstanding
to be taught by, learn from the Doctors of the Law, that he might be unto us an
example to observe the same way of instruction, and breeding.

The example of S. Paul the great Apostle of the Gentiles bred up at the fect
of Gamaliel, his Divinity Lectures for the space of seven years together,
Exemplified.
preached in the School of one Tyrannus, has both warranted and exemplified
the joint use of Philosophy, and Divinity, Lectures in our Colleges; and the
useful combination of humane and divine learning, of humane Arts, and divine
Theology, Reason, and Religion, the one as the Handmaid, and the other as the
Mistress, or rather the Queen of saving knowledge and wisdom.

As to the second, Those who either study to preach, or preach what they have
studied, and learnt, out of ambitious and covetous desires only: as their
intentions and desires are best known unto God the Judge of all, so to his just
judgment it is our Christian duty to refer them: B^r. in cant. Sermon. 3^. ^itat.
p^r. Th. Aq. and Est. in 1 Cor. 8.1.
And herein it is to be heartily wished, that those pious and prudent directions
of S. Bernard, might by all students, and preachers both be remembered, and
observed: Necesse est ut scias etc. He that will study aright for knowledge,
and rightly employ it, when he has obtained it, it is necessary that he
consider and observe 1. A right order. 2 A right endeavor. 3. A right end in
his studies, and spiritual labors And. 1. He observes a right order, who
studies to know that first which is most conduceable to eternal salvation. 2. A
right endeavor is observed, when that is most earnestly labored for which
most tends to the inflaming of the soul with the celestial fire of holy
charity. 3. He observes a right end in his studies, who studies not, either 1.
out of curiosity, or 2. of vainglory, or 3. for filthy lucre and preferment;
or in a word, for any sordid and worldly ends, but only for the edification of
himself and others. For, 1. there are some (says the Father) who study to
know, only that they may know: and this is a fantastic, and misbecoming
curiosity. Others 2. study to know that they may be known, and taken notice of
for learned, and knowing men: and this is pride and vainglorious ostentation,
against whom that satirical lash of the Poet is directed, Scire tuum nihil est,
nisi te scire hoc sciat alter. Others 3. study to know, that they may make sale
and gain of their knowledge; and this is filthy covetousness. Others 4. do
study for knowledge and widom for their own edification in the most holy Faith:
and this in prudence. And others 5. study for the aedification of others: And
this is Charity. Only the two last, (says the Father) abuse not their
knowledge, because for this end only they labor for knowledge, that they may
know to do good, both to themselves and to others.

The necessity of learning as to the understanding of holy Scriptures, will
further appear by induction of particulars. --

CHAP. X. The several parts of Learning required to the understanding of the
holy Scriptures.
I. TO the right understanding of the true and genuine sense of Gods holy Word,
first, The knowledge of Tongues and Languages is requisite. For tongues are the
gates of knowledge, or the doors to the house of wisdom: and as ordinarily no
man enters a house but by the doors thereof; so no man, how piercing soever his
understanding be, can enter the cabinet of divine mysteries contained in holy
Scriptures, but by some insight in those languages wherein they were written.
For 1. it is not enough to see these waters of life in their streams, except we
see them also in their fountain, not only as they are severally and variously
translated by men, but as they are the immediate dictates of the Spirit of God:
for as waters are more clear in the fountain then in the stream, so the holy
Scriptures appear more clear and intelligible in the Original and fountain
Language, then as they are conveyed unto us in the stream of Translations
into other languages.

2. The holy Scripture is full of Metaphors, Multa dicuntur in sac. Script.
(...), and omnis metaphora, si de-alia in aliam linguam transferatur ad verbum,
quibusdam quasi sentibus orationis sensus and germina suffocantur, Hier. in
Ephesians. 4.
and as Hier. observes, When a Metaphor is transferred out of one Language into
another, if it be done exactly, and to a word, it loses its proper emphasis,
and the sense and fruitfulness thereof is stifled and choakt.

3. There is no Translation, how accurate soever, can in all words and phrases
punctually agree with the Original: because there are but few words to be found
in any language which have not diverse significations.

II. The knowledge of Geography, History, Arts, and monuments of antiquity. For
1. The holy Scriptures being the Language of other Countries, how shall they
understand them, that know nothing of the situation of those countries and
places, or of their rites and customs, particular idiomes, phrases, and
proverbial speeches, which must needs seem strange, improper and insignificant
to them, who know no more but the ordinary places, customs and expressions of
their own nation?

2. The Scriptures are of all books in the world, the most ancient: now as
times do alter and vary, so do the customs and constitutions, actions and
affections, manners, and proverbial sayings of all people alter also: hence the
14. chapter of the 1 Cor. is so hard to be understood. Because those customs
are so long since out of date. And this may seem to be one reason, why God in
his wisdom, has so often altered his ways of dispensation, and the revelaton
of his truth unto his Church: and it is the ground of that wise direction of the
Father, Distingue tempora and intelliguntur Scripturae, he must warily
distinguish, betwixt ancient and modern times, that will rightly understand the
Scriptures.

III. The knowledge of Rhetoric, Logic, etc. by the help whereof we are
enabled to take notice, 1. Of those tropes and figures, and metaphorical
expressions, whereof the holy Scripture is full, to know what is properly, and
what figuratively expressed, what is the literal, and what the mystical sense
therein; what is delivered by way of History, and what by way of parable, and
similitude; what by way of command, and what by way of counsel; to compare the
more obscure, and dark places, with the more plain and perspicuous: the like
saying in one place, with its like in another; and the differing and unlike,
with its unlike and differing expression.

2. To observe the causes and grounds, the scope and drift of every saying,
with the reasons, and arguments to enforce it, and warily to distinguish,
betwixt the substance and circumstances of each command and admonition.

3. By way of Logical Analyze to open, divide, and resolve the holy Word into
its proper parts, that each who hears and reads the same may know his own
portion, and what particularly is applyable to him: An art which Timothy was
commanded to study for: Study to show thy self approved, a workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 1 Timothy 2.15.

IV. The knowledge of natural causes, virtues, operations, and effects; which
is the sum of Natural Philosophy. For, 1. The holy Scripture as well sets forth
unto us the works of God, Adoro scripturae plenitudinem, quae mihi factorem
manif^stat, and facta, Tert. cont. Herm.
as his words, of command, admonition, etc. Witness the history of the
creation, Genesis 1. which is in it self a little epitome of all natural
Philosophy, and the admirable discourses of Gods works in the book of Job, and
in the Psalms of David, and many other places; and this because the works of
God are, as the great Basil styles the world, (...), the School of Gods
knowledge; For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. The most wise God who has revealed himself unto
us in his works as well as in his word, has also used the one as a means to
illustrate and clear the meaning of the other: so that as the word of God sets
forth his mavelous works, so by his works, and by similitudes and
resemblances taken from his creatures, he teaches us in his word, both the
knowledge of himself, and of his holy will, touching the ways of his worship:
witness the manifold commands and admonitions expressed under the notion of
several creatures: The Ox and the Ass, the Stork, the Crane, Isa. 1.3.
and the Swallow. To exemplify but in one text, which is also a positive
command of the Gospel, Mat. 10.16. Be ye therefore wise as Serpents, but
innocent as Doves: He then that knows nothing of the nature of the Serpent,
and of the Dove, how shall he understand the meaning or yield obedience to this
command? And that very appearance of the holy Ghost in the shape of a Dove upon
our Savior, Mat. 3.16. Act. 2.2, 3.
and in wind and fire upon his Apostles, implies the necessity of this price
of humane Learning, to understand something of the properties of that creature,
and of these elements, to understand aright the several qualifications of the
holy Ghost.

V. The knowledge of moral Philosophy: for rightly to understand the nature,
properties, etc. of moral virtues, must needs conduce exceedingly to the right
understanding of the perfection and excellency of spiritual graces: the one
being but the elevation and raising up of the other to an higher pitch of
perfection. The light of nature being not extinguished, but made more clearly
seeing, by the light of Grace. And the guidance of natural reason being not
abolisht, (...) Just. Mart. Diol. cum Tryph.
but rectified, perfected, and confirmed by the dictates, and commands of the
holy Christian Faith. Therefore Justin Martyr styles Philosophy (meaning I
believe natural and moral Philosophy as subservient to Divinity) The greatest
possession and most acceptable unto God, as the means whereby we are brought to
the knowledge of God, and of his holy will.

CHAP. XI. Of the Analogy of faith: and the Doctrine of the Church.
TO the right understanding of holy Scriptures it is further required to know
what sense and meaning the ancient Fathers, the learned and pious Doctors of
the Church in all ages have given of them: for no Scripture is of private
interpretation. But interpreted and understood it must be according to the
general Canon, or Analogy of Faith; that faith which was once given to the
Saints by the Apostles, the articles whereof are summarily comprehended in the
Apostles Creed: That Faith which so delivered and received, has been preserved
and maintained, Winc. vi^.
semper, abique and ab omnibus, at all times, in all places, by all persons,
Councels, and Fathers; and is by the merciful providence of God (in spite of
all opposition from Infidels, Heretics, and Schismatiques) brought down unto
us. Prove. 3.5.
This Faith, must be the rule according to which we must steer our
interpretations of holy Scriptures: not leaning to our own understanding, or
abounding in our own sense, but ever submitting our private judgment to the
public judgment of the Church: which in the Apostles own times was
commanded, when the gift of prophecy or interpretation of Scripture was by
more immediate and extraordinary inspiration communicated, yet even then the
judgment of the Church was to be allowed in the interpretation of Scripture, 1
Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge.

Numb. 16.14.
Will thou put out the eyes of these people? must we not see with our own eyes,
but only with those of the Church? Shall we pin our faith upon any men's
sleeves? What need we the authority of men, when we have Gods own authority for
our direction; and men are but men, i. e. frail and liable to error, so that
all they affirm is not to be taken for Gospel?

In answer whereunto, consider,

implicit faith and blind obedience to the dictates of the Church, and a
submission to the public judgment thereof: The first deprives the people of
their reason and judgment; the second renders them more meek, humble,
submissive and obedient; and thereby more capable to receive the impression of
the knowledge of celestial mysteries.

2. That we assert not the ancient and learned Fathers of the Church, ut
dominos, sed ut duces sidei, Nihil carum rerum scire quae ante nascereris facta
sunt, hoc est semper esse puerum. Cic.
Not as Lords over our faith, but as guides in the true belief: And he that
knows nothing of the Religion of the Fathers for his guidance and direction, is
most likely still to continue a child in his religion.

Nor, 3. are we to receive for Oracle, all that the ancient reverend Fathers of
the Church did affirm, being very few amongst them, Quicquid omnes vel plures
uno eodemque sensu, manifest, frequenter, perseveranter velut quodam sibi
consentiente concilio, accipiendo, tenendo, tradendo firmaverint, id pro
indubitato, certo ratcque habeatur. Quicquid vero quamvis ille doctus, and
san^tus, quamvis Episcopus, praeter omnes, aut etiam contra omnes senserit, id
inter proprias, and privatas opiniunculas a communis and publicae generalis
sententiae authoritate secretum sit. Vinc. Lyr.
but had their particular errors and mistakes: and in many particulars also
('it is confessed) they did contradict each other. It Is not therefore the
affirmations and private opinions of particular persons we must look upon as
the Doctrine of true Religion, and true meaning of the Scriptures: but the
general and universal consent of all, for that all should err and fall from
the truth is contrary to what our Lord has promised, who will undoubtedly be
as good as his word, Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against it, and Mat. 28.20. I am with you
always even to the end of the world.

In a word, in the interpretation of Scriptures and for the confirmation of
holy truths thence deduced, the authority of the ancient Fathers, and Doctors
of the Church is to be consulted and known for these reasons.

1. Because they are certain and undeniable witnesses of what the Church, and
the people of Christ did in their respective times, believe and hold for
orthodox Doctrine. If the same doctrine St. Augustine taught in Africa, was
also taught by St. Chrysostom in Greece, by St. Ambrose in Italy, by St.
Hierome in Palestine, and so in other places by holy and reverend Bishops, and
Pastors of the Church, then this undoubtedly was the doctrine of the Church:
and thus were the holy Scriptures understood in those ages of the Church, Ita
intellexit. Ambrosius, ita Cyprianus, etc. Thus Ambrose, thus Cyprian
understood, such or such a place of Scripture, this had some weight in St.
August. time, and St. Aug. opinion, and there is no reason, but that it should
be of the same force still amongst us.

It Is no way probable but that persons so eminent in learning and in piety, so
frequent in holy prayers and meditations, in fastings and wailings, so
indefatigable in their studies and labors in the Word and Doctrine, and who
laid down their lives, and fortunes for the doctrine they preached, should more
truly understand the Scriptures, and the truth of Christian Religion then we,
who if there be any thing of Modesty and Humility in our hearts, must confess
our selves far inferior to them in the said gifts, and graces of the holy
Spirit. Aug.
Vsque adeo promiscuit imis summa longus dies, etc. Has time so confounded all
things, is light so changed into darkness, and darkness become light, ut
videant Pelagius etc. that Haeretiques now are the only seers, Et caeci sunt
Hilarious, Cyprianus, Ambrosius, And the learned pious Fathers of the Church
become blind? The words are too much appliable to the Heretics of the times.

3. The judgment of the Fathers being so far remote from these times wherein
we live, must needs be impartial as to the controversies amongst us, touching
the interpretation of any texts of Scripture, or doctrines therein delivered,
as being altogether disinterested, and knowing nothing of our disputes and
contestations thereabouts, Aug. contra Julian Pelag
Nullas nobiscum vel vobiscum amicitias attenderunt, etc. They were neither in
friendship nor in community with us, or with them, who in this age are of a
contrary opinion to us, they were neither angry with us, nor them, neither did
they pity either of us, but what they found professed in the Church, they
faith, fully preserved, what they learned they taught, and what they received
from their fathers, they delivered unto us their children: and undoubtedly,
Survey of the pretended discipline.
as a learned man of our Church observes, they that contemn the learned Fathers
that went before them, do but open a gap to their own discredit, making way
thereby to be contemned themselves, by all those that shall come after.

4. We cannot but reasonably imagine, that those holy and learned persons, who
lived nearer the Apostles times, should proportionably know better the Apostles
meaning in their writings, and the doctrine they preached, then any of us who
live so many hundred years since. Iren. l. 3. chapter 4.
Therefore says Irenaeus, who was the Disciple of Polycarpus, the Disciple of
St. John, Where any question arises, and the holy Scripture (as it is too
common) is so perverted, Vinc. Ler.
as to be made speak for both sides; whither shall we have recourse for
satisfaction, but to the ancient Churches of Christ, in which the Apostles
converst? from thence to hear what the truth is, viz. Quid Apostoli, quid primi
fideles, quid eorum successores, etc. what the Apostles, what their Disciples,
and successors, what the primitive Saints and Martyrs, Councels and Fathers
have received, taught and delivered unto others: For what? came the word of God
our from you, or came it unto you only? 1 Cor. 14.36. Since the Word of God
comes not first to us, but by and from the Church it is delivered, it follows
that the sense and meaning of Gods word, must not spring from our own heads,
but to be by and from the Church delivered together with the word.

The learned Doctor Whittaker in his disputes against the authority of the
Church, Whit. de sac. Q. 3. con. 1. c. 2. Du^l. adv^^s. Staplet.
as it is by some Romanists preferred before the authority of holy Scriptures,
does yet acknowledge these four offices in the Church in order to the
Scriptures: 1. That the Church is the Register, and conserver of the
Scriptures. 2. The Judge both to discern and define, what Scriptures are
Canonical, and what Apocryphal. 3. To be the promulgator or publisher of them
to all its members the people of God, where ever dispersed over the face of the
earth. And, 4. To be the interpreter and expounder of them: and in these
respects to contemn, or neglect the Ministry and Testimony of the Church, is
the way to err from the faith; (says he) to rush into certain destruction:
And in these cases I may very well add the words of our Lord, He that will not
hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen or a Publican, Mat. 18.17.


CHAP. XII. Three inferences hence appliable to the general subject of the
whole discourse.
ANd now if we lay all these together: The knowledge of Tongues and Languages:
of History and Antiquity: of Arts and Sciences, as Rhetoric, Logic, natural
and moral Philosophy: of the Analogy of the true Faith, and of the Doctrine of
the Church, Councels, and Fathers: all which do appear necessary to the right
understanding of holy Scriptures: we may very well hence infer,

1. That the work of the Ministry in the interpretation of the Scriptures, is
not so slight and easy a business, as too many persons now a days make of it.
And they who can so easily run from the plough to the pulpit, and from the
meanest trades and employments of the world to intermeddle with the most
sublime and celestial mysteries of godliness: who pretending to the Spirit, and
yet have not these gifts of the Spirit: and to divine Revelation, being
altogether devoid and destitute of the means thereof, do thereby become vain in
their imaginations, liable to strong delusions, giving heed to seducing spirits
and doctrines of Devils, and that for want of learning, (which they do
therefore despise only because they want it) they do pervert and wrest the
Scriptures to their destruction. 1 Timothy 4.1.
And,

2. That it is not immediate Revelation we must depend upon for the right
understanding of holy Scriptures: since these several parts of what is called
humane learning, has appeared necessary thereunto: for otherwise 'twas in vain
that

1. The Apostles of Christ, which at the first were illiterate, should be
extraordinarily, and miraculously endued with the gifts of learning. 2. That
such persons should be called both ordinarily, and extraordinarily to the
Prophetical office as were eminent for learning and knowledge, not immediately
infused, but by their studies, and industry, and Gods blessing thereupon
acquired. 3. That it were also in vain, we should be commanded to hear, read,
study, mediate, seek, search and dive for knowledge. 4. That in vain also has
God of his great mercy afforded us the writings, directions, and instructions
of holy and learned men in all ages: It Is an undeniable truth, that Deus and
natura nihil faciunt frustra.
There are no arts of the divine Providence useless and unprofitable: But as
God of his great mercy is never wanting to give what is needful: so of his
great wisdom he is never lavish in giving more then is needful. Vnumquodque
propter operationem suam, God has made all things for their uses: every book,
and every writing of the learned, orthodox and holy, and every tongue, and
every science in every such book is for the manifestation of some truth, and
the profit of some soul. That I am sure is the end of Gods Spirit thereby, what
ever may be the end of man's: For the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12.7.

3. And thirdly, we may very well hence infer also that it is an over bold, rash
and saucy presumption in any persons of what quality or breeding soever, to
assume the office of Priesthood, and start up preachers of the Gospel, being
not first well studied and endowed with the several qualifications of learning
and knowledge requisite thereunto. Add hereunto the dignity of those precious
jewels committed to their charge, viz. The immortal souls of men, which are of
so great value before God as neither gold, silver, nor any corruptible thing
could redeem them, but the blood of Christ the eternal Son of God, 1. Pet. 1.18.
as a lamb without blemish: now that which cost our Redeemer so dear, and is
designed either to eternal happiness, or eternal misery, according as it is more
or less wisely and carefully ordered; requires surely such a guide and pastor,
as is not only wise, learned, and discreet, but also vigilant, careful and
conscientious.

Under the Law, how unwilling was Moses to be sent on the Lords message though
he was a learned man? Exodus 3. and so was Jeremy also: I am a child and cannot
speak, Jer. 1.6. And many others cautious of their own weakness, and of the
great abilities required to the execution of so great a function, have more
safely declined then arrogantly assumed the same. Greg. de cura past. l. 2. c.
7.
Hinc quique praecipites colligant, etc. from hence all forward novices may
observe, how great a guilt of sinful presumption they contract, who set up
themselves to be teachers of others, whilst they have yet need to be taught
themselves: since that yet holy men of God, were afraid to undertake so weighty
a calling, even when God himself called and commanded them thereunto. Under the
Gospel Christ himself who is the word of God and the wisdom of the Father,
would not preach till he was 30. years old, Vt vim saluberrimi timoris, Greg.
ibid.
etc. That he might infuse the virtue and efficacy of wholesome fear and caution
into the hearts of the over forward; since he who could not err in his
preachings, would not yet preach the ways of perfection and felicity till he
was of perfect age.

The Apostles of Christ notwithstanding that they were conversant with Christ
all the while he continued preaching the Gospel upon earth, daily heard his
heavenly Doctrine as it distilled from his own mouth, and saw the miracles he
did for the confirmation thereof: and though they were endued in some measure
with the gifts and graces of the Spirit before his ascension; For he breathed
on them, etc. Luke 24.45. He opened their understandings, to understand the
Scriptures, yet all this was not thought sufficient to preach, and open the
mysteries of the Gospel to the world: but they were forbidden to do it, till
they received additional gifts of learning and knowledge from above, Luke
24.49. Tarry you at Jerusalem, till you be endued with power from on high:
Gloss. ordin. in Loc.
Vt exemplum sequentibus daretur, etc. Giving example to all posterity, that no
weak and illiterate persons, wanting the gifts of Tongues, Arts, etc. presume
to intermeddle with preaching or unfolding the mysteries of the Gospel.

It Is recorded of the great St. Basil, and Nazianzen, that after their long
studies in saecular learning, Russin Lib. 2. cap. 9.
they continued for the space of thirteen years together in a monastery, giving
themselves to the study of holy Scriptures, the sense and meaning whereof, they
fetched not out of their own heads, but out of the writings and authority of the
ancients to whom by succession from the Apostles, the rule of right
understanding the Scriptures was apparently known.

The order of divine wisdom and providence in the dispensation of holy truths
to the world, is worth our observation out of 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. There are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit, there are diversities of
administrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of operations,
but the same God that works all in all: From hence it is easy to observe,
that there must be gifts before administrations, (i. e.) 1. A man must be
qualified with gifts fit for every calling, before he receive administration,
or be ordained to that calling. 2. There must be administration before
operation, i. e. A man must be lawfully ordained to a calling, before he work
or labor therein: So in the great calling of the Ministry, the gifts of the
Spirit must precede or go before, before Letters of administration be taken.
And, 2. a lawful ordination must be taken before operation, or working therein.
And he that either 1. assumes this high and sacred function, Bish Andr. sermon.
in 1 Cor. 12.14, etc.
being not qualified with gifts, contemns the Spirit from whom they come: Or,
2. He that labors in the word and Doctrine, though he be gifted, being not
also lawfully ordained, contemns the Lord from whom all administrations come,
and who has instituted and commanded ordination thereunto: Or, 3. He that
being both gifted and lawfully ordained is not industrious in this calling,
contemns God the Father of all operations, who works all in all. He that
thinks any of these superfluous, may as well question whether some one Person
of the Trinity be not superfluous also, even that Person from whom comes that
part of the division, which he slights and contemns. As it is therefore in the
order of the Trinity, as the Father begets the Son, and from the Father and the
Son proceeds the holy Ghost: So in this Division, the gifts of the Spirit beget
the Lords Administration, or calling to the Ministry, and both together produce
the operation or labor therein, which is the work of God: and as no man comes
to Christ, but by the holy Ghost; so no man comes lawfully to the calling, but
by the gifts; and as no man comes to the Father, but by the Son, so no man
comes to the work, but by the calling.

CHAP. XIII. The internal and divine qualifications of the soul, as to the
understanding of holy Scriptures.
1. It Is confessed, that all the external parts of humane learning already
remembered, though they be the gifts, and blessings of Gods Spirit, and
necessary helps to the opening of the Letter, and right understanding of the
literal and genuine sense of Gods word, yet are not in themselves alone
sufficient to attain a true, and thoroughly saving knowledge thereof: except our
souls be enricht as with the outward gifts, so with inward graces of the holy
Spirit also.

Truth and Holiness are the two inseparable constituent parts of spiritual
wisdom: and to understand the truth or true meaning of the Spirit of Truth in
the word, the Spirit of holiness must necessarily concur. And this is most
eloquently expressed Job. 28. where after a most high, and magnificent
expression of the praises, great price and value of true wisdom, a view is
taken of all the parts of the world, where it might be found: gold and silver,
iron and brass, all useful metals, and precious stones, have their places,
though secret, designed them: but where shall this rich pearl, where shall
wisdom be found, and what is the place of understandings? Verse. 12. It is not
found in the land of the living: the depth says, It is not in me, and the sea
says, It is not in me. Verse. 14. It is hid from the eyes of all living, and
kept close from the fowls of the air, verse. 21. The most Eagly sighted
Philosophers, and wisemen of the world, who have viewed the natures,
properties, and causes of all things, not in the earth alone, but in the
heavens also, even the courses, influences, and operations of the Sun, Moon,
and Stars, have not yet attained true wisdom: how then shall we find it out?
it follows, God knows the place thereof, and he understands the way
thereof, verse. 23. -- And he has said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding: briefly describing both the
place of wisdom, and the way thereunto; even the way of piety, and obedience.

And of that piety, which is necessarily requisite to the understanding of holy
Truth, there are several species or particular parts, which from the example of
holy Bernard, may be thus reckoned up: Qui ut legeret, intelligendi fecit
cupiditas; ut intelligeret, oration impetravit; ut impetraret, quid nisi vitae
sanctitas promeruit? His earnest desire of knowledge, made him studious and
industrious in reading: his fervent prayers obtained the understanding of what
he read: and his holy life made his prayers effectual for the enlightening of
his understanding: and thus he must desire, thus study, thus pray, and thus
live, who will attain that knowledge, which shall make him wise to salvation.

1. The first divine qualification of the soul requisite unto knowledge is the
desire thereof: The beginning of wisdom it the desire of instruction, Wisd.
6.17. Come unto me all ye that be desirious of me, and fill your selves with my
fruits, Ecclesiasticus 24.19. and what is more authentic* If thou seek
wisdom as silver, and searchest for her as for hid treasure, then shall thou
understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God, Prove. 2.4.
Such desires, and studies for wisdom, the holy Ghost undoubtedly would never
1. exemplify, 2. exhort unto, 3. enkindle in the hearts of men, but that they
should tend not to vexation, and trouble, but to satisfaction and
accomplishment in the prosecution of them: Et hoc modo prius invenire oportet
ut quaeras, deinde quaerere ut before invenias.

This desire of knowledge must not be only earnest, but also sincere, Pura erit
intentio si in omni action aut honorem Dei, aut militatem proximi, aut bonam
consci^ntiam conscientiam quaeramus, Bern. sermon. par.
free from partialities, prejudices, and prepossessions, free from pride,
covetousness, ambition, emulation, and all base, carnal, and worldly ends, and
interests: denoted by the singleness of the eye, Mat. 6.22. which is generally
interpreted to be purity of intention in all our studies, and endeavors; which
renders the whole body of our actions clear and successeful.

2. This earnest, and sincere desire of wisdom, must be prosecuted as with
diligent studies, Men's obcaecatur in divinis nisi a Domino illuminata.
so with fervent prayers unto God for his daily blessing thereupon: For the
mind (which is the eye of the soul) sees nothing of the things of God, but as
by God it is enlightened therein: therefore to him we are commanded to apply our
selves for wisdom, Jam. 1.5. So the wise man obtained it, Wisd. 7.7. Wherefore
I prayed, and understanding was given me -- Prayer is the key that opens the
cabinet of Gods secrets; Melius solvuntur dubia ^raetione, quam humana
inquisitione, Aug.
the bucket wherewithal we dive, and draw forth the waters of life of the
fountain of wisdom: And the mysteries of godliness, says the Father, are
more easily unfolded by the efficacy of fervent prayers, then by the force of
humane studies.

3. But all men's prayers are not effectual to the obtaining of true wisdom:
Joh. 9.21. Jam. 5.16.
For God hears not sinners, it is the fervent prayer of the righteous man,
that prevails with God: In the third place therefore, our prayers must be
enlivened by the piety and purity of our hearts and lives. And herein these two
divine qualifications of the soul are most especially required, Innocence and
Obedience.

1. And first Innocence, or the purity and cleanness of the soul is necessary
to the reception of saving knowledge: for wickednesss, W^sd. 4.11, 12.
says the wise man, alters the understanding, and deceit beguiles the soul: or
the deceitful lusts of the flesh, and of the world, cosen the soul of its
right understanding, so it follows, for the bewitching of naughtiness does
obscure things that are honest, and the wandering of concupiscence does
undermine the simple mind.

For as in a renewed, and righteous soul, all the faculties thereof move
forward, in their proper place and order; the understanding first rules the
will, and affections of the reasonable soul, and these guide the inferior
desires, or lusts of the sensitive soul, and keep them within their due bounds,
and limits: so in a sinful soul the government is perverted, and all moves
disorderly and backward: 1. The inferior lusts of the sensitive soul, or carnal
concupiscence masters the will and affections: and 2. these master the
understanding and pervert the judgment. So that to the right understanding of
holy Mysteries, a holy and renewed soul is most necessarily requisite: Blessed
are the pure in spirit, for they shall see God, Deus est purgatae mentis
sapientia, Aug.
Mat. 5.8. For God (says the Father) is the wisdom of the purified mind.

2. Obedience is that second specification of piety, which renders our souls
capable of saving knowledge: meaning by obedience, not that universal obedience
to the Laws of God, which includes all the parts of piety, Citius exauditur
una oration obedientis quam december millia contemptoris, Aug. Hom. 3. ad monac.
but that obediential meekness, and humility of spirit, which makes us ready to
receive the impressions, and willing to submit to the judgments of our
superiors: And one prayer, says the Father, of such an obedient person is
sooner heard then ten thousand of the scornful, and such as are wise in their
own conceit: Surely he scorneth the scorners, but gives grace to the lowly,
Quanto obedientiores fucrimus Praepositis, and patribus, tanto obediet Deus
orationibus nostris, Eusebius. limiss.
Prove. 3.34. And Eusebius Emissenus says, By how much more we are obedient to
our Ecclesiastical or spiritual governors, and fathers who have the rule over
us, and watch sor our souls; by so much the more God will be obedient to our
prayers, and yield to our desires: see for further proof hereof, Ps. 25.9. Joh.
7.17. Jam. 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5.

These divine qualifications of the souls, as to the right understanding of
holy Truths, have these ensuing benefits.

1. Hereby the Mysteries of godliness appear more plain, easy and intelligible
to the soul: For the ways of God are plain to the holy, but stumbling blocks
to the wicked, Ecclus. 39.24.

2. Hereby the soul does really taste and is delighted with the bread of life:
For, says the Father, as bread is sweet to the sound and healthful palate,
Palato non sano poena est panis, qui sano est suavis, and oculis agris odiosa
est lux, quae puris est amabilis. Aug.
which to the sickly, and unsound is unsavory: and as light is pleasant to the
clear eyes, but to the weak and sickly troublesome, and offensive: so the bread
of life, and light of divine knowledge, is to the pure and holy, sweet,
savoury, and pleasant: To the pure all things are pure, but to the impure and
unclean, even holy things themselves become unholy, Tit. 11.15.

3. Hereby God is invited, and won to preserve, and guide us in the ways of
Truth, and to scatter and dispell all temptations, and seductions to error, and
deceit, Ps. 25.11.14.

4. Hereby that doctrinal knowledge of God, and literal understanding of his
word in the use of outward means obtained, is made perfect, and completed: The
former being but the body, and carcass, but this the soul, and spirit of saving
knowledge: If ye know these things, happy are ye, if ye do them, Joh. 13.17.

Hereby the heart is prepared, and the mind made capable of a greater, and
more full light of true wisdom, according to that promise of the Lord, Habenti
dabitur, Mat. 25.29. To him that has shall be given, and he shall have more
abundance: to him that makes a right use of his knowledge, more shall be added:
therefore the paths of the just are compared to the shining light, which
shines more and more to the perfect day, Prove. 14.8.

CHAP. XIV. The objection from the misdemeanors of the Ministry considered.
THE necessity of piety and integrity, as to the sacred and saving knowledge of
Gods Revealed will being thus apparent, the want hereof in some persons of the
Clergy has brought, even upon the sacred function it self, that great contempt
and reproach under which it now lies oppressed: there being nothing so frequent
in the mouths of the people, as the sins of their ministers: the Perjury,
time-serving, and wavering inconstancy of some, the faction and sedition of
others; the pride, the covetousness, the drunkenness of others, Etenim non
solum docti esse volumus, sed and docti, and bom: qualis omnin^ est, qui recte
quidem verbis, sed multo rectius mo^ibus and vita philoso phantur. Sabel. orat.
7.
have made even the profession contemptible, and our labors in the word and
doctrine ineffectual, and vain: fervent prayers, and holy living being those
spiritual engines, whereby those holy truths delivered in sermons, have their
influence upon the hearts and lives of the hearers: and where an exemplary
purity of life is wanting, it is no mervail, that God, who is the fountain of
purity, deny his blessings upon our labors, and turn our preaching into
foolishness.

And herein the Enthusiasts of the age, have found so great a flaw in the
Ministry, as that they absolutely decry the calling: or if not so, yet the
best terms they can afford the most upright, and conscientious amongst us, is
false Prophets, and deceivers of the people.

But yet that the error of this opinion, and sinfulness of the railing
accusations, though against some persons they have too much of truth, may
appear; it is necessary to take notice of these following considerations:

1. That it is the sins of the people, that provokes God to give them ignorant
and sinful shepherds; And there shall be like people like Priests, says the
Lord, and I will punish them for their ways, and reward them their doings,
Hos. 4.9. and again, The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense
are come, Israel shall know it: The Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad:
and what is the reason? for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great
hatred, Hos. 9.7. Non est a pl^be, aut vulgaribus hominibus arguendus, aut
accu^andus episcopus lices sit inordinatus, quia pro meritis subdit^rum
disponitur a Deo vita dectorum. Evar. ep. fratribus Egypt.
And therefore says Evaristus: A Bishop, and Pastor of souls is not to be
reviled by the people, though be disorderly, because God disposes of the lives
of the Teachers according to the deserts, and qualities of the hearers. And so
of Princes as well as of Priests: wicked Princes God gives in his wrath, Hos.
13.11. viz. when he is angry with a people for their sins: And even the errors
of the best kings are ascribed to the sins of their subjects: As David's sin in
numbering the people was caused by the anger of the Lord against Israel, 2 Samuel
24.1. For the Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord, and he turns it whither
soever he will, Prove. 21.1. either for a blessing or curse upon their subjects:
Sic pro meritis plebis saepe pastores depravantur ecclesiae, Anacleti epist.
tertia.
ut proclivius corruant qui sequuntur: It Is even so with the Pastors of the
Church, who are depraved, and diorderly in their lives, because the people by
their sins have deserved to have such leaders, whose directions shall sooner
tend to the ruin, then to the health of their souls.

2. It Is the duty of all Christian people, rather to cover and veil, then to
disclose, and publish the enormities of their Pastors: For they are their
spiritual Fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15. And the nakedness of Fathers must not be
discovered by the children, that the curse of Cham fall not upon them, Genesis
9.22.25. If the Pastors neglect their duty toward God, the people must not
therefore neglect their duty to their Pastors, but wisely distinguish betwixt
their example and doctrine, obeying the truths they deliver, but avoiding the
sinful practices they follow: which is positively commanded by our Lord, Mat.
23.2, 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair, -- All therefore
whatsoever they bid observe, that observe and do: but do not ye after their
works, for they say and do not: Etiam si quisquam traditor subrepsisset, etc.
says Aug. Though some traitor or wicked person creep into the chair of Moses,
Aug. Epis. 165.
it should nothing hurt the Church, or innocent Christians, for whom Christ
has provided, saying of evil prelates, what they say, do ye.

3. The knowledge of the Truth may be obtained in the use of outward means, and
the ministerial office thereupon conferred upon such persons, as want the
internal qualification of true piety: which is clear from the examples of
Balaam, who loved the wages of righteousness, and yet had the gift of
prophecy: of Judas who was sent out by the Lord himself to preach the Gospel,
and yet had a Devil: and Nicholas chosen by the Apostles, one of the Deacons,
and yet was the father of the Nicholaitan Haeresie, so much detested by God,
Rev. 2.6. Shall we therefore accuse, and rail upon the Prophets of the Lord for
the sin of Balaam, or disparage the Apostles of Christ for the sin of Judas; or
impute to the rest of the holy Deacons the error of Nicholas? or shall we not
hear and obey the truth, because it comes from the mouths of some wicked as
well as good Ministers? It is rather our duty to admire the wisdom, and
magnify the goodness of God, who to give the greater testimony to the Truth,
and to make it more illustrious and evident, is pleased to deliver it unto us
by his Ministers of both sorts, good and bad, both by the holy, and by the
profane. And it is the Spirit of God undoubtedly that works in, and by all
persons that deliver the truth: though not in all alike, but in men of diverse
qualifications after a different manner: in good men as ingredient, and
insident: in bad men, as urgent, and impellent: by good men more frequently and
effectually he works the conversion of his people; and by bad men sometimes
also, though more rarely, that the working of his grace may appear in all, and
the glory thereof may to him as the supreme cause, and not to his instruments
be ascribed.

4. That the gifts of Gods holy Spirit, are not limited to those that receive
his graces, is further clear, Mat. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that day:
Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in thy name -- Here were great gifts
bestowed, and that upon wicked, and unsanctified persons: for it follows
immediately, Then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, depart from me
ye workers of iniquity: so also 1 Cor. 13.2. Though I have the gift of
prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and though I have all faith so as to
remove mountains (viz. of seeming impossibilities) and have not charity, I am
nothing. From whence two things are plainly, and clearly observable.

1. That the understanding of holy Scriptures, and of the mysteries of
godliness, or prophetical and ministerial gifts, may be obtained in the use of
outward means, without the internal sanctification of soul which consists in
charity or love, which is the fulfilling of the Law.

2. But then secondly, The gift of prophecy, with all the wisdom and
knowledge of holy things, though they may be, and often are useful for the
edification of others; yet are they altogether fruitless, and ineffectual to
the person that has them, if not animated by the grace of charity, or
obedience to the Laws of God, for so they are not much unlike a candle in a
dark lanthorn, which casts its light abroad upon others, leaving the person
that holds it in darkness.

CHAP. XV. The dangerous and destructive consequences of, and depending upon
immediate Revelation.
He that pretends unto or depends upon any further Revelations from heaven
then God in his great mercy has already afforded unto his Church and people,
viz. 1. His written Word, 2. Those several means and helps forementioned, both
divine and humane, outward and inward, for the right understanding of his Word,
by the blessing of God, and the secret influence of his holy Spirit upon our
studies, and meditations therein: lays himself open to manifold temptations,
and dangerous seductions of the spirit of error and delusion: and as much as in
him lies, subverts the very foundation of the holy Christian Faith: for
hereupon these destructive inconveniences must needs ensue.

1. The canon of holy Scripture is transgrest and dissolved, by the
superaddition of new Revelations: and the authority of Gods Word is made null,
and void; that must pass for a dead letter, when the fictitious dreams, and
delusions of every idle enthusiastical brain, under the mask of Revelations,
shall be mistaken and miscalled too, The quickening Spirit.

And he that sets up any thing of Religion to the dishonor of holy Scriptures,
Opta^. l. 3.
1. says the Father, he does, adificium de ruina construere, erect a building
upon the ruins of Gods truth; and such a building can be no better but an heap
of errors and deceits: For what will not he dare to affirm, and hold, who holds
any thing besides, or above, or but equal to the Word of God, for the Rule of
Faith? Hereupon the Resurrection has been denied, and the last judgment, and
the necessity of all holy, just, and good works, the necessary consequences of
these points of our faith: for he that believes not the Resurrection, and last
judgment, Quid boni aut very, what holy Truth will he care to believe, or what
good action will he make conscience to practice?

2. He opposes himself to the doctrine of the universal Church of Christ, for
1600 years together, who with one unanimous, and common consent, have received
the holy Scriptures as the very canon of Faith, without addition or diminution,
without ever hoping or waiting for any new Revelations to be superadded
thereunto: and very good reason sure, if that dismal curse wherewith the canon
of holy Scripture is concluded, have any influence upon the minds of men, Rev.
22.18.19. If any man add unto these things, God shall add unto him, the
plagues that are written in this book, etc.

3. And more particularly he makes void all those commandments of God to
search the Scriptures, to hear, read, meditate, and study, and delight our
selves in the Laws of God: For all immediate Revelation of Gods will,
presupposes the knowledge of the truth, without any search, study, etc. The
contempt or neglect of which duty has sad and heavy judgments threatened
thereunto, as Jer. 9.13, etc. And the Lord says, Because they have forsaken my
Law, which I set before them -- And have walked after the imagination of their
own heart -- I will seed them with wormwood, and give them water of gall to
drink, I will scatter them among the heathen, etc. with manifold texts to the
same purpose, both in the old and new Testament, as Prove. 13.13. and 28.9.
Psalm. 81.11, 12. Zach. 7.12.13. Joh. 5.45, 46. and 12.48.

4. He makes void and unnecessary the sacred function of the Priesthood, or
Ministry, which God has in all ages ordained and settled in his Church, as to
mediate with God for the people, so to instruct the people from God: And this
sacred office God has both confirmed by miracles, and by testimony of his
blessings ordinary and extraordinary, and guarded the same by many direful
threatenings denounced, and many heavy judgments inflicted upon such as have,
or shall sacrilegiously violate, infringe, or usurp this office, or neglect,
refuse, or contemn to hear the word of God in the mouths of his Prophets, and
faithful Ministers: See amongst many other places, Jer. 5.12, etc. Because the
people belied the Lord, and said, It is not he, when he spoke by his Prophet;
And because they said moreover, The Prophets shall become ^inde, and the word
is not in them -- Therefore thus says the Lord, Because ye speak this word, I
will make my words in thy mouth, fire, and this people wood, and it shall
devour them: And to the same purpose, Jer. 6.10, 11, 12. and Mat. 10.14, 15.
Luke 10.11, 12.

5. All pretense to immediate Revelation lords it over the faith of our
Christian brethren: For an immediate Revelation commands an immediate belief,
and blind obedience, without any further fearch or trial at all: contrary to
those express commands, 1 John 4.1. Believe not every spirit, but try the
spirits: 1 Thessalonians. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good, or
agreeable to the word of God: but reject that which is not so, and hold for
accursed the publishers, and promoters thereof: Gal. 1.8. Though we, or an
Angel from heaven should preach unto you another Gospel besides what ye have
received, let him be accursed.

6. The faith of the Enthusiast (if it may be called a faith, and not rather an
illusion of his fancy) is not built upon the same grounds with the faith of
Christ's Church; which is the pillar and ground of truth: the Church is built
upon the foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the head corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20. i. e. what the Prophets of the Old Testament,
and the Apostles of the New, have revealed to be the doctrine of salvation in
Christ, is the foundation which the faith of all true Christians is built upon:
But the Enthusiasts faith, is not built upon old, but upon new Revelations, not
upon what is revealed already through the mediation of the Prophets and
Apostles, and communicated by their successors, but upon what shall be
immediately revealed from heaven: and this groundless ground of faith is
opposed to that which is the true ground of faith indeed, and made of equal
authority therewith; so that upon this ground every private man's sayings, and
affirmations are of as great authority, and as much to be regarded, as the
divinely inspired sayings of the Prophets and Apostles; and this must needs be
so, were there any truth in men's p^etended Revelations: for undoubtedly we owe
as much faith, reverence, and obedience to every Revelation from heaven, how
mean soever the person be, that receives it, as we do to any part of Gods Word
already revealed, though by the greatest Patriarch or Prophet, that ever lived
upon earth.

7. All dependence upon new Revelations, lays a secret stain of dishonor upon
God: and this in two respects:

1. That God, notwithstanding his several methods of divine Revelation, by the
Patriarchs and Prophets of old, by his own Son Jesus Christ, and his Apostles
in these last days, should yet be defective in making known to his people the
ways of his service, and of their own salvation.

2. All pretense to new lights and Revelations, makes God, the Father of
Lights, with whom is no variableness, or shadow of change, to vary and change
his mind as often as the fickle and deceitful minds of men do alter: Nay, thus
God is made to speak things quite opposite and contrary to himself; whilst the
several conceits, secret suggestions, and whispers of men's hearts, which are as
numerous as the sand, and contrarious as light, and darkness, are yet all under
pretense of immediate Revelation fixed upon God, who changes not.

8. It does extremely much derogate, and detract from the honor of holy
Christian Religion to have no better ground and foundation, then either the
divinity of the Heathens of old, or that of the Mahometans, which of later
times has so far overspread, and swallowed up so many Christian Kingdoms, and
flourishing Commonwealths in the world; and both the one and the other of
these, not only derive their original, but also their progress, success, and
present continuance does depend upon immediate Revelations: which no good
Christian surely does doubt to be any other then Diabolical Delusions: The
Divinity of the Heathens was such, as the Priests of their respective Temples
and Oracles delivered to the people in their prophetic trances, for celestial
Responses, and divine inspirations: And the more subtle, and sublime of the
heathen Philosophers recommend unto us, an Ecstatical contemplation, even to
the abolition of the understanding, and Reason, as the highest and most perfect
way of divine knowledge. Mahomet began with Raptures, and ecstasies, and
supposed Revelations of Angels. He therefore, that shall seriously consider the
monstrous Idolatries of the one, and the horrid Blasphemies of the other, will
be careful surely how he trusts unto, or depends upon immediate Revelations.

9. This doctrine of immediate Revelation (should it be granted) is not safe
for sober and peaceable-minded Christians to embrace, or depend upon it: but is
fittest rather for such persons, whose destructive plots, and designs, under
the mask of Religion, are to dethrone, and murder Christian Princes, ruin well
established government, and governors, both Ecclesiastic and Civil, massacre
their Christian brethren, rob, ruin, and destroy whatever opposes their
designs, and private persuasions in point of faith, and manners, how sacred and
useful soever it be: such mischiefs and barbarous cruelties, when open force is
wanting to effect, may be, and too often have been effected by pretended
Revelations, and men of ecstatical, and seduced fancies; who have though they
have greatly merited thereby, and done God good service by destroying the
enemies of his Truth, and abolishing Haeresie, Superstition, etc. when as
indeed they have made havoc of a people more righteous then themselves,
destroyed the truth, and true worship of God, opened the way to disorder and
confusion, and this through perjury, sacrilege, murder, rebellion, and the
breach of all the laws of piety, justice, and charity.

10. The neglect of the means of saving knowledge, viz. learning, divine and
humane, and to depend upon Revelation, without the use of such means, is the
way to advance Lady Ignorance again as the mother of devotion, to drown the
world in Barbarism, Espencaeus.
and to reduce the Church of Christ to that sad condition, wherein it was in the
ninth age, which was called, The unlearned, and the unhappy age of the Church:
wherein he that studied Philosophy, and the Mathematics was counted a
Magician: he that knew the Greek tongue was shrewdly suspected, but if he
understood Hebrew also, he was no better then an Haeretique. It Is observed by
the learned, both Historians and Divines, that all the ten bloody persecutions
of the Church by the Heathen Emperors, did not so damage holy Christian
Religion, as did the subtle underminings of Julian the Apostate, Eusebius. eccl.
hist. l. 10. c. 32. Soz. l. 5. c. 5. Theod. l. 3. c. 7.
who fought not against Christian Religion, as did the rest of the persecuting
Emperors with fire and faggot; but by taking from them all offices of dignity,
and places of preferment: all Ecclesiastical promotions, and Church
privileges, and more especially by putting down, and forbidding all Schools of
learning, for the training up their youth in the knowledge of tongues and
sciences: that so the light of holy Religion might be lost in the dark of
ignorance and decay of arts: For Arts and Tongues are the handmaids to holy
Religion: these as 'twere hold the candle, whilst the sacred light of Truth is
displayed for our direction in the ways of light and life everlasting.

11. He tempts the good Spirit of God, who expects to receive the knowledge of
Truth by immediate Revelation and miracle, which by ordinary, common, and known
means is attainable: Dominum tentare, est novo miraculo velle p^rficere, quod
aliis rationibus sieri potest.
so the Devil tempted our Lord to seed himself with the bread of a miracle,
when Gods ordinary and common providence yielded bread enough, Mat. 4.3. and to
cast him self down from the pinnacle of the Temple, when the way to come down
by steps, was plain and easy without any such praecipitation.

That dependence upon immediate Revelation is unnecessary, and consequently
useless and unprofitable, is manifest from what has been already said from
the sufficiency of Gods revealed Truth: and is yet further manifest from the
vain, and bootlesse issue of all such dependence; For what sacred Mysteries of
holy Religion have been either made known, or more plainly unfolded by
immediate Revelation in these last days since the time of Christ and his
Apostles? many Impostures, and lies, many Haeresies and errors, many Schisms
and divisions, have fancied Revelations brought forth: but that any sound
soul-saving truth has been of later times immediately revealed, I could yet
never hear or read of by any authentic witnesses: and it is most just with God
to give men up to the vanity of their mind, and to the delusions of their own
hearts, who thus tempt his holy Spirit, by leaving the known and beaten paths
of Truth revealed, to depend upon what is unnecessary, useless, and vain: and
not only so, but also,

12. Dependence upon immediate Revelations lays us open to the delusions of
Satan, 2 Cor. 11.14.
who transforming himself into an angel of light, insinuates his suggestions,
and diabolical doctrines under the show and vizard of divine Revelations: Many
pious men have been deluded by this wile of the Devil, and have fallen into
gross errors. Tert. de anima c. 9.
Tertullian though he observed this, and saw how grossly many of Montanus sect
were cheated into foul mistakes and errors, upon fancied Revelations, yet
notwithstanding so strongly does the Devil work upon the fancy by the force of
this enchantment, that he himself was deceived also, and became a Montanist,
being cousened hereunto, especially by the pretended Revelations of a holy
sister, whom he much extols in his tract de Anima: whose pretended vision of
the substance of a soul corporally exhibited to her view, made him believe the
soul to be corporeal: and although for this opinion he was not condemned for
haeresie; neither yet was guilty of those more gross and blasphemous opinions
of the Montanists, which their fancied Revelations brought forth: yet because
more zealously then discreetly he maintained private Revelations, the Church of
that age seeing the many mischiefs, that ensued upon that doctrine, severely
censured him for it: which made him desert the communion of the Catholic
Church, and set up a congregation of his own, which were called from him
Tertullianists, and are reckoned by S. Aug. amongst his Catalogue of Haereticks.

A story not much unlike this of Tertullian, Jos. Acost. de temp. noviss. l. 2.
c. 11.
is remembered by Doctor, Casaubon out of Acosta: who records of a learned
Doctor of Divinity, and a very great zealot, who was cousened into strange and
blasphemous opinions, first by the pretended Revelations of an ordinary woman:
the story is at large set down in English by the said Doctor in his 3. chapter of
Enthusiasm, with many other remarkable stories of deluded persons, under
pretense of Revelations.

Those two great pretenders to Revelation, Prisca and Priscilla, Montanus his
minions, were so long cousened with Satanical illusions, which they took for
divine Revelations, that at the last it was revealed unto them, that they
should hang themselves, that they might pass from the miseries of this life,
to the joys of the other: Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 5. c. 16.
And Theodotus a Montanist had a vision, that he should be taken up into
heaven, and believing the spirit of error, he was lifted up on high, and thence
let fall down to the earth again, and so miserably ended his life: And many of
Montanus sect which were great pretenders to Revelation, and had withdrawn
themselves from communion with the Catholic Church, at several times ended
their lives in an halter, being thereinto incited by the Devil that inspired
them, who was the father of their Revelations.

There were another ancient sort of Haereticks in the Church, called Messalians,
and from their assiduity in prayers more then ordinary, they were also called
Euchites: Their tenants were, that every one brought into the world with him an
evil spirit, wherewith they were possessed until by earnest prayer the evil
spirit being driven away, the good Spirit of God did take possession of their
souls, and after this they needed no more, no Sacraments, no Sermons, no
Scripture to make them perfect, for they could see the holy Trinity visibly,
and foreted things to come, and all by immediate Revelation: But by this
pretense to perfection, and dependence upon Revelation, most of them, if not
all, Theod. Hist. eccl.
proved to be relly possessed by the Devil, as is recorded by Theodoret in his
Ecclesiastical History.

I might stuff this chapter with multitudes of holy persons, that have been
cousened with illusive, and lying Revelations: Katharine a holy woman said, it
was revealed to her, that the Virgin Mother of our Lord, was conceived in sin:
And Briget as holy as she, Joh. Franc, Picus.
pretended a Revelation quite contrary to that of the other, viz. that the holy
Virgin was free from original sin: venerable Bede remembers a vision, says
Bellarm, Bell. de purgat. l. 2. c. 7.
wherein it was showed to a certain devout person, That there was a fourth
place besides, Heaven. Hell, and purgatory, not unlike the Elizian fields
described by the heathen Poets, wherein lived those souls which suffered
nothing, being not as yet made fit for the beatifical vision: and this says
the Cardinal is not improbable, since like to this Revelation Dionysius, Cart.
Suarez. Jes^ to, 4 in Thom. disp. 46.4. Number. 9.
and Greg. have many others: but contrary hereunto says Suarez another
Jesuit, Revelationes Bedae and Carthusiani, etc. The Revelations of Bid, and
Carthusianus are not to be believed, but in a metaphorical sense.

S. Augustine in his Confessions, Aug. conf. l. 10.
acknowledges himself to have been mercifully delivered from the curiosity of
visions, and miracles: For it is both a sin, and a judgment to be curious in
affecting, and depending upon such extraordinary means of divine Revelation:
since the ordinary is not only sufficient, but more certain and infallible,
which is affirmed by S. Peter preferring the Word of God before immediate
Revelation by voice from heaven, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19. And this voice which came
from heaven we heard -- But we have a more sure word of prophecy, etc. the
meaning is, that an immediate voice from heaven revealed Christ to be the son
of God: but the written word of God is a more sure and infallible way of
revealing Christ: and what is the reason? but that voices from heaven, visions
and immediate Revelations may be, and often are counterfeited by the devil. But
the holy Scriptures rightly understood, are a sure, and infallible guide and an
unerring rule of Truth, as being the Dictates, and inspirarations of the Spirit
of Truth himself.

CHAP. XVI. Several texts alleged against humane Learning, and against the
Ministry, and for immediate Revelation, explained.
THE tenor of the new covenant recorded Jer. 31.34 and remembered to be
accomplished, Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.
Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. is the chief place alleged against the necessity of
Learning, or the teaching of man, as containing the promise of an immediate
teaching from God himself: This is the covenant which I will make with the
house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord: I will put my Laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts -- And they shall not teach every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all
shall know me from the least to the greatest: for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.

In which Text consisting of three verses, there is a threefold difference
betwixt the old covenant and the new, delivered.

1. The old Law was written in Tables of stone, but the new in the fleshly
tables of men's hearts: verse. 10. I will put my Laws into their minds, etc.
i.e. my Laws under the new covenant shall be more agreeable to the minds, and
more approve themselves to the Spirits of men to be the ways of perfection and
felicity, and consequently shall have a stronger influence upon their hearts,
then the Laws of the old covenant: for that consisted of many beggarly elements
many types and figures, rites and ceremonies, which considered in themselves,
had no such efficacy to work upon the soul to obey them, as the Laws of the
Gospel have: therefore the one are called carnal ordinances, and the other
spiritual.

2. There was more need of frequent instructions, and teachings of the people,
to keep them up to the observance of those carnal ordinances under the old Law,
then there is under the new: because the doctrines of the Gospel are more
plain, clear and convincing: so that persons of the meanest capacity may
understand the knowledge of God: which is the meaning of verse. 11. They shall
not teach every man his neighbor, etc. Not that there should be no teaching at
all under the Gospel, but that less teaching should serve the turn.

3. The sacrifices under the Law, were weak and insufficient, as to the taking
away of sins: but the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all, is
a sufficient sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of
the whole world, 1 John 2.2. and that is the scope of verse. 12. I will be
merciful to their unrighteousness: and their sins and iniquities I will
remember no more.

Cognitio viae, and cognitio patriae, Lyr. in Loc.
And for the further clearing of these words, They shall not teach, etc. There
is a twofold knowledge of God: 1. In this life, 2. In the life to come. And to
both of these the words in their literal sense do relate. 1. That in this life
the knowledge of God under the Gospel was not at the first taught by man, but
by the blessed Son of God himself, by him the Apostles were instructed at the
first, and not one of another: And to him this prophecy is by himself applied,
they shall be all taught of God, Joh. 6.45. 2. That in the life to come, all
the blessed Saints of God from the least to the greatest. shall truly know God
without the mediation of humane Teaching: For then shall we see God as he is:
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done
away, 1 Cor. 1.3.9, 10.


But that in this life the people shall have no need of Pastors to teach them
the knowledge of God, is a false collection from the words: For as under the
Law, Moses taught Gods will unto the people, and afterward, they that sat in
Moses chair; so under the Gospel. 1. Christ himself revealed and taught Gods
will to his Church, and afterward his Apostles and their successors in all
ages since: this being one of the promises and privileges of the Gospel, thine
eyes shall see thy teachers, Isa. 30.20. And of the gifts of the Spirit: He
gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers
for the perfecting of the Saints, etc. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. For as the same Apostle
demands, How shall they, i.e. any people believe in him, of whom they have not
heard? And how shall they hear without a preacher? Romans 10.14. where preaching,
and hearing, are affirmed to be the necessary mediums of receiving the Gospel,
and believing in Christ.

Another place to the same purpose is alleged, 1 John 2.^0.
1 John 2.20. Ye have an unction from the holy one: and ye know all things. And
verse. 27. The anointing which ye have received from him, abides in you, and ye
need not, that any man teach you: but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as he has taught you, remain in
him still.

This Unction from the holy one teaching, and whereby these Disciples were
taught all necessary Truths; is the holy Spirit sent down from Christ the holy
one, upon his Apostles, who being replenisht with his celestial gifts were not
only themselves led into all Truth, but did also teach their disciples the same.

And the same anointing abides in you] i.e. The same spiritual gifts, viz. of
prophecy, of miracles, of tongues, etc. did still as yet abide in their
Churches, for the confirmation of those Truths, which they had been taught: and
hereby, even by those sacred persons, which had these gifts, they were held up
to the Truth, and kept free from the seducements of Heretics.

And ye need not, that any man teach you] So far as they were already taught,
and knew all things already that were necessary to be known, they had no need
of any man to teach them: namely, as ignorant and seduced persons have need of
Teachers: the ignorant must be taught, that they may learn what they knew not
before: and the seduced and erroneous must be taught, that they may return to
that faith from which they are fallen: but these faithful persons to whom the
Apostle here writes; were it seems neither ignorant, nor yet seduced; and in
neither of these respects had need of teaching:

But yet in other Respects both these disciples, and all others that do both
know, and persevere also in the Truth, have need of Teachers still, by whose
assistance, and direction they may 1. Be confirmed, and strengthened to persist
in the Truth already received. 2. Grow up, and increase daily in the knowledge
of God. and of his Son Jesus Christ. 3. Be armed against the fair words, and
cunning speeches of such as lie in wait to deceive.


The like place, 1 Thessalonians. 4.9.
1 Thessalonians. 4.9. which may help also to the further clearing of this, is 1 Thessalonians.
4.9. Touching brotherly love ye have no need, that I write unto you, for ye
your selves are taught of God to love one another: Taught of God, but how? not
by immediate Revelation, but by the Gospel of Christ the Son of God, who does
so often ineulcate this lesson of brotherly love, Joh. 13.34, 35. and 15.17.
And the like is to be said of all other Gospel Truths, all of them we are
taught of God: From him they descend originally: he is the fountain of Truth,
and Christ's is the Conduit through whom the waters of life do flow: from God to
Christ, from Christ to his Apostles, from them to their Successors, and
Disciples, Pastors and people in all ages.

But withal it is confessed, and with all thankfulness of soul to be
acknowledged, That there is an inward teaching of God, as well as an outward,
viz. the dictate of the Spirit within, as well as the doctrine of the Word
without. These two God has joined together, and we must not presume to part
them, by depending upon the one without the other: for as all study, and
meditation, reading, and hearing the Word, are ineffectual, if the inward
influence of Gods Spirit does not open the wndowes of the soul to receive the
light displayed thence: so the inward influence and working of Gods. Spirit, is
ordinarily and for the most part silent and stirs not but by reading,
hearing meditating of the word, and of good instructions thence derived: the
one being as the body, and the other the soul of Religion: and when these two
meet together, viz. the unction without, and the anointing within: or when the
spiritual gifts of the Ministry, and graces of the people concur: or when then
the outward effusions of the Spirit in the word fall upon hearts infused, and
seasoned with Grace and Obedience: then are these several promises
accomplished, then are a people truly (...) The taught of God indeed: or, which
is all one, then are they the true Disciples of Christ.

The next memorable place misapplyed to patronize extraordinary and immediate
Revelations, is that prophecy of Joel, 2.28. remembered to be accomplished, Joel
2.28. Act. 2.16, etc.
Act. 2.16. etc. It shall come to pass in the last days, says God, I will
power out of my Spirit upon all flesh: And your sons and your daughters shall
prophecy, etc.

This text must be understood with several limitations, otherwise many
dangerous, and false consequences will ensue, and such as are contrary to what
in other places of Scripture is affirmed.

I will pour out of my Spirit] not (...), but (...): not my Spirit himself, for
no flesh, not all flesh can contain the Spirit of God, Ad dive sa dona
respicit, non ad minutionem substantiae. Gloss. ordin. in Loc.
who fills all the world, and contains all things, Wisd. 1. But of my
Spirit, i. e. of his gifts, and graces, even as beams from the light, as heat
from the fire, or a^ streams from this fountain of Truth.

2. I will pour out] Denoting indeed the liberal donation of spiritual gifts
under the Gospel, but yet with restriction to certain times, and certain
persons: for not at all times, neither upon all persons, is the Spirit of God
plentifully poured out: when the holy Ghost visibly, and miraculously descended
upon the Apostles, there was a plentiful pouring out, so that they were filled
with the Spirit, verse. 4. The gift of Tongues, the gift of Prophecy, to
understand and open all mysteries, the gift of healing all diseases, the gift
of miracles, etc. these and many other gifts were at this time after such a
plentiful manner poured forth, that there were some relics, some drops of
this full measure remaining in the Church for 400 years after. Thus it was
then, and 'twas then necessary, because the first publication, and planting of
the Gospel, required extraordinary and more ample gifts and abilities for the
effecting thereof: But we must not look to see those days of such
extraordinary effusions to return again: which is intimated in that they are
called, the last days, in the text, as being the last time we must expect any
such miraculous and immediate effusions, or Revelations, till the last day of
all, even that great and notable day of the Lord come, verse. 20.

Although therefore this prophecy may in some general respects be extended to
all the people of God, yet particularly, and after an especial manner 'twas
fulfilled in the persons of the Apostles themselves, and by S. Peter it is here
applied unto them, verse. 15, 16. And undoubtedly it is high presumption in any
man, or sect of men to apply to themselves, what was peculiar and proper to the
divinely inspired Apostles: and their hopes must needs be vain, who wait for
extraordinary inspirations upon misapplied promises, and prophesies long since
accomplished.

Upon all flesh] Which 1. is not to be understood of all men promiscuously; but
of all such men of all nations, and conditions, as give up their names to
become my sons and daughters; to be called by, and to call upon the name of the
Lord, to the hope of salvation, for so the prophecy concludes: Whoseever shall
call on the name of the Lord shall be saved: and so S. Peter concludes his
Sermon upon this prophecy, Repent and be baptized, verse. 38. Not all flesh,
but such only as are capable of the effusions of the Spirit: and this
limitation cuts off all Turks, Jews, Infidels, Heretics, and Hypecrites: for
no such flesh have the Spirit of truth and holiness powered on them, but are led
by the spirit of error and wickedness.

2. All flesh] cannot be meant of all Gods people neither as to the gift of
prophecy, and full understanding of the mysteries of godliness: For so all
good Christians, men and women, whether be they young or old, children or
servants, must turn Prophets. And all flesh (as the reverend Andrews) must be
cut out into Tongues, which is a monstrous thing to imagine: For if all the
body of Christ were a Tongue, where were the ears, etc. If all were Preachers,
where were the Hearers? Such were not an orderly Church, but a Babylon of
confusion, where the one heard not another: therefore though it be said, all
flesh, it is not said, all your sons and daughters shall prophecy, but some
shall do it for all: some sons, and some servants too, i. e. some Jews and
some Gentiles, some of all nations: God gave some Apostles, some Prophets, etc.
And these must be of the male, not of the female sex, they are prohibited, 1
Cor. 14.34. Let your women keep silence in the Churches. If you demand, how is
the Spirit then upon all flesh? It Is upon all holy and good Christians, but not
upon all to prophecy: all Gods people, have in some measure the Spirit of
grace and truth, but that does not authorize them presently to turn speakers
and teachers of others.

But does not the Apostle say, ye may all prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14.31.
1 Cor. 14.31. Ye all, that is, as many as be prophets, but to think that all
are so, the Apostle holds it very absurd, demanding with indignation, Are all
Apostles, are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12.29. not so surely; the gift must first be
had, and then letters of Administration taken, before the operation or work of
Prophecy be lawfully performed.

It Is further alleged to the same purpose, 1 Cor. 12.7. To every man is given
the manifestation of the Spirit to profit withal: 1 Cor. 12.7.
whence it is inferred that both liberty of prophesying for the profit of our
brethren, and immediate Revelations, or manifestations of the Spirit to that
end, are given to every man. every man is not meant every particular person,
but every man that has those gifts mentioned in the next words, viz. The gifts
of wisdom, knowledge, faith, tongues, etc. has them for this end given, that
he may profit and edify the Church, and people of God thereby: And they are
called, The manifestations of the Spirit: 1. Because they flow from the Spirit,
either extraordinarily, or immediately, as in the firster and primitive times
of the Church; or ordinarily, and in the use of means in all ages since. 2.
Because by the help of these gifts we are enabled to manifest and clear the
truth, and true meaning of the Spirit in the word.

Joh. 1.9. That was the true light which lights every man that comes into
the world: Joh. 1.9.
From whence it is urged, That every man has a light within him, displayed from
Christ the true light of the world, whereunto if he give heed, he shall not
need any outward illuminations or instructions from men, for this is the work
of Christ himself: and himself has sufficiently done it.

illumination, Non quianullus est hominum qui non illuminatur, sed quia nisi ab
ipso nullus illuminatur. Aug. Si^ut nemo a seipso esse, sic nemo a seipso
sapiens esse potest. Beda.
whether natural, spiritual, or eternal: But yet the words are not so to be
understood, as if every man, says the Father, were truly and fully enlightened
immediately by Christ himself: but that no man is enlightened but by him: For as
no man can be; so no man can be wise, or holy from himself, but from Christ.
But as it is in the effusion of the natural light of the world, there is Lux,
lumen, and luminare: There is 1. the light it self; 2. The medium that receives
it; 3. The splendid bodies from whence it is displaid: so it is in the spiritual
light of the Church; There is 1. Lux, the true light it self, and this is
Christ; 2. Lumen, the medium whereby our souls are enlightened by Christ, and
this is a lively faith: such a faith as is both doctrinal and practical: Joh.
12.46. I am come a light into the world, that whosoever believes on me should
not abide in darkness. 3. Luminaria, the lumiraries, or personal lights, by
whose Ministry this light is imparted: And these are the Apostles and
Ministers of Christ in all ages; to whom our Lord says, Ye are the light of
the world, Mat. 5.14. So that as every man is enlightened by Christ primarily
and originally, so by his Ministers also secondarily and instrumentally: they
are the earthen vessels that carry this heavenly treasure. The Liminaries that
convey unto others that light of Grace and Truth, which from Christ they have
received, even as the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, are the conveyances of that
material light, which had its being before them. And what the Psalmist speaks
of the diffusion of the light of the heavens, over the face of the whole earth,
Psalm. 19.4. is applied by the Apostle to the Preachers of the Gospel, Romans
10.18. Their sound is gone out into all the earth, and their words unto the
ends of the world. And for the more full understanding of this text, it is
worthy observation, that the words may as well, if not more properly he rendered
thus in English, He is the true light who coming into the world lights every
man: applying, as Grotius notes, (...), to (...), and not to (...), and this is
most agreeable with the context, for it immediately follows, He is in the
world: and as long as I am in the world I am the light thereof, Joh. 9.5. And
this was Christ's principal errand into the world, to give light to them that
sit in darkness, etc. Luke 1.79.

1 Cor. 14.30. But if any thing be revealed to another that sits by, 1 Cor.
14.30.
let the first hold his peace: whence it is alleged that the people are capable
of Revelations from heaven, and may thereupon interrupt and silence the
Preacher, that their Revelations may be heard.

divine Revelation, and keep silence when God himself speaks by the mediate
ministry of man, or Angel; but that no such immediate Revelation can be meant
in this text, is clear from the context: the words immediately before, are
these, Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the others judge: whereupon
it follows, if any thing be revealed; not immediately from heaven surely, for
that is not liable to humane judgment: but as it is verse. 26. If any man has a
Revelation, i. e. the gift of revealing or opening some Gospel Truth, which is
hid under the veil of some type, figure, or mystical expression in the Law:
For Evangelium est velatum in lege, and lex est revelata in Evangelio, i. e.
The Law: and he has the gift, or Spirit of Revelation, not who brings in new
Revelations (which under a dismal curse is forbidden) but who can reveal and
open the old, who can pull the veil off Moses face, who can open the Law with
the Gospel key, and find Christ and the mysteries of salvation, under the
types and dark expressions of the Law and the Prophets. And this is that which
is also meant by the Spirit of Revelation, Ephesians. 1.17. and may serve to clear
that text also from the like false collection thence. Ephesians. 1.17.


Only we may again remember herewithall for the clearing of both these, and all
other texts alleged to the same purpose, that this gift of Revelation, was
extraordinarily, and by more immediate inspiration communicated to the
Apostles, and first preachers of the Gospel, and therefore it is called The
spirit of Revelation, which no Enthusiast without sacrilege can now pretend
unto, no more then he may to the gifts of Tongues, miracles, etc. All which
were peculiar to those primitive times, being then necessary for that first
planting of the Gospel, and working of faith in the hearts of the hearers, but
are now, and have long since ceased, as being no further useful: since the
Gospel is planted, and we all profess to believe the same. So that what the
Father said of Miracles, the same is true of the gifts of Tongues, of Wisdom,
Miracula necessaria fucre priusquam crederet mundus, ad hoc ut mundus credert;
Quisquis adlue prodigia ut credat inquirit, magnum est ipse prodigium: qui
mundo credente n^m credit. Aug. Romans 8.9.
Revelation, and all extraordinary and immediate inspirations of the holy
Ghost: This were necessary before the world believed, even to this end, that
the world might believe: But he that now looks for such grounds of his faith,
as are extraordinary, and miraculous, is himself a miracle, because he believes
not with the rest of the world of Believers.

Other texts alleged for the proof of immediate inspiration, are such, wherein
the inhabitation of Christ and his Spirit, and our communion with them is
expressed. And Romans 8.9. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of him. And 1 John 3.6. Whosoever abides in him sins not. And verse. 24.
Hereby know we that he abides in us by the Spirit which he has given us.

Rightly to understand which texts, and the like expressions in all other
texts, and to free them from the false collections which Euthusiastical persons
gather from them, two things must be explained. 1. What is meant by Christ
being in us. 2. What by the Spirit which he has given us.


For the 1. By Christ being, and abiding in us, is meant that communion, which
all faithful souls have with Christ, whereby they derive from Christ as
branches from the vine, the sap of nourishment and growth in Grace, and
obedience here, unto the hopes of eternal Glory hereafter, Joh. 15.4, 5. Abide
in me, and I in you, as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self except it abide
in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me: I am the vine, and ye are
the branches, etc. But this mutual inhabitation of Christ in us, and we in
Christ, is not, Nostra and ipsius conjunctio, nec miscet personas, nec unit
substantias, sed affectus consociat and confoederal voluntates. Cypr. de coen.
dom.
says the Father, a mixture of his person with ours, nor of his substance with
our substance, (for so the blasphemous corceit of being equal with Christ, must
needs follow) but it is the consociation of our affections, and confederation of
our wills, with the holy desires, and blessed will of our Lord: And thus Christ
abides in us by our obedience to his doctrine, and conformity to his example
both in the affections of our hearts, and the actions of our life: therefore he
says, Joh. 15.7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, etc. and verse.
10. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love, even as I have kept
my Fathers commandments, and abide in his love.

In like manner the being of the holy Spirit in us, is not to he understood of
his personal being: but of the being of his graces in our hearts, which render
us of such a gracious, and holy disposition of Spirit, as makes us obedient to
the will, and conformable to the Spirit of Christ, who is not only our
Lawgiver, but also the exact pattern of perfect obedience to the Laws he has
given us: so Phil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus. What to be equal with God? as some blasphemous Enthusiasts have
perverted the text: No, but the same gracious temper of mind, or spirit: even
the same humility and obedience to the will of God, both in life and death: so
it follows, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal
with God, yet made himself of no reputation, and humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death -- And whosoever by the influence of Gods holy Spirit, has
this gracious temper of mind or Spirit wrought in him, may be assured, that
Christ dwells in him by his Spirit, which he has given him; which makes him
conformable to the mind or Spirit of Christ, who is as the fountain, so the
exemplar of all gracious perfections.

And this is also the meaning of that other perverted text, 1 Cor. 6.17.
1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit: not that he has the
same essential Spirit with the Lord; but being by the mystical bands of holy
faith joined unto him by the influence of his Spirit, he becomes to be a man of
the same Spirit, viz. of love, meekness, gentleness, goodness, holiness,
patience, humility, obedience, which were graces of the Spirit most emineat in
Christ, and must be in us also according to our model, and measure of
reception; if we be truly his Disciples. 2 Cor. 13 5.


That other text alleged by the same purpose, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know you not your
selves, that Jesus Christ is in you except you be reprobates? is more generally
misunderstood: for the words (...), are not so rightly rendered in English: in
you, as among you: and the meaning is, that Christ in his holy Gospel, was so
evidently present amongst these Corinthians by S. Paul's powerful preaching,
and the miracles he wrought, that if they did not acknowledge it, and believe
in him, they must be such senseless obdurate persons, as were incapable of a
true saving faith.

From 1 Cor. 13.11, 12. When I was a child, 1 Cor. 13.11, 12.
I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I thought as a child, but when
I became a man, I put away childish things -- now we see through a glass
darkly, but then face to face -- It Is alleged, That Scripture and ordinances
are useful only in our minority: whilst we are babes in Christ, but these as
childish things must be laid aside, when we are grown up to be perfect men: and
if we will see clearly, we must throw away the glass of the word, and
ordinances, and have our inspection into the things of God more immediately,
and nearly, even by immediate Revelation.

different degrees of Grace in this life, but the different condition of the
state of grace and of glory are compared together: being not here taught, who
have need of the glass of holy Scriptures, and who not: but what the best and
most perfect of us are in this life, in respect of what we shall be in the life
to come: here we see the things of God through the glass of his word, works,
sacraments -- but hereafter more immediately and fully, not by way of species,
image, and representation, as through a glass; but in a full view, face to
face: Here that we may be united unto God, we must use the mediation of Faith,
Hope, and Charity, verse. 13. Now abides Faith, but hereafter our faith shall
be changed into vision, Verse. 13.
our Hope into fruition, and only Charity shall remain, which being now but a
spark shall increase then into a flame, which shall never die, but burn for
ever.

In the mean time we must make use of those prospectives God has graciously
lent us, through which his goodness, power, wisdom, are represented to us:
and if we throw away this glass, or neglect the ways and means of grace and
salvation, which God has ordained: we must expect either to see nothing at
all, or nothing, but what are the dreams and fond imaginations of men's hearts,
or what is worse, the delusions and destructive suggestions of Satan the Prince
of darkness.

The like objection is made from 2 Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of
prophecy, 2 Pet. 1.9.
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts: From whence
it is alleged that the Word of God and his Ordinances, are only useful until
we get possession of Christ into our hearts, and then they are of no further
use, because Christ by immediate Revelation is all in all to them in whom he
abides.

immediate Revelation, then any way can be pretended for it: for this sure word
of prophecy, whether it be understood more particularly of the prophesies and
coming of Christ to the destruction of his crucifiers, and deliverance of his
people; or whether more specially of the Law, and the Prophets of old, or
whether more generally of all the Scriptures, both the old and new Testament;
in what sense soever this light of prophecy is taken, it is preferred before
immediate Revelation, by voice from heaven: as being a more certain infallible
way to direct us to the knowledge of Christ the true light.

For the further illustration whereof, 'twill be not impertinent to observe,
that there is a twofold light, whereof Christ after an especial manner is the
fountain, and original. 1. The light of Grace, and truth in this life. 2. The
light of Glory, and peace in that life to come.


And in both these respects, Christ is termed the morning star. The dayspring
from on high: or as in the text, The dawning of the day. The holy Scriptures,
or (in the language of the text according to some interpretations) the word of
prophecy, is as 'twere those beams, which are displayed from Christ the light
of the world, for our illumination, and guidance in the paths of grace and
truth, unto the mansions of glory and peace eternal: Thy word is a light --
Psalm. 119. And all they who enjoy this word of prophecy in the right
understanding, and conscientious practice thereof, are therefore termed
children of the light and of the day, not of the night and of darkness, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5.

But assuredly (what ever seduced persons may falsely gather from this text)
whosoever shall neglect, or contemn the use of this light or obscure the same
by false glosses, and mis-interpretations, must read the Apostles words
backwards, and become children of the night, and of darkness, and not of the
light, and of the day.

But yet as the light of a candle is useless, when the Sun arises, so the
light of Gods Word for our direction in the way of grace shall cease, when the
light of glory shall once arise, and the dayspring of eternity appear, when we
shall be united unto Christ, not by faith, but by vision, when we shall no more
see him, and enjoy him in his word, and ordinances, through a glass darkly but
face to face, plainly and fully be made partakers of him.

But in the mean time whilst we live in this darksome place of the world,
darkened, by ignorance and error, by sinfulness and manifold temptations
thereunto; he that will not walk in darkness, not knowing wither he goes, must
make use of Gods holy word for a light unto his feet, and a lanthorn unto his
paths.

Against the use of humane learning by the preachers of the Gospel is alleged
1 Cor. 2. 1, etc. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2, 4.
And I brethren, when I came to you, came not with excellency of speech, or of
wisdom. For I determined to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified -- And
my speech, and my preaching was not with the enticing word of man's wisdom, but
in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power.

The Apostle in this place, takes not away the use of humane learning, because
himself in other places makes use thereof: he had his books and writings which
he commanded to be brought unto him, 2 Timothy 4.13. he read the Greek Poets,
which he quotes Act. 17.28. Tit. 1.12. He commands Timothy to give attendance
to reading, 1 Timothy 4.13. and to study, 2 Timothy 2.15. But amongst these
Corinthians at the first he declined the use of his humane learning, not
drawing his arguments from natural reason, and probable discourses out of
Philosophy, gilded with curious, quaint, and rhetorical expressions, which he
calls the enticing words of humane wisdom, (...), probable arguments, or
persuasive discourses: this was not the way he went to convert these
Corinthians; but by the demonstration of the Spirit, and power, i. e. He proved
Christ to be the Savior of the world,

1. By the demonstration of the Spirit. Showing that the holy Spirit 1. did
speak, and foretell in the Law, and in the Prophets, of Christ's coming into the
world, and of his doings and sufferings for our salvation. 2. That he both
visibly descended on him, and audibly bare witness to him, in a voice from
heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, etc. 3. That he both visibly and
audibly descended upon his Apostles also, and endued them with extraordinary
gifts, and through their ministry also he descended upon others that were
converted by them. Thus S. Paul preached Christ to these Corinthians by the
demonstration of the Spirit. And,

2. Of Power also, viz. The power of miracles, curing diseases, speaking with
tongues: these were the topical arguments, wherewith he persuaded them to
become Christians.

And the reason hereof he gives, verse. 5. That your faith might not stand in
the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, i.e. That the grounds of your
belief in Christ, might not be the persuasions and allurements of men, how wise
soever, but such as God himself made use of. In a word, his meaning in this
place is, that he preached unto them plainly and not Rhetorically: and the
arguments he used were demonstrative and divine, not probable and humane only.
But,

1. We may not hence gather, that S. Paul did always decline the use of
Rhetorical, and Philosophical wisdom in his preaching, but such was his great
wisdom, that his preaching was according to the conditions, and capacities of
his hearers, sometimes more plainly, sometimes more elegantly, and
mysteriously: using sometimes divine, and sometimes humane, sometimes
demonstrative, and sometimes probable arguments, and persuasions: He fed the
babes in Christ with milk, as here, Verse. 2. I determined to know nothing among
you, but Christ, and him crucified, but the more perfect and grown up in
Christ, he fed with stronger and solid meat, as verse. 6. Howbeit we speak
wisdom among them that are perfect.

And 2. when his preaching was most plain, it was not devoid of learning both
divine, and humane, 'twas not without order, method, proper and pertinent
expressions, like the upstart intruders into the ministerial office now a
days: who to avoid as they pretend the enticing words of man's wisdom, speak
not forth the words of truth and soberness: but rove, and ramble about many
points in Divinity, which rightly they understand not; heaping together variety
of texts, and Scripture expressions without either order or right application;
as if to spend an hour, or more in a rude and zealous delivery of religious
nothings, were to avoid the enticings words of man's wisdom, and to preach in
the demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power.

1 Cor. 2.14. But the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of
God: neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned, Animalis
homo est qui babet intellectum and affectam depressos ad sensibilia. Lyra.
but he that is spiritual judges all things: whence all Enthusiasts, and
pretenders to the Spirit, most presumptuously arrogate to themselves an
un-erring judgment in all spiritual and divien things: vilifying all other
persons besides themselves, be they never so learned or pious, as blind and
ignorant, under the notion of matural men; whose presumption in the wresting of
this text, and the true meaning thereof will appear by considering, 1. What is
meant by the natural and spiritual man. 2. And what by the things of the Spirit
of God.


For the first, the natural man is such a one whose understanding and
affections soar no higher then outward sensible objects. So that there are two
kinds of natural men. 1. One who is merely natural in respect of the
understanding of his mind. And, 2. Another who is natural in respect of the
manner of his life.


Of the 1. sort were the heathen Philosophers of old, who received not the
things of the Spirit of God, but accounted them as foolish, idle, and
ridiculous, because they did seemingly contradict the dictates of their natural
reason.

Of the 2. sort are all vicious sinful persons, who are so wedded either to
their carnal delights, or to their worldly ends, and interests, that holiness,
humbleness, self-denial, taking up the cross, and the rest of such commands in
the Gospel are altogether disrelished, they are foolishness unto them.

For the 2. The things of the Spirit of God are reducible to two heads,

1. Pia dogmata. 2. Bona opera. i. e. either, 1. Holy doctrines to be believed:
Or, 2. Good works to be performed. The first are contradictory, and seemingly
foolish to the natural man's reason and judgment: and the 2d. to the natural
man's affections and conversation.

And the reason is given, because they are spiritually discerned] For, 1. The
holy doctrines of Christiany many of them are above the reach of natural
reason, and only by the eye of faith, which is a gift of the Spirit, to be
discerned. 2. The good works by Christ in his Gospel enjoined, many of them are
cross to the natural man's inclinations: It must be a higher principle, even the
quickening grace of the Spirit, that does open our eyes to discern them to be
the way of blessedness, and so incline our hearts to yield obedience thereunto.


So that the truth delivered in the first part of this text consists of two
branches: or, The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God two
ways. 1. In that the mysteries of the holy Christian faith are not discernible
by the eye of natural reason. 2. In that the Christian duties or good works of
the Gospel are not relished, not obeyed by men of mere natural affections and
inclinations.


But he that is Spiritual judges all things] The spiritual man is such a one,
1. Whose understanding is enriched with the Gifts; 2. Whose affections are
rectified by the Graces of the Spirit, Or, 1. Whose natural reason looks into
the things of the Spirit, viz. the doctrines and duties of Christianity, with
the eye of faith. 2. Whose affections and desires are inclined hereunto by love
and obedience.



He judges all things] viz All those things of Gods Spirit, which natural men
judge to be foolish, and contrarious to their reason, and to their felicity: he
rightly judges to be most wise and most conducible to the attainment of that
perfection and blessedness, whereunto being after the image of God, he is
created.

Yet he himself is judged of no man] As being above and out of the reach of the
censures, and judgments of natural men: All whose censures, and censorious
detractions of him he values not, as knowing them to be both rash and idle,
foolish, and false.

2 Cor. 4.3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. Whence
it is alleged, that the Gospel of Christ is clear, and intelligible enough to
the children of Gods election, and heirs of the promise, without the help or
assistance of any humane learning.

obstinate, obdurate, reprobate sense: In whom (as it follows verse. 4.) the
God of this world, has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image, of God, should shine
unto them.

And the Gospel is hid to them that are lost two ways. 1. When they receive it
not being plainly preached to them, or approved to their conscience in the
sight of God: as in verse. 2. Or else, 2. When they do hear, and receive it, but
not aright.


And men do not rightly receive the Gospel, 1. When they do not acquiesce, and
rest in it, as the undoubted way of life. 2. When they do not readily obey, and
put in practice what the Gospel enjoins and commands. 3. When they persevere
not, are not constant in this faith and obedience.


To this text many more are urged, wherein the privilege of the Saints, and
servants of God, as to the understanding of his will both mediately and
immediately, Psalm. 25.14. Mat. 5.8. Joh. 10.4, etc.
Ps. 25.14 The secr^t of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show
them his covenant, Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in spirit, for they shall see
God. Christ's sheep do know his voice, and follow him; but a stranger will they
not follow, neither do they know the voice of strangers, Joh. 10.4, 5. with the
places before remembered, Mat. 11.25. 2 Cor. 1.26, 27. From which and many other
places both of the old and new Testament it is alleged, that the elect, the
Saints, holy and humble men, and such as fear God, have a secret teaching from
God whereby they understand his Word and will, without the help of humane
learning: they are that new Jerusalem which has no need of the light of Sun,
Moon, or candle, but the Lord God is the light thereof, Rev. 21. They are the
Saints that know all things, and need not that any should teach them: And
though they be illiterate, yet do they know more of God, then the Learned, and
great ones of the world, whom the god of this world has blinded, that they
cannot see Christ through the thicket of profane learning, and unprofitable
speculations.

To clear all which Texts from the false glosses, which unlearned and unstable
men have put upon them to patronize their own want of learning and inconstancy
in the way of truth; It Is confessed,

1. That only the pure, and holy, only such who are sanctified by the Spirit of
Grace, have the true and saving knowledge of God, and of Jesus Christ: But
withal we must remember; that there is a twofold knowledge of God and of Jesus
Christ.

1. The one doctrinal, and speculative, which is not ordinarily obtainable but
in the use of outward means, and the blessing of God thereupon.

2. The other practical, or the sanctified use of this doctrinal knowledge by
the immediate influence of Gods Spirit upon the soul, enquickning and
perfecting the same in all obedience and holiness of life, as the body is
enquickned and animated by the soul: And the former of these must ever precede,
and go before the later: For all holiness and obedience to the will of God,
does presuppose the knowledge thereof. Prius est Deum nosse, postea colere,
says Lactantius: no man can do the will of God, that knows it not, nor make a
sanctified use of that knowledge which he has not obtained: but as in the
procreation of the natural man, 1. The body is formed; and then, 2. The soul
infused: So of the spiritual man also: 1. The body of sacred knowledge must be
conceived and framed in the mind. 2. The soul of sanctification infused in the
obediential and practical use of this knowledge. And both of these are the work
of Gods Spirit; the one the issue of his gifts, and the other of his graces,
but neither without the use of those respective means which God has thereunto
most graciously appointed.

2. Whosoever pretend to immediate Revelation, and to have a secret teaching
from God, because they are of the number of his Saints, and such as fear God,
must remember, that it is an act of great presumption, misbecoming the humility
of Saints, and directly opposing the fear of God, to neglect the means, and
depend upon miracle for the knowledge of his will; so that by the very act of
depending upon immediate Revelation, they cut themselves off from all title,
and interest in those promises, that are made to the meek, lowly, humble, and
such as fear the Lord: for how can they be of the number of those babes to whom
the mysteries of heaven are revealed? who rank themselves amongst the most wise
and perfect: All professions and boastings of wisdom and holiness, being
symptoms of pride and presumption, are thereby evident tokens, that there is
no true sober wisdom, or solid soul-saving piety in the hearts of such
professors: but that they intrude into those things, Col. 2.18.
which they have not seen, being vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind. And the
mind never swells with that fleshly humor of self-conceited knowledge, and
purity, without the secret infusions of that Diabolical spirit, who as he was
the first original of all pride and presumption, so of all sinfulness, and
error thence derived, and infecting the hearts, and lives of men: For pride is
the beginning of sin, (and error also) and he that has it shall power out
abominations. Ecclus. 10.13.


What, and how great are the benefits of piety, and holiness of life, as to the
right understanding of Gods revealed will, has been already expressed: That it
is as the very soul, and spirit, so the top, and perfection of true wisdom and
knowledge: that it is the end of all our studies and endeavors, and of all
learning and knowledge both divine and humane: and that without this holiness
of life, all our learning and knowledge shall be so far from being any way
useful as to our own particulars, that it shall tend to our greater
condemnation at the last day: Luke 12.47. That whilst we study for learning
and knowledge: with desires and intentions only to be more wisely, and
knowingly pious and religions, and withal do make a sanctified use of our
knowledge received, not suffering it to continue notionary, and speculative in
the brain, but to be practical in the heart, and have its influence upon the
actions of our life: That thus I say God is invited, and according to his
promises, will undoubtedly multiply, and increase our talent: and by his holy
Spirit open our eyes to see more clearly the ways of his service, and our own
salvation, then such persons who have perhaps a greater portion of learning,
but less piety: and hence undoubtedly many persons of meaner gifts, and less
learned, have outstript others more learned and knowing in the knowledge of
holy mysteries, God of his great mercy enriching their understanding with more
for the holy and pious use they have made of the less portion of knowledge
imparted to them.

But yet notwithstanding, the soul must not be advanced to the destruction of
the body of sacred knowledge: nor that which is the end and perfection of true
wisdom, must not make null and void the means God has destined thereunto: nor
may we presume upon our good desires, pious intentions, and fancied relations
unto God as this Elect and people, further then in all humility to wait upon
him for his blesting, not without but in the use of those means of grace and
truth, which he has ordained for our direction and guidance therein.

To conclude this discourse in the words of judicious Hooker, If license were
given to every man, Eccl. polit. l. 5. sect. 10.
to follow what himself imagines that Gods Spirit does reveal unto him, or
what he supposes that God is likely to have revealed to some special person,
whose virtues deserve to be highly esteemed, what other effect would ensue
hereupon, but utter confusion of his Church, under pretense of being taught,
led, and guided by his Spirit? The gifts and graces whereof, do so naturally
all tend unto common peace, that where such singularity is, they whose hearts
it possesses, ought to suspect it the more, in as much as if it did come from
God, and should for that cause prevail with others, the same God which
reveals it to them, would also give them power of confirming it to others,
either with miraculous operation, or with strong invincible remonstrance of
sound reason, such as whereby it might appear, that God would indeed have all
men's judgments give place unto it. Whereas now the error, and insufficiency of
their arguments, does make it on the contrary against them a strong
presumption, that God has not moved their hearts to think such things, as he
has not enabled them to prove.

The Prayer.
"O blessed Father of lights, and fountain of all holy, true, divine, and
celestial Revelations; as thou have been pleased to reveal thy Son unto us to
be the way, the truth, and the life: so give us hearts to cleave fast to these
divine Revelations; both to acquiesce and persevere in the sacred doctrine and
saving practice thereof: take from us all vanity of mind, and deceitfulness of
imagination; and let not the Author of lies prevail upon our depraved fancies,
to take us off from an holy, humble, and constant dependence upon thee, in the
use of the means of grace and truth ordained by thee: Let thy Word be ever a
light unto our feet, and a lanthorn unto our paths: and let thy holy Spirit
ever clear this light to our minds, and inflame our hearts with the sacred fire
of divine love and zealous obedience to thy holy will revealed in thy word:
that by the guidance of this twofold light, thy Word without, and thy Spirit
within, both our outward and inward man may be directed in the ways of thy
service, and of our own salvation, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

The Ground, and general Heads of the ensuing Discourse.
1. THere were never any times, wherein that admonition of S. Peter was more
necessary to be observed, by all careful and conscientious Christians: Be sober
and vigilant, for your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about,
seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

2 There are two ways, whereby the Devil working upon men's frailties, and upon
their extravagant lusts and passions, does devour, or destroy their souls.

1. By blinding their understandings, whereby they become apt to be seduced to
the entertainment of errors, and belief of lies.

2. By poisoning their affections with the false paint of worldly vanities:
whereby they are ininveigled into sinfulness and vice.

3. And so nearly, and entermixedly are the acts of the understanding
interwoven with those of the will, and affections, that the corruption of the
one, does ever corrupt and vitiate the other: So that as sinfulness on the one
hand, clouds the judgment, and is ever productive of errors in the
understanding: so an erroneous Judgment on the other hand, is ever fruitful in
the production of sinful acts and habits.

4. Hence it comes to pass by necessary consequence (the just judgment of God
concurring) that the great, and crying sins of our Nation, have produced so
many great, and dangerous overspreading errors amongst us: For the broaching,
and belief of lies, as it is in it self a sin, and the fruitful dam of many
sins: so it is also by the just judgment of God, a punishment for sin: which is
affirmed, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Because they received not the love of the Truth,
that they might be saved. For this cause God shall send them strong delusions
that they should believe a lie.

5. The love of the Truth is not received so as to be effectual unto salvation
three ways. 1. When we do not acquiesce, and rest in it, but fondly dote upon
new Lights, and new Revelations, as if the truth of Christ revealed, were
imperfect and defective. 2. When we do not practice, and live according to the
truth, having a form of godliness, in the doctrinal knowledge, and discourse
of the truth only, but no power, in the conscientious practice thereof. 3. When
we do not persevere either in the profession of the true Faith: or practical
obedience thereof.


6. When any of these ways the love of the truth is rejected, the guilt of so
great a crime, most justly provokes the Almighty to permit holy Truth to be
poisoned with lies, and doctrines of Devils. And in this respect God himself
affirms him self to be the author (not actively, but permissively) of all
delusions, as Ezekiel. 14.9. If the Prophet be deceived when he has spoken a
thing: If the Lord have deceived that Prophet: which God does most justly for
the sinful disobedience of the people; for this is no other, says Hierome,
Hier. in l^c.
but what is agreeable to that threat, Luke 26.27, 28. If you will not hearken
unto me, but walk contrary unto me: then will I walk contrary unto you in fury,
etc. There being nothing that God inflicts more contrary to the happiness of a
people, then the infatuation of their Priests and Prophets.

Haeretici, veris catholicis membris Christi, malo suo prosunt, dum Deus utitur
malis been, and diligentibus eum, omnia coop^rantur in benum, Romans 8.
But, as all things work together for good to them that love God, so do Heresies
and errors also: The which as they are for evil, by the infatuation of the
wicked: so they are for good also, in the further illumination, and
sanctification of the Righteous. Nor would the supreme goodness ever suffer
the evil of Heresy, or any other evil to be, but that he full well knows how
to bring good out of evil.

8. That we may then attain those good ends for the which God permits Heresies
amongst us, and avoid the evil of infection and infatuation thereby: or
according to the same Father, Aug.
Ut quisque sic carpet botrum, ut caveat spinas, and ex luto aurum colligat:
That every one may so pluck the fruits as to avoid the thorns, and gather the
gold of sound doctrine, out of the mire of filthy Dreams and delusions, 'twill
be necessary seriously to weigh and consider, 1. The nature of Error, Heresy,
and Schism, with the general heads hereof. 2. The danger of being infected
thereby. 3. The ends for which God permits them. 4. To observe such rules, and
receive such directions, as may by divine assistance, keep him free from
infection by them.


Of ERROR, HERESY, and SCHISM.
CHAP. I. Of Error in general.
1. EVery man by nature is as prone to Error, as to sin: the understanding
being as well clouded, as the will, and affections corrupted by the fall of
Adam: Our first parents out of a saucy presumption, affecting to know what they
ought not, involved themselves and all their posterity, in blindness and
ignorance of what they ought to know.

The body of man being subjected to natural corruption and mortality, subjects
the soul whilst it is imprisoned therein to a spiritual corruption also,
through ignorance and error. For the corruptible body (says the wise man)
presses down the soul, and the earthly tabernacle weighs down the mind that
museth upon many things, and hardly do we guess aright at things that are upon
earth, In is ^llo errore, non hunanitatis, sed Deitatis selum est. Aug. sermon.
ad f^ati, in erem.
and with labor do we sinde the things that are before us, and the things that
are in heaven who has searched out? Wisd. 9.15, 16. So that not to be
ignorant, and not err in the points and particulars of heavenly truth, is not
humane, says the Father, but the sole prerogative of the divine nature.

2. There is a threefold ignorance, wherewith all the minds of men are
naturally clouded. 1. To be ignorant of what is necessary to be known. 2. Not
to know what is necessary and expedient for us, agreeable to our persons,
callings, breeding, and the times wherein we live. 3. When through a corrupt
and depraved disposition of mind, we mistake falsehood for truth, and darkness
for light, and this whether in bare opinion, or else of set purpose, and settled
determination: The last of these is the most sinful ignorance, and that which
properly and (...) is called Error, whereunto that woe belongs, Isa. 5.20. Woe
unto them that call evil good, etc.


3. In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. And this not only by iniquity in
life and action, but also by error in judgment and opinion. But as God of his
great mercy, through the merits of Christ, imputes not unto us those sins which
through natural frailty, and mere infirmity, daily and hourly invade the
innocence of the soul, i. e. if with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient
heart we confess them, and unfeignedly believe in Christ for the pardon of
them: so neither does he impute those errors of our judgments, which are of
smaller consequence, whilst they infect not the will, and affections, so as
obstinately and perversely to persevere therein.

A bare and naked error in the understanding only, is rather an infelicity then
a crime: it is the obstinacy of the will, the animosity, and perverseness of the
affections in cleaving to the mistaken conception of the understanding, that
renders the mistake a sinful and diabolical error; for, says the Father, Aug.
de verbis Apost. sermon. 22.
Whilst we do but err, we are but like our selves, frail mortal men, whose
thoughts are miserable, and whose devices are but uncertain: but when through
animosity and perverseness we persist in our errors, Joh. 8.44.
we are then of our father the Devil, who as he was a liar from the beginning,
and abode not in the truth, so does he obstinately abide for ever in the
destructive and damnable errors of his ways.

Both this infelicity, and also this sinfulness of error will more fully
appear, by considering and rightly understanding the nature of Heresy and
Schism, the two general heads whereunto all sinful error is reducible.

CHAP. II. Heresy: the nature and ingredients thereof.
Heresy has its denomination from the Greek word (...), to choose or follow by
way of division, and separation: the which being continued, and increased by
perverseness, and obstinacy therein; gives unto Heresy its perfection, and
compleatment: The former is an error of the understanding, the latter an
exorbitancy of the will: And thus both the Sententiarist, and the Schoolman
define an Heretic: He is an Heretic who both erres in the Articles of holy
faith, through defect in his understanding, and withal pertinaciously cleaves
to such errors, through the perverseness of his will.

From this general description of an Heretic, and the nature of Heresy, the
particular ingredients, whereof the cup of Heretical poison is compounded, will
appear to be these:

1. To be an Heretic is to err in matters of faith, not of Fact, and in
points of Doctrine, not of Discipline: the former distinguishes Heresy, from
sinfulness of life: The latter opposes Heresy to Schism.

These points of faith are either 1. Fundamental, such as are the grounds,
pillars and constituent parts of holy Christian Religion: Or, 2.
Superstructive, such clear and evident truths as are built upon, and by
necessary consequence do flow from those grounds. An error in the former is
primarily, and principally, and in the latter secondarily and consequentially
Heresy.

2. He that in either of these respects, erres in the most holy faith, through
ignorance, misunderstanding, or misinformation, is not presently to be adjudged
an Heretic: until this error in his understanding, has so infected his will
and affection, that he cleaves to this his private erroneous opinion, even
against the judgment of holy Catholic Church and the doctrine of Christ
sufficiently made known unto him: so the Father, Qui in ecclesia Christi
morbidum aliquid pravumque sapiunt, Aug. de civit. dil l. 18. c. 51.
si correpti, ut sanum rectumque sapiant, resistunt contumaciter, etc. They who
in the Church of Christ, do believe any pernicious doctrines, and being
instructed and admonisht to receive the sound and saving truth, do yet
pertinaciously persist in their errors, and continue to defend them still,
without conversion and amendment, are hereby become Heretics; of whom S.
John, 1 John 1.19.
They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us, viz In the society of holy or
thodox Christians. And being gone out through the obstinate maintaining the
delusions of their own heads, they become, says the Father, of the number of
those enemies whom God permits for the trial of our faith, and exercise of our
charity.

And this particular ingredient of Heresy, the same Father in one of his
Epistles more fully clears thus, Qui s^ntentiam suam quanvis falsam, mulla
pe^tinac^ animositate defendi^: praeser^m quam non audacia suae praesumptionis
peperit, sed a seductis and in errorem la^sis parentibus accepit: Quaerit autem
cau^a solicitudine veritatem, corrigi paratus cum invenerit: nequaquam est
inter haretices deputandus. Aug. Epist. 162.
He that defends his opinion though it be false, with no perverseness and
animosity, especially if it arise not from his own bold and saucy presumption
of mind^, but from his erroneous and seduced guides and pasiors, or parents he
has received it: if with all carefulness and diligence he seek to know the
Truth, being of a ready and prepared heart to embrace it when he shall sinde
it, such a person, though he does err in the most holy faith, is not to be
accounted an Heretic.

3. The third ingredient then of Heretical poison, is the obstinate cleaving to
an erroneous opinion, or tenent in Religion, contrary to the judgment of the
universal Church. So Isidore defines Heretics to be such persons, Isid. de
verbo Haetes.
who of their own heads depart from the judgment of the Church; hammering out
of their own brains false and perverse doctrines: whereas (says he) it is not
lawful for us (orthodox Christians) to bring in any thing of our own heads, nor
yet to receive and believe what any others of their own heads have brought into
the Church: We have the Apostles of Christ for our Authors, for even they
brought in nothing of their own mind, but the doctrine they received from
Christ they faithfully published and preached to the world. And though we,
says the Apostle, or an Angel from heaven should preach any other Gospel,
besides, etc. Gal. 1.18.

From the Apostles, the sound and saving Truth is received by the Church: so
that, says Irenaeus, We ought not else where to seek the truth, Non oportet
adhuc quaerer apud alias veritatem quam facile est ab ecclesia sumere, cum
Apostoli quasi in depositonum dives, plenissime in ea con^ulerint, omnia quae
sunt veritatis, ut omnis quicunq velit sumat ex ea potum vitae. Irenae. l. 3.
c. 4.
which in the Church may be easily found, since the the Apostles have most
fully treasured up therein, as in a rich storehouse, all things that are of
Truth, so that whosoever list, may thence take out the waters of life:
Therefore the Apostle styles the Church, The pillar and ground of Truth, 1 Timothy
2.15. The pillar,] Gloss. ordin.
In se been sustinens veritatem, ne corruat licet tribuletur. Upholding the
Truth that it fall not, though daily distressed by the gates or powers of hell,
whose instruments are Wolves without, or Foxes within, the one by open
persecutions assailing, the other by secret infectious opinions undermining the
Truth: but the Church like a pillar supports it; and like the ground which God
has made to stand continually, both upholds, and holds forth the true faith;
and like a rock against the raging billows of the sea stands it out against
all the gusts of persecutions, heresies, and schisms, which are as 'twere that
spiritual ammunition wherewith all the gates of hell are furnished, to fight
against the Church of Christ, and the most holy faith thereof: But whilst we
stand with the Church, we shall not need to fear either the crafts or assaults
of these ghostly enemies: For upon a Rock Christ has grounded his Church, and
the gates of hell shall never prevail against it, Mat. 16.18. When any
particular person then opposes his private spirit, and judgment, against the
public judgment, and spirit of that Church whereof he is a member, or when
any particular Church opposes the judgment of the Catholic, or universal
Church in point of holy faith; this necessarily makes one ingredient in the sin
of Heresy: for so he or they do not stand upon the rock, whereupon holy faith
is grounded, nor rest on that pillar which upholds the Truth. This (says
Irenaeus) is the way of life (meaning the way of the Church) and all the rest
are thieves and robbers -- Whosoever he be that will obstinately persist in his
own erroneous opinion, Haec est vitae introitus, omnes a. reliliqui fures sunt
and latrones -- Si quis tam obstinate in suo errore pe^sistat, ut universam
Christi ecclesiam audire nolit, talis juxta Christi mandatum pro ethnico and
publicano nobis habendus est. Irenaeus.
and refuse to hear the Church, let him be unto thee (according to the command
of Christ) as a Heathen or Publican.

As in the natural body he is accounted a monster, rather then a perfect man,
who has any exuberant member that is disproportionate, and not agreeable with
the rest of the members of the body: so in the mystical body of Christ, he is
an Heretic, Sicut mensura est unius cujusque partis, ita totius corporis,
quod omnibus suis partibus constat. Aug.
no orthodox Christian, whose particular faith is exuberant, and agrees not
with the whole body of the Church: according to that undeniable axiom, Turpis
est pars omnis toti non congrua: That part is disorderly and sinful, which
agrees not with the whole, whereof it is a part.

As there is but one faith, Ephesians. 4.5. which is therefore called, The unity of
the faith, verse. 13. and though there be several articles, or parts of holy
Truth, which constitute this one body of faith, August.
yet says the Father, Veritas est veritati congrua: one truth bears such a
proportion with another, as is agreeable to the whole, so that the whole body
of the true faith is like it self in all the parts or particular points
thereof: even so there is but one body, Ephesians. 4.4. i. e. one Church professing
this one faith, Vna fides non numero, sed genete, qua similis in omnibus.
and though there be many members of this one body, yet each true member is so
proportionate to the whole, as that all makes up but one orderly mystical body
of Christ, which ought to be as without spot or stain of sin, so without the
exuberant disorder of error.

It Is the end and office of the Ministry to bring all Christians to this pitch
of perfection, even to be all incorporate, as members of one mystical body of
Christ, by the unanimous acknowledgement of one faith: Ephesians. 4.11, etc. He
gave some Apostles -- for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the
Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come into the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that we henceforth be
no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in
wait to deceive: but speaking the truth in love may grow up into him in all
things, from whom the whole body fitly joined together, and compacted by that,
which every joint supplyeth according to the effectual working in the measure
of every part, makes increase of the body to the edifying of it self in love.

4. The 4. ingredient of Heresy, is to hold and maintain an error in faith,
with frowardness, and opposition to lawful determinations. For though all
Christians cannot perhaps in their judgments submit to all lawful
determinations of controversies in Religion: yet however these are thereby
obliged to a passive obedience, to possess their souls in patience not to
oppose the authority, and disturb the peace of the Church. Remembering, 1. That
the unity, peace, and authority of the Church in general, is more to be valued
then any particular man's satisfaction. And 2. That the public resolution of
the Church, is to be preferred before any private man's persuasion to the
contrary.

That opinion of S. Cyprians concerning Rebaptization was in him but an error,
because the Church had not determined any thing for, or against it; but after
the Church had defined it, and adjudged Rebaptization unlawful, Eusebius. eccl.
hist. lib. 7. c. 2.
'twas in all persons that maintained it, not an error only, but an Heresy.

To sum up all in few words: A man becomes guilty of Heresy. 1. By
disbeleeving any fundamental Article of Faith, or necessary part of saving
Truth, in that sense, as it was evermore received by the universal Church of
Christ. 2. By believing any superstitious Errors, or Additions, which do
vertually, and by necessary and evident consequence subvert any article of holy
faith, or overthrow a fundamental Truth. 3. By believing and maintaining these,
or lesser errors then these, with perverseness and obstinacy after sufficient
conviction. 4. By believing and obstinately opposing private opinions in points
of faith, against the public lawful Determinations of the Church to the
contrary.


CHAP. IV. Of Schism, the nature and kinds thereof.
1. SChism is so called from the Greek word (...), to divide, or rent; the word
is used, 1 Cor. 1.10. (...), That there be no Schisms or divisions amongst you:
And because Schism, and contention are inseparable twins, what therefore in
this verse are called Schisms, in the next verse. 11. are called, (...),
contentions: (...), That there are contentions amongst you: And the better to
conceive what is meant by these schisms and contentions, it is exemplified verse.
12. One says, I am of Paul, another, I am of Apollo, another, I am of Cephas,
and another will not depend upon any acknowledging neither Paul, nor any mortal
man to be his Tutor, and instructor, and he says, I am of Christ.

Thus the immaculate body of Christ is divided into parties and sects, the
partakers and followers of which several sects, are therefore called
Sectarists, and Separatists, viz. Such as cleave not to the whole body, but
follow some one part, that is broken off, and divided from the whole.

2. Heresy and Schism in the mystical body of Christ, do differ, as an inward
sickness, and outward wound in the natural body of man: but yet so, that there
are several internal as well as external parts, and branches of Schism: for by
how many ways, and means, communion is maintained amongst. Christians, by so
many ways, it may be broken, and dissolved: And every breach of communion is a
Schism.

3. Now the Communion to be maintained amongst Christians is either Internal.
External.


The internal communion has several branches, viz.

1. To believe and assent to all those saving truths revealed to us by Christ,
and his Apostles, and in all ages of the Church maintained, 1 Cor. 13.7.

2. To be with all obedience prepared in heart to assent to the Dictates of the
Church, whether universal or particular, that are agreeable to such revealed
Truths, Mat. 18.17.

3. To judge charitably each of other, accounting all such for our Christian
brethren, who profess this same Christian faith, and are of this Christian
mind, and spirit, Col. 2.16.

4. To sympathize in each others affections: which includes several
particulars: as 1. To sorrow for the sins and errors of others. 2. To condole
in the sufferings of others, or to weep with them that weep, Romans 12.15. As
also to congratulate the prosperities of others, or to rejoice with them that
rejoice: which enjoynes also, 3. To rejoice as do the Angels of heaven at the
conversion of a sinner, or any misguided soul from the errors of his ways,
Luke 15.7.

5. To pray for the growth, and perseverance of all holy and orthodox persons
in faith, and obedience, and for the conversion of all profane, schismatical,
and heretical persons, and for the reunion of all such to the Church, as are
divided from it, 1 Samuel 12.23. Psalm. 122.6. 1 Timothy 2.1.

6. To hold communion in our desires and affections with all such as are
divided from us in persuasion, and judgment, and by all means to endeavor an
external communion with them, according to our several powers, and in our
several places and offices, Gal. 6.1.

The external communion consists also of several branches. As, 1. In the oral
confession of the same Creeds or Symbols of Christian Faith, Romans 10.9, 10. 2 Timothy 1.13. 2. In the participation of the same Sacraments, 1 Cor. 10.16. 3. In
the admission of, and submission unto the same Apostolical discipline, and
government, Heb. 13.17. 4. In the use of the same Liturgies, or public forms
of external divine worship, 1 Cor. 1.10. Romans 15.6.


4. Hence by the rule of contraries, 'twil appear plainly, who is a
Schismatique, or in what respects the guilt of Schism is contracted.

1. He is guilty of Schism, who withdrawes his assent from the doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, either as it is by the Church universal professed, or
else as it is expressed by the doctrine, and established by the Laws of that
particular Church whereof he is a member, whilst this particular Church
opposes not the doctrine of the Church Catholic: for when any particular
person shall in any point of faith oppose his private opinion against the
public judgment of the Church, this is not only Schism in him, but such a
branch of Schism also, as coincident with Heresy, whereof before.

2. He who shall limit the Church of Christ to his own particular sect or
fraternity, saying, we are the Church, we are the elect and people of God,
Recepimus pro misstones d^ universalitate ecclesiae, toto mundo diffusae, si
ergo angelus de coelo tibi has premissiones tenenti diceret, Dimitte
Christianitatem totius orbis, and tene partem Donati, anathema esse deberet,
quia ted toto praecicidere, and in partem contrudere conaretur, and alienare a
promissis Dei. Aug. Epist. 165.
and all who join not in communion with us, are cast-awaies, and out of the
State of salvation, he is guilty of Schism, in that he cuts off the main body
of Christian people, or rather cuts off himself and his own fraternity from the
main body of Christ's holy Catholic Church. So the Donatists of old limited the
Church of Christ to their own sect, and the confines thereof to that part of
Africa where they inhabited, contrary to the promises of God, who has given
unto Christ the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the
earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. and Genesis 22. In thee shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed: whereupon the Father infers, since we have the
promises of God, concerning the universality of the Church to be diffused, and
spread over the face of the earth: if therefore an Angel from heaven should say
unto thee, Forgo thy relation to the Catholic Church, and be of this or that
particular Church or sect, which says, we, and we only are the Church and
people of God, he ought to be accursed, because he has endeavored to cut thee
off from the whole, and to limit thee to a part, and thereby by to alienate
thee from the promises of God in Christ Jesus.

A third branch of Schi^m, necessarily depends upon and flows from the second.
And this is rashly to judge, and uncharitably to condemn the Churches, or
societies of our Christian brethren; so the Montanists persuaded their
followers to speak evil of the universal Church, where ever spread over the
face of the earth, and not only to deny thereunto all reverence and esteem,
Eusebius. eccl. hist. l. 5. c. 16.
but also in no wise to join with them: of this kind of Schism are all such
guilty, who refuse to join with their Christian brothren in the public
service of God, under pretense of separating from the wicked of the world, who
with the proud Pharisee in the Gospel, presumptuously justify themselves and
their own Church, and faction, and unjustly condemn all others, Luke 18.9. who
are so pure in their own eyes, as to say to others, Vere existimemus posse
aliquid esse occultum in alio, quo vebis superior sit, etiam si bonum nostrum,
quo illo videmur superiores esse, non sit occulium. Aug. de verbis Apo. ser. 21.
Stand by thy self, come not near to me, I am holier then thou, Isa. 65.5.
little esteeming the exhortation of the Apostle, Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done
through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other
better then themselves: For says the Father hereupon, There may be those
secret and hidden virtues in others, whereby they do excel thee, though that
whereby thou do seem to excel others be not secret, but apparent.

4. To have no Christian sympathy, or fellow feeling either of the sins or
sufferings of our Christian brethren, is a fourth branch of Schism: For as in
the natural body, if one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one
member be honored, all the members rejoice, 1 Cor. 12.26 And the reason is
given verse. 25. That there should be no Schism in the body, but that the
members should have the same care one for another: So it is in the mystical
body of Christ, as it follows verse. 27. Now ye are the body of Christ, and
members in particular. That there be no Schism therefore it is required that we
have the same care one for another, and according to the same Apostles
injunction, Gal. 6.2. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of
Christ, who has borne the burden of our sins, and so must we by his Law of
charity bear one another burdens both of sins and sufferings, or else we
manifest our selves to be no true members of his mystical body, but either such
members as are dead by sinfulness, or cut off from the body by Schism.

5. He cannot be free from the guilt of Schism, who does not heartily desire,
and fervently pray for the peace of the Church, even for the peace, 1. of all
Christendom in general, for the happy knitting together of the broken parts,
and divided members of this too much disagreeing body: and for the peace and
prosperity; 2. of that particular Church, whereof each one is member, as Psalm.
122.6, 7, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, They shall prosper that love thee,
peace be within thy walls, and prosperity, etc. The same Christian duty is
commanded also, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

As to the parts of external communion;

1. It Is a branch of Schism to reject the ancient Christian Creeds, which are
no other but those consonant agreeing joint bodies of the holy Christian faith,
whereby, as by so many ligaments and sinews, all Christians are conjoined as
members of the same mystical body, being all of one accord, and of one mind,
Phil. 2.2. For it is unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, or the unanimous sincere profession of one, and the same Christian Faith,
whereby we grow up together as one perfect man unto the measure of the stature
of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

2. To forsake the public assemblies of our Christian brethren in the
public worship of God, is another branch of external Schism, and contrary to
the rule of the author to the Heb. 10.25 Where he forbids this, as he enjoynes
the former, and that because the one does commonly follow upon the other: 1.
Therefore he enjoynes, verse. 23. Let us hold fast the profession of our faith
without wavering -- And 2. that which would follow upon the transgression of
this command, not forsaking the assembling of your selves together as the
custom of some is, verse. 25. 'Twas the custom of some for fear of
persecution, and reproach to forsake the public assemblies of Christians:
Gloss. interlin. in loc.
and of others says the Gloss, upon presumption of their own piety and
perfection to separate themselves from the rest of their brethren whom they
rashly judged to be sinners, and such imperfect, defective persons, as were
unworthy of their society: to forsake the assembling of our selves together,
for either of these causes contracts the guilt of Schism. In the latter respect
the Novatians separating themselves from the Church of Christ, Eusebius. eccl.
hist. l. 6. c. 33.
called themselves (...), or Puritans: says the ecclesiastical historian.

3. And this kind of Schism consists of two parts. 1. To refuse to join in the
participation of the same Sacraments. 2. In the use of the same Liturgies, or
public forms of divine worship. As to the 1. There is but one baptism, Ephesians.
4.5. or one Sacrament whereby we are engraffed into the body of Christ's Church,
which whosoever refuses, or readmits, both the Catabaptist, and the Anabaptist
makes a breach in the mystical body of Christ. So, but one Sacrament of our
nourishment and growth in grace, even that of the holy body and blood of
Christ: in communion whereof, we being many are one bread, and one body, for we
are all partakers of of that one bread, 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Even says the
Father, As many grains are incorporate in one bread, and many members in one
body, so the faithful members of Christ's Church, make up but one bread and
body, by participation of Christ's blessed body and blood under the sacramental
representation of bread and wine. Aug.
He that contemns or neglects then the use of this Sacrament, does for his part
separate and divide himself from the body of Christ, wherewith every prudent
good Christian desires to be joined, that he may grow into him in all things,
which is the head, even Christ, Ephesians. 4.15. And Sacraments among many other
holy ends of their institution, has this for one, that they are marks of
distinctions, says judicious Hooker, to separate Gods own people from
strangers. Hook. eccl. pol. lib. 5. sect. 57.


4. To decline the use, and to refuse to join in the Church Liturgies, or
public forms of divine service; such Liturgies being both agreeable to the
word of God, and to the doctrine, and constant practice of the Church in all
ages; if it be not in it self a branch of Schism, it is the cause, and cursed
parent thereof: For as no form of prayer is the mother of confusion, so several
forms by persons of the same Church, are the means and in-lets of division: for
whilst one likes this man's way of praying, and another likes another man's way:
one says, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollo, etc.

Therefore to prevent all division in the Church, and to keep out all
corruptions both in faith and manners, and to avoid all ignorant,
insignificant, improper, and extravagant ways of expressing our minds, unto
God in prayer: As also that we might communicate in each others prayers, and
reap the benefit of each others fervency and devotion of soul in prayer, these
were the great and weighty reasons wherefore ever a set and standing form of
public prayers has been prescribed and used in the Church of Christ. And
when we do consider, and remember, 1. That God himself under the Law commanded
set forms of prayer to be used, Numb. 6.23. Deuteronomy. 20.3. and 26.3, 5. 2. That
Moses thanksgiving for that admirable victory given the Israelites against
Pharaoh, not only stands upon record for a precedent or pattern for the framing
of prayers, which might be repeated often; but also grew afterward to be a
part of the Jewish Liturgy. 3. That all the Psalms are so many set forms of
prayer and praise that were used in the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. although they
never had again the same occasions which brought them forth at the first. 4.
That under the Gospel, not only John Baptist first, but afterward Christ
himself taught his Disciples a set form of prayer, with a positive command when
ever they prayed, to say, Our Father, etc. Luke 11.1, 2. 5. That Christ himself
used a set form in his agony, Mat. 26 39. not altering his expressions, (as if
God were pleased with variety of phrases, a custom which only serves to tickle
the itching ears of men, and win popular applause) but he went again and
prayed, saying the same words, verse. 44. And also upon the cross he used a set
form, not of his own framing, but used long before in the Church, Mat. 27.46.
6. That this was the way of the primitive Church, as appears form the Liturgies
of S. James the Apostle, of S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, etc. Hook. eccl. pol. l.
5. sect. 25.
And 7. if we consider with the judicious Hooker, The irksome deformities
whereby through endless and senseless effusions of indigested prayers, the
worthiest part of Christian duty to God, is unsufferably disgraced: whilst men
are herein subject to no certain order, but pray both what and how they list:
All these things being seriously considered, we must needs say with the same
learned author: That no doubt from God it has proceeded, and by us it must be
acknowledged as a work of his singular care and providence, That the Church
evermore held a prescript form of Common Prayer, although not in all things
every where the same, yet for the most part retaining the same Analogy: So
that if the Liturgies of all ancient Churches throughout the world be compared
amongst themselves, it may be easily perceived, they had all one original
mould, and that the public prayers of the people of God in Churches thoroughly
settled, did never use to be voluntary dictates, proceeding from any man's
extemporal wit: but such known public forms, wherein all might join together
in the worship of God, according to the Apostles command, Romans 15.6. That ye
may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Calvin himself, who was furnished with as great gifts for the
pouring forth of his soul in prayer, Dr. Ferns Case.
as any of those persons that now plead so much for the liberty of their
expressions in public prayer, is yet said to have often wished that all the
Churches had one and the same public worship, or Liturgy, and that upon
these reasons, The holding of unity in the Church, and the excluding of
novelty, faction, and the boasting of gifts.

5. To deny obedience to our lawful ecclesiastical superiors, whether it be the
Church universal, or particular: essential, or representative: or whether it be
some single superior, and this either of divine, or of lawful humane
institution: it is generally acknowledged by the Fathers, to be a branch of
Schism.

S. Cyprian Filiusimpius, qui contemptis episcopis and Dei sacerdotibus
derelictis, constituere dudet aliud Altar. Cyp. de unit. eccl. Hi sunt conatus
schismaticerum -- ut sibi placeant. Vt praepositum superb^ tumore contemnant.
Id. ep. 65. Vnum scire debes -- si quis cum episcopo non sit, in ecclesia non
esse. Id. ep. 69. Hier.
defines a Schismatique: To be such a wicked son as contemns the Bishops, and
forsakes the Priests of the Lord, presumptuously during to set up another Altar.

And again, These are the ways of Schismatiques -- to please themselves, and
with proud disdain to contemn their Rulers.

And again, This you ought to know -- Whosoever is not with the Bishop, is not
in the Church. And S. Hierome says, it was the judgment of the whole
Christian world, ( totius orbis decreto, are the words) That for avoiding of
Schisms, and Heresy, it was necessary there should be one Bishop in every
Diocese.

S. Augustine admonishes his Christian brethren, Nolite mihi resistere, Aug.
ad frat. senn. de obed.
quia omnis potestas a Deo est -- you are not to oppose or resist me, who am
your Bishop, For all powers are of God, whether of Church or Commonwealth, and
whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, etc. Romans 13.
When Samuel the Prophet was rejected of the Jews from that rule and government
he exercised over them, the Lord said unto him, They have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel 8.7. The
same thing said our Lord to his Apostles, Luke 10.16. He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises -- Therefore said S. Bern. Hern. de praec.
and disp. tract. c. 12.
Obedientia quae majoribus praebetur, Deo exhibetur: The obedience we give unto
our superiors is exhibited to God himself, and so of disobedience also.
Therefore we read Deuteronomy. 17.12. The man that will do presumptuously, and will
not hearken unto the Priest -- or unto the Judge -- even that man shall die.
Cavete engo sacerdotes, ne aliquis vestrum audeat insurgere contra praepositum
-- As the father goes on in the forementioned place, Take heed ye that are
Priests, Aug. ibid.
how you rise up against him that has the Rule over you: For (says he) all
Ecclesiastical governors are planted in the Church for our good, and for the
Churches unity, whereof our Lord would have us to be very careful, lest like
sheep without a shepherd, we be divided from the unity of the faith by diverse
errors.

But to come nearer home: Doctor Moulin, the son of P. Moulin, wrote a book to
vindicate the French reformed Churches from being the pattern to any Scottish
or English Presbyterians to reject their Bishops; where he gives us also the
severe censures of Zanchy, and Calvin themselves, against those that deny
obedience to their lawful Bishops, Testor me Deo -- says Zanchy, I protest
before God, and in my conscience, that I hold them no better then
Schismatiques, that account it a part of reformation in the Church, to have no
Bishops -- And says Calvin, They are worthy of any execration that will not
submit themselves to that Hierarchy which submits it self unto the Lord --
These censures he cites out of the Tracts de reformat. Eccl.

Beza himself, the great patron of Presbyterian Eldership, yet confesses it to
be necessary, Bez. cont. Sar.
Vt Presbyterio (...) esset and permaneret, that one be Prelate over the
Presbytery; and this not pro tempore, but to continue; and allows S. Hierom's
Reason why it should be so, in Romedium Schismatis, for the avoiding of Schism.

Against these two branches of Schism, the holy Ignatius in his Epistle to the
Magnesians, gives them this twofold counsel and advice, As Christ (says he)
did nothing without his Father, being all one with his Father, Ignat. epist. ad
Magn.
(...), so neither must you do any thing without your Bishop, (...), but
assemble together, and have but one prayer common to you all.

A fifth branch of Schism follows upon these two last: Festa ecclesiae recte
colunt quise filios ecclesiae esse cognoscunt, Aug. de Tem. ser. 253.
which is to reject and profane those public times of Gods service, whether
festival, or fasting, observed by the Church of Christ in all ages: concerning
which I shall only remember the words of S. Aug. They do rightly observe the
festivals of the Church, who acknowledge themselves to be faithful, and loyal
sons of the Church; and not Schismatiques.

CHAP. IV. That Heresy and Schism, are the mutual causes each of other.
AS Heresy and Schism like abortive twins are in many particulars coincident
and cleave together, like Jacob and Esau, the one holding fast by the heel of
the other: so they are mutually the productive causes, and cursed parents each
of other. For,

1. Heretical errors in points of faith do easily produce a Schism, and cause a
separation amongst Christians in the use of the same Sacraments, and of the
same public worship at the same time and place: For difference in opinions,
breeds difference in affections, and different affections produce diverse
societies and congregations: and these according to their opposite opinions,
frame opposite forms, and ways of divine worship. So the Arrian Heresy
brought forth a different doxologie in the Church: the Orthodox Christians
saying, Glory be to the Father, to the Son, and to the holy Ghost. And the
Arrians, Glory to be the Father by the Son in the Spirit. It Is the property of
Heretics, as to depart from the faith, so from the Congregation also: Ex
nobis prodierunt, sc. ab unitate catholica recedentes. Gloss. interlin
These are they that separate themselves, Jude 19. So S. John also sets forth
the ways of Heretics, They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if
they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, etc. 1 John
2.19.

2. That Schism is the cause of Heresy, is also manifest from the example of
the Israelites, who first were but Schismatiques in breaking communion with the
Church of God at Jerusalem, but presently after they became guilty of Heresy,
nay, downright Idolatry, worshipping the golden calves of Jeroboam, Non vobis
objicio nisi Schismatis crimen, quod etiam haeresin male perseverando fecistis.
Ad. Don. Epist. 164.
erected in Dan, and Bethel: so the Donatists; their crime at first was only
Schism, they separated themselves from the congregation of Christ's flock under
a pretense of more holiness then the rest of their brethren: but their
perseverance in this Schism made them afterward Heretics: as S. August. in
one of his Epistles calls them. And in our own Church at home, it is too
manifest, that 'twas Schism, which first opened the gap, whereat all those
infectious Heresies which overspread us entered: The breach of Communion in the
use of public prayers, and participation of the Sacraments, Ecclesia unitatem
qui non tenet, tenere se fidem credit? Cyp. de unit. eccl.
and submission to the Apostolical government of Episcopacy, being followed
with Heresies that subvert all government, decency, and order, and the very
Sacraments themselves. Nor indeed can we imagine it should be otherwise, if we
consider it first,

1. That Ecclesiastical government and authority, discipline and order,
together with a public Liturgy or form of prayer, whereby all members of the
same Church join in the worship of the same God, as with one heart, so with one
voice: That these I say, are the mounds or hedges, which keep out the wild
Boars of the Forest from rooting up the Lords vineyard, and the little Foxes
from eating up the grapes thereof. In respect whereof, the Church which is the
spouse of Christ, is called an enclosed garden, Cant. 4.12. As therefore the
breaking down of any garden wall, lays it common and waste: so the breach of
these mounds by Schism and disobedience, lays waste the Church, makes it a
wilderness and desert, wherein briars and thorns, heresies and iniquities
spring up and grow.

In respect therefore of the first, viz. Ecclesiastical government, He that
will not hear the Church, says the Lord, let him be unto thee as an heathen,
etc. Mat. 18.17. And Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves; for they watch for your souls, viz. To keep you free as
from the pollution of sin, so from the poison of Heresy, which are the two
snares of the Devil, wherein he also continually watches to entrap, and devour
the souls of men.

And in respect of the second, A public known form of Prayer, it was ever
conceived by the wise and learned Fathers of the Church, That liberty for every
man to vent in public his own private conceptions, if not first examined and
approved, did open a gap to all licentiousness in opinion: for the proof
whereof, I shall only mention two testimonies.

The 1. is the 23. Canon of the third Council of Carthage, in these words,
Quascunque sibi preces aliquis describet, non its utatur, nisi prius eas cum
instructioribus fratribus contulerit: no man may use any prayers, which he has
made, till first he has consulted with his more learned brethren concerning
them.

The 2. which is more apposite to our present purpose, is the 12. Canon of the
Milevitan Council, in these words, Placuit ut preces, quae probatae fuerint in
concilio, ab omnibus celebrentur, nec alia omnino dicantur in ecclesia nisi
quae a prudentioribus traclatae, and comprobatae in Synodo fuerint, ne forte
aliquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit
compositum: It was decreed, that the prayers which were approved in the
Council, should be used by all, and that no other should be said in the Church,
but those that had been weighed by the more prudent, and approved in a Synod,
lest either through ignorance or negligence, any thing should be said, or
framed against the true faith.

If then the wisdom of the Church determined, that approved and set forms of
prayer were necessary for the preservation of the true faith: it must needs
follow, that the neglect, and contempt hereof has not been the least cause of
so much depravation, and corruption of the faith amongst us.

2. That Schisms and breaches of public communion are those gaps, whereat
Heresies do enter: we must need acknowledge, if we consider, That the Devil who
is the author of all Schism and division (who is therefore so well known to the
vulgar by his cloven foot) is serpens lubricus, a sly, slippery, insinuating
serpent, give him but the inch, and he will quickly have the ell: suffer him
but to make a rent in the garment, and he presently assailes the body of
Religion: if he win ground in the ceremonies, and make a Schism there, he will
not be long from the Sacraments, and produce Heresies in them: Thus 'twas
amongst the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11. From their neglect of Ceremonies, sitting
covered at prayer, they grew as irreverent and homely with the Sacrament,
eating, Bishop Andr. sermon. upon 1 Cor. 1^.16.
and drinking, as if they had been at home, so that the Apostle is fain to tell
them, verse. 22. That they had homes to be homely at: The Church, the house of
God was no place for such irreverent demeanor. And the like is obvious to each
man's observation amongst us, how the decent ceremonies, and public orders of
Prayer, and of the Sacraments, being struck at, the substance of both has not
long continued free from that impetuous violence of factious, and schismatical
spirits.

3. This will yet further appear, if we consider the nature of contention,
which is so unruly, that it knows no bounds and limits, but like waters
overflowing the banks, which run endwise ever, without return, so Prove. 17.14.
The beginning of strife, is, as when one lets out water, therefore leave off
contention before it be meddled with.

To contend for the true faith, is commendable, and commanded also Jude 3. but
(...), contention is one thing, and (...), to be contentious is another. To
contend for the Truth is the duty of all good Christians, but to contentious
about harmless ceremonies, and things indifferent, is not the custom of Gods
Church and people: If any man list to be contentious, we have no such custom,
nor the Church of God, 1 Cor. 11.16. From the cohaerence of which Text, the
danger of contentiousness is also observable: For 1. all the contention was
about ceremonies, about wearing long or short hair, praying covered, or bare,
verse. 13, 14, 15. and verse. 4, 5, 6. And being contentious about these things,
presently there followed Schisms, or divisions amongst them, verse. 18. and
shortly after downright Heresies, verse. 19. Thus Pruritus disputandi, becomes
Scabies Ecclesiae, the itch of contention, breeds the scab of Schism and
Heresy in the Church.

Hear from a person interested in such contentions, the truth hereof confessed:
Public wars, and private quarrels, which do usually pretend to the
reformation of the Church, Bauter. Saints Rest. 3. part chapter 13.
the vindicating of the truth, and the welfare of souls, do usually prove in
the issue the greatest means to overthrow all: it is as natural for wars and
contentious to produce Errors, Schisms, contempt of Magistracy, Ministry, and
Ordinances, as it is for a dead carrion to breed worms and vermin: believe it
from one who has too many years experience of it, both in armies and
Garrisons: It is as hard a thing to maintain in a people, a sound
understanding, tender conscience, a lively gracious heavenly frame of spirit,
and upright life, in a way of war, and contention, as to keep a candle lighted
in a storm, or under the waters.

4. When a Schism is once made, and the communion of the Church deserted, the
separatists like travelers out of the beaten road, find no path to walk in,
and so become circular, and endless in their ways: or like such folks, which
continually toss and turn themselves upon their bed, seeking that rest and
repose, which cannot be found till the humors of the body recover their due
temper, and be confined to their proper limits: Hence it comes to pass, that
new doctrines, and new opinions in religion are commonly broacht, and set a
foot by Schismatics, and this in opposition still to those ancient Truths
which are the doctrines of the Church, from which they have separated
themselves: Alienati vero a veritate, digni in omni volutantur errore,
fluctuati ab eo, aliter atque aliter per tempora de iisdem sentientes, and
nunquam scientiani stabilem habentes. Iren. l. 3. c. 4. adv. Haer. Nullum
Schisma non sibi aliquam fingit Haeresim, ut recte ab ecclesia recessisse
videatur. Hier. ad Tit. c. 3.
It being the essential property of a Schismatic, like Proteus, to change his
mind into every opinion, represented to his fancy as plausible. Hereunto
agrees that ancient authentic father of the Church, Irenaeus; When men are
once alienated from the truth, they deservedly wallow themselves in the mire of
all kind of errors, being tossed to and fro thereby: Sometime of one opinion,
and sometime of another, even in the same things: having no certain, sixth, and
settled knowledge at all.

And the reason hereof why Schismatiques must need become Heretics, is
rendered by S. Hierome; No Schism (says he) but will beget an Heresy, that
thereby the Schismatique may the better maintain his unlawful separation from
the Church.

CHAP. V. Of the causes of Heresy, and Schism: and the manners of Heretics.
HE that will convert an Heretic, Eu^n qui Haereticum vult convertere,
oportet, scire regulas sive argumenta eorum. Nec. n. est possibile alicui
curare quosdam male habentes, qui ignorant passionem eorum, qui male valent.
Iren. part. in lib. 4. advers. Haer.
says Ireneus, he must know, as the arguments which they use, so the Rules
whereby they proceed: It being not possible for any to work a cure upon another
that is diseased, if he know not the causes of his disease, and the ways of
its progress, in the infection of the humors, spirits, or more, solid parts of
the body: so that to heal the distempers of Heresy, and Schism, it is necessary
to search out the causes, and take notice of those evil ways, and corrupt
customs of seduced spirits.

1. The first original cause of all Heresies and Schisms, is pride and
ambition, which was the original sin both in men, and Devils, says Syracides,
Ecclus. 10.13. Therefore he admonishes, Extol not thy self in the counsel of
thine own heart, that thy soul be not torn in pieces as a wild bull, straying
alone, chap. 6.2. Thus Simon Magus, the first Heretic in the Church of
Christ, bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was some great
one, Act. 8.9. Thus Montanus (as Eusebius records) being inflamed with the
greedy desire of primacy, and superiority, Eccles. Hi^t. lib. 5. cap. 16.
yielded to the Actings of contrary, or evil spirits in himself, by whom being
suddenly extasied and entransed, he began to utter strange and new doctrines
contrary to such, as were generally received in the Church, pretending to the
gift of prophecy by immediate Revelation. Theodor. l. 1. hist. eccl c. 24.
Thus Arrius, and Novatus, being defeated of their ambitious desires of being
Bishops, the one of Alexandria, the other of Rome, became the heads, and
pestilent Authors of most pernicious Heresies; Si^n radix ela^ionis
abscindi^ur, rami pravae assertionis arcfiunt. Greg.
that they might lift up themselves to be the heads and leaders of Heretics,
since they could not be so of orthodox Christians. S. Augustine affirms of
Primianus, and Maximinianus, who through pride and vain glory lifted up
themselves to be the heads of two factions among the Donatists; And 'twas well
for them, says the Father, such factions fell out; for otherwise Primianus had
been Postreminianus, and Maximinianus had been Minimianus, persons of whom no
notice had been taken, but now in a Schism, either of them is a jolly fellow,
and notorious in the way of opposing the Church. So Jack Straw, and Wat Tiler
had been buried in oblivion, had they not raised a mutiny, and made an
insurrection. And are there not too many amongst us, whose mean stamp, calling,
and parts, pride and vainglory has stirred up to faction and Schism, partly to
raise themselves up out of the dust of contempt, and oblivion, and partly out
of covetousness, knowing it to be the best fishing in troubled waters?

What else can it be but pride of heart, that either moves some to decry
government, as scorning to be under any command, or that moves others so stiffly
to contend for a parity in government, as scorning any superiors? Lib. 6.
'Twas noted by every man, says the History of the Church of Scotland, That of
all men, none could less endure parity, and loved more to command, then they
who had introduced it into the Church. Was not this the gainsaying of Corah,
who because he could not be high priest himself, he would have all priests
equal, and no one to lift himself above the congregation of the Lords Numb.
16.3. Quosvis ad intellectum pravum intentio perversa non raperet, nisi prius
superbia inflaret; dum enim prae caeteris sapientes arbitrantur, sequi alios ad
melius intellecta despiciunt, atque ut apud vulgus scientiae nomen extorqueant,
student sum mopere and ab aliis recte intellecta destruere, and sua perversa
roborare. Greg. de cur. past. p. 3. adm. 26.
And can it be other but the same tumor of Pride, and vainglory, that moves men
to prefer their own private conceptions and extemporal effusions in prayer,
before the approved wise, and commanded forms of the Church? If you run through
all the several parts of Heresy and kinds of Schism remembered; if you take
notice of all the Heresies that have been in the Church: this humor of pride,
Andr. sermon. of imag. Epist. 165.
observe it who will (says reverend Andrews) has brought forth most part of
the Heresies since the time of the Gospel: Matter omnium haereticorum superbia
est, says Aug. The mother of all heresy is pride, and so they are described
by 2 Pet. 2.10. To despise government, Diversis locis sunt diversa haereses,
sed una matter sup^rbia omnes genuit; sicut una matter nostra ecclesia catholica,
omnes Christianos fideles toto orb diffusos. Aug. de Temp.
to be presumptuous and selfwilled, and not afraid to speak evil of dignities:
and to the same purpose, Epist. Jude, verse. 8. And so the Father again, There
are many Heresies in many places, but they have all one common mother, which is
pride, (in opposing private persuasions to the public resolutions, and
observances of the Church) even as there are many faithful good Christians
dispersed over the face of the earth, and these also have all but one common
mother, the Catholic Church, to whom they duly render all obedience, and
submission.

2. A second cause of Heresies and Schisms, is covetousness, which is directly
asserted by the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.10. For the love of money is the root of all
evil, which while some have cov^ted after, they have erred from the faith:
This was the cause of Balaams error in that he loved the wages of Righteousness.

The Novatians called themselves (...), h. e. mundos, Cathari mundiores se
c^teris praedicant: qui nomen suum si cognoscere vellent, mundanos se p^tius
quam mundos vocarent. Isid. orig. l. 8. Est n. qui non amator esset pucuniae,
nisi per hoc putaret se excellentiorem esse; et est qui non amaret excellere,
nisi putaret per hoc majores divitias habere. Aug.
the pure, and the clean: but says Isidore, Had they given themselves their
proper character, it should have been not mundos, but mundanos; not the
Puritans, but the worldlings: Covetousness inseparably cleaving to all the
members of that heretical crew, as Pride was the parent of them. Nor can we
well imagine, whether pride or covetousness reigned more in Montanus, Arrius,
and Novatus, when failing in their hopes of Ecclesiastical preferments, they
became the heads of the several Heresies called by their several names.

Nor is it a bare and single convetousness, but that which is the worst and
most enormous kind thereof that often breeds, and always possesses the
spirits of Heretics and Schismatics, viz. the great, and crying sin of
sacrilege; even a sacrilegious, and evil eye after the revenues of the Church;
sacrilege being one of the Devils most strong and alluring snares, whereby he
entraps men into Heresy and Schism: It is a snare to the man who devoureth
that which is holy, Prove. 20.25.

3. A third cause of Heresies, and Schisms is Ignorance; And such a kind of
ignorance, as under the show, and appearance of knowledge possesses the mind:
which makes all persons in an error so stiff and perverse in the maintenance
thereof: their ignorance being not easily to be dispel'd by the light of Truth,
because in what they are most ignorant they conceit themselves most knowing:
Heretics in this respect being not unlike persons that are drunken, and yet
think themselves sober, and so become guilty of much wild, and exotique
demeanor, the which, not conceiving themselves to be drunk, they fondly imagine
to be bravely discreet, and gallant: so these professing themselves to be wise
they become fools, Romans 1.21. being wedded to their own opinions how false
soever, whilst they think themselves wiser, then those from whom they ought to
receive directions in the ways of Truth.

Hence 1. arises that exorbitant custom of the Heretics to detract, and
undervalue their superiors in the knowledge of things divine, and boldly to
presume to teach their teachers, Greg. Nazian. ora^.
at which presumption of a people, Gregory Nazianzen being greatly offended,
uses these words in an oration to them, Presume not ye that are sheep, to make
your selves guides of them that should guide you, neither seek ye to overskip
the fold which they about you have pitched. It suffices for your part, if you
can well frame your selves to be ordered: Take not upon your selves to judge
nor to make them subject to your laws, who should be a law to you; For God is
not a God of sedition, and confusion, but of order and peace.

Hence 2. they presume to justify themselves, and despise others, which none
dare presume to do, but such as do not truly know themselves. Such is that
generation who are pure in their own eyes; they would never be so, were they
not ignorant of what follows. But they are not washed from their filthiness,
Prove. 3.12. And hence come Schisms, (says a learned man) because men do say,
we are pure, and we are holy, we are they that sanctify the impure, and it is
our prayers that are effectual with God, and for our sakes his blessings
descend upon others: And upon this ground they separate themselves into sects
and parties, each one saying of his own sect, Ecce habes ecclesiam per totum
mundum: noli sequi falsos justificatores, sed veros praeci pitatores, Aug. in
Joh. tract. 1.
Lo here is Christ, and lo there, Mat. 13. limiting him to a part, being
ignorant that he has bought the whole, and 02 taken possession also, being the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole
world, 1 John 2.2. Whereupon says the Father, Behold, thou have the Church
diffused over the whole earth, follow not therefore such who falsely justify
themselves, and thereby too truly headlong themselves into the gulf of errors.

Hence 3. they presume to meddle with Mysteries above the sphere of their
capacities, The sincere milk of Gods word will not serve their turn, but they
will drink of the wine of celestial truth, which their understandings being
not able to digest, they are intoxicated therewith and stagger like drunken
men, being tossed and fro with every wind of doctrine: against which
presumption the wise Syracides admonishes, Ecclus. 3.21. Seek not out the
things that are too hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy
strength. But what i^ commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence -- For
many are deceived through their own vain opinion, and an evil suspi^ion has
overthrown their judgment.

Hence 4. Even from ignorance under the pretext of knowledge, it is the custom
of Heretics to snarle, and detract, and speak evil of those Truths, the
profound and deep excellency whereof their darkened understandings cannot
fathom; so they are described 2 Pet. 2.12. and Jude, verse 10. To speak evil of
the things they understand not: As the Jews because they understood not
Christ's Doctrine of the bread of life, therefore they strove amongst themselves
saying. How can this man give us his flesh to eat? Joh. 6.52. And Nicodemus,
because he understood not the nature of Regeneration, was offended at the
doctrine, saying, How can a man be born when he is old, etc. Joh. 3.4.

Whereas all good Christians, who have any grain of true faith, do believe with
reverence, even those mysteries of godliness, which they understand not,
expecting with all humility and obedience till they shall be opened, and made
known unto them. Hist. eccl. l. 7. c. 13.
So Eusebius records of Dionysius Alexand who speaking of the Revelation of S.
John, says, I do not impugn those things therein, which I understand not, but
rather admire them, the more for that they are above my understanding. And S.
Aug. gives us this rule to be observed as touching the mysteries of holy
Religion: Quod secundum fidem qua imbuti sumus inteligere valucrimus, tanquam
de cibo guadea^us; quod secundum sa^a^n sidei regulam intelligere non
poterimus, bonum tanen and verum esse minime dubitemus. Aug. in Joh. tract. 18.
What according to the measure of faith wherewith we are endowed, we do
understand aright, let us therein rejoice, as it is the food of our souls, but
what we cannot according to the sound rule of faith conceive, we must not
therefore doubt, but to be holy, just, and good.

Hence 5. arises so much levity and inconstancy of mind in all heretical, and
schismatical persons: like children tossed to and fro with every wind of
doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Even as children for want of judgment distinguish not
betwixt wholesome, and unwholesome diet, betwixt food and poison: so all persons
become erroneous and wavering for want of knowledge, and judgment, rightly to
distinguish betwixt light and darkness, tares and wheat, corn and chafe,
betwixt what is the food, and what they poison of their souls: therefore they
are compared to clouds without water, carried about with winds, Jude, verse.
12. denoting the emptiness of sound knowledge, which renders them not only
inconstant in the tenants of religious Truths, but also obnoxious both to the
broaching and belief of lies: having ever an itching desire to things new, and
strange, but with the Israelites loathing the old Manna, though it be the food
of Angels, for no other reason, but because they are accustomed to it.

And this spiritual itch, a more baneful disease then the corporal, is grown
epidemical, and so overspreading the body of our Church, as that prophecy of
the Apostle has at no time been more manifestly fulfilled, then in these our
days. 2 Timothy 4.3.4. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound
doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves teachers, having
itching ears. And they shall turn away their ears from the Truth, and shall be
turned unto Fables. This itch, says the Father, Pruritus in auribus
spiritualiter fornicantibus: sicut pruritu libidinis in carne corrumpitur
integritas castitatis. Aug. in Joh. Hom. 43.
is as pernicious to the purity of Truth, as is the itch of lust to the virtue
of chastity: for hence many solid and soul-saving Truths are often contemned,
for their antiquity, because they were heard of before, and so they tickle not
their itching ears: And lies, and errors are readily embraced in their stead
merely for their novelty. And those teachers which feed this humor, and claw
this itch by bringing things new and strange to their ears, are the only
persons they lust after, delight in, and follow by heaps, and multitudes.

But undoubtedly amongst many other, this is one infallible mark whereby to
distinguish Truth from Error, and consequently Heretics and Schismatiques
from orthodox Christians: Truth like the Sun in the firmament, is ever one and
the same, and constant to it self: but Error changes like the Moon, is
multifarious and endless, knows no stint, or limits; therefore Tertullian calls
the faith of Heretics, Fides annua, menstrua, sides temporum non
evangeliorum: Not like the faith of the Gospel which is fixed and settled,
permanent and constant, but the faith of a year, or of a months continuance,
and the faith of the times; as the times change and alter, so does the Religion
commonly of all seduced, and erroneous persons.

From which inconstancy new sect, and parties daily and hourly do arise amongst
Heretics: as from the shop of Simon Magus Heresy, sprung all those
innumerable sorts of Heretics in the Church, till the time of the Manichaean
heresy And these Manichees were also subdivided into Catharists, Macarians,
and Manichees strictly so called. From Arrius sprung the Macedonians, Aerians,
Aetians, Aug. cont. Don. l. 1. c. 6.
and innumerable others: Donatus party, says S. Aug. was soon broken into many
less and smaller parcels; Denique penitus inspectae omn^s haereses in multis
cum autoribus suis dissentientes deprehenduntu^. Teit. de prae. cont. Haer. c.
42.
The Anabaptists amongst us are subdivided into Antinomians, Brownists,
Seekers, Ranters, Quakers, Familists, etc. And finally, says the Father, look
into all Heresies, and you may easily find them in many things dissenting even
from their own authors and Founders: And seldom shall you see Heretics agree
in any one point, except it be to oppose, and cry down the Truth, as Herod and
Pilat against Christ.

6. From the same dark Abyss of Ignorance, Neque n. natae sunt haereses, and
quaedam dogmata illaqueantia animos and in profundum praecipitantia, nisi dum
scripturae bonae intelligerentur male; and quod in its non been imelligitur,
etiam temere and audacter asseritur. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 18.
under the semblance of self-conceited wisdom, has sprung that which is of
all others the greatest cause of Heresies, viz. The misinterpretation and
mis-application of the holy Scriptures: For says the Father, Heresy had never
sprung up: nor false doctrines bewitching and destroying the souls of men, had
never been broacht, had not the good word of God been ill understood, and that
also which is but ill, and weakly understood, been rashly and presumptuously
affirmed. It Is ever the custom of Heretics to allege holy Scriptures in a
wrested and perverted sense, making those sacred writings like a nose of wax,
turning, and writhing them to this, and to that, and to every sense that best
agrees with their own vain imaginations: Aliter Photius, aliter Novatianus,
etc. One Heretic understands it this way, and another diversely from him, and
a third distinct from both, and all put another sense upon the words of God
then ever his holy Spirit intended therein: Pro voluntatis sue sensu, Hilar.
Vinc. Lir. adversus Har. c. 1. Hill de trinitate l. 2.
The sense of their own mind and spirit, not of Gods Spirit, they put upon the
Scriptures, which occasioned that complaint plaint of S. Hierome: It Is only the
Art of understanding Scriptures which all persons challenge to themselves. So^a
scripturarum a^s est, quam sibi passim omn^s vendicant. Hanc gariula avus, hanc
delirus senex, hanc so phista verbesus, hanc universi presumunt, lacerant,
docent, ante quam discant. Hier. ad P^l. l. 1. c. 6.
This the prattling old wise, and the doting old man, and the wrangler full of
words, this all men presume unto, and upon presumption of their interest
therein, they tear, and wrest, and abuse it at their pleasure, presuming to
teach the doctrine thereof before they have half learned it.

As in the natural creation of children too many are the issue of lust, and
wantonness, nor is it considered when they are begotten, how they shall be
kept; even so it is in the spiritual brood of Heresies; pride, covetousness and
ignorance, begets them before the authors know how to maintain them: but as
children when they are once gotten, must be kept though they pinch upon their
neighbors; so this heretical crew rather then the opinions which are the issue
of their pride and vanity should die, they will steal the sincere milk of the
word to nourish them: or in language of another strain; rather then they will
submit their vain imaginations to the truth and true meaning of Gods word, the
truth of that must submit to their imaginations. And this, Videtis id vos
ag^re, ut omnis scripturarum de medio auferatur authoritas, and suus cuique
animus author sit quid in quaque scriptura probet, quid improbet: id est, non
ut authoritati subjiciatur s^ripturarum ad fidem, sed ut sibi scripturas ipse
subjiciat: non ut illi ideo placeat aliquid quia hoc in sublimi authoritate
scriptum legitur, sed ideo recte scriptum videatur quia hoc illi plac^^t. Aug.
cont. Faust.
says the Father, is the way to rob the Scripture of its authority, whilst
every man's own imagination must tell him what it allows, and what it
disallowes: this is not to be subject to the authority of the Scriptures, but
to make the Scriptures subject to our imaginations: so that therefore this or
that is not acceptable unto them, because it is written in the word of God, but
therefore it is well said, or written there, because it is acceptable unto them.

The great danger they incur, who put another sense upon the holy Scriptures
then Gods holy Spirit ever intended therein, is represented to us, by the
strange fire, which that rebellious crew under the conduct of Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram offered up unto the Lord, there came out a fire from the Lord and
devoured the presumptuous sacrificers, Numb. 16.18, 35. So those unlearned and
unstable souls which wrest the Scriptures, do it to their own destruction, 2
Pet. 3.16. As a remedy to prevent so great mischief, the ancient Fathers
thought it meet to provide (says the reverend Andrews) that they who took
upon them to interpret the Scriptures, Lat. con^. secundum s^ss. 11.
should put in sureties that the sense they gave of them should be no other
then what the Church in former times acknowledged. So Vinc. Lirin. also, By
reason of the manifold windings and turnings of the Scriptures, Propter tantos
tam varii erroris anfractus, necesse est, ut propheti^ae, and Apostolicae
interpretationis l^nea, secundum ecclesiastici and catholici sensus normam
dirig atu^. Vine. Lir. advers. Haer. c. 2.
for the maintenance of several errors, it is necessary to direct the line of
prophetical and Apostolical interpretation, according to the rule of an
Ecclesiastical sense and meanings: for, Quis unquam Haereses, etc. says the
same Author, Who ever brought in an Haeresie but first he disagreed from the
consent of antiquity, and of the ancient Catholic Church: Et in laqueum sit
verbum Dei, says Estius: the holy Word of God becomes a snare, and a stumbling
block to all those who contemning the authority of the Church, presume to
impose their own private sense upon it. And he that obtrudes his private sense
of Scripture upon his hearers, not only lords it over their faith, but over the
faith of the universal Church of Christ, Estius in Romans 11.9.
nay he makes null and void the authority of holy Scriptures, for Scripture is
no more Scripture, if not rightly interpreted.

7. Another general cause of erroneous opinions in Religion, is Hypocrisy:
when men are cold and lukewarm, and too negligent in the practice, which is the
life of Christianity, when they receive not the love of the Truth, so, as
readily to obey and practice it; then it is just with God to give them up to
strong delusions. Nay, hereby men lay themselves open to the delusions of
Heretics, because the excellency of holy Christian truths are not, cannot be
known but by the practice and experience thereof, therefore said our Savior,
If ye do his will, ye shall know of my doctrine whether it be of God or no,
Joh. 7.17. So that undoubtedly what ever piety, or purity Heretics may
pretend unto, yet generally it is but a mere formal outside, a show, and shadow
of truth, but no substantial solid piety, or charity; having a form of
godliness, but denying the power, 2 Timothy 3.5. For to such who by obedience,
practice, and experience do know and believe the excellency of Truth, it is not
possible to be seduced, and drawn aside therefrom: Qu imdiu bona ep^ra sa^
imus, ipsum lumen ju stitiae ante oculos nosties adaperit veritatem. Chrysostom. in
Mat. 7. Hom. 19.
therefore our Lord calls all false Prophets, Woolves in sheeps clothing, Mat.
7.15. that is, Nominis Christiani extrinseous superficies, mere nominal outside
Christians: no men so seemingly austere and strict, and yet all is but empty
appearance of holiness: no men assume to themselves more holy titles, the
Saints, the Elect, the People of God. If they, be simple and illiterate
persons, then they apply to themselves, God has chosen the simple, 1 Cor.
1.27. and those that confute them in discourse, do it by carnal Reason, and the
wisdom of the flesh; if they be subtle and acute in argumentation, and put to
silence some weak adversary, then it is the wisdom of the spirit in them, which
the wisdom of the flesh cannot resist. Tell them of their folly and madness,
they say Christ's own Apostle was accounted mad: if they suffer according to law
for their enormities, then they say they suffer for righteousness sake; nay
their sins and delinquencies they would make appear to be pieties: so subtle
are all Hypocrites in the outward and nominal part of Religion, that if it were
possible, they would deceive the very. Elect: and many thousands are deceived
by their appearances of holiness, and strictness of life, but it is such only
who are somewhat infected with Hypocrisy as well as themselves: therefore they
are styled Wels without, water, clouds that are carried with a tempest, 2 Pet.
2.17. For as empty clouds are most tossed by the wind: so men that are
religious only in religious names, and religious talk, and outward show of
Religion, being not ballast with sincere devotion toward God, and charity
toward man, such are they that are most apt to be tossed with every wind of
doctrine.

8. All errors and seditions in the most holy faith are generally thrown upon
the grand impostor and father of lies, the Devil, who no question has a great
influence therein, therefore called, The doctrines of devils, and he and his
Angels, seducing spirits, 1 Timothy 4.1. and all that are seduced, the children of
the wicked one, Mat. 13.38. but yet withal we must know, that if the voluntary
sins of pride, covetousness, presumption, etc. did not first infect the mind,
his tares of Heresy and Schism could never take rooting there: it is of the
corruptions of the minds and manners of men that all Heresies are engendered,
and like the creatures of putrefaction to which heat and moisture gives a
natural being, so the filthy moisture, or corruption of men's hearts quickened by
the incessant operation of the evil spirit, gives unto all Heresies their
spiritual being, and growth in the mind: For wickedness, says the wise man,
does alter the understanding, and the bewitching of naughtiness does obscure
things that are honest, Wisd. 4.11. Sin, says Chrysostom. does so blind the senses
of sinners, Chrysostom. in Mat. 7. Hom. 19.
that seeing not the ways of falsehood and error, they headlong themselves
therein: nor could ever any errors prevail ever man, if sin had not made the
way: for first a man is blinded by his sins, and then drawn away by the devil,
and seduced: For error, says he, begets not sins, but sins beget and bring
forth error.

CHAP. VI. The ends why God permits Heresies and Schisms.
ALmighty God as by his powerful word, of nothing he has made all things, so
does he still not only uphold all things by the word of his power, but most
wisely govern, order, and dispose of all, being the Master-wheel of all
motions, and the original cause of all actions, and events, whether they be
good or evil, of the good by his active, and of the evil by his permissive
providence, as Amos 3.6. Shall there be any evil in the city, and the Lord has
not done it?

Terra salutiferas herbas, eademque nocentes Nutrit, and urticae proxima sea^e
rosa est.
And as it is in the greater world, all good and useful things have their
contrary evils: there are fruitful showers and the fatning dew of heaven: and
there are also harmful storms of hail, and corrupt, and infectious vapors:
There are trees of wholesome fruit, and herbs for the use and nourishment both
of man and beast, and there are also both trees and herbs that are unwholesome
and poisonous: there are living creatures also both tame and wild, both such
as are serviceable unto man, and such also as are destructive. fierce, cruel,
and mischievous: so in the lesser world also; there is in the field of Gods
Church, both wheat and tares, corn and chafe; both true and false Prophets,
the one the pillars of sound, celestial, soul-saying Truth, the other the
deceitful workers, and Patrons of errors, heresies, and schisms.

Truth stands ever firm upon its own proper base, and being supported by no
other but its own native excellency and virtue, ever appears like it self in
its own plain simple naked colors: But Error being in it self crooked, and
deformed, puts on the shape, and ever appears in the likeness of holy truth,
following her steps to trip up her heels, and take possession of her throne:
The very Philosophy of the Heathens, was followed and undermined by false
Philosophers: and amongst the Jews their circumcision, and some other rites
and ceremonies were imitated by the Arabians, and other nations: and yet the
one were the worshippers of the true God herein, and the others worshipped
Idols: And in the worship of the true God, to that which is sound and sincere
is opposed false, counterfeit, and hypocritical worship: to the true and lawful
Baptism, is opposed unlawful and extraregular dipping: to the commandments of
God, the traditions of men: to the Apostles and faithful Ministers of Christ,
false Apostles, and deceitful workers: and in a word, there is nothing of the
most holy fath, but by the cunning of the Devil, working upon the corruptions
of men's hearts, something is forged in opposition thereunto: (...). Athen. lib.
de resur.
No article of the Christian faith escaping the invasion of Heretics, and the
corruption thereof by heretical and false positions: the which will easily
appear to every man that list to consult Philastrius, Epiphanius, Augustine,
Joh. Damscene, who out of Ecclesiastical records have given the several
catalogues of Heresies and Heretics.

The Reasons why God is pleased to permit it should be so, may be reduced to
two general heads, viz. 1. In respect of the faith it self. 2. In respect of
the professors thereof.

1. In respect of the faith of Christ. 1. The excellency thereof does appear
from the manifold assaults, and machinations of the devil there against: for
were not the steadfast profession of the Christian faith, and the conscientious
practice thereof, the way both of Gods acceptable service, and of man's
salvation, the devil would never be so busy to corrupt and adulterate the
same, whose inveterate enmity both to God and man, incites, provokes him
perpetually to deprave and falsify the pure worship of the one, and hinder the
salvation of the other.

2. The holy faith of Christ appears more pure, sincere, and illustrious by the
test, and opposition of heretical positions: we read Numb. 16.36. that the Lord
commanded Moses to take the censers of those proud rebels, which rose up
against Moses and Aaron, wherein they offered strange fire before the Lord, and
to make broad plates for a covering of the Altar; for they offered them before
the Lord, therefore are they hallowed: sc. sanctificata in mortibus peccatorum:
Through the death of the offenders they were sanctified to be a memorial to the
children of Israel, to beware of the like schism, insurrection, and sacrilege.
These censers, (says the Father) are a figure of the holy Scriptures, wherein
Heretics offer strange fire, by imposing a strange sense, and distinct from
the mind of Gods Spirit therein, which is so abominable unto God, that it is
commonly the ruin of the Authors, and abettors thereof: But yet if we bring
these brazen censers to the golden Altar of God, and compare the strange fire
therein, with the true fire from heaven, the luster of the one will appear more
clear and eminent, through the false and counterfeit gloss of the other: for
as that maxim is true in general, Contraria inter se opposita magis,
elucescunt, All contraries by their mutual opposition do more clearly show
themselves, so this in particular also is as true, veritas falsorum
comparatione magis fulgebit, Truth when compared and opposed to falsehood,
appears like gold from the dross when tried in the fire, more illustrious and
shining.

It Is one reason therefore, why holy catholic doctrine is so much besieged,
and impugned by heretical gainsayers, and tares of erroneous opinions are
intermixed with the pure grain of sincerity and truth, viz^ That tho holy faith
might not loose its gloss and luster, but appearing like it self clear and
perspicuous might more effectually conduce to the illumination of our souls.

3. The holy faith by the opposition of Heresy is elevated and raised to a
higher pitch of perfection, and the mysteries thereof become thereby to be more
acutely handled, more narrowly sifted, and thoroughly considered: whereas
otherwise like children we should ever be content with milk, and neglect the
more solid and substantial food, Haereticos permisit Deus, ne semper lacte
nutriamur, and in bruta infantia remaneamus. Aug. Tr^ct. 36. in Joh.
resting in generals, and not descending to the discussion and right
understanding of particular truths. So says the Father, God therefore suffers
Heretics amongst us, that we might not always be nourished with milk, and
continue for ever in the more brutish estate of infancy.

4. The holy faith by the opposition of Heresy is the more confirmed and
strengthened, even as trees shaken with the wind, take the faster hold, and are
thereby more firmly enrooted in the earth; so the more the foundation of our
faith is assaulted and shaken by the gusts of heretical opinions, the faster
hold is taken, and more firmly the principles of holy truth are enrooted in our
hearts.

Nor is this the weakest argument to persuade us of, and confirm us in the
truth of all the Articles of the Christian faith, that notwithstanding the
several oppositions of Heresies in all ages, many whereof have for the time so
prospered and prevailed, as to infect the greater and more eminent sort of
Christian professors, yet the true faith has ever in the end triumphed over
them; they have dashed themselves in pieces like waves against a rock have
broken into a foam, and vanished into smoke: for, magna est veritas and
praevalebit: As for truth it endures, and is always strong, it lives, and
conquereth for evermore, Esd. 4.38.

The second general end why God permits Heresies, is in respect of the
professors of the holy faith: And these being of two sorts, good and bad,
either such as are sound grain, or else such as are empty chafe, therefore he
suffers the fan of temptation to pass over all, by the assaults of erroneous
opinions, that the one might be distinguished from the other, that the corn
might be winnowed from the chafe, the wheat separate from the tares, and sound
orthodox Christians might be known from the un sound, hollow-hearted, Chrysostom.
Hom. 19. in Mat. 7.
hypocritical professors of the faith. That the evil may not be crowned with
the good, therefore God sends temptations (says the Father) and that the good
may not perish with the evil, therefore he commands us to beware of false
Prophets.

2. The reason why the unsound, and sinful professors, are tempted, and by
temptation overcome by the assaults of erroneous opinions in Religion, is by
the just judgment of God permitted for a punishment upon them: for as it is in
the way of sinfulness, one sin is commonly the punishment of another, God most
justly withdrawing the assistance of his divine grace from such as wilfully
transgress his most holy Laws: Peccatum, quod non per poenitentia^ diluitu^,
mox suo pondere ad aliud trahitur. Greg.
So that when sin (says the Father) is not washed away with the tears of
repentance, the weight thereof sinks the soul into the puddle of following
sins: His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his sins, Prove. 5.22. So it is in the way of Error, they who
receive not the truth in the love and life thereof, which is sound and sincere
obedience thereunto; For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie, that they all might be damned, who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. So Saul for
his disobedience, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. The Spirit of the Lord departed from him,
and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him, 1 Samuel 16.14. So Ahab for his
many abominations, refused to ear ^^hthe voice of the true Prophet Micaiah, and
listened to false Prophets to his own ruin and destruction, 2 Chronicles. 18. And so
Judas whose faith in Christ was never sound, but his Religion lay in his purse,
not in his heart, was therefore suffered to be tempted, and eternally ruined by
that temptation to betray his Master.

3. In respect of the sound and sincere professors of Christianity, God permits
Heresies for many useful and profitable reasons.

1. That those smaller errors and mistakes, wherewithal through ignorance, or
misperswasion the understandings of many good men are infected, might by the
opposition of Heresies be cleared, and done away, and the chafe, by the fan of
temptation be winnowed, Datam scimus Sa anae potestatem, ut servos Christi
crib^aret, ut quod de trinco inveniri p^ssit h^rreis ^ungeretur: and quod de
his ad ign um alimenta transiret. Anacleti epist.
and sifted from the purer grain: so says an ancient Father of the Church: We
know that power is given to the Devil to winnow, and sift the servants of God,
that what is found to be sound and good wheat might be gathered into the barn,
and carefully treasured up in the steadfast belief thereof: and what proves but
chafe and fit for the fire, might be shaken off: The inundation of heresies
being one of those fiery trials, whereby every man's work shall appear, whether
it be gold, silver and precious stones to be continued, or whether no better
then wood, hay, and stubble (which too often is built upon the same foundation
with the other) and to be consumed, 1 Cor. 3.11, 12, 13.

2. Heresies are permitted, to scour off the rust of idleness, sloth,
negligence, and carelessness in matters of faith; they render all careful and
conscientious Christians more diligent in sifting, and searching out the truth,
and more careful also of what they hear, and of what they receive: for truth,
according to those several commands given, Beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7.15.
Take heed how ye hear, Luke 8.18. And take heed what ye hear, Mark 4.24. Try
all things, and hold fast that which is good, 1 Thessalonians 5.21. And believe not
every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God or no, 1 John 4.1.
Therefore many false Prophets, and false spirits there are, and heretical
assertions are interwoven with the Articles of the true faith, that we might
not grow dull, and stupid, and negligent, and idle, but be industrious,
vigilant, and wary, having our senses exercised to discern both good and evil,
and our understandings polished, through the many exercitations, and
oppositions of untruths: ^^m. 19. in Mat. 7.
Because God would not have his servants without judgment (says Chrysostom.) not
to be able to discern betwixt light and darkness, therefore he sends them
temptations, and because he would not have them to perish through ignorance,
and negligence, therefore he commands them to beware.

3. For the exercise and trial as of our sincerity, so of our courage, and
spiritual fortitude in the opposition and resistance we make against the
assaults of Heresies, is another end why God permits us to be assaulted by
them: there is no greater sign of our sincerity in the love and service of God,
then by being steadfast in his covenant, Psalm. 78.37. one chief and principal
part of which covenant is, steadfastly to believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith: from the which there is no man that loves the Lord with all
his heart, can be induced to swerve, or go astray; nor can all the machinations
of the Devil, or any sinful lusts of the world, or of the flesh in this respect
prevail against him. For he that is vere pius, est vere fortis: True and sound
piety never wants courage to defend the Truth; and true courage, through divine
assistance, is ever accompanied with constancy, and victory over all
temptations: This is commanded Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise a false Prophet, thou
shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet -- And the reason is rendered,
why such should arise, and why thou should not hearken unto them, verse. 3. For
the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with
all your heart, etc. q. d. If you truly love the Lord, it will appear by the
opposition to whatsoever does corrupt, or deprave the ways of his worship: God
sends not temptations that we should hearken and yield unto them, but that our
love to him might appear by our resistance and vanquishment of them. And our
weapons in this spiritual warfare, are fervent importunate prays, arising from
a true sincere and sound piety and devotion of soul; The Lord is nigh unto all
them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth, He will fulfill the
desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry, and will save them,
Psalm. 145.28, 29. He will save them out of the windings and subtle ways of
error and deceit, who truly love and fear him, and in the sincerity of their
souls call upon him: For God is faithful, and will not suffer you to be tempted
above that you are able, but will even give the issue with the temptation that
they may be able to bear it, 1. Cor. 10.13. Vel cadere non sinit, vel a casu
erigit: Gloss. in loc.
either God suffers not the righteous to be moved, Psalm. 55.22. Or if he fall,
yet shall he rise again, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand: -- Qui
tentanti dat licentiam, tentato dat misericordiam: The same God who suffers the
tempter, supports the tempted also: and against the temptations of false
Prophets upholds the true faithful soul that loves the Lord his God with all
his heart, with all his might.

4. As our love to God, so our love to our neighbor also is exercised and
tried by the permission of Heresies amongst us: And this,

1. By our readiness to instruct the ignorant, and strengthen the weak, that
they be not seduced, and ensnared by them: Romans 14.1. Him that is weak in the
faith receive ye, but not to doubtful disputations.

2. Before endeavors in the use of all possible means to bring into the way of
Truth, all such as have erred, and are deceived. proving whether God will give
them repentance to the acknowledgement of the truth, that they may escape the
snare of the Devil, of whom they are taken captive at his will, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.

3. By your prayers for them, that God would open their eyes to understand the
truth, and relinquish their errors, that they may be converted, and be healed,
Jam. 5.16. Praying one for another that ye may be healed.

5. For the exercise of our patience and meekness: For all Heretics and
Schismatiques whatsoever, do generally and for the most part assume to
themselves to be the only Church and people of God, and all others besides
themselves to be reprobates and castawaies, whom therefore, where they have
power they constantly persecute, and afflict: and where outward power is
wanting, they show their inward malice by bitter railings, revilings, and
uncharitable censures and condemnations of them: All which God permits for the
exercise of our patience, meekness, and Christian moderation: that being
reviled, we revile not again, not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for
railing: but contrariwise blessing, and earnestly praying for their conversion,
who as earnestly wish for our confusion: and this both according to the command
and example of our blessed Lord and Master, Mat. 5.44. But I say unto you, love
your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and
pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you.

CHAP. VII. Of the danger of Heresy and Shism.
THE most holy God, as he is infinite in mercy, so in justice; for as well
wrath as mercy comes from him, and his indignation rests upon sinners: it is
of his mercy that all things work together for good to them that love him;
Etians peccata, says the Father, ever their sins, whilst truly repented do
work to their greater Humiliation, and more careful conscienciousness of their
ways, and so their errors also do work both for their trial of, and
confirmation in the most holy faith: It Is of his justice, that evil does haunt
the wicked person to his ruin: both the evil of sin, and the evil of error,
leaves not the wicked person till he be ceased with the evil of punish^ent
either temporal or eternal: hence it comes to pass, that Heresy is both
profitable and dangerous, as S. Chrysostom. observes, Chry. Horn. 19. in Mat. 7.
it is useful and profitable in that thereby the truly faithful are sifted,
tried and known from the light, giddy, and counterfeit number of professors;
and it is dangerous in that many are thereby seduced and perish.

The great danger of Heresy and Schism will appear, if we consider,

1. The infectious nature of them, how easily this spiritual plague does sease,
and how fast it cleaves to the depraved soul of man: There is no question, but
if holy truth could be discerned by mortal eyes, in its native beauty and
luster, there is nothing that would so much attract and ravish the soul,
whether we respect the cause thereof, as being a beam displaid from the divine
light of heaven: or its effect, being the perfection, and joy of the highest
faculty in man, the understanding: in both respects there is nothing so
illustrious and lovely in it self, as holy Truth: that therefore which makes
errors, and lies so plausible, and infectious, is not their own natural stamp
and quality which is deformed and hateful, but the counterfeit dross of seeming
Truth wherewithal the Devil does gild, and paint, and cover their deformities;
nor could the devil ever obtrude his lies, and errors, but that they are gilded
over with holy and religious expressions, and intermixed also with many wholesome
and profitable truths: and thus does this Prince of darkness transform himself
into an Angel of light, that he may at once both amuse and betray the deceived
souls of men, through a spiritual to an eternal darkness.

But as sin is the more sinful and dangerous, Ibi vitiorum illeceb^ae sunt ubi
tegmen putabatur viriutum. Hier. in Eccl.
the more it is palliated and clothed with the name and attire of virtue,
because, says Hierome, In those veils and covers of virtue, the snares of
sinfulness and vice do secretly lurk: So errors in Religion are the more
deceivable, and destructive, by being arrayed in the garments of truth and
integrity: for thus they appear to the outward view of the unskilful, more
true, says Irenaeus, then truth it self, even as a counterfeit jewel made
bright and sparkling by Art, Si quis aquae mixtum gypsum dans prolacte seducat
per similitudinem coloris, sic de omnibus qui quolibet modo depravant quae sunt
Dei, and adulterant veritatem Dei. Lacte gypsum male miscetur. Irenae. l. 3. c.
19.
so deceives the eyes of the unskilful Lapidary, that he prefers it before the
true and genuine Diamond: or as poison secretly mixed with wholesome food passes
for good nourishment: or as well mixed whitelime by the likeness of its color
passes for milk; Sunt quidam vaniloqui, and mentis seducteres, non Christiani,
sed Christum mercantes, and cauponantes verbum Evangelii, qui venenum erroris
commiscentes dulci blandimento, sicut oenomeli, ut qui biberit illius potus
gustabilem sensum, dulcedine captus, in observanter morti abdicatur. Ignat. ep.
ad Trall.
so the untempered mortar of false Prophets, Ezekiel. 22.28. for the sincere milk
of the Word, 1. Pet. 2.2.

To this destructive quality of error, the holy professions, and strict austere
outward actions of Heretics do much conduce, no man so pure in their own
eyes, none so seemingly pure and holy, to the outward view of other men's eyes,
none more zealous in their way, none so full of religious phrases, and
Scripture expressions: their crossed arms, downcast eyes, neglected gestures,
garb, and attire, seemingly bespeak them men altogether weaned from the world,
and whose conversation is in heaven; Sed latet anguis in herba: when under all
these fair, and goodly appearances, there lies secretly the serpentine poison
of error, falsehood, and lying vanity of mind, they do not only hereby deceive
themselves, but mightily seduce, and deceive others also: For, there is nothing
(says Chrysostom) does so much destroy Truth, and Holinoss, Chry. Hom. 19. in
Mat. 7.
as counterfeit truth, and feigned holiness; for the evil which is manifest, is
shunned and avoided as evil; but evil covered under the show of Good, is not
therefore avoided, because not known to be evil, but is received as good and
holy: and does therefore destroy that which is good by being intermixed
therewith: And thus says he, the servants of the Devil do most wickedly
corrupt, and deprave the holy Christian Religion, whilst they pretend to be
themselves good Christians: of whom our Lord therefore commands us to beware,
saying, Beware of false Prophets which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly are ravening woolves, Mat. 7.15.

2. The great danger of Heresy, and Schism, will further appear, if we
consider that they are ever productive, and fruitful in all licentiousness, and
sinfulness of heart, and life: for Heresies being begotten by the Devil of the
sinful corruptions of men hearts as is already noted, cannot therefore have any
other issue but of the same mold and temper, whereof they are themselves
begotten.

What ever therefore may be the external garb, and appearance of holiness,
which Heretics generally do put on, and how ever pure they may seem in their
own eyes, yet are such who are not washed from their filthiness: Prove. 30.12.
and however they may justify themselves with the Pharisee, yet are they not
therefore just before God, but rather the further off from justification.

Some of them you shall hear to brag much, and boast of the Spirit, and yet
very fruitful in the lusts of the flesh. For says the Apostle, whereas there
is among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3.
To talk much against the vanities of the world, and to be themselves worldly
minded: for so says S. John of false Prophets: They are of the world,
therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them, 1 John 4.5. To
profess; and make a great show of humility and obedience: and yet as S. Jude
observes, The despise government and speak evil of dignities, verse. 8. To be
righteous and just persons: and contrary to the rule of righteousness, they
render not to all men their due, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to
whom custom, fear to whom fear belongs, honor to whom honor appertains,
Romans 13.7.

No men ordinarily profess more zeal to Religion then Heretics, and to the
pure worship of God in spirit and in truth; yet none do more maim, corrupt and
deprave Religion, and undermine Gods holy worship: the greatest heat of their
zeal being laid out, and exercised in crying out against parts, and essential
branches of Gods service: some against Gods Commandments, others against the
Articles of the most holy Faith, others against that all-perfect form and
pattern of devotion, the Lords Prayer, some against public prayers, others
against the Sacraments: some are against the places, others against the times,
others against the persons devoted to the sacred service of God: and others
sacrilegiously rob him of the means, and maintenance of his service.

S. James tells us, Pure Religion, and undefiled before God, is to visit the
fatherless and widows, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world, Jam.
1.27. And yet it is usual with Heretics, none more, to profess purity of
Religion, and none less charitable to the fatherless and widows, whose number
is increased by their cruelty, not relieved by their mercy: And as to the
pollutions of the world, none more subtle and active to undermine their
neighbors, and by covetousness, injustice, false accusations, and all unlawful
and indirect means to deprive them of their means, estates, and preferments in
the world.

And hence it is that Heresies and Seditions, or Schisms, are reckoned amongst
the fruits of the flesh: because both they proceed from fleshly lusts, pride,
covetise, etc. and are themselves also productive of many exorbitant and wicked
works.

Nor is it possible but that all Heresies, and heretical opinions must needs
produce loose, sinful, and dissolute actions: because the acts of the
understanding, and of the will are so nearly, and mixedly interwoven, that the
corruption of the one, does ever corrupt and vitiate the other. And indeed
there are few Heresies, which either do not directly teach, or secretly imply
some kind of looseness, exorbitancy, and sinfulness of action. The Gnostics
and Ebionites openly declaimed against the honor of virgin chastity: The
Nicholaitans would have all wives in common: The Manichees with their
ancestors, the disciples of Simon Magus, were all of loose, dissolute,
licentious lives, of whom S. Peter particularly speaks, 2 Pet. 2.10. Yet they
(i. e. Simon Magus and his disciples) walk after the flesh in the lust of
uncleanness, and despise government; presumptuous are they, and self-willed,
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. The Circumcellions were taught
to lay violent hands upon themselves, and the Montanists also. The Anabaptists
and many other Separatists of the same stamp, openly profess, that themselves
being the only people of God, have only right therefore to the c^^ature, all
others beside themselves being usurpers of what they enjoy, and so it is no
injustice in them to rob, plunder, and dispossess them of their goods and
estates. The Solifidians deny the necessity of good works, and so they may live
as the^ list; and generally all Heretics rail, revile, censure, judge, and
condemn all that are not of their own mind and wa^, which are sins of no small
account in the sight of God.

And what else bath filled all Christendom with factions, and seditions, with
tumults and troubles, with massacres, wars, and bloodshed, but first the
broaching and belief of Heresies and lies, and renting the seamless coat of
Christ by uncharitable excommunications, and schismatical separations, both of
general Churches, and particular congregations each from other? We read not,
that the Arrians, or the Donatists taught or professed any thing that was for
matter of action, sinful, factious, and seditious: and yet the tumults and
troubles, uncharitable censures, cruel persecutions, that followed both the
Heresy of the one, and the Schism of the other, are too many to be expressed.

It is the duty of all good Christians to be meek, gentle, humble, patient,
obedient to superiors, etc. and it is the duty of all good Pastors to exhort
their people to the practice of these and the rest of the fruits or graces of
the Spirit: but Heretics on the contrary part blow the trumpet of war,
faction, division, crying Down, down still with this, and that, and the other
piece of religious worship, which they brand with the loathed name of
Superstition, only because it suits not with their deceived imaginations.

3. Great is the danger of Heresy and Schism, because the spirit of Heresy,
and faction shuts out the Spirit of Grace, and robs the soul of all divine
assistance in the ways of life. It is no marvel therefore that Heretics are
generally cruel, mischievous, and evil persons, since they are deprived of the
grace of God, without which we can do nothing that good is: And Grace cannot
live out of the company of her twinsister, Truth: Grace and Truth flow from
Christ the Sun of righteousness, as light and heat from the Sun in the
firmament, both which are so co-essential to the Sun it self, that the one
cannot have a being without the other. All errors therefore, when through
perverseness and wilfulness they are grown up to be Heresies, as they blind the
understanding, so they harden the heart also, and provoke the most just God to
give up such persons to a reprobate sense, Romans 1.28.

4. Heresy and Schism are the more dangerous in that the infection knows no
bounds or limits, but spreads and eats like a canker, 2. Tim. 2.17.
says the Apostle 2 Timothy 2.17. or as a gangren, which beginning in a small
unperceivable spot, increases still if it be not destroyed, till it overspread
and consume the body: So it is in the way of Error, that which begins many times
but with a small scruple, if it be not wisely stayed, increases into such
erroneous opinions as are destructive to the main body of Religion, and being
of a Church. Thus Montanus first began with the conceit of immediate
Revelation, then to limit the inspiration of the holy Ghost to himself, and his
followers, thence they fell into the sin of Schism, and broke off communion
with the whole Church of Christ, which proceeded at length to this monstrous
conceit among them, that only the house of Montanus was the true Church, and
that Montanus himself was the holy Ghost: even so amongst us first the
ceremonies, and then the substance both of the holy Sacraments, and divine
service were first scrupled, and then cried down, and afterward pulled down
also: first Christian liberty is pretended, and then brutish disorder, and
confusion follows. The Church is free, it is most true, and not to be clogged,
and burdened with a number of needless, fruitless, insignificant ceremonies,
but yet not so free, as to be freed of all order, decency, reverence, unity,
and uniformity in the public service of God: but that scrupulous and new
fangled souls, when they once begin to doubt, and then leave the way of truth,
like travelers that have lost their way, wander up and down, and are as far,
if not farther off their journeys end, then when first they left the high and
beaten road.

It would be endless to reckon up the several Sects and monstrous Heresies,
which have crept in amongst us at this one gap first of all, viz. The
schismatical desertion of that public form of prayer, administration of the
Sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies instituted and commanded by the
Church to be observed by all the obedient sons, and faithful members thereof.
One who has computed the Heresies, which seven years ago sprung up from that
time when the Common Prayer was abolished, says, they have doubled the number,
of what they were in S. Austins time, and in his days they were very near
fourscore: and they are much multiplied since that time, and daily do increase;
for evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being
deceived, 2. Tim. 3.13. Nor must we hope for other, till the God of all truth,
and peace be pleased together with his Truth to restore unity, and order in his
worship, whereof for our manifold sins he has so long deprived us.

5. Heresies and Schisms, as they are the cursed parents of sin, so of
judgments also, both temporal, and eternal: as to temporal judgments, S.
Stephen tells us out of Amos 5.25. That if we make to our selves tabernacles, or
figures to worship them, our punishment shall be to be carried away beyond
Babylon, Act. 7.43. Babylon, Aug de civit. dei. l. 18.
says the Father, est civitas illa confusionis, quae indifferenter habet
philosophos inter se diversa, and adversa sentientes That city of c^nfusion,
which consists of persons of diverse and contrary opinions each to other: and
that is the portion of those people, that either vent, or addict themselves to
new opinions, the fond imaginations of their own hearts, they shall dwell in the
midst of perpetual strifes and contentions, and the Babylonish confusion of
diverse, and contrary opinions each to other: whereas Gods city, the Church, is
a city that is at unity in it self, the b^essed inhabitants of which city, the
members of the true Church are all of one heart, and of one mind: neither is
there, or ought there to be in this city, as in Babel, liberty for every
sect-master to set up what imaginations he please without control; for when
liberty of conscience produces licentiousness of opinion, confusion, and
disorder must needs ensue; and if Babylons confusion goes before, the captivity
of Babylon will not be far behind; for what else can be the end of confusion,
through diversity of opinion, but ruin and desolation?

The blessed fruits of unity and concord, are peace and prosperity; Concordia
res parvae cresennt: and the cursed effects of contentions, and variety of
opinions, are war, and destruction; Discordia maximae dilabuntur. The world is
full of examples of both kinds: therefore is there no one Christian duty,
whereunto we have more pathetical and zealous admonitions in the Scriptures,
then this of unity and agreement both in judgment and affection: for this our
blessed Lord so fervently prayed, Joh. 17.11, 22, 23. To this he so frequently
exh reeth his Apostles, Mark 9.50. Joh. 14.27. And his Apostles, all
Christians, Romans 12.4, etc. chap. 15.6. and 1 Cor. 1.10. Qui perversa mente de
praeceptis pacis discordiam faciunt, justo d^i examine ipsi de verbis vitae
moriuntur. Greg. de cur. past. Adm. 25.
Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment: so
also, 2 Cor. 13 11. Ephesians. 4.1, etc. Phil. 1.27. and 2.2. He therefore, faith
the Father, that through perverseness of mind, shall out of the precepts of
peace and concord, create dissension and strife, creates death to himself out
of the words of life: Charity is of the very essence of Christianity, the Queen
of graces, the sum, perfection, and fulfilling of the divine Law: but all the
bonds of Christian Charity, and therein all the sacred duties we owe both to
God and man, Quam vero dilectionem custodit, and cogitat, qui discordiaefarore
^r sanus, eccl siam semdit, pacem ^urbat, cha^itatem dissipat? Cyp. de unit.
eccl.
are infringed and transgrest by contention, strife, and Schismatical rending
and tearing the Church of Christ into factions and parties: and what ever piety
such persons may outwardly make show of, yet can they not have any true
charity, says Cyprian, or love either to God in the first place, or to their
neighbors in the next, who endeavor not to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bend of peace, Ephesians. 4.3. without which no man shall ever see the Lord, Heb.
12.14.

And this will yet further appear if we consider,

6 That Schism alone without any heretical opinions (though these two can
hardly be parted) cuts a man off from the unity of the Church: for it is an
insurrection, a being in arms against the Church, Arma contra ecclesiam
po^tat. Cyp. de unit. eccl.
says Cyprian: And he that is separated from the Church the spouse of Christ,
is joined to an adulteress, says the same Father, and euts himself off from
all the promises made unto the Church and people of God: nor must he think to
own God for his Father, who acknowledges not the Church for his Mother; Cyp
ib. d.
For as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one
body, being many are one body, so also is Christ, 1 Cor. 12.12. And for this
cause, faith S. Aug. No man can be righteous, whilst he stands separated from
the unity of Christ's body, Aug de corree. Domst. c. 25.
but as any part or member of man's natural body being c^t off the body, is
thereby devoid of the spirit of li^e: so the man that is cut off from the body
of Jesus Christ the righteous, is thereby devoid of the spiritual life of
righteousness, though he do retain the shape, form, and likeness of a true
living member: and the ancient Father Irenaeus gives the reason further, out of
1 Cor. 12.28. In the Church God has set Apostles, Prophets, teachers, and
universam operationem Spiritus reliquam, all the gifts and graces of Gods holy
Spirit, are therein dispensed: Irenae advers. Haerd. 3. c. 40.
Cujus non sunt participes, etc. whereof they are not partakers, who come not
unto the Church to be joined thereunto, but defraud themselves of life by evil
opinions, and worse actions: Vbi enim ecclesia, ibi and spiritus -- for where
the Church is, there is the Spirit of life and sanctification.

7. Heretics, Extra ecclesiam consisten^, and contra pacem, and dilectionem
Christi sacions, inter adversarios computetur. Cyp. ep. 76.
and Schismatics have been ever accounted the great adversaries of Christ's
Church, and people, whose intestine broils, and homebred divisions have done
more mischief to the truth, and doctrine of Christ, then all the external
persecutions of bloody tyrants and Heathens: hence the sharp command of the
Apostle against such, Tit. 3.10, 11. A man that is an heretic after the first
or second admonition reject, knowing that he that is such, subverteth and
sins, because condemned of himself: such a one is self-condemned, having 1.
passed sentence upon himself by professing against the doctrine, and dividing
from the communion of the Church. And 2. he has done execution upon himself
also, for he has excommunicated himself in going out from the Church: Quomodo
te a tot gregibus scidisti? Firmil. ad Cyp. Ep. 75.
exscidisti teipsum: He that is such a one, reject, have no company with him, 2 Thessalonians. 3.14. S. John going to wash himself in a Bath, and there espying
Cerinthus an Heretic, leapt hastily out of the Bath again, saying that he
feared the fabric of the Bath would fall upon them all that were there, since
Cerinthus the enemy of truth is in it: Iren. ad^^rs. Haer. l. 3. c. 3.
And Polycarpus, who was S. John's disciple, and heard these words from the
Apostle, meeting with Marcion another Heretic, who saying unto him, Cognosce
nos, acknowledge us for the true Disciples of Christ, answered, I know thee to
be the first born of Satan. So great fear, says Irenaeus, had the Apostle, and
their Disciples of having any communication with persons that had depraved and
corrupted the Truth: according to Tit. 3.10. For. nulla ab iis tanta potest
esse corruption, Id. l 4. c. 62.
quanta est schismatis pernicies, says the same Father. Athanasius, Apparet
Antichristos omnes esse, quos constat a charitate atque ab unitate
ecclesiae^ecessisse Opt. l. 1.
and Epiphanius deny Heretics (nisi homonym^s) to be called Christians: and
Optatus tells us, that Schismatiques are the Antichrists spoken of by S. John, 1 John 2.18. for so they are described, verse. 19. They went out from us, but they
were not of us, etc. Which is the way of Schism, and the description of
Schismatiques: and he instances in Novatian, qui extra ecclesiam consistens,
inter Antichristos computetur. The Samaritans, who were Schismatiques from the
Jewish Church, Addendo autem civitatem Samaritano^um det^re omitti ubi erant
schismatici, ostendit schismaticos Gemilibus adaequari. Cyp. Ep. 76. Id. ibid.
the Jews therefore had no conversation with them, Joh. 4.9. And they are
reckoned by our Savior with the Gentiles, Mat. 10.5.

8. The sad condition of all Heretics, and Schismatiques, lying under the
guilt of grievous sin, and being obnoxious thereby to the judgments of God, is
frequently also remembered by the Fathers: How are they without all hope, says
Cyprian, and incur Gods heavy indignation, to their own ruin, who make a
Schism, the holy Scripture does declare in the book of the Kings: where the ten
tribes making a breach and Schism in the Church, and departing from Judah and
Benjamin, the Lord is said to be wroth with the whole seed of Israel. And by
the example of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram is manifested and proved, says the
same Father in the same place, that they are not only guilty of great sin, Aug.
^p. 164.
but liable to grievous punishment who rashly join themselves with
Schismatiques: Illud scelus ad exemplum devitaudi: God for the present so
grievously punished the sin of Corah and his accomplices, giving us thereby an
example, says S. Aug. to avoid the same; and showing that when he spares to
punish such persons in this life, the greater punishment he reserves for them
in the life to come: which is affirmed 2 Pet. 2.9. For God will judge such
persons, says Irenaeus, who make Schisms and divisions, minding more their own
utility, then the Churches unity, Qui propter modicas quaslibet causas magnum,
and gloriosum corpus Christi conscindunt: who for every light cause and
unnecessary scruples rend the great and glorious body of Christ, Ir^n. l. 4. c.
62.
and as much as in them lies destroy the same, speaking of peace and charity,
but making war and division, straining at a gads, and swallowing the camel.
Gods service is the way of man's salvation, and that nation or kingdom which
will not serve the Lord shall penish, Isa. 6.12. The ground and foundation of
Gods service is faith, for without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11.6. Now the true, holy, and orthodox faith is but one, Ephesians. 4.5. therefore
termed the unity of faith, verse. 13. Now he that pleases not God by the mean
of a true faith, does displease, and fight against him by the opposition of a
false faith: according to our Saviors own rule, Mat. 12.30. Ho that is not
with me is against me, and he that gathers not with me scatters abroad: And
undoubtedly, he that is against Christ, he that is his adversary, makes himsel
immediately liable to eternal condemnation, which is effected by every one that
holds not the unity of the true faith, for he that b^leeveth not in me is
condemned already, Joh. 3.18. In a word, as the true faith believed and obeyed
is the way of life, so a false faith embraced and followed is the high way of
death and ruin; as the word of truth is the key of the kingdom of heaven, so
the word of untruth and error, is the key that opens the gates of hell; as the
first is that true and sacred light which discovers and clears the way that
leads to light, and life everlasting, so the latter is the ignis fatuus, the
false fire that misguides the wandering souls of men, to the confines of that
kingdom, where dwells blackness of darkness of that kingdom, where dwells
blackness of darkness for evermore. Of all seducers and maintainers of
Heresies, the Apostle S. Peter affirms, that they bring upon themselves swift
destruction, that their judgment of a long time lingreth not, and their
damnation slumbreth not* 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2, 3.

CHAP. VIII. Rules and directions for the avoiding of Errors in Religion.
THat we might be the better armed against the assaults of Heretics, and
heretical opinions in Religion, our Lord and Master has not only foretold us,
that false teachers should in all ages of the Church arise, and errors spring
up with the truth, Mat. 24.23. and 7.15. Mar. 13.21. Luke 17.23.
as tares amidst the wheat: but also has strictly charged us to beware of
them: not to follow after them, nor believe them: whose pretenses shall be so
plausible, their outward appearances of holiness so specious, and taking: and
their words and works by the secret, and invisible assistance of Satan so
extraordinary, as that if it were possible they would deceive the very elect.

The Apostles of Christ treading in the same steps with their Lord, and even in
their own days seeing his words fulfilled, Gal. 1.7. 1 Timothy 5.12. 2 Timothy 3.6,
7. and 4.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Jude 8. Ephesians. 4 14. Romans 16.17, 18. 1 John 4.1.
and false. Prophets arising: not only severely inveigh against them, but also
impose upon us the same strict care and caution: not to be seduced by them, or
like children to be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive.

To yield obedience to these several injunctions, and to stand fast in the true
faith rooted, and built up therein, against the assaults of false and deceitful
workers, these following directions will be useful.

1. To be well, and thoroughly instructed in the grounds and principles of holy
Religion: For as no firm and durable building can be raised without a good
foundation laid; so no man can be built up in the most holy faith, and firmly
settled in the truth, except the foundation and groundwork be first well, and
surely laid in the right understanding and firm adherence to the principles of
holy Religion.

Now the general ground, and foundation of all holy and saving Truth, is the
word of God: or the divinely inspired writings of Moses, and the Prophets in
the old, and of Christ, and his Apostles in the new Testament: Ye are built
upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself being
the head corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20.

But although all things contained in the holy Scriptures be infallibly true,
and in some respect or other useful and edifying: yet all are not therefore
fundamental Truths.

Those principles of holy truth contained in the Scriptures which are
fundamental, are according to the doctrine of the Church reduced to five Heads:
1. Repentance. 2. Faith. Chapter catec.
3. Obedience. 4. Prayer. 5. Sacraments. If any wind of doctrine move us from
off any of the grounds, our souls must needs suffer the shipwreck of holy
Truth, and be split upon the rocks of false erroneous opinions: As to these
principles therefore, these particular rules must be observed for the avoiding
of errors.

1. And first for Repentance, which is termed the foundation of Christian
Doctrine, Heb. 6.1. He that will not build but upon what is the foundation of
truth, must not admit of any opinion whatsoever, that shall take him off from
the constant confession of his sins with all humility, and godly sorrow:
remembering that there is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins
not, Eccl. 7.20. And the only means left us to recover our selves out of the
snares of sin, is by Repentance to wash our hearts with the tears of godly
sorrow for sin, to empty our souls of them by confession, and make them clean
by more steadfast purposes, and strong resistance against all temptations unto
sin: And this is the first part of that Baptismal vow, or of that covenant we
made with God, when any of us by holy and lawful Baptism were admitted into the
bosom of his Church: even to forsake the devil and all his works, the pomps
and vanities of this wicked world, and all the sinful lusts of the flesh: or,
manfully to sight under the banner of Christ against the devil, the world and
the flesh: which is no other but to adhere to the doctrine, and to continue in
the practice of true Repentance.

2. As to Faith, which is joined with Repentance, as another essential part of
the same foundation of Truth, Heb. 6.1. it is necessary for the avoiding of
Errors, to admit of no opinion relating to Religion, that is not agreeable to
those Articles of the Christian faith, summarily expressed in the Apostles Creed,
which is that (...), or form of sound words in faith, Symbolum Ap^slorum est
r^gula fidei vestrae, brevis and grandis, braevis num^ro verborum, gra^dis
pondere sent^nt^arum. Aug. de Temp.
we are commanded to hold fast, 2 Timothy 1.13. That model of faith once given to
Saints, we are commanded earnestly to contend for, Jud. 3. The Apostles Creed
(says S. Aug.) is the rule of your faith, which is though short, yet weighty:
short in the number of words, but weighty in sentences, or the several articles
thereof. The Gospel of Christ is indeed the grand Rule of faith, whereof this
lesser Rule, the Apostles Creed is the sum, and Epitome: And he that gees
besides, and not according to the Rule of faith goes not forward in the way,
but backward from the way of Truth.

3. As to Obedience: To entertain no opinion, that agrees not with that
all-perfect rule of Righteousness, the Decalogue, or ten Commandments of the
moral Law* for whatsoever shall oppose, thwart, make void, or any way take off
our obedience to any of Gods Commandments, is to be rejected as false and
erroneous: Whosoever (says our Lord) shall break one of these least
Commandments, and teach men so to do, he shall be called least in the Kingdom
of heaven: that is, says the Gloss, the most despised in the Church of
Christ: Minimus in r^gno - h. c. d^spectissimu^ in ecclesia, quia decidit a
side. Lir. in loc.
and the reason is given, because he is saln from the faith: he is lapst into
error, which is expressly asserted by S. John, Hereby we are sure we know God,
if we keep his commandments; he that says he knows God, and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him, 1 John 2.3, 4.

And in order to this Rule, it is necessary also to admit of no opinion that
tends to the breach of either of those general Rules of Charity, which is the
fulfilling of the Law, viz. To love God above all, and thy neighbor as thy
self: for on these two hang all the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 22.37, etc.
Whatsoever therefore does not tend either 1. to the inflaming of our souls with
the sacred fire of divine love, to the advancement of Gods glory, and the
promoting of his service, both inward and outward; As also whatsoever, 2. tends
not to the maintenance of love, and unity, justice, and charity, innocence, and
beneficence toward our neighbors, is not to be entertained as a beam shining
from the light of holy Truth, but as a slash of illusion suggested by the
spirit of Error: Hereby shall all men know that you are my disciples, if ye
love one another, Joh. 13.35. He omits (says the Father) the gift of Miracles,
Tongues, Prophesies, Aug.
Knowledge to understand all mysteries, Faith to remove mountains; by none of
those, but by your charity you shall be known to be my disciples.

6 As to the doctrine of Prayer: That we admit of no opinion, that shall take
us off either from the frequent and fervent use of holy Prayers in general, or
more particularly from the use of the Lords Prayer, the which is not only
commanded by our Lord to be used when we pray, Luke 11.2. but by the which also
we do communicate in our prayers, with all holy orthodox Christians: there
being no time when ever we do use this prayer, but many thousands of pious
persons are at the same time pouring forth their souls unto God in the words of
the same prayer. To neglect therefore, much more to despise the use of this
prayer, if it be not a piece of disobedience to the plain and positive command
of Christ and so a branch of Hecesie, yet it is a depriving our selves of the
greatest benefit of the Communions of Saints, and so a branch of Schism.

7. As to the Sacraments, that we reject, what ever does either obstruct the
use or deny the efficacy either of Baptism, or the Supper of the Lord: Mat* 26
26, 27. etc 28.1^. Joh. 6.51.53. Act. 2.38.
The use thereof being positively commanded, and the efficacy thereof as
positively asserted by Christ himself: These being also the seals of the
covenant of grace, Baptism the seal of our admission, and the Eucharist of our
confirmation in the most holy faith: whatsoever opinion therefore either
opposes the practice, or disanuls the virtuous influence of these holy
Christian performances, makes void the commandments of Christ, infringeth the
seals of the new Covenant, obstructs the blessed means of grace, and must
therefore necessarily be false, erroneous, and destructive to the Truth.

2. A second general rule for the avoiding of errors, Id tencamus qued semper,
quodubique, qu^l ab ^mn bus. Vi^c. ^ir. c. 3.
is, That in these, and in all things, that relate to Religion, we suspect
every opinion that is new, and strange, to be false, and erroneous: for it is a
certain and infallible rule: That what is most ancient and generally received
is most true: For God who is the fountain of Truth is immutable, Jam. 1.17.
with him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. And holy Truth, being a
celestial ray displayed from his sacred Majesty, must needs be like unto him,
ever constant to it self, and not liable to alteration.

That we may be guided in the ways of Truth, hear what counsel the holy Ghost
in this respect gives unto us: Deuteronomy. 4.32. Ask now of the days that are past,
which were before thee from the day that God created man upon earth, etc. and
Joh 8.8, 9, 10. For inquire I pray thee of the former age, and prepare thyself
to the search of their Fathers ( For we are of yesterday, and know nothing --)
Shall not they teach thee and tell thee -- And Jer. 6.6. Thus says the Lord,
stand ye in the ways and see and for the old paths, where is the good way, and
walk therein, and ye shall, find rest for your fouls: But they said ('it is the
saying of all Heretics and Schismatiques) we will not walk therein: we are
for new ways, new lights, and new revelations; we have itching ears, and these
must be scratcht with new doctrines, till the scab of Heresy arise upon the
soul: your old Doctrines are out of dare, they are nauseous and offensive,
their age and antiquity makes them tedious to our souls: 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
thus sound doctrine will not be endured because men have itching ears, and
therefore they shall be tutned away from the truth, and shall be turned unto
fables and lies. But Catholicorum hoc fere proprium etc. Vinc. li^ in.
It is the prophecy of all holy Catholic good Christians, to hold fast the
Doctrines deposited, and committed by the Apostles first to the ancient fathers
of the Church, and by them transmitted to all posterity: Hier. in loc. 1 Timothy
6.20. Cum Galatae, falsis Prophetis auditis, nausea quodam veritatis adfecti
catholicae doctrinae manna revomentes haereticae novitatis sordibus
oblectarentur, ita se Apostolica exercuit authorit as, ut summa cum veritate
decerneie^, ^ice^nos aut angelus de coelo etc. Vino. c. 12.
O Timothy keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane and vain
bablings; profane, and vain, because new and strange, Quae a me non audisti,
says S. Hier^me, Doctrines which the Apostles delivered not: Nay, if they
should deliver any doctrine strange and new, or if an Angel from heaven should
do it, the Apostle has said it, and said it again, Though we, or an Angel
from heaven should preach any other Gospel then that you have received, let him
be accursed, Gal. 1.9. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from
the beginning: if that which ye have heard from the beginning remain in you,
then shall ye also continue in the Son, and in the Father, 1 John 2.24. And
this same rule is again prescribed 2 John 6. and the reason is given, verse. 7.
Because many deceivers are entered into the world, q. d. the way not to be
deceived, is to hold fast what you heard from the beginning, and to walk in it.

Thus the Nicene Fathers, (...): Hold fast the old doctrines and usages of the
Church: And this was ever the cry of the Church, Mos antiquus obtineat, let
antiquity be the judge what is true and what false. He therefore that will not
headlong himself into Heresy, must not be new fangled in his Religion, not
affecting novelty, but stick close to antiquity, Nil novandum nisi quod
traditum est -- Nos religionem non qua vellemus ducere, sed qua illa duceret,
sequi oportet. Vinc. adv. Haer. c. 9. Discamus hoc esse proprium diaboli
artisicium, si non potest nocere persequendo and destruendo, hoc facit
corrigendo and aedisicando. Luc. de refut. Haer.
receiving nothing for truth, but what was first received by our ancestors, and
delivered from one generation to another by continued succession from the times
of the Apostles: For we must not follow Religion (says the Father) which way
we would lead it, but what way Religion leads us.

3. To avoid errors in Religion, we must beware of extremity in opposing
errors: It Is an ordinary piece of cunning in the devil (as Luther has
observed) that whom he cannot hurt by persecution and affliction, he has
ruined in the way of correction, aedification, and reformation: Thus by sad
experience, we have seen almost an extirpation of Religion under the notion of
Reformation, a blind zeal of reforming errors has deformed the truth it self,
and in stead of paring the nails has cut off both the hands and feet of
Christ's spouse the Church: Thus in opposition to Prelacy, we have run into
Anarchy: and in crying out Popery, popery, we have cried down many necessary
Truths, and banished all decency and order in divine worship, together with all
Ecclesiastical Discipline, and government from amongst us. Thus also a
pretended purity to separate from sinners has caused many to separate from
people more righteous then themselves: and whilst they have presumptuously
thought to leave the wicked of the world, they have left their religion behind
them: according to the old proverb, making a great deal more have then good
speed.

That therefore our much forwardness in opposing one error, may not headlong us
into another, and our zeal to truth overrun and trample it under foot: we must
remember that this zeal is to be tempered ever with meekness of wisdom, Quia
quos im plet omnes and columnae simplicitate mansuetos, and igne zeli ardentes
exhibet.
Gal 6.1. therefore the holy Ghost descended on our Savior in shape of a Dove,
as well as on his Apostles in likeness of fire; to denote unto us, that we are
as well to be endued with the meekness and innocence of a dove, as with the
heat and fire of zeal: that as by the one we are quickened and enlivened unto
piety, so by the other we may be tempered, and qualified to keep within the
limits of truth and soberness.

4. That we beware of opposing one part of religious truth against another, and
of disjoyning those things, which God has joined together, e. g. God has
joined faith, and good works as the soul and body, as the tree and its fruits,
or as the foundation and building of holy Religion. And in good-works, or the
holy actions of obedience, he has coupled both the Tables of the Law together,
the one containing the sacred offices of piety toward God, and the other of
justice and charity toward man: he then that will not be guilty of Error, must
not presume upon any pretense how specious soever, to divide these or any of
these each from other. For he that parts faith from good works, part the body
from the soul, and overthrowes holy Religion from off its proper basis, and
foundation. And he that parts holiness and righteousness, or righteousness from
holiness, who pretends Religion to God, to be unjust, or uncharitable to man,
or out of a pretense of justice or kindness to man, robs God of any part of his
worship, uses one table of the Law as an instrument to break the other, to the
ruin and breach of both.

5. To avoid errors, it is necessary that we obey and submit our selves to the
directions and guidance of those consecrate persons, whom God has ordained,
and according to Gods ordinance are lawfully called, and rightly instituted to
be the Pastors of our souls, and the pillars of his Truth: This direction God
himself gives to his people as an antidote against idolatry, and all false
worship: Deuteronomy. 12.19. Take heed to thy self, that thou forsake not the Levite,
as long as thou live upon the earth: and chap. 17.8. If there ari^e a matter
too hard for thee in judgment -- thou shall arise -- and come unto the
Priests, the Levites -- And the man that will do presumptuously, and will not
hearken unto the Priest that stands to minister -- even that man shall die,
verse. 12. And Mal. 2.7. The Priests lips, Haec sunt initia haereticorum ut sibi
placiant, and propositum superbo ^^mere contemnam. Cyp. l. 3. epist. 9.
etc. The same command is given, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over
you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, etc.

But when people contemn their Pastors, and despise their directions, when they
presume to be wiser then their teachers: and to set themselves above those who
are over them in the Lord: when they will control their Priests, and snatch
the holy oracles out of their mouths, censure their doctrines, revile their
persons, scandalize their profession, hence arise Heresies, Schisms and
factions, this opens the gap to all errors, seductions, and falsehoods: Thus
when the spirit of contradiction reigned, and the people were as those that
strive with their Priests, Hos. 4.4. hear what a dreadful ruin attended them:
verse. 5. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet shall fall with
thee in the night, destruction shall follow upon destruction, as the night
follows the day, and I will destroy thy mother, the Church. And what else can
be expected, but that men should stumble, and fall into errors and deceits even
when the light of saving knowledge shines unto them: if the directions of
those whom God rightly placed to be the lights of his Church, Mat. 5.14. are
neglected and disobeyed: especially if we remember, that all such contempt and
disobedience reflecteth upon Christ the true Light himself: Luke 10.16. He that
hears you hears me (says our Lord to his Disciples, In discipul^ magister
auditur, and in filio pater honoratur. Bed. in loc.
and in them to all faithful Pastors) and he that despises you, despises me:
and he that despises me despises him that sent me.

And here we that are Pastors ought in all humility to acknowledge that there
is as well obedience due from us to our Ecclesiastical Fathers, the Bishops, as
there is from the people unto us: and when we deny the one, it is most just
with God to deprive us of the other: the miserable effects whereof we are by
sad experience too sensible of.

6. That we be not ensnared in the labyrinth of error, it is necessary that we
suppress all swelling conceits of our own knowledge, and wisdom: For see
thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hopes of a fool, then of such
a one, Prove. 26.12. And undoubtedly no men for the most part are so wisc in
their own conceits, and proud of their knowledge in spiritual things, as they
that have the least portion of spiritual understanding: for the first
appearance of spiritual light, does so amaze all weak and ignorant minds, that
they think presently they are the children of the light, when they are not yet
out of the confines of the Kingdom of darkness, and are confident of knowing
all things, when as yet they have not so much knowledge as to acquaint them
with their own ignorance. And as one has truly observed, It Is ordinary with
men, whilst they are young, and novices in Religion, to despise those
doctrines, and religious offices, which upon more maturity and ripeness of
judgment, they have approved and embraced.

He then that desires to be endued with the spirit of truth must conform
himself to the Spirit of Christ, in all meeknes^ and humility: Learn of me, for
I am meek and lowly: Mat. 11.29. And he that will not learn this lesson, shall
never learn exactly to know the errors of his ways: for Humility moulds and
prepares the soul to receive the impressions of holy Truth: which pride and
self-conceitedness resists and opposes: so Psalm. 25.9. The meek will he guide
in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way: but Jam. 4.6. God resists
the proud, and it is because the proud first resist the impressions of Gods
Spirit: As the black apple of the eye sees clearly, but if there be a white
pearl therein it sees nothing; even so the eye of humane understanding, says
Greg. if sensible of its own ignorance, and sinfulness, sees more clearly the
secrets of Truth: but if once it apprehend, Greg. de ^ur, past. c. 11.
and gather a self-conceited whiteness, and purity of holiness and wisdom,
it is excluded from the light of celestial knowledge: For so much the less does
any man perceive the light of truth, by how much he is by pride exalted and
puffed up with conceit of his own understanding.

There be too many in these sad times of such universal delusion, that think
themselves very wise and great proficients in Religion, if they can but talk,
and wrangle, and hold discourse to and again of religious matters; such
discourse is too often also in Scripture phrases either not understood or else
wrested, and perverted, and tends ordinarily to the crying down of some
religious practice, or ancient custom of the Church, though it be not only
innocent but useful and edifying: expressions and arguments of this nature, the
devil is ever ready to suggest to the minds of men, and to whet and smooth
their tongues to run on readily in such kind of unprofitable, and destructive
effusions, which puffes them up with fond conceits of their knowledge, and
understanding in the ways of God, till professing themselves wise, they become
fools, and wax vain in their imaginations, and their foolish hearts be darkened,
so that they cannot see the light of truth through the mist, and imperfect
glimmering of their own conceited knowledge: Thus the Devil himself was lost in
the bottomless pit of error, and eternal confusion, his knowledge (which was so
great, (...) quasi (...) sciens. Aug.
that from the excellency thereof he derives his name in Greek) puffed him up and
made him swel with pride, till he burst out into flat rebellion against his
maker: they then that will not fall into the same condemnation, must give ear
to these directions of the holy Ghost, Prove. 3.7. Lean not to thine own
understanding: for many are deceived by their own vain opinion, and evil
suspicion has overthrown their judgment, Ecclus. 3.24. Woe unto them that are
wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight, Isa. 5.21. Be not
therefore wise in their own conceits, Romans 12.16. with many more places to the
same purpose.

7. From whence will follow another rule of direction for the avoiding of
errors, That we entermeddle not with those mysterious points of Religion, nor
yet with those harder places of holy Scripture, which are above the reach of
our understanding. For all such over curious entermedlings, coming from pride
and self-conceited wit begets such an exorbitance in the spiritual man, as
surfeiting, and drunkenness in the natural. For when men overweening their own
judgments will presume to pry into those secret mysteries of godliness and
portions of holy writ, which their understandings cannot fathom, nor their
judgments digest, hence arises a giddiness of mind, this makes them reel to
and fro, and stagger like drunken men, being tossed with every wind of doctrine,
how strange, new, and fanatic soever, which I may not improperly call a
spiritual drunkenness with the wine of Gods Word, or a surfeit of the bread of
life. It Is the grand epidemical disease of the times, and the too too fruitful
dam of many of those abortive sholes of erroneous opinions that swarm amongst
us. So says the Apostle of such as are beguiled into a false worship: They
intrude into those things which they have not seen, being vainly puffed up with
their fleshly mind, Col. 2.18. out of pride and an overweening conceit of
their knowledge and judgment they presume to meddle with what the understood
not, and so were cousened with falsities and lies.

To avoid this mischief, take for example the Prophet David, Psalm. 131.1. Lord
mine heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self
in great matters, or in things too high for me. Advice to the same purpose the
wise Syracides gives us, Ecclus. 3.21. etc. Seek not the things that are too
hard for thee, neither search the things that are above thy strength; but what
is commanded thee, think thereupon with reverence: for it is not needful for
thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret: be not curious in
unnecessary matters -- And if you desire advice herein yet more authentic, see
Romans 12.3. For I say through the grace given unto me to every man that is among
you, not to think of himself more highly then he ought to think, but to think
soberly: or to be wise with sobriety.

And this wisdom with sobriety consists of three particulars.

1. Not to profess or boast of more knowledge and piety then God has really
and truly endued us withal, Ecclus. 3.25.

2. Not to boast of that little knowledge and goodness which really we have,
Romans 11.20.

3. Not to lean to our own understanding, Prove. 3.5. But to submit our
judgments to the judgment of persons that have more understanding then our
selves: remembering that even the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the
Prophets: 1 Cor. 14.3^.
And that they who had the gift of Prophecy, were commanded to submit their
doctrine to the judgment of others, 1 Cor. 14.29. And undoubtedly he is a man
of the best judgment (says the Italian proverb) that trusts not to his own
judgment.

8. But yet though we must submit our judgments to our superiors, 1 John 14.1.
we must not be too credulous, nor believe every one that says he has the
Spirit, no not of the Ministry, Romans 16.18.
especially in these evil days, wherein many false prophets are gone forth
into the world: who with cunning words and fair speeches deceive the souls of
the simple.

If we judge according to the outward appearances of men, and think because
they are very zealous in their ways, and strict in their life, and spiritual
in their expressions, that therefore they are in favor with God, and know his
mind, and are partakers of the Spirit of Truth; we shall be sure to be
cousen'd: Because,

1. Such are generally the professions, pretenses, and appearances of all
Heretics, and Schismatiques.

2. The pretenses and appearances of such are generally more fair, plausible,
and zealous then ordinary: And the more forward and zealous they are in
justifying their own sect, and ascribing to themselves infallibility, the more
false, and counterfeit commonly they be: this being the very way whereby the
Devil does by his instruments insinuate all his delusions, and lying vanities,
even under the plausible pretenses of seeming holiness, forward zeal, and more
then ordinary strictness, and austerity of conversation: And no marvail, for
Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light, h^e. callide sub sp^cie
religionis decipiemes. Gloss. interl.
therefore it is no great thing, if his ministers also be transformed as
Ministers of righteousness, 2 Cor. 14.15. i. e. says the Gloss, craftily
deceiving under the show of Religion.

3. There is in some men a more natural disposition to strictness and austerity
of life then others have, and there is a natural quickness, and volubility of
language, and a natural ardour and fervency of mind wherewith some men are
endowed more then others: which are not therefore infallible tokens, that all
opinions such persons maintain are orthodox and true.

Scultetus tells of an arch-heretique in Germany called Swenchfield, Abrab.
Scult. annual. eccles.
a great Sect-master, who amongst other extravagancies held many blasphemous
opinions touching the Scriptures, and yet this man did ardentes ad Deum preces
creberrime fundere, was both very fervent, and very frequent in his prayers
unto God.

Hacket, who was executed for blasphemy in the days of Queen Elizabeth, is
reported to have excelled so much in the gift of extempore prayer, that his
disciples did believe him to be altogether inflamed with the Spirit of God: and
that his expressions were immediately from the Spirit, and that there was
nothing he might not obtain from God by his prayers.

Basilides the great Duke of Muscovy, was very much exercised both in Prayer,
and Fasting, and very severe toward others under his command, that did not
conform to his example: He had his feigned Visions, Paulus Odor bornius in vita
q^at. l. 2.
and Revelations also, and yet a greater Tyrant, and a more bloody villain
Christendom has not seen.

The Scribes and Pharisees of the Jewish Church, and the Novatians and
Donatists of the Christian, were far greater pretenders to piety, and
strictness of life, then the truly orthodox of either Church, and yet very
great, and notorious Schismatiques.

Not to be cousened therefore with fair and goodly pretenses of any party, or
sect of men, how seemingly holy and zealous soever, and pretending that they
have Christ, that they have the Spirit, that they only are in the right, when
they are deeply involved in an abyss of errors: our Lord has fore-arm'd us
with sound and saving counsel, Mat. 24.23, etc. Then if any shall say unto
you, Lo here is Christ, or lo there, believe it not, for there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prophets -- Wherefore, if they shall say, Behold, he
is in the desert, go not forth, behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe
it not: for as the lightning comes out of the East, and shines unto the West,
so shall the coming of the Son of man be.

Two rules for the avoiding infection by false Prophets under specious
pretenses, are hence observable.

Habet unaquaecunque Haeresis vel certas mundi parts, unde d^. ecce hic, ecce
ill^c.
1. Every Heresy (says the Gloss) is limited to some particular parts of the
world, and the infection is not universally diffused, therefore it is said, Lo
here, or lo there: If any man then shall limit Christ to his particular Church,
much less to his particular sect, or fraternity, believe it not, for such are
false Christ's, and false Prophets: For the Truth displaid from Christ the Sun
of righteousness, Ne cr^datur schismaticis, nomine autem o^ientis and
occidentis totum orhem designat. Gloss. ordin.
like the light of the heaven is diffused from East to West, or spread over the
face of the whole earth: which renders the Church. i. e. all sound and sincere
professors of the Truth, as well Catholic as Holy.

Vel in occultis aut obscuris conventiculis curiositatem hominum decipit
haeresi^. Id.
2. Heresy, and Schism seek out obscure and retired places, and begin in
conventicles and private meetings, therefore it is said, Behold, he is in the
deser^ behold, he is in the secret chambers: So the Apostle of deceivers also,
they creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, etc. 2 Timothy 3.6. But
Veritas non quaerit angulos, Truth seeks no lurking holes, is not ashamed to
appear in public, being like the light that shines from East to West, open,
free, and manifest to all, except forced to retirement by persecution and
violence.

9. For the avoiding of errors 'twill be necessary to observe further: that a
Truth is not to be disbelieved, or rejected, because it is professed by lewd and
licentious persons, or maintained by a Church, and people, that are in other
respects erroneous, and misguided. For Truth is Truth, by what mouth soever it
be spoken, and it is the more confirmed to be Truth, because it is even by the
enemies of Truth attested to be so.

The unwary neglect of this rule, has not been the least in let to manifold
errors: for it is too usual with many to object both against orthodox truths and
ecclesiastical orders on the one hand, that this or that the Papists hold, and
against a strict careful conscientious life on the other, that thus and thus
the Puritans profess: Hence many truths have been rejected for errors, and many
decent, useful orders, customs, ceremonies, and necessary acts of discipline
have been cried down as superstitious, idolatrous, and antichristian, and the
sacred body of religion it self is almost wholly turned out of the Church under
the style of Popery.

Nor has that piety and integrity of life, which is required of particular
persons escaped better, but under the notion of Puritanism has been too much
banished from the lives, and manners of men, for fear of being branded with the
guilt of Schism, faction, and separation.

10 He that will not unawares headlong himself into the gulf of error, must
not presume upon any extraordinary infusion of Gifts, and Graces from above:
but in all humility wait upon God in the use of means, and the careful
improvement of what gifts and graces he has already received: It is the manner
of Heretics and Hypocrites (says a learned man) ever to pretend to high
lights of the Spirit, and to find new, Joh. Cast.
and unheard of ways of walking with God, slighting all that is common, though
never so commendable, and catching at all that is curious, though never so
dangerous; and thus they lose themselves in their chymerical conceptions: and
pretending to refine ancient piety, and truth, are puffed up with secret pride,
and presumption, and grasp nothing but froth and vanity.

That there are such things as Ecstasies, and more then ordinary ravishments of
spirit, and infusions of divine gifts, and qualifications, is not doubted: but
such supereminences, only superexcellent souls are capable of: neither yet are
they afforded to all pious, devout, and heavenly minded persons, that so none
may presume to depend upon them, but that every man should keep his station,
and walk humbly with his God: not relying upon extraordinary inspirations in
the neglect of ordinary means, which is in many respects destructive and
dangerous, as in the former Treatise.

And although it be most true, that the conversion of every man to the truth,
being a work of the Spirit, is therefore sudden, and at one instant, or moment
of time begotten and wrought in the soul: yet notwithstanding our progress
toward perfection and bliss in the ways of Truth, and Holiness, goes on step
by step, leisurely and by degrees: The paths of the just are as the shining
light which shines more and more to the perfect day. Prove. 4.18.

Both the knowledge of the Truth, and the practice of holiness, begins with
dawnings like the light of the day, all darkness of ignorance, and sin, being
not presently, and in the same instant dispel'd and scattered; but by little,
and little, the light of Grace and Truth increases, and still more and more
clearly, shines toward perfection; and we ascend from gift to gift, and from
grace to grace, as the Sun mounts up by degrees to the vertical point: not
unlike the motions of the Angels upon Jacobs ladder, Genesis 18.12.
who although they had wings, did not suddenly fly up and down, but ascended,
and descended, step by step: so says the Apostle, Add to your faith, virtue,
to virtue, knowledge, and to knowledge, temperance, etc. 2 Pet. 1.5.

There be many now adays, wherein dissimulation and presumption so generally
reigns, who like to those heretical Messalians of old, pretend to that
perfection as to be above ordinances and means.

And although it be true, that some few divine celestial souls, by their
private fervent prayers, holy desires, heavenly contemplations, zealous
hungrings and thirstings, pantings and breathings after God, have a nearer and
more close familiarity with him, then in, and by the use of external ordinances
is attainable: yet so to be above ordinances, as to live without them, is to
live besides the rules of the Gospel, and not to submit to the Law and
government of Christ, which is in effect to say with those rebels in the
parable, We will not have this man to reign over us.

Whilst our souls do inhabit in these tabernacles of clay, God has appointed
us to receive his blessings by means suitable to our condition: And to have our
blessedness dispensed by Gods immediate hand, is not to be hoped for, till we
have our consummation with the blessed Saints, and Angels of heaven.

In the mean time let us take heed, lest whilst we exalt our selves to be
equal with the Angels, we fall not lower then the state of good men, and prove
like hollow vessels, all sound, and no substance, all prattle and pretense,
without the soundness and sincerity of pure and undefiled Religion: He that
will rise to perfection must fall low in his own estimation: 1 Pet. 5.6. Humble
your selves -- If in all humility and obedience we keep within that line of
duty, which God in his good providence has drawn about us, he will in his due
time exalt us to such a measure of gifts, and graces, as shall best conduce to
the advancement of his service, and our own salvation.

11. Lastly, he that will carefully avoid all erroneous opinions in Religion,
must not dwell so much in disputes and argumentations in the things of God, as
in the conscientious practice, and careful obedience unto his most holy Laws:
It Is not true Religion that is only notionary in the brain, nor that a godly
zeal, that only dwells upon the tongue, they must be also practical in the
heart, and have their influence upon the actions and manners of our lives,
conforming them to that all-perfect rule of righteousness, which is the will
and command of God.

There was never more talk and prattle of Religion, and yet never less
practice, all the fire of holy zeal is spent in preaching, and hearing,
disputing, and wrangling, and the maintenance of sects and factions, whilst
obedience to Gods Commandments lies a bleeding, and the sincere practice of
Christianity, which is the life thereof, is neglected: all the sap of grace
being wasted in the production of leaves, no fruits of truly pious, and
charitable actions appear: which is not the least cause of such universal
apostasy from the Truth. For whilst Religion is not settled in the heart, and
thence breaks forth into the actions of a holy life, but floats aloft in the
fancy, and descends no lower then the ear, or tongue, to hear and talk of it;
thus it does but render the mind sickle, and apt to receive the impression of
every new and strange opinion how erroneous soever, if it wear but the garments
and appear in the colors of the Spirit of grace and truth.

It is also sad to observe how eagerly men contend for shadows, in the loss of
the substance: how strict and curious many are in smaller matters, and things
of indifferency, whilst the essential duties of Christianity are slighted. A
spice of that old hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees: who paid tithes of
mint, cumin, and anise, but omitted the weightier matters of the Law,
judgment, mercy, and ^aith, Mat. 23.23.

There is no readier way to give stop to the current, and stay the violent
inundation of Heresies amongst us, then that professors of Religion would be
more careful of religious practices, then studious of opinions; more
industrious to subdue their carnal, and worldly lusts, and to cherish all
inclinations to pious and charitable actions, then to move questions, and raise
disputes in religious matters; undoubtedly more practice of Religion, and less
dispute about it, would much wither the tares of error now in their full
growth, and make those holy orthodox truths appear in their proper luster,
which are now obscured in the bustle of unnecessary contentions, and lost in
the confused heap of variance and vain opinions.

12. There are two practical points of holy Christian Religion, which are great
antidotes, and preservatives against the delusions of Satan, if carefully and
conscientiously performed, viz Prayer, and Fasting: this being as 'twere the
body, and the other the soul of true practical piety. And the concurrence of
these two together, a religious Fast, with a pure and fervent Prayer, is armor
of proof, against the most violent temptations of Satan, either to sinfulness,
or error: when nothing else will enchain the Devil, and quell his temptations,
he is cast out by prayer and fasting. Mar. 9.19.
Prayer is that whip, which drives the Devil out of the temple of the Heart:
and Fasting makes this whip more sharp, Oration daemoni flagellum. Iejunium
orationem reborat. Bern.
vigorous, and piercing: Prayer is that chain which ties up the Devil from the
infusion of his seductions and deceits: and by fasting we strengthen the chain,
and make it hold.

13. But a threefold cord is not easily broken: If therefore we shall add to
our Prayers and Fastings, Eccl. 4.12.
the exercise of Christian Charity, avoiding all malice, and hatred, all
uncharitable censures, bitter railings, and envyings one of another, which are
too usual with persons of different persuasions: and shall with all meekness of
wisdom, long-suffering, and forbearance, endeavor each others instruction, and
direction in the ways of truth, and holiness: against such powerful spiritual
weapons, undoubtedly, the spirit of error shall not have strength to prevail,
whilst through the mean of a lively faith these holy actions receive their
efficacy and value from the meritorious death and sufferings of our dearest
Lord and Savior, who by his death has overcome him who had the power of
death, the Devil, and all the spirits and powers of darkness: all whose black
and mischievous designs, and secret insinuations of error, and deceit, are
annihilate, and deaded, and from them, all we have redemption through faith in
the blood of Christ.

Blessed Lord who have built thy Church upon a rock, and promised that the
gates of hell should never prevail against it;

Behold O Lord how that infernal spirit of error, and delusion has prospered
and prevailed amongst us.

O God the heathen are come into thine inheritance, thy holy Temple have they
defiled, and made thy Church an heap of confusions and disorder.

We are become an open shame unto our enemies, a very scorn and derision to
them that are round about us.

Lord how long will thou be angry? shall thy jealousy burn like fire for ever?

O remember not our old sins, but have mercy upon us, and that soon, for we are
come to great misery.

Help us O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name.

O deliver us, and be merciful to our sins for thy Names sake.

O be gracious to thine inheritance, and let not thine enemies any longer
devour and tear thy Church into erroneous sects and factions.

Remove not good Lord, thy candlestick, the light of thy truth from amongst us:
but let us ever enjoy the freedom of thy Gospel, the food of thy Word, and
sweet refreshing of thy Sacraments, with all the benefits of the communion of
Saints.

So we that be thy people, and the sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks
for ever, and will show forth thy praise to all generations.

And to this end vouchsafe holy Father, to give us a right understanding, and
firm practical belief of all the points of holy Christian Doctrine: with an
humble conscientious obedience to all thy most holy Laws: inflame our hearts
with the most sacred fire of Charity, that we persevering in the love and
service of thy sacred Majesty, and in mutual love and brotherly kindness each
to other, thy mercy may in the end receive us from amidst the tumultuous waves
of temptations to sins and errors in this life, to the haven of eternal
security, and peaceful felicity in the life to come, through Jesus Christ our
Lord, Amen.

THE END.
A Catalogue of some Books printed for Rich. Royston at the Angel in Ivie-lane,
London, and some formerly Printed at OXFORD.
Books written by H. Hammond, D. D.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Test. by H. Hammond
D. D. in fol.

2. The Practical Catechism, with all other English Treatises of H. Hammond D.
D. in two volumes in 4.

3. Dissertationes quatuor, quibus Episcopatus Jura ex S. Scripturis and
primaeva Antiquitate adstruuntur, contra sententiam D. Blondelli and atiorum.
Authore Henrico Hammond, in 4

4. A Letter of Resolution of six Queries, in 12.

5. Of Schism. A defense of the Church of England, against the Exceptions of
the Romanists, in 12.

6. Of Fundamentals in a notion referring to practice, by H. Hammond D. D. in
12.

7. Six books of late Controversy in defense of the Church of England, in two
volumes in 4. newly published.

The names of several Treatises and Sermons written by Jer. Tailor D. D.
1. (...), Course of Sermons for all the Sundays in the year, together with a
Discourse of the Divine Institution, Necessity, and Separation of the Office
Ministerial, in sol.

2. Episcopacy asserted, in 4.

3. The History of the Life and Death of the Ever-blessed Jesus Christ, 2.
Edit. in sol.

4. The Liberty of Prophesying in 4.

5. An Apology for authorized and Set-formes of Liturgy, in 4.

6. A discourse of Baptism, its institution and efficacy upon all Believers, in
4.

7. The Rule and Exercises of holy living, in 12.

8. The Rule and Exercises of holy dying, in 12.

9. A short Catechism for institution of young persons in the Christian
Religion, in 12.

10. A short institution of Grammar composed for young Scholars in 8.

11. The Real Presence and spiritual of CHRIST in the Blessed Sacrament proved
against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in 8.

12 The Golden Grove, or, A Manual of daily Prayers fitted to the days of the
week, together with a short Method of Peace and Holiness.

13. The Doctrine and practice of repentance rescued from Popular Errors, in a
large 8. Newly published.

Certamen Religiosum, or a Conference between the late King of Engl. and the
late Lord Marquess of Wo^cest. concerning Religion, at Ragland Castle,
together with a Vindication of the Protestant Cause, by Chr. Cartwright, in 4.

The Psalter of David, with Titles and Collects according to the matter of each
Psalm, by the Right honorable Chr. Hatton, in 12. the fifth Edition with
additionals.

Boanerges and Barnabas, or Judgment and Mercy for wounded and afflicted
souls, in several Soliloquies, by Francis Quarles, in 12.

The life of Faith in dead Times, by Chr. Hudson Preacher at Putney, in 12.

The Guide unto true Blessedness, or a Body of the Doctrine of the Scriptures,
directing a man to the saving knowledge of God, by Sam. Crook, in 12.

Six excellent Sermons upon several occasions preached by Edw. Willan, Vicar of
Hoxne, in 40.

The Dipper Dipped, or the Anabaptist duck'd and plunged over head and ears, by
Daniel Featly, D. D. in 4.

Hermes Theologus, or a Divine Mercury; new Descants upon old Records, by
Theoph. Wodnote, in 12.

Philosophical Elements concerning Government and civil Society, by Thomas
Hobbs of Malmsbury, in 12.

An Essay upon Statius, or the five first Books of Pub. Papinius Statius his
Thebais, by Tho. Stephens, Schoolmaster in Saint Edmundsbury, in 8.

Nomenclatura Brevis Anglo-Latino-Graeca inusum Scholae Westmonasteriensis, per
F. Gregory, in 8.

Etymologicum Parvum in usum Scholae publicae westmonasteriensis, opera and
studio Francisci Gregorii, in 8.

Grammatices Graecae Enchiridion in usum Scholae Collegialis Wigorniae, in 8.

A discourse of Holy Love by Sir Geo. Strode Knight, in 12.

The Saints Honeycomb full of Divine Truths, by R. Gove, Preacher of Henton S.
George in Somersetshire, in 8.

The Communicants Guide, directing the younger sort which have never yet
received, and the elder and ignorant sort, which have hitherto received
unworthily, how they may receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper with
comfort, by R. Gove, in 8.

A Contemplation of Heaven, with an Exercise of Love, and a Descant on the
Prayer in the Garden, by a Catholic Gent. in 12.

A Full Answer to a Declaration of the House of Commons concerning no more
addresses to the King, printed at Oxford 1648. in 4.

The Royalists Defense, printed at Oxford 1648. 4.

Mercurius Rusticus, or the Countreymans Complaint, printed at Oxford 1648 in 8.

A Relation of the Conference between W. Land, Lord Archb. of Canterbury, and
Mr. F^sher the Jesuit by command of K James, fol.

Church Lands not to be sold, 1647. in 8.

The Countrey-mans Catechism, or the Churches plea for Tithes by R. Boreman, B
D. in 4.

The Regal Apology printed at Oxford, in 4.

A Fair Warning to take heed of the Scottish Discipline by Bishop Bramhall, in
4.

Sacrosancta Regia Majestas in 4. printed at Oxford, and written by the
Archbishop of Tuwn.

The Christians Directory, in 12.

The Royal Slave, a Play in 4 acted at Christ-Church in Oxford.

Devotion digested into several Discourses and Meditations upon the Lords most
holy Prayer; Together with additional Exercitations upon Baptism, The Lords
Supper, Heresies, Blasphemy, The Creatures, The souls pantings after God, The
Mercies of God, The souls complaint of its absence from God, by Peter Samwaies,
Fellow lately resident in Trinity Col. Camb. in 12.

Of the Division between the English and Romish Church upon Reformation by H.
Fern. D.D. in 12. the second Edition with many Additionals.

Directions for the profitable reading of the Scriptures, by John White, M. A.
in 8.

The Exemplary lives and Memorable Acts of the 9 most worthy women of the
world, 3 Jews, 3 Gentiles, 3 Christians, by Tho. Heywood, in 4.

The Saints Legacies, or a Collection of Promises out of the World of God, in
12.

Judicium Universitatis Oxoniensis de Solenni Lege and Foedere, Juramento
Negativo, etc. in 8.

Certain Sermons and Letters of Defense and Resolutions to some of the late
Controversaries of our times, by Jasper Mayn, D. D. in 4. New.

Ja^ua Linguarum Reserata, sive omnium Scientia^um and Linguarum seminariu^,
Auctore Gl.Viro ^.A. Comenio, in 12.

A Treatise concerning Divine Providence, very seasonable for all ages, by Tho.
Morton Bishop of Duresme, in 8.

Observations upon Mr. Hobbs his Leviathan, with some Observation upon Sir
Walter Rawleigh's History of the World, by Alex. Rosse, in 12.

Fifty Sermons preached by that learned and reverend Divine, Jo. Done, in fol.

Wits Common wealth, in 12.

The Banquet of Jests new and old, in 12.

Balzac's Letters the fourth part, in 8.

Quarles Virgin Widow, a Play, 4.

Solomon's Recantation, in 4 by Francis Quarles.

Amesii antisynodalia, in 12.

Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, by John Tombs, in 12. New.

Dr. Stuart's Answer to Fountains Letter, in 4.

A Tract of Fortifications, with 22. Brass outs in 4.

Dr. Griffiths Sermon preached at S. Paul's, in 4.

Blessed Birthday, printed at Oxford, in 8.

A Discourse of the state Ecclesiastical in 4.

An account of the Church Catholic where it was before the Reformation, by
Edw. B^ughen D. D. in 4.

An Advertisement to the Jewry men of England touching Witches, written by the
Author of the Observations upon Mr. Hobbs Leviathan, in 4. New.

Episcopacy and Presbytery considered, by Hen. Fern. D. D. in 4.

A Sermon preached at the Isle of Wight before his Majesty, by H. Fern, D. D.
in 4.

The Commoners Liberty, or the English man's Birthright, in 4.

An Expedient for composing Differences in Religion, in 4.

A Treatise of Self denial, in 4. by a concealed Author.

The holy Life and death of the late Vicountesse Falkland, in 12.

Certain Considerations of present Concernment, Touching the Reformed Church of
England, by H. Fern, in 12.

Englands Faithful Reprover and Monitor in 12. by John Allington.

Newly published.
The grand Conspiracy of the Members against the Mind, of Jews against their
King. As it has been delivered in four Sermons by John Allington, B. D. in 12.

White Salt, or a sober Correction of a mad World, by John Sherman, B. D. a
discontinuer, in 12.

The matching of the Magistrates Authority, and the Christians true Liberty in
matters of Religion, by Will. Lyford, B. D. and late Minister of Sherborn in
Dors. in 4.

A compendious Discourse upon the Case as it it stands between the Church of
England, and those Congregations that have divided from it, by Hen. Fern. D. D.
New.

A correct Copy of some Notes, concerning Gods Decrees especially of
Reprobation, by T. P. Preacher of Gods Word in Northamptonshire, and published
to prevent calumny in 4. New.

The History of the Church of Scotland, by Joh. Spotswood Archbishop of St.
Andrews, in fol. New.

Phraseologia Anglo-Latina, or English Proprieties rendered into proper Latin
for the use and benefit of Grammar Scholars, in 8.

Dr. Cousins Devotions, in 12.

The persecuted Ministry, b^ William Langley late of St. Mary's in the City of
Liechfield, Minister, in 4.


