The Doctor Degraded; Or The REWARD of DECEIT: Being an Account of the Right
Perfidious, and Perjury'd TITUS OATS; Who Recieved Sentence at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, at Westminster the 16th day of May, 1685.
ON Saturday the 16th Day of May 1685. Titus Oats, being then brought to the
Kings-Bench-Bar, Westminster, about a 11 of the Clock by a strong Guard, My
Lord Chief Justice and others of his Brethren being on the Bench, was called;
the Attorney General, craved Judgment of the Court against Titus Oats, for
his Perjuries; Oats craved time till Monday, but it was denied him; then the
Right Honorable the Lord Chief Justice proceeded to declare the Heinousness of
his Crime. saying, It was formerly, by the Law of this Land, punishable with
Death. And after that, being somewhat moderated, the Penalty was, to have the
Parties Tongue cut out. And being yet farther taken into Consideration, the
Punishment was left to the discretion of the Court. So they Proceeded not to
Life or Member, notwithstanding his Lordship said he had consulted with all the
Judges of England, and that they were unanimously of opinion, that the power
was in the Court to Proceed to any Sentence under that restriction; and having
in a most Emphatical Speech, from point to point, related the matter at large,
his Lordship left the Pronounciation of the Sentence to Judge Withens, who told
the Prisoner, that his Nature was Compassionate, and that he delighted not in
passing Sentence on his fellow HERE STAND I FOR PERJURY

depiction of Titus Oats in the pillory Creatures; yet in case of such a
Crime, he must confess he did it without remorse, and having further expressed
himself in detestation of the Prisoners offense, and Eloquently discoursed it
at large, he was pleased to Pronounce the following Sentence, viz.

Fined on each Indictment 1000 Marks.

That on Monday the 18th of this Instant he walk about Westminster Hall, with a
Paper upon his Forehead, mentioning his Crime: And afterward stripped of his
Canonical Habit, Stand upon and in the Pillory before the Hall Gate between the
hours of 11 and One, for the space of an hour to stand.

Tuesday the 19th. at the Royal Exchange.

Wednesday the 20th. to be Whipped from Aldgate to Newgate.

Friday the 22d. from Newgate to Tyburn.

Aug. the 9th to stand at Westminster.

August, the 10th at Charing Cross.

August the 11th at Temple Bar.

September the 2d at the Royal Exchange.

April the 24th 1686. to stand in the Pillory at Tyburn, facing the Gallows.
To lie in Gaol during Life. And to stand Annually in the Pillory,

August the 9th. at Westminster.

August the 10th at Charing Cross.

August the 11th at Temple Bar.

September, the 2d at the Royal Exchange.

O Cruel Fate! why art thou thus unkind,
So wavering and unconstant in thy Mind,
To turn (like weather-Cocks) with every Wind?
Did thou not once make Oats thy Favorite,
Thy only Darling, and thy dear Delight?
And mounted him upon thy Wings so high,
That he could almost touch the very Sky,
And now must Oats stand in the Pillory?
There to be Battered so with Rotten Eggs,
Both on the Face, the Body and the Legs,
That he will wish himself in Hell for Ease,
And Beg as Beggars do for Bread and Cheese,
That Oats might not be Thresh'd as Men do Pease.
And must he too (when once he has stood there)
Be sent to Ride upon the Three-Leg'd-Mare?
Zouns what is the meaning of it with a Pox?
Is that the way to pay his Christmas-Box?
Was he not once the Savior of the Nation,
And must he be Contemned and out of Fashion?
Called Perjured Rogue and slighted be by all,
And tossed about just like a Tennis-Ball.
What if he did Forswear himself a little,
Must his sweet Bum be rubbed thus with a Nettle?
O fie! It Is not well done to Rob the Spittle.
But it is in vain I see to Mourn for Oats,
For if we Roar until we split our Throats,
We cannot help the poor distressed thing;
No hopes to get a Pardon of the King,
Therefore he must endure his Suffering.
Indeed (if to Lament would do him good)
Then we would Weep that is to be understood:
But, my beloved Brethren in the Lord,
That cannot keep him from a Hempen-Cord,
Or from his peeping through a Two-inch-Board.
And so it is needless that we Vex or Fret,
God's holy Will be done, we must Submit.
However let poor Oats be Brisk and Bonny
(Long as he Lives) he shall not want for Money,
For to his Hive we'll bring both Wax and Honey.
Yet (if he should be Hanged and Die that way)
Oats will spring up again at Judgment Day,
Although there will not be a bit of Hay.
But it is a great Disgrace that O brave Oats
(The Rampant Doctor of Religious Plots)
Is not (in state) Promoted up on High;
The just Reward of bloody Perjury.
Yet he is no Coward, fearing to be Halter'd,
Unless of late his Courage should be Altered:
Fight Dog, fight Bear, he values not a Fig,
He always was and ever will be a Whigg,
And stand up for the Cause we know full well,
Tho he were sure almost to go to Hell.
Therefore if he be Hanged, and in a Cart
Carried to Tyburn, what cares he a Fart,
At last the Dearest Friends of all must Part.
And now Beloved Brother Oats adieu,
Although this story looks a little Blue,
Yet what I Wrote of thee is very True.
LONDON, Printed by George Groom, at the Sign of the Blue-Ball in
Thames Street, over against Baynard's-Castle. 1685


