A DISCOURSE UPON QVESTIONS In debate between the KING and Parliament.
With certain Observations collected out of a Treatise called, The Diffrence
between Christian Subjection, and unchristian Rebellion,

HAving been a by-stander, and observing so well as I could how this great
game has been played on both hands; between the King and Parliament; I have
wondered to find considering the Declarations on both part^) that with great
expense of time and money they have made a shift to argu: themselves into a
civil war. And the the ^onder is no less to hear the variety of opinions;
some asserting his Ma^e^ties proceedings, some the Parliaments, and some
affirming that the thing in variance belongs to neither, divided from the
other; for (say they) it is but who shall rule arbitrarily, in cases to which
the Law has not fully or not at all extended; which the King calls his
Prerogative, the Parliament (as matters now stand) theirs.

To take the better view of the present differences, look a little way back
upon the actions of precedent times. It has been the general belief of this
Nation (upon what reason I cannot judge) that the design of his Majesty's late
father King James was to wind up this government ^o the height of France, the
better to ho^d correspondence with forraig^ Princes, whose power increasing
their riches, and both together their reputation, it was a shame to be left
behind, but finding the times averse, and being the best Astrologer in the
world what the success should be of ^i^ own actions, he betook himself to
the ^atisfactions of his age which he could acquire, and left the complement of
this to his Majesty that now is^ in whose person were concurrent a title
indubitable, settled by a succession, and the activitie and glory that is
insepa^able to youth, and the fresh assu^ption to the Throne of three Kingdoms.

The first dis^olved Parliament (to stumble at the first step) seemed ominous
to some, others took it for a trial, and in pursuance of the design. And the
rather for that (his Majesty's Protestations to govern by the laws, and his
late answer to the petition of right notwithstanding) the exaction of loan
money immediately following, the erection of Monopolies, and the forcible
taking of the Subsidy of Tunnage and Poundage, begat an universal diffidence
in the people of his Majesty's personal promises, and an opinion, that his
best resolutions were easily overthrown by the counsel of others, and so
consequently that his actions were not his own: which opinion true or false
when ever it got belief, has proved fatal to the Princes or to the people of
this Kingdom: For the Nation has hated to be governed by many Viceroyes, and
resents to insolences in their Princes so much as defects, rapes, murders,
and particular depredations, being more tolerable, when the virtues of the
Kingly Office have a happy influence and latitude upon the whole body of the
Commonwealth And yet to speak a truth, the same argument that aggravates the
violations in government may be a reasonable excuse for his Majesty (and the
same that the reverence of the English nation to their Princes has ever uses)
those acts of injustice were not the kings but his Ministers: for what other
opinion could the king retain, then what the Judges delivered for law, and the
Divines for Gospel: for these had made a general definition of a king, and
applied it to all Princes, and those had made a general day of judgment upon
all the laws, and subdued them to the will and pleasure of those Princes: and
being mindful of their own interest, and how much it concerned them to make
the king absolute, whom they had hope absolutely to rule: they would needs make
a king by the standard out of Gods Word, that his subjects might be slaves for
conscience sake: And by examples taken from the kingdom of the Jews, they
invested him with power essential to his office, to use at pleasure the
persons or estates of his subjects; of a divine institution, incomprehensible
by laws, if necessity require a variation and under heaven no other Judge of
that necessity besides himself: And having placed him in the rank of God^
gave him the like election, to govern the World by second causes, the fit
officers of nature, or by miracles and wonders, effects of his immediate
interposition; by the grand Councels, Judges, and inferior ministers of the
Laws; or by Pate^^^ with non ^bstante^, Proclamations, and a divine
prerogative.

But to say a truth his Majesty has of late admitted a better information of
this kingdom of government; and has given many assurances by protestation to
innovate nothing, yet this satisfies not, and the reason would be examined; as
also what those difficult questions are, whereof the sword must needs make the
resolution.

The ill satisfaction the people receive, notwithstanding the kings mighty
protestations to govern by the laws, to defend the protestant religion,
Privileges of Parliament, etc. springs out of this Jealousy, that if it come
into his Majesty's power to do otherwise, he will do so. For who can think
(say they) having the some maxims in his mind, and the same couns^ll in his
ear, that he has had; that he will do otherwise than he has done: That he
will after the ruin of this Parliament, refuse the fruition of that which has
cost so much labor, when the danger is passed: who will believe he will have
recourse for aid and advice to Parliaments; when he shall remember to what sad
exigents he has been re^uced by them, (whereof that himself was any part of
the cause shall be hid from his eyes) how averse they are in their composition
from the Genius of the Court, how apt to be mis^ed by a few, how unfit
councellers in matters out of their usual cognizance, wanting abilities to
advise and modesty to be silent, how slow and lingering the remedies are for
the maladies of the Commonwealth: who will not think how much better it is for
the King (if he can) to satisfy the people upon the word of a King, on the
word of a Gentleman, that their grievances shall be remi^ied as well without a
Parliament? who will not believe that he will rather choose to be the father of
a Militia of his own, who receiving their livelihood out of his Coffers, shall
help to fill them; by whose hands he shall have power to mow the fertile
meadows of Britain as often in the Summer as he pleases. And what shall
hinder? the Law? no; there shall be the same imminent necessity that was
pretended before, and there shall not want both Divines and Lawyers that shall
say the King and his private council are sole Judges of that necessity, shall
the Kings promises and protestations hinder? I cannot tell, it may be so, I
wish the people of this Kingdom had such confidence in his Majesty's personal
promises, but if the King cannot himself tell, i no King nor private man can
tell, how his Councels and resolutions may change, when the ^^ate and condition
wherein he made them is changed: if humane nature easily relapse to those
things that it loves, and if the resumption of such illegal power, suggest not
only the sweetness of riche^ and dominion, but by false arguments comes
apparelled with necessity of the kingdoms preservation, I know not whether
naked words subject to so much variety of construction will be of force to
resist so great temptation.

Hazael being but a private person thought himself much injured when the
Prophet made that cruel Character of his future behavior, Am I ^ dog? yet he
was so dogged, and few (perhaps) that knew him would ever have thought it.
Therefore if his Majesty will have those promises believed, let him not
apparently go about to place himself in such a condition, that he may break
them at his pleasure.

I know the Allegations for the manner of his Majesty's present proceedings
are, first the just vindication of his royal Prerogative (whereof it is
pretended violation h^th been made to the prejudice of himself and the
people) and wherewith he is trusted by God; which trust he may not ^^sert, for
Gods sake, his own, and his peoples.

For the Prerogative of Princes (so much talked of and so little known) it may
in brief be said, That all Princes have gaind Dominion by force or by
bargain, For to say that Adam, if he had lived to this time had been king of
the whole world, and therefore the king is first in order before the people,
his natural vassals; and production is an Assertion invented to flatter
Princes, for all men know that the multiplication of Colonies in Regions far
distant from the first rules of Nations, must impell the necessity of erecting
many independent governments, and the necessity will be as great in the
independency, as for the multiplicitie) therefore by force or by contract they
must commence: Dominion got by force, is kept by force and styled Tyranny, or
else it dissolves into Government by contract, and so takes a lawful form.
Therefore of the nature and latitude of the prerogative that rests in the hands
of a Prince, that comes in by agreement with the people; is the now dispute. It
may be defined thus: A power to see the Laws put in execution, and to do that
which is good for the people in cases to which the Laws have not yet extended;
if there were no Laws (as perhaps there are not many in the first erection of
a Monarchy) but that all were trusted to the wisdom and goodness of the
Prince, yet by all the reason in the world the intendment of that trust was to
enable him to do good, not to do every thing. Now, where the Laws are
positive the Prerogative claims no jurisdiction. The corruptions of Princes,
and the extravagancies of the people occasioned Laws, for bounds and limits to
both: and it is a thing out of all question, that the first contract would have
left no prerogative at all; if all future needs and inconveniences of the
government could at one entire view have been presented to the people; but
that being impossible, the discretion of all commonwealths meeting in their
representative bodies, have given a stop by laws to the progress of any
inconvenience as it has been emergent.

His Majesty complains that he is divested of his legal prerogative. That
is, he is denied the power to execute the Laws, with his own sense and
exposition upon them: And the Lords and Commons in Parliament pray to have
reduced into a Law that Arbitrary power which he has of Custom exercised, in
things to which the Laws do not fully extend: or to speak shorter, they are
not willing to trust him any longer with a power undefined, which they have
employed to their harm byt desire to have it defined and limited; that for the
time to come it may be so no more; And this they expect from his Majesty as a
duty of his office to the people, who if they are incapable of reason of state,
yet are not incompetent Judges of what is good for themselves; unless we shall
maintain Aruments of France in England, and to the same end; That the people
are altogether ignorant of their own welfare, that the King only knows it;
That is best with an implicit faith to trust him, and his Army, and Council,
with the safety of the Commonwealth, and every man's life and estate, That when
France is free from fear of foreign enemies, the subjects shall be
discharged of the oppressions; In the mean time to make himself and his
Mamalukes formidable to his neighbor Princes he has transformed millions of
Christ an souls into beasts, reducing them back to the Elements whereof they
were made, yet they must not complain nor defend their Laws and liberties,
lest they seem to resist Authority: Nor supplicate the supreme Magestrate to
govern according to right reason, and the Laws of the Kingdom, least they
seem wiser than their teachers, to be short, I hope it will never be so in
England. And if the English Parliament be at sometime mistaken (as it is not to
be presumed that they will be) yet they are not so much hurt by the
inconvenience of that mistake, until the next Parliament rectify, as they
are, if they shall be disabled from al competency to judge in matters tending to
their own welfare.

For the other branch of His Majesty's Allegation that the streightning on his
Prerogative is prejudicial to the people: It is true a Prince of high and
magnanimious endowments cannot dispense with that liberty and the influen^e of
his excellent personal virtues, if he be too much bound up by the dead letter
of the Law; for the actions of some have been transcendent to all Laws or
examples; and pity it had been that they should have been confined. And
(indeed) the people do lose willingly of their liberties to such good Princes
which proves unhappie to them, when worse make a title to the same liberty, by
such Examples; And there is no surer a sign of a weak Prince, than to contest
with the people upon these Presidents, rather seeking examples for his purpose
amongst the actions of his predecessors, than desirous to be himself an
example to posterity. How ever those Princes that have surmounted all Laws in
their glorious actions have been very rare, a festival that comes but once a
year; which if it came every quarter, yet a good constant diet were much
better.

It is strange to find how defective some are in the right understanding of
the Mysteries they profess, what is it that a Prince would have, (that affects
not glorious vindications and conquests upon foreign enemies) to live safely,
plentifully, and beloved of his people, to dye lamented, rich, and of a blessed
memory; this is all that can accrue to the best of the sons of men; And if
Princes did not proferre their wills before their profit; if they did not shame
less to pick locks, pockets, and their subjects pursues, than to say, I
thank you; if they did not choose rather by force to justify injustice, rapine
and oppression, then to have any actions of themselves, or ministers called by
such names, doubtless in a short time they could not choose but arrive at an
almost absolute dominion. For the arguments used to div^rt from honest
accommodation^ with the people, do not appear to me that ever they were
entertained by those. Heroic Prince^ that have filled the stories of all ages
with their high and exc^llent glories, but by some of narrow and limited
qualifications for government, one argument i^, That if the same ways of
munificence and bounty by which some Princes have ingratiated t^emselves,
should for some descents of Princes be pursued, the Crown, regal Authority,
and revenue would be destroyed, and nothing left whereby to oblige the people
or wherein ^o be liberal. 'T^s true, indiscreet prosution has consumed many
Princes (and that is indiscreet that is misimployed and lost) it never availed
(that I have heard) to ^he advanceme^t of any, nor does it extend much further
than ^he Kings chamber; nor is it any Motive of affection in the people to
hear, that the King is liberal of his purse to his servants and Favorites. A
Princes bounty shines in a little sphere, if compared with the pe^ples, as his
estate i^ small, compared with the revenue of the whole Commonwealth; his
liberality cannot extend to all his subjects, theirs may to him; it is ^ot that
virtue that exalts him in the opinion of the people. And yet it is a liberality
but not co^sumptive to his estate, nor destructive to his authority, but
accumulative to both, liberality, justice whereof the impartial distribution
has raised Princes into the rank of Gods. And I am verily persuaded if there
should fall out to be so happy a race of Princes, who disposing all particular
interests, should advance only public justice and utility; The Arms,
traffic, and tranquillity of their people, the honor, industry, and spirit
of the Nations under their command; that in a few descents they would become
absolute, and clearly acquitted from all obligation to Laws, or at least the
execution would be so long intermitted that with much difficulty they would
ever come in force, and the restitution seem as great an innovation, as of
late has been thought of Laws in force long-layed aside for want of use; And
in the times of such Princes we hear no t^lke of prerogative, or liberty, the
one is surrendered to the will of the Prince, the other employed to the
advantage of the people, and it is an infallible sign of great distempers in
government when such disputes arise.

To conclude the Prerogative is a trust which (because no laws are large
enough to meet with all accedents) resides of necessity in the person, or body
politic, where the Sovereignty resides: And it is true the King is trusted by
God with this Prerogative, as all in authority are in their degree to discharge
themselves piously toward him, hone^^^y ^o those under their command: He is
also trusted by his Subjects, who do not say, they may resume their power upon
breach of trust, but say, they ought ^ot to be denie^ when they desire those
breaches to be repaired and better fortified for time to come, and the trust
exemplified into a Law as occasion shall requ^re: Nor is it re^sonable for any
Prince in the world to say, I have been tr^sted, and if I or my Ministers have
not in these and these particulars well di^charged that trust, yet we will be
trusted still, and you shall believe that matters shall be better herea^ter.
What the privileges of Parliament are, i^ another great question, i^ under the
term be comprised the King, the Lords and Commons, the question may be better
made, what is not within the power and privilege of Parliament, for it is on
all hands confessed that the commonwealth may di^pose of it self; but if the
King be divided from them, what are then priviledge^? truly none at all, if
they cannot make a t^mporary provision to ^ave themselves without the Kings
license; for take away safety, and privilege is gone; If they be safe, yet if
it be better known to their adversaries then themselves, and that the
continuance be at disc^et^on and good pleasure of another, if any be a more
competent Judge of their safety then themselves they have no privilege at all,
say what they will. Nor can it possible be that both houses have power to
preserve the body of the kingdom which they repres^nt, if there not be an
inherent e^sentiall and underived authority in ^h^t assembly to preserve it
self (^is granted in the P^inces minority, absence, or incap^ssity to gove^ue,
the power to preserve and provide for the state, rests in the great counsel,
and their diligates, doubtless the case is the some, if it be on like manner
granted that the Prince is divided from the body of his people ^y evil
counsel (to prove if the counsel be good or bad, examine the legali^y, it
appears in his Majesty's expres^es: and that of most remarke, is to declare
law (which being denied to the great counsel, must needs be taken to reside in
the King and his privy counsel) To have sole managing of the arms of the
kingdom. And upon misprision of treason to sequester membe^s of Parliament to
trial in inferior Cou^^s. If this counsel he legal it is good. If his
Majesty were admitted the best Lawyer in the kingdom: Yet if the laws of this
Kingdom have reserved the exposition of themselves to the Lawmakers and not
to the K. the advise^ to appropriate that power to himself is not good, that
they have done so, presidents are not wanting where the J^dges have humbly
praid both houses to deliver their sense of a doubtful law, If these
commissions of Array and breach of privileges be declared illegal by them
that have only power to declare law in dubious cases, then the advice by which
they were done is not good, yet concerning this ^cruple of declaring law; It Is
true the Parliament cannot declare that to be law which is not. They cannot
declare it to be the law of the land that my b^o^he^ by a second venture shall
inherit my land before my kinsman ten degrees off though that were great reason
but they can declare that there rests no power by virtue of any trust in any
person to convert the forces of the kingdom to the destruction of it self.
And they may declare it legal to stop the a^ven^^^es and appro^hes to such
power if it be attempted, his Majesty may array Arm and command his subjects
against the Fr^nch and Spaniard not therefore to fight one against another, he
may Array arm, and command them to suppress Rebels ^o legality declared not
therefore to oppress, the Parliament, th^se are not very cons^quent to a
reasonable m^n. It is no strange, nor are the examples rare to find how much
Princes may be mistaken in the councellor^ friends and enemies; for how hardly
can that man be thought an enemy who studies nothing so much as to enlarge the
power, and advance the pro^it of his Prince, Yet the abundant services of some
have more mischief to their Masters than foreign arms or combination ever
could, was it not taken for good service to invent a new revenue of 200000. l.
per annum to supply the wasted tents of the Crown. And would not he have bin
esteemed rather a fool than no friend to the Kings profit that had advised to
lay that down after it was once or twice paid. Yet in his Majesty's own
judgment that tax had better never bin. And it had never bin if the advice had
never bin. And the advice had never bin; or not bin pernicious; If the King had
received the same from the greater council as he did then from the less. I am
of opinion though it rain not in Egypt, yet the inundations of Nilus are caused
by rain in another region. And the black clouds that hung over Scotland and
their troubled waters made them think it rained some where, and provide for the
storm, for doubtless if the motion ^o ab^olute dominion and ruin of all laws,
had not been so visible and swift in England as it was; The new Service book,
had never brought so many thousands Scots over Tweed.

We may then conclude upon the whole matter; That that physic was not good
that brought the body of the Commonwealth into so great distemper; That the
people though a moveable body like the Ocean, yet never swe^l ^ut when blown
upon by intemperate winds; That that council which has caused the King to
stake his Crown, and the Kingdoms their safety, now the third time; That has
contested with the great Council for precedence in the Kings judgment, and
has obtained it; That broke the last Parliament by the King, and would break
this by the Kingdom: Is not good for us, nor for those discree^ Gentlemen (if
they understood their own interest) that labor so much to ^upport it. But
that in every case wherein the general state of the Kingdom is concerned, the advice ^h^t the body of the Kingdom gives, upon a view taken of it self is
not only least erroneous, but by the Law not presumed to err.

Neither can the suggestion^ made against this Parliament (indissoluble but by
consent) any way avail to countenance a forci^le dissolution, That they have
too much handled the flowers of the Crown, those that adorn the person, ^f
not constitute the office of the King; That they go about to erect a new
Aristocraticall government, or rather a Tyrannical of 5. or 600. That this
Assembly is no Parliament, His Majesty dissenting; that ^he Major part of both
Hous^s are gone to the King, or have left the rest, the remnant are a faction.

To the first it is answered before; that those rights of the Crown which are
by the positive and express Laws of the Land vested in the King to uses, are
not questioned; except in case where it is manifest that the uses have been
prevented; And in that case no more is required but that the breache^ be
repaired, and that the influences of his Majesty's Government may be
transmitted unto the people by better Mediums, which is no prejudice to hi^
Majastie, unless he imagine that he ought not to grant it, because it is
desired; That he is bound to relieve the people, but not at the peoples
reques^. We will take it for granted that in any case it only appertains to
our Sovereign Lord the King to defend wearing of Arms. The use of this power
vested in his Majesty is for defense of himself an^ subjects, and can h^ve no
other intendment by Law and reason, but suppose that by evil Council that may
be about a Prince (by his own unwise Election, or Gods appointment when he
gives Princes bad Councillors, or people ba^ Princes for scourges to wanton
and corrupted Nations;) this power is employed to divide the Kingdom against
it self, one Faction sees this power lodged in the person of the Prince, but
never observes to what end, so sides with him. Another insist upon the end for
which he was trusted, and defend themselves by Arms: Faction begets Civil
war: Civil war dissolves the present Government; After follows a
foreign yoke^ if our neighbor Nations be not fast asleep, or otherwise
employed: In this expectation, and in the very minute when this imminent
tempest is breaking upon our heads; the representative body of the Kingdom
prostrates it self at his Majesty's feet, and beseech him to change (not the
Government) but a few subordinate Governors, that he will shine upon his
people through transparant and unblemished crystal glasses, not through
Sanguine, Murry, and Azure which make the Air and Objects beheld to seem
bloody, and blue; Assuring him there is no other way to calm the Seas that
begin to rage and to preserve from wreck the ship of the Commonwealth wherein
his Majesty is himself imbarqued, and is the greatest adventurer. Now come in
he Malignant Councillors, and tell his Majesty that these humble
Supplications will (if he yield to them) turn to Injunctions: Ease them and do
them right (s^y they) but not at the requst of Parliament; Which is no less
th^n to place him in a condition to do what he shall think to be right; That is,
what he shall be advised by them is right; That is (in many cases) what ambition,
hatred, covetousness, luxury, lechery, suggest to be right; That is, flat
tyranny more absolute than the Turks.

For the Introdu^tion of a new form of Government, the Arguments are, That if
the Parliament draw to it self the Jurisdiction of the maritime and land
^orces, the power to name Councillors and Judges^ or prescribe a rule for
their nomination, To make Laws (for it is all one if the King may not deny those
that are presented to him by both Houses) to perpetuate the sitting of this
Parliament: The Sovereignty has (if these be allowed) made no secret but a
very apparent transition from the person of the King into the persons of the
Parliament men.

The Subjects of this Kingdom have never had one Example of a Parliament that
has gone about to make themselves Lords over their Brethren; And if they would
they cannot; for when they forsake the duty o^ their place^ and the interest of
the Kingdom, the Kingdom will forsake them; and sometimes before: which
though the people have dearly repented, yet it serves to prove that the
subsistence of a Parliament is impossible if dominion or any other end be
perceived then Reformation and preservation of the Commonwealth.

In the Minority and absence of former Kings^ opportunity was far more
favorable for such a design then at this present, yet what Prince was ever
hurt by his infan^y or absence, when they were trusted both with his dignity
and revenue. And it is out of question, if his Majesty had been clearly
concurrent with this Parliament for the punishment of Delinquents, and
conservation of the peace, and Liberty of the Subject, they had never risen up
into so high requests; but take the Argument at the best, it follows not that
the Parliament intends to assume Soveragne Authority, because when Ireland is
in Rebellion. England in combustion, Scotland scarce quieted, France and Spain
in Arms, they do humbly supplicate his Majesty to entrust, for a short and
limited time, the Militia under the commands of persons of Honor, that the
Lords and Commons (those whose blood and es^a^es must defend the State) may
repose says in: yet this is not to be granted, and the fears and jealousies
of his Majesty's best Kingdom and most obedient Subjects held so unworthy of
any regard or satisfaction, that they are esteemed and so published for
frivolous and false pretended, merely to obtain an unjust purchase out of the
Kings prerogative.

For the nomination of prime Officers, Councillors and Judges, I presume that
request results out of the precedent misgovernment, and is intended only for
this time; And peradventure the temper will be better for the people, that the
King (being once environed with a wise and religious Council) appoint Judges
and public Officers, whom the people may, if there be cause accuse, and the
Parliament judge; nor would this branch of the Kings prerogative been reached
at by the people, if the Judges (who ought to be conservators of the Lawes^ had
not been the destroyers; If the counsel of a few even in Parliament time, had
not involved the whole state in a common calamity; and contested with the Grand
Counsel of the Kingdom assuming to t^emselves more zealous affection to his
Majesty, a greater care of the Commonwealth and a better di^cerning what was
necessary and fit for both, Yet the election of public Officers is not without
president in the times of former Kings; But I would not have those Kings
presidents to his Majesty, that such demands may not be president to us.

Concerning the perpetual Dictatorship of the Parliament, It may be deman^ed^
why is the work prolonged by them, who ask why are you so long at work? why
are Delinquents protected? by what means are difficulties objected? How comes
t^is Rebellion in Ireland? why does the Parliament spend time in providing for
their own safety? which ought to be spent in redress of public disorders and
vindication of ^he Subjects from oppression? do they pretend fear, because
they would rule? Let his Majesty render those fears apparently false, and
concur more heartily than they in securing the Kingdom; Let him grant
Commissions for Ireland, let him grant guards for the Parliament as well to
secure their fear as their danger: Why should his Majesty confirm their
fears by discharging their Guards, and attemping their persons; If he know
them to be safe^ let them know it also, or confute their fear to the
understanding of the whole Kingdom, by granting their own ways of security,
the next way to dete^t those apparitions of fear if they be false. And when
the Religion of our Church is vindicated; The vigor of our Laws renewed; A
Guard of strength and terror provided for their future preservation; The
Rebellion in Ireland quelled; His Majesty's revenue examined and repaired;
particular Delinquents punished; The Court of Justice reformed; The banks
founded by the industry of our Ancesters with so much blood and treasure
against the inundations of the prerogative, or malignity of private counsels
repai^ed and better fortified, then let us see what pretense will be made for
continuation of the Session still. The English Nation will not doubtless sell
their birthright for a mess of pottage. Nor chang the government of a Prince
(time nor story remembering any other in these Kingdoms) of extraction so
i^lustrious of a title so indubitable, to be ruled by their equal,
peradventure inferior neighbors.

To that allegation that this assembly is no Parliament in the Kings absence;
if it be understood when he is not present^ it is an opinion so ancient as
since his Majesty left the Parliament, for before I am perswade^ it was never
heard of: And it must follow thereupon (as has been answered before) that by
the accedentall absence of the prince^ or in sickne^^es that induce
stupifaction, or in the first degrees of infancy, when the pow^^ of the
reasonable soul, have no latitude of operation, the state may be left without
means to preserve it self, which is a great obsurditie to think. But if by the
Kings absence be undestood the want of his voluntary concurrence in
confirmation of the Acts and Ordinances of both houses, and that in such cases
they are no Parliament, it may well be doubted if they have bin any Parliament
during this Session: For the acts that have passed his Royal ascent (so much
amplified in his late declarations to the people) are shrodely suspected to be
with no great good liking of his Majesty. I am sure if they were voluntary,
they were not exhibited with due circumstances, for through that opinion, his
Majesty has lost much of the thanks due for such transcendent graces, which
no Prince, or inferior person, ought in discretion to loose. However that both
houses legally convened and authorized to sit, do not by the Kings absence
loose the essence and denomination of a Parliament, appears by presidents of
former times, when in the absence of a Prince (further distant in body then his
Majesty is in mind I hope) the estates have assembled themselves (which is a
little higher then was yet in dispute) have administered oaths of fealty to
the subject, have named officers for public services, and as well to
superintend the peace of the Kingdom as the revenue of the King. And though
there was not nor is any law authorizing the assembling of a parliament in such
a case, yet was the legallity of that parliament never questioned, nor will, of
any other upon the same or the like occasion, when the matter to be treated on
is the peace and safety of the Kingdom, whether the King be absent in body or
mind, it changes not the question much.

But which is a short answer to all that can be said is: that by an Act of all
the estates, this Parliament is not disolveable, but by an Act of all the
estates, therefore a Parliament until that Act be passed.

To the other part of the allegation that Major part of both Houses have left
the rest, and are gone over to the King. It may be demanded why does not then
his Majesty send them up to adjourn the Parliament to Oxford or Cambridge, are
they so fearful of the Aprentizes of London, that they dare not appear to do
his Majesty so great a service by shouting a yea or no in the house of
Commons, how willingly would they adventure a battle that refuse to speak a
word in a crowd. Truly it were the way to put an end to all the controversy,
to reverse with ease the acts that have given so great cause of repentance, to
reduce the Parliament to terms of due obedience; to save a multitude of
offenders to weed out of both houses those factious members that insist so
obstinately upon a trust reposed in them; to distill out of the delinquent City
of London much cordial water to save the labor, charge, and hazards of war,
to save the purses, persons, and horses of the willing Gentry, who labor for
those fetters (such is the understanding of this time) that their Fathers swet
to be rid from; For if arms be raised only against a small malignant party, a
faction of a few Parliament men: The Major number would quickly deliver them up
and what place could afford safety for them against the Ire of his Majesty and
both Houses of Parliament.

To such as put these Questions, What is the power and privilege of
Parliament, by what Law do they impose Orders upon the people without the
Kings Assent? they seem to me like them that dispute how legally the next
houses are pulled down, when the flame and winds make cruel vastation in the
beautiful buildings of a populous City. They are honest m^n, and would feign
be thought wise, but I doubt it is not in the o be of their understa^ding to
comprehend^ what power resides in the vast body of the people, and how
unlimitedly that power operates, when it is animated by danger, for
preservation of it self. A man may make the same observation upon them that is
made upon Cato, who pleaded the Laws and usages of peaceable times, when the
liberty of that Commonwealth was at the last ^aspe, and would not be drove off
it, till it was too late; his argument was this in effect, That the Authors of
Laws for preservation of the Commonwealth, may not preserve it, but by their
own Creature. This was Cato his error, and is so confessed by all men yet (I
take it) he was a better Statesmen then these disputants. The King was admitted
Judge of the danger of the Commonwealth before the Parliament and it was
apparent for no other reason, but the better to levy money? Shall the Parliament
sitting be a less compatent Judge? As though a Physician that says you are
not well, though you do not perceive it; Give me five or ten pieces, I will
c^re you, shall be the better believed then the man that has been wasted with
a Quotidian Fever sixteen years together. They talk what the Parliament may
do, and what not, as though this were the Parliament that made an Act for
pavement of an highway, and had little other work. Truly, if the regulation
of a Trade, or creation of a Tenure, or erection of a Corporation were the
Question in a peaceable time, it were easily resolved, that the Kings demurre
should stand for a denia^l; but to say the Kingdom may not defend and secure
it self, who ever says to the contrary, is to fight against the oldest and
best known Law in nature, the Center of all Laws, and the inseparable right
of all Kingdoms, Corporations and Creatures. But they say the Kingdom is in
no such danger; who is a better Judge the repres^ntative body of the Kingdom it
self? not those that say so. Who like a man that standing upon the beach at
Dover will not believe that the Sea has any shore toward Fra^co, until he be
brought to the top of the Hill. It is not within their view to tell better then
the Parliament whether there be danger or not. His Majesty indeed has the
most eminent place to observe what Collection of Clouds are in any quarter of
the Heaven, and what weather it wi^^ be, but his calculations (supposed to be
made by others from a lower ground) are therefore not so well believed. But be
it in danger or none it matters not much the Laws have been in danger^ (none
will deny) and were recovered by another danger or had been lost: I^ it be now
peace (as th^se men say) it is the better time to secure them if it be not
peace, it is well to save the Commonwealth by any means whatsoever, and if the
King concur not so speedily as the occasion requires, the b^ame is not theirs
that go before for his preservation and their own.

To make an end, I wish an union of the three Kingdoms, under the same
Government^ Ecclesiastical and Cavell (if it be possible) that this Crown
having three such supporters, and surrounded with the salt waters at Unity, at
Liberty, at Peace in it self may not fear the whole forces of the disjoynted
contenent of Europe, That his Majesty would understand his Interest to be, to
unite, not to divide his Subjects, and to remember with what Tropheyes the
magnanimous Princes of former times have adorned their Funerals and Fame. That
he will choose rather to fight in the head of the British Armies, for
restitution of his Nephews to their lost, inheritance, than employ them here to
pillage and destroy his own subjects; That he will first command the hearts,
then the persons, then the estates of his subjects, and not begin at the wrong
end: That in the Parliament may reside a Spirit of that Latitude and Nobleness
which ought to dwell in an Assembly of so much Honor and Gravitie, That just
things be done for justice sake, without bowing less or more for the raging of
popular surges in the South^ or for the cold winds that blow from the North:
That the conditions of peace may not be enhansed by any prosperous success,
but like the Noble Roman before and after the victory the same: That his
Majesty may be convinced of the Error of his private Councels, by finding in
the Grand Council a quiet repose and a stable foundation of peace and plenty
to his Royal Person and Family. And lastly (since his Majesty and his people
thus divided cannot be happy) that with all convenient Expedition, such as
have studied this division between the Head and the Body, may h^ve their heads
divided from their bodies. So farewell.

Certain Observations, Collected out of a Treatise, called, The difference
between Christian Subjection, and unchristian Rebellion; Allowed by public
Anthority to be set forth, as in the title page may appear.
Compiled by that judicious and learned Divine, Tho: Bilson, then Warden of
Winchester, since Bishop there; necessary in these times to be perused.
Theophilus the Christian. Philander the Jesuit. The third part, page 279.
verbatim.


Theop. CAses may fall out even in Christian Kingdoms, where the people may
plead their right against the Prince, and not be charged with Rebellion. In
some Cases the Nobles and commons may stand for the Public Regiment and Laws
of their Country.



Phil. As when for example?


Theop. If a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a foraigne
Realm, or change the form of the Commonwealth from impery to tyranny, or
neglect the Laws established by common consent of Prince and People to execute
his own pleasure; in these and other Cases which might be named; if the Nobles
and Commons join together to defend their ancient and accustomed liberty,
Regiment and Laws, they may not well be counted Rebels.


Phil. You denied that even now when I did urge it.


Theop. I denied that Bishops had authority to prescraibe Conditions to Kings,
Christian Kingdoms may settle their States with common consent of Prince and
people, which the Prince alone cannot alter.
when they Crowned them; but I never denied that the People might preserve the
foundation, freedom, and form of their Commonwealth, which they foreprized
when they first consented to have a King. I never said that Kingdoms and
Commonwealths might not proportion their States as they thought best; by their
public Laws, which afterward the Princes themselves may not violate. By
superior powers ordained of God, we understand not only Princes, but all
politic States and Regiments, somewhere the People, somewhere the Nobles
having the same interest to the sword that Princes have in their Kingdoms, and
in Kingdoms where Princes bear rule; The Princes sword, his Law, not his ^ust.
by the sword we do not mean the Princes private will against his Laws; but his
precept desired from his aws, and agreeing with his Laws; which though it be
wicked, yet it may not be resisted of any Subject with armed violence. Marry
when Princes offer their Subjects no^ justice but force, and despize all Laws
to practice their lusts; not every nor any private man may take the sword to
redress the Prince; Princes may be stayed from tyranny by their own Realms
though not deposed.
but if the Laws of the Land appoint the Nobles as next to the King to assist
him in doing right, and withold him from doing wrong, then they be licensed
by man's Law, and so not prohibited by Gods to interpose themselves for the
safeguard of equity and innocence; and by all lawful and needful means to
procure the Prince to be reformed; but in no case deprived, where the Scepter
is inherited, etc.


FINIS.

