Dr. SHERLOCK's TWO KINGS OF BRAINFORD Brought upon the Stage.

IN A Congratulatory Letter TO Mr. JOHNSON.

Occasioned by The Doctor's Vindication of Himself in Taking the Oath of
Allegiance to Their Majesty's after the Time, indulged by the Law, was expired.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1690.

Dr. SHERLOCK's Two Kings OF BRAINFORD Brought upon the STAGE.
SIR,
THis is to congratulate your Victory over that Passive Obedience Doctrine, the
Chief Confessor of which is far from imitating you; who were a real Martyr for
that Truth, which is opposite to it.

The Great Champions on the other side, were Dean Hicks and Dr. Sherlock; these
gave the word to the Party; the first would prove it by Man's Law, the last by
God's; and thus the Laws both Humane and Divine, were pressed into its Service.

Dean Hicks his last Effort for it was, in Signing or Dictating the Weak Dying
Declaration of the late Bishop of Chichester, who had sucked it in with his
Milk, and might be thought to dye with a Surfeit of it. But the Dean finds yet
no occasion to renounce any part of that Doctrine, the Defense of which, some
say, procured his Deanery. According to his Golden Book, God himself had fixed
his Allegiance unalterably to the Vid. Dr. H. his Jovian.
Late King, as long as he should live; and to the Sham Prince after him: unless
his Spurious Birth be fully proved. For the Dean had taught, that God had
Preface to Jov. p 56.
given the Imperial Crown of England for an inalienable Inheritance to the
Royal Family, that is, as he immediately explains it, to the next Heir upon the
Line: to exclude whom or any Person of the Royal Family, from the Absolute
Right or Birthright which God alone had given him, he asserted to be to oppose
the Will of God: nor does he seem yet, to have thought of our Doctor's
Distinctions for Preserving and maintaining the Right of such an one, and yet
obeying another, as having Gods Authority: Wherein the Doctor sets up Two
Kings, one of Right, the other by Providence. But upon this Point, the two
Brotherly Champions are divided, and leave you Master of the Field, while they
engage against each other. That Dr. Sherlock gives up the Point of Succession,
and says, what amounts to a total yielding the Cause to you, may appear from
the most Cursory Consideration of his Book, and tho I must confess he has a
great Art in Startleing his Reader, Page 3.
and helping himself off from Assertions, which at first look very Gross; yet I
cannot but think, that in the main he leaves either himself, or his Beloved
Doctrine, without Excuse: and where his present Actions oblige him to depart
from it, he shows it is like a parting with a right hand, or right Eye; and
therein, indeed, does more for the Government than other Men; and endures
little less than Martyrdom. I need not profess to you, that I have no disesteem
for the Man, but his Opinions, in relation to Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, are, in my apprehension, so Derogatory from the Goodness of God,
Vid. Anonymus his Letters to him about Church Communion.
so uncharitable to Men, and destructive to Humane Societies; that I long since
thought my self bound publicly to avow my dislike of them; tho* the
Government, and consequently, in his Sense, Gods Authority were on his side; as
I am sure the Government is now on mine, it being founded upon Legal
Principles, as directly contrary to his, as he often is to himself.

I maintain, by Law, that their Majesty's are rightful King and Queen, and came
by their Power by due means; which is impossible to be proved upon his Grounds.

The Absurdity, and perhaps, Blasphemy of his, you can best set in their true
Light, and expose to the just Abhorrence of Mankind; and have already done it
by way of Anticipation.

But tho you have gained the Victory over his Opinions about Civil Government,
and every Lash you bore for the sake of our English Liberties, shall rise about
you in Circles of Glory; yet such Men will be likely to reap the Spoil; till
they who maintain the Right to be in King James, shall, as the Law declares
them, if they act accordingly, be adjudged Traitors to their Majesty's: and
till the Principles of Hobbs and Matchiavel become as Odious, as the Doctrine
of our Pretenders to the Spirit of the Church of England, was in the time of
King James. Vid. Dr. H's Sermon. Vid. Dr. Sherlock 's Case of resistance.
When that Sovereign Power, which was taught to be inseparable from his Person,
and could make Repeal, and Dispense with Laws, touched but the Hem of the
Canonical Garments; then the Dying Voice of a Meek Moses, and the louder Cry of
that Blood, which was Sacrificed to their Idol, could not be heard for the
Jangling of Aaron's Bells. Then they who had been transported with the
Fallacious Promise of Maintaining the Church of England, began to bethink
themselves that there was not the least word of Religion: and what comfort
could it be to them, to have Diana's Greatness out of Danger, when others were
likely to enjoy the Profit of the Shrines? Till then the King's Most Illegal
Acts had the Authority of Sovereign Power; that is, as the Case of resistance.
Doctor tells us, Gods Authority: and it would be hard if that Authority could
not make them Legal.

They thought they had this fast on their side, and not foreseeing any
Probability that there would be a Flaw in the Succession, till this Generation
should pass away; by making that Sacred and Inviolable, they hoped to secure
Reverence and Authority to themselves, who had taught the Oracles to
Philippize, and speak as the Present Powers would have them.

On the other side, King James and his Sottish Priests, thought those Warm Men
of our Clergy, believed their own Doctrine, and would inculcate it to their
People, however even the Clergy themselves should be used: And finding the
Lay-Herd, like the Tribe of Issachar, imagined that the Levites, who had taught
them to crouch under their Burden, would have had more Modesty and Sense of
Shame, than to be Clamorous.

But certain it is, how much soever they inveighed against your true
Representation of the Behavior of the Primitive Christians toward Julian;
they out-went the Pattern, and were beholden to you for their Justification.

Far be it from me, in the least to reflect upon the Vid. Pref. p. 4.
Body of the English Clergy: their Learning the World Admires, their Prayers at
least, called for their Majesty's; and the most of them Swore Allegiance to
them as soon as the Law required it; and, it is to behop'd, with Sincerity.

Yet if they were means of delaying our Settlement, or of undermining it, I
should not think my self Guilty of Profaneness or Infidelity in telling them,
they would thereby Blacken themselves, and Obstruct the Propagation of that
Religion Vid. the Doctor's Pref. p. 4.
which by Profession they should promote: The Blemishes of the Guilty ought by
no means to be concealed, if it were for no other reason than to advance the
Honor of the rest; yet I think there is a much better ground for exposing
them, which is, that they Entitling Religion to their Quarrels and Absurd
Errors, thereby expose Religion its self, till their Chaff be separated.

The Jewish Clergy were as Sacred in their Persons, as pompus in their
Ceremonies, and more Absolute in their Authority: and yet those Acts of a
Convocation, which are Trumpt up, as a new Revelation, to Support a Baffled
Doctrine, seem to think matter of Instruction contained in the Description of
the Miseries which befell the Jews, and how Religion Bishop Overall 's
Convocation Book, p. 72.
went in those days, when the Priests had gotten the Reins in their own hands.

How far our Clergy did thrust themselves into the State in the time of the two
Charles's, and what were the Effects of their Interposition, I shall not now
enquire; it is certain the Romish Priests drove their Votary to a Fatal
Precipice: and some of our Churchmen, but many of their most Zealous
Disciples, to their Praise be it spoken,, invited our Deliverer, and, in
appearance, entirely closed with the Deliverance. till, as it was upon the
Discovery of the Popish Plot, they found the Number and Sincerity of others
more remarkable; and thinking their handful would be lost in the Crowd, they
betook themselves to another Multitude, the Criminals in former Reigns. And, as
Evil Ministers could not be called to account, but the Throne was thought to be
Shaken, because of their running behind it: no Man could be in danger of being
made an Example for Subverting the Laws, but he found a Sanctuary in the
Church, or a Protection in the very Name of it. Though the Clemency of the
Government freed them from their just Fears, they soon showed that those
Methods were so far from reclaiming them, that they took Encouragement to
divide the State, and make Vid. Mr. Dodwell 's one Altar, one Priesthood.
a Schism in the Church, even in their own Sense, setting up Altar against
Altar: The Separate Church had its peculiar Forms of Prayer, and the Breach was
every day growing wider and wider, as the Designs of France hastened toward a
Birth: How many stood on Tip-toes, expecting a friendly Descent of French
Dragoons, and other Romish Missionaries!

But let me tell you, King William's Sword carries more Conviction withit, than
all your dint of Argument; his Passage over the Boyne was not more amazing to
the World, than it was stupifying to them; its passive Waters, like those of
Lethe, made them forget their former Thoughts. Had he perished there, he had
been damned from Chair and Pulpit, as an ambitious Usurper, and they only not
call him so now.

They thank God that they had no share in what they account a Sin in him, and
in all them whom After-Ages Vid. Dr. S's Thanksgiving Sermon which he is
desired to Print.
shall celebrate, for freeing themselves from those Incantations, which would
have kept them fast bound from ministering to that Providence, which loudly
called for their Service.

Now Providence has declared for Their Majesty's, and God is with them, if the
Doctor believes himself; yet he has found means, if Providence should change
its Course (to the Trial of which he too plainly invites the late King) to
recommend himself to his good Graces: as his not being forward to comply with
the Revolution; and when he did, doing it upon such Principles as by no means
justify it.

Of all the Passages which make for the late King, the following is not the
least worthy of regard.

The Providence of God, says the Doctor, removes Kings and sets up Kings, but
alters no Legal Rights, nor forbids those who are dispossessed of them, to
recover their Right when Case of Alleg page 56.
they can, etc. A legal and successive Right is the ordinary way whereby the
Providence of God advances Princes to any hereditary Throne. And this bars all
other humane Claims; but yet God may give the Throne to another if he pleases,
and this does not destroy the legal Right of the dispossessed Prince, nor
hinder him from claiming it when he finds his Opportunity. In which,

1. He is inconsistent with himself. 2. He makes nothing of God's Authority.
1. The Law, says he, looks upon the Crown as hereditary, P. 56.
and the Change of the Person or Royal Family does not make the Crown cease to
be hereditary; and therefore whoever has Possession of the Crown has an
hereditary Crown; and leaves it to his Heirs, as long as they can keep it: as
is plain from the Example of the three Henry's who succeeded each other.

Here he makes the Fact to argue a Right; and whoever has a settled Possession
of the Crown, has, according to him, an hereditary Crown in the Eye of the Law,
and leaves it to his Heirs, which must be meant of a legal Right of Succession.
The Instance he gives, is of them who came not to the Possession of the Crown
as right Heirs, upon the supposed fundamental Settlement; and is a manifest
departure from his Assertion, That such a Possession alters no legal Right:
unless he will have it, that two may have, not only different Titles to the
same Crown, the one by legal Right, the other by Providence; but that both may
have real legal Right upon different Titles: which, indeed, how great soever
the Inconsistency be, he plainly does; for the dispossessed Prince has, with
him, a legal Right unaltered: and yet he yields the other has a legal Right
according to the Law of this hereditary Monarchy. which will evidently appear,
if we consider that this odd Notion of Hereditary Monarchy was framed to avoid
the force of an Objection, That the Law makes it Treason to kill the King's
eldest Son, as well as to kill the King: and therefore if it should relate to
every King in Possession, might he a means of securing the Page 56.
Crown to an Usurper; who, as is said by the Objector, has no Right himself,
and therefore his Heirs have no Right to Succession.

He answers by that new Conceit of his own, whereby he will have it, That the
Possessor of a Crown, without any express or implied Consent of the Subjects,
may by Law leave this to his Heirs; what is added, as long as they can keep it,
does not diminish this legal Right, while they keep it.

If therefore, during such Possession the ejected Prince, or his Heir, should
with Arms oppose him that is invested with the Power, the Doctor must not deny,
that he would fight against one, who has the Law, and God's Authority, on his
side.

Which leads me to prove, that

2. He makes nothing of God's Authority, either in relation to Princes, or to
Subjects; by admitting, That though a Prince is placed and settled in the Throne
by God himself; yet he who had the Right before that Settlement may sti^l fight
for it.

Obj. If it be said that the Subject Matter confines his Position concerning
God's Authority though spoken absolutely, to the Duty of Subjects, who are by God
himself discharged from their Allegiance, but concerns not the dispossessed, or
any foreign Prince.

Answ. 1. Then at least this shows, That a Prince in Possession has not God's
Authority absolutely, for that is to be resisted by no Person whatsoever.

2. But more particularly, Admit every Act done by the Possessor toward a
Settlement were sinful, yet as soon as, and for the Time that he is settled, if
the Doctor stand to his own Notion, the Prince who usurped upon the other has
God's Authority of his immediate Gift: God, the Sovereign Lord of all things,
Page 15.
did set him up without regard to Law or legal Right: nor does Page 2.
it, with the Doctor, make any difference in this case to distinguish between
what God permits and what he does; the Event Page 12.
is ordered by God: and the Scripture, he says, expressly tells Page 34.
us, that Kingdoms are disposed by God.

If therefore the Kingdom be taken from the ejected Prince, and given to
another by God himself authoritatively, not barely by permission, (and surely
all his Acts must have Authority) 1. Does not the dispossessed Prince, in
fighting for it, deny the Authority and Force of Gods Gift? 2. Does not God
himself warrant him that is in Possession to defend his Gift? or, 3. Shall it
be said agreeably to the Doctor himself, that God designed to take it away
again, till, by restoring the Power to the other, he has given him the Stamp or
Sign of his Authority.

Till the Doctor answer these Questions with some Consistency, it may well be
held, that the Attempt for a Restoration cannot be justified till Success; and
by consequence no more than any Usurpation; nay, here is an Usurpation upon
God's Authority, and Legal Authority, the Doctor tells us, is but Man's. Page
25.
But if God's Authority is no Reason why a dispossessed Prince may not strive
to regain the Possession; how can that be a reason, why those who live within
that Kingdom, and have never bound themselves by Oath to the Possessor, or
taken benefit of his Protection, and had sworn to maintain the others Rights;
may not, when they can, put themselves under their former Prince, or any other
to whom he will resign his Pretensions.

If God's Authority in giving the Kingdom may be opposed by the ejected Prince;
it may be thought a much stronger Case for the Non-swearing Multitude; because
God had never decided the Chance against them directly, as he had done against
the Prince: however, there would be this only Difference that the People
resisted God's Authority over them; the Prince God's Authority against him.

3. If God has taken the Kingdom from the dispossessed Prince, he becomes but a
private Person.

Besides, the Subjects being obliged to obey God's Authority with the other,
how can the Right of Government be where it is not the Subjects Duty to obey,
if not actually, yet when there is opportunity? But while the Possessor is
settled, Page 14.
the Doctor owns, that he alone has God's Authority to govern them, and God
requires their Obedience.

Wherefore it can never be lawful for the Prince out of Possession to attempt a
Recovery of it, till the Subjects are discharged from their Obedience to the
other; so that the Subjects may fight against the Possessor of the Crown as
well, and as soon, as the former King.

4. If a foreign Prince should, without receiving any Injury, or being invited
by them that have, be at liberty to follow the Temptation of Ambition; tho
another is, by God himself, appointed and settled King within such a particular
Dominion; would not this be contrary to God's Authority? nay, if Injury should
warrant any other Prince not only to damnifie this Prince and his Subjects in
proportion to the Injury received, but to strive for the Crown, when he has a
fair Game for it; may not Subjects, in the like Circumstances as well shake off
God's Authority, as the other go about to unsettle and dislodge it, and make
himself King, where God had appointed an other to be his Vicegerent?

5. If the dispossessed Prince, or any other, may fight against God's
Authority, where it is settled without regard to another Prince's Right; let the
Doctor, if he can, assign a Reason why the Subject, unless humane Law otherwise
provide, may not fight against the same Authority, when exercised without any
regard to Laws? or when the Prince Case of Allegiance, page 2.
assumes an absolute Power, where the Constitution gave but a limited one. The
most probable Account why a Prince may fight after running away is, that he
never yielded, or promised not to try another Vid. page 9. The Submission of
the Prince indeed may be thought necessary to transfer a legal Right.
Chance or more favorable Providence: and the same holds for the Subject, who
has no way, in Person, or by his Representatives, consented to that Power which
the Prince assumes: nay, this is stronger on the Subjects side; for till such
Consent, the Prince is not possessed of an absolute Power, tho God has given
him the other's Crown.

In short, the Doctor owning that a Prince who came to a Crown by undue means,
has God's Authority when he is settled, and yet that the Prince rejected by God,
may fight against his Authority, whenever he has an inviting Opportunity, does,
as Cicero says of the Epicuraeans, in Name place God in the Government, Nomine
ponere re tollere Deos.
but in Reality exclude him.

Since the Doctor seems to look upon himself as of a Nature superior to other
Men, at least, His Thoughts are not as their Thoughts; I shall not presume to
judge of them otherwise, than as he explains or hints them, in justifying in
the lump all that Preface, p. penult.
ever he taught, that is not here particularly retracted.

This I conceive may be my Warrant for drawing together a Scheme of his Book
into a Speech to the old Passive Obedience Men, and all others who may stand at
gaze.

Gentlemen,
Tho I was long since satisfied that our Religion, Vid. page 50.
Laws, and Liberties, could not, without a Miracle, be preserved, but by this
Government, and The Words in Italick are his own.
that the Return of the late King, after his resigning himself into the Hands,
as well as Conduct, of the French King, must have involved the Nation in
unspeakable Vid. page 50.
Calamities; yet, as much as the Authority of my Example could prevail, I
strengthened the hands of the Enemies to the Peace of our Israel: but having
forfeited my Preferments, by not giving that Assurance Pref. page 1.
which the Law required, of being True to their present Majesty's, it is the
most probable Conjecture, that I acted very honestly and sincerely; and that I
never thought there was any possibility of King James his Return, to reward my
Loyalty to him without Reserve.

I shall fairly represent my Thoughts about this matter, and Page 66.
shall take all due care not to impose upon my self, nor others, by some little
Fallacies. To speak plainly, This being an hereditary Monarchy, I thought the
present Settlement an Usurpation, and that Usu^pations are not to be obeyed. I
think it an Usurpation still, but find we should be ruined if we might not obey
Usurpers; I except the Rump Parliament, and all Enemies to the Church of
England. After I had heartily prayed that I might not forfeit the Exercise
Pref. p. 3.
of my Ministry for a mere Mistake, and continued to pray that I might not
forfeit after I had forfeited, and yet exercised it after the Forfeiture; at
last I found out two Expedients for the Monarchy. 1. That every one who could
catch it had an hereditary Monarchy; for some Usurpers have left it to their
Heirs: 2. That whatever the Constitution may be, it is but humane, and must
yield to the divine Law of Providence.

This seemed to be new and singular, and therefore I suspected the Thought or
Inspiration, call it which you please, or at least feared it would never pass
for current Doctrine, unless I could get it to be stamped with Church
Authority. This I was the more puzzled to do, because I found our Homilies to be
very stiff for adhering to a Natural Prince. But would you think it, that very
Declaration of our Church, which the Conclave at Lambeth published, you may be
sure not without consulting me, to justify not Swearing Allegiance to their
Majesty's, confirmed my former Notions, and suggested some new Thoughts to me,
which removed those Difficulties which I could not before conquer.

That taught me to obey the Power which is uppermost, tho the Form of
Government be degenerate. Call it Rump, or what you will. That taught me to
pray for King Case of Allegiance, page 4. Pref. page 2.
William and Queen Mary by Name, according to the Apostle's Directions to pray
for all that are in Authority. And this I did before I owned that they were the
Power which God had ordained; but now I thank God I have received that
Satisfaction which I desired, from these self-evident Principles, tho they were
long hid from my eyes. Pref. page 2.


1. That Allegiance is due, not for the sake of Legal Right, but Government;
that is, not upon the account of Page 2.
Right, but of Force; when those who will not submit, may be crushed at the
pleasure of the Prince in Page 9.
Possession.

2. Allegiance is due not to bare Legal Right, but to the Page 2.
Authority of God: That is, not confined within Legal Bounds, but is due to
Gods Authority, to which nothing can give Bounds: Or if you will have it in
other Case of Resist. p. 197.
words, to a Power Independent on Laws.

3. God, when he sees fit, sets up Kings without any regard to Legal Right, or
Humane Laws.

4. Kings, thus set up by God, are invested with Gods Authority: And that you
may not think that I mean, Page 3.
that only they that are set up by God, without regard to Right and Laws, have
a Power without Limitation, you must consider, that Allegiance is due to Gods
unlimited Authority in all (...) ^hatever, for their very Persons are the
Higher Powers, and Authority is not in Laws, Case of Resistance. Page 13. Laws
were never called the Higher Powers 'neither in Sacred nor Profane Writers,
(...), in the New Testament always signifies the Authority of a Person. ibid.
p. 194.
but in Persons;or rather as the Powers are Persons, and Persons Powers; it is
not in Law, but in Power.

These are Principles upon which I can Swear Allegiance to Turk or Teckeley; or
what is worse, to a Rump Parliament, or Protestant Rabble, if they get the
Power into their Page 50.
Hands, and are not likely to lose it till I might Starve.

Say not this is Hobbism. Indeed it Entitles our Page 15.
Gown to the Favor of all Governments, better than Hobbism does. Mine are the
only Principles which Page 43.
can make Government easy both to Prince and People in all Revolutions: For
after any Prince had lost his Crown, either because his Subjects would not
assist him, or resisted his Exercise of that Absolute Authority which God gave;
no Prince would accept the Government, but the People must be always in a State
of Confusion, unless Princes were assured that the Doctrine of Passive
Obedience was believed, as part of Gods Law.

Besides, Mr. Hobbs taught the Absolute Power of all Princes, only as a
Philosopher, upon Principles of mere Reason; but we, by adding the Authority of
Scripture, are sure of as profitable an Office in the State, as the Keepers of
the Sibylline Leaves had among the Romans, by always finding a Prophecy to
serve the Exigencies of State. But we are not only Keepers, but Interpreters of
the Divine Law, and the full power of declaring the Sense of it is with our
Convocation, whether the King Ratifies its Acts or no; as the Legislative Power
is with the King: yet, as Bishop Sanderson long since showed, the King is
pleased not to make a Law without the Consent Vid. Sand. de obligatione
Conscientiae. p 189, 203, 209.
of the People; nor the Clergy to publish Canons without consent of the King.
But King James the First, not having consented to the Publication of these
Canons, which seem designed to quiet the Dispute about his Title: James the
Second being gone; and no King here, that we would own; then was a proper time
for the Church Vid. The question upon his Title, in the Fundamental
Constitution of ^^e English Government, Chapter 9. The Opinion of two Parl^aments,
25 and 28 H. 8. and the Common Law, in relation to Foreigners.
to exer^ its full Authority: especially since it derives the Power of all
Princes from an Absolute Power in the First Father; and therein shows, that the
late King exercised no Power, but what he had of Right, and there is one Bishop
Overall's Convocation book, Canon 28.
Canon against Invasion by any Bordering Prince, which we thought a direct
Parallel to to the present Case.

How much soever that Convocation labored to ingratiate themselves with the
then Possessor of the Crown, they took care to have the Favor of all others,
who should once come to be Settled; and always to be of the strongest Side.

But whereas Mr. Hobbs makes Power, and nothing else, to give Right to
Dominion, we who are Gods Page 15.
Ambassadors, take care to have a share secured to God, even in Authorizing
those Revolutions which are brought about by the Sins of Men. Government, we
say, is founded in Right; I God is the Natural Lord of Page 15.
the World, and whoever has the Power, has a certain Sign to us, that God
placed him in it; however the Right to the Crown is so Sacred, that God himself
cannot alter it, without a miraculous Interposition: For that Providence which
removes and sets up Kings, does not; tho God Page 26. Page 14.
gives the Man in Possession the true and rightful Authority of a King, and
makes him true and rightful King. And indeed, notwithstanding Gods setting up a
King, and making him Rightful, as far as his Authority can, the measures of
Obedience are Doubtful, there are different degrees of Settlement and
Submission, and the Convocation Page 17.
Book leaves it a very great question, Whether Allegiance can be due to an
Usurper, while the right Heir lives.

I should not tell any but Friends, the Art I have used about the Story of
Jaddus the High Priest, whose Scruple against taking an Oath to Alexander,
during Darius his Life, is the Foundation of a Canon, wherein the Church
declares, If any Man affirm, that Juddus, having Sworn Allegiance Canon 30.
to Darius, might have lawfully born Arms against him; he does greatly Err. I
know, that if I had taken notice of this part of the Canon, it would have
seemed a very Foreign Interpretation, to say, The meaning was no more than
this, that he having Sworn Allegiance to Page 8.
Darius, could not make a voluntary Dedition of himself to Alexander. If this
Art of mine should be published in the Streets of Gath, some Barbarous
Philistines would be ready, with rude Clamours, and unchristian Vid. Pref. p. 1.
Censures, to say, That I used the Canons, as I did Bracton; whom with a
curious Vid. Case of Resistance, p 196. Bracton Lex facit Regem: attribuat ergo
Rex Legi, quod Lex attribuit^ei, viz. Dominationem and potestatem; non est
etenim Rex ubi dominatur voluntas, and non Lex.
piecing together the beginning and end of a Paragraph, I brought over
cleaverly to my side; after the Rogue had said in the middle, That the King
receives his Dominion and Power from the Law.

But not a word more of this: and take a short safe Rule with you. Never Resist
when you are like to be Crushed for it; and not to do your Legal Prince any
Service. Be not righteous over much, why should ye destroy your selves? Ye may
be preserved for Good Times: should your Legal Prince Land with an Army; then
your Oaths of Allegiance may equally Balance on both side, and you may lie
still till Providence has declared it self; or take that side which has most
Indications of its Favor.

In this last Particular I may seem to misrepresent the Doctor, who may be
thought to have determined the Point absolutely on the side of this Government,
when the People have not only submitted to it, but the late King's Power is
broken, and there is no prospect of his helping his Friends. In such case, he
says, If it be visible that the dispossessed Prince can never recover his
Throne again, Page 18.
but by making a new Conquest of the Nation by Foreigners, who will be our
Masters if they conquer, and no gentle ones neither. We may then look upon the
new Prince, as advanced and settled by God in his Throne: and therefore such a
King as we owe an entire Obedience and Allegiance to.

1. But if we observe what he says, upon the Enquiry by what means the
dispossessed Prince shall recover his Right; it will appear, that he lays the
Subject under no higher Obligation to the Prince in Possession, than not to
assist the other; but I do not find that he thinks they are bound to defend the
Possession, though they have sworn Allegiance, which implies a legal Defense
according to their Abilities: so that if he speaks out, he will not yield
entire Obedience and Allegiance to be due: all Men, he says, are not bound to
list themselves Soldiers; and though he allows the Militia, and Posse Com. to
be a legal Defense, he no where says, that Men are bound to act Page 31.
in it, against their legal King, as he supposes the dispossessed Prince to be:
so that Men only run the hazard of the Penalty, if Providence should still keep
on the side of the Possessor. Nay, upon his Principles, if it be safe, Duty
leads us to take part with his legal King out of Possession. Whether a
Commission granted by such a King be a legal Commission, Page 71.
he makes such a nice point in Law as he is not Lawyer enough to decide; but if
we go to him as a Divine, he will tell us, the Sovereign Power is inseparable
from his Person; and tho Case of Ref. page 20.
the Commission be not legal in form, it has the Authority of Sovereign Power.

2. I do not find that he allows the Prince who is in Possession to defend
God's Authority against the supposed legal Right, and neither Prince nor People
may defend the Kingdom against the legal King and foreign Forces.

3. If the Doctor thinks the Rights of the Church, or of the Monarchy injured,
in either of these Cases he seems to encourage the Subjects to resist God's
Authority. In the late Times of Rebellion and Usurpation, he says, all the
Friends of Monarchy, Page 48.
and of the English Government, and of the Liberties of their Country, and of
their own Honors and Fortunes, were bound in Interest to take all Opportunities
to restore the late King. The Church he owns is provided for now. Page 50.


But he says if it be well considered, the Defense of Monarchy Page 47.
and the Rights and Prerogatives thereof, will appear a very material part of
the Oath; which may bind Subjects when the Person of the King is changed, and
may make them think themselves more obliged to restore such a Prince, when they
cannot restore Monarchy and the ancient Laws and Government of the Nation
without him.

God's Authority it seems in these Respects is suspended under God's King or
other Minister: if he but allowed the same under Man's, his legal King, I fear
it would set aside his Doctrine of Passive Obedience, when the Constitution is
violated: as (according to his Notion of the Rights of Sovereignty, that is, of
the Person of the King) it is greatly by the Bill of Rights, nor is it likely
to be restored but with the late King, to whom they had ascribed it.

4. The danger from the Foreign Invasion be may answer in the same way as he
does the danger of the legal Prince's losing his Right for ever, if not
assisted by his old Subjects; viz. This may be called a difficulty in
Providence, but no difficulty to the Subject, if he pursue his Duty; that is,
if according to his Rule, he cautiously wait upon the Motions, or rather
Events, of Providence.

5. If the Doctor will in such a Case yield as entire Obedience to the King of
Providence, as he did to the legal King, he has as I shall show, learned this
from Principles directly contrary Vid. infra at large.
to the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non resistance; the Professors of
which, as himself tells them, do not think it a sufficient Confutation of their
Doctrine to say, Page 34.
that this puts it into the King's Power to invade the Laws and Liberties, the
Lives and Fortunes of hss Subjects at pleasure.

Perhaps he was not aware that herein he exposed his own Doctrine as well as
his old Friends; for he admits a possibility for a Prince in a limited Monarchy
to govern arbitrarily, Non-Resist. page 209.
and to trample upon all Laws; and yet will allow no Remedy but Patience.

In the Time of Charles II. when this slavish Doctrine had prepared Men for
Submission to Tyranny and Popery, of which the Discovery of the Plot, and
Management of that Discovery, gave an immediate prospect; the Doctor's business
was to Vid. Pref. Liberty of Thinking cramped.
allay Men's Fears, and cramp their Endeavors to secure the Religion and Laws;
upon these dazzling Assurances:

1. Though we might be ruined, and Violence might Case of Resist. p. 209, 210.
overwhelm this Generation; yet the Constitution might revive in future Ages,
till the breach of it were settled by a Law: The Prince cannot make or repeal a
Law without the Consent of the People: you may be sure when the People are made
Slaves they will be very loath to part with their Liberty!

2. The Prince would offer constant Violence to himself: especially if he were
a Papist, it would grieve him to the Heart to overthrow the Protestant Religion
by Law established.

3. Subjects are not bound to assist him in his Usurpations: he must work
without Tools; the Age is so virtuous that none could be found.

4. It would be dangerous for Subjects to serve him contrary to Law; because,
if the Law should have its course again, they might be punished.

5. If we believe him, all our Historians scandalize King John and Ric. 2. for,
in this long Succession of Princes in this Kingdom, there has been no Prince
that has cast off the Authority Page 212.
of Laws, and usurped an absolute and arbitrary Power. Even King James you must
understand exercised the Rights of Sovereignty when he dispensed with the Laws,
and might have done it safely, had he not violated the Rights of the Church.
That the Doctor then imposed vain Assurances, himself is now convinced, and
admits his bare possibility to have been reduced to act; but still he would
have the whole Difficulty left upon Providence, and that Men should stand still
and see the Salvation of the Lord.

Besides what has already been observed, these Consequences are obvious from
his unretracted Doctrine

1. That all Kings are absolute, and have Authority from God to trample upon
our Religion, Liberties, and Laws, at their sovereign Will and Pleasure.

2. That all who joined in Arms with King William before the Abdication,
resisted the Ordinance of God, and without Repentance shall receive Damnation.

3. That King James has still a legal Right to the Crown: and therein, one
would think to our Obedience.

4. That he may use Arms to recover that Right which the Doctor ascribes to
him. But how the Subjects, and this King himself, are in this Case cramped by
him, has appeared Page 16.
before.

5. That they who fought against the late King in Ireland, fought against their
rightful King before Providence had declared God's Will.

6. That the Doctor's Justifrcation of himself for refusing the Oath of
Allegiance so long, and taking it at last, amounts to this; that, agreeably to
what he had before taught from Press and Pulpit, he held that Allegiance ought
not to be paid to Usurpers: but having met with Bishop Overall's
Convocation-Book, which teaches that Usurpers are to be obeyed, when settled in
the Power; his own Reason took its rise from that Authority, to satisfy him
that Allegiance is due to Usurpers, tho the others legal Right remains: and
upon this Account he has taken the Oath to their Majesty's. Wherein he retracts
his supposed Error, that Usurpers are not to be obeyed, but retains a real and
pernicious one, That their Majesty's are Usurpers. His declaring, That he is
far from intending to reflect upon the present Government, is a Page ult.
Protestation contrary to the plain Fact. Tho the Intention makes the Crime,
the Law implies the Malice when the Fact cannot be excused.

The Doctor confesses there is no prospect of Securing the Church of England,
and the Laws and Liberties of the Nation, by other means, than by this
Government: Yet this Page 50.
is so far from prevailing with him to renounce King James his Right; that
notwithstanding his particular Obligation to the Mildness and Gentleness of
this Government, and his urging the Obligation of Gratitude upon Pref. p. 1.
Page 39.
others, who will not Swear now he does: He publicly maintains those
Principles, upon which it is impossible that the late King, while he Lives,
should lose his Right, or their Majesty's be other than Usurpers: and prefers
the Vanity of asserting, That he never taught but one Error, to the Security of
our Religion, Laws and Pref. p. 5.
Liberties. For which, it is to be presumed, his Book will undergo a public
Censure: And the University of Oxford, which condemned your Book to the Fire,
out of Loyalty, beyond Law; would make a due Atonement, if they offered Case of
Resist. and Case of Alleg.
up the Doctor's Political Treatises to its injured Manes.

Sure I am, the Bishop of L -- s Chaplain had no regard to his Master's Honor,
and uncovered his Spiritual Father's Nakedness, when he Licensed such palpable
Reflections upon that Action of his, which was much more Commendable, and
Glorious, than his Defense before the High Commission Court.

But besides those Observations, which may occur to any Body, upon the first
running over Dr. Sherlock's Book; there are others, which may not be thought
of, till things of the like Nature are sorted together, and set in a proper
Light: As,

First, That he would set aside the Consideration of Law, and Legal Right, as
Useless, Unfit and intricate; yet shows himself under an Absolute Necessity of
having recourse to it. 2. Takes upon him to explain it, but verifies his
Censure of it, by his uncouth way of understanding it.

Secondly, That in the room of Law, he would set up Scripture and Reason,
without regard to Law, but abuses Scripture, and perverts it, to the bringing
God to Authorize Usurpation upon Princes, and Tyranny or Usurpation upon
Subjects; and makes Reason inconsistent with its self: but his Inconsistencies
return so often, that I need not make any distinct Head of them.

Thirdly, That he would maintain his Old Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as far
as he can, with color, make it consistent with his present Actings; yet he
effectually renounces it, and says, those things, which if he had pursued the
thoughts with that Force which Nature has given him, would have brought him to
a sound Judgment in this matter.

Fourthly, Would excuse his holding off from the Government, and his Behavior,
while he did; yet is Self condemned.

Fifthly, Seems to make his court to the King, out of Possession, and to their
present Majesty's; yet neither did, nor does, by this Book, serve either; but
quite the contrary.

First, He would have the Justification of the right Waved, as an unfit
Dispute; and besides, To judge of Page 1.
the Legality of the Revolution, he says, requires such perfect Skill in the
Law and History, and the Constitution Page 2.
of the English Government, that few Men are capable of making so plain and
certain a Judgment of it, as to be a clear and safe Rule of Conscience.

It is to be observed, that here the question is not in relation to them who
were to consider of their Duty before the Revolution; but what might satisfy
their Consciences when it was settled; and when it might be looked on as
settled. And this very matter he himself thinks a plain case in our Law; he
says, the Law it self, as well as the Principles of Reason and Religion, P. 59.
c. 60.
have annexed the Authority of Government to the Possession of the Throne: And
has no other colorable means of proving a Settled Possession, but by the Law
of the Land; for he places it, under God, in the regular Consent and Submission
of the People; and owns, that the Submission has been made by a Legal
Representative of the People: That Page 9. Page 51.
the Law only tells us, who is King; that he has no Right, that is, no
Authority, but by Law: And that our Representatives in a Convention, at least
in Page 54. Page 65.
Parliament, are the Judges in whose Judgment we should acquiesce. And they,
it is certain, have declared, that their Majesty's are Lawful and Rightful King
and Queen. Vid. The Act Settling the Crown. And that which declares the Acts of
the First Parliament to be binding Laws.


Is not this a plain case, without troubling the Subjects with particular
Controversies? But then he confounds this matter, which otherwise were plain,
when he offers at the Law.

1. Tho the Statute 11 H. 7. shows that Legal Allegiance is due to the King in
Possession, and that he is the Legal King: he will have it, that the Law does
not deny Page 65.
the others Legal Right to the Crown.

2. Whereas the Lawyers say, and prove from History, Records and Law Books,
that the Constitution of this Monarchy, is, as has been observed of the Jewish,
Hereditary as to a Family, elective as to Persons. The Doctor will have it,
that the Lineal Heir has the Right to the Crown: and yet that it is Hereditary,
Page 52.
to any Person who gets a settled Possession; tho he be not of that Royal
Family, which has, through Providence, either by Affinity, or Consanguinity,
maintained the Possession for near 1000 years, as may easily be proved; and I
hope may continue the Possession, till time shall be no more.

3. Whereas the Lawyers say, that our Monarchy is limited, and founded in
Contract; that a King, who Acts without regard to the Fundamental Contract, is
not a Legal King; and that the Natural Allegiance due to our Country,
supersedes the Obligation of what otherwise was due to him: He will have the
Law to allow a Legal Right to the Crown, unto him who is out of Possession, and
lost it by the Just Judgment of God, for exercising an Authority which the Law
condemns and rejects: And tho the Law in a limited Monarchy Page 30.
sets Bounds to Sovereign Power; yet that Scripture and Reason require our not
Resisting a King, Page 30.
when he Subverts the Laws and Liberties, and Legal Established Religion of the
Kingdom, by Illegal Methods; as if he had Gods Authority for all this: nor can
they find a Contradiction in the thing, that God should give a Prince Authority
Case of Resistance, p 119.
to govern according to Law; and yet Subjects are at Liberty to resist, when
the Bounds which God had set him are wilfully transgressed.

And if a Lawyer may be allowed to Reason upon this Point, he would say, if he
may not be resisted, because he has Gods Authority: Because he has Gods
Authority, he ought to be obeyed in every thing, not contrary to Gods Law. For
it is certain the Sovereign Power, which is Gods Authority, is to be obeyed
actively in all things within that Limitation. A Person may act beyond it, but
the Power never can: which shows a necessary Distinction between Persons in
Power, and the Power which they have, or exercise, tho the Doctor allows of
none; and helps himself, by confounding and joining what God separates; which
is as bad as separating what he has joined.

Thirdly, That he would set up Scripture and Reason, without regard to Right or
Law, appears from the very Scheme of Government, which he lays down in his
first Section: The design of this Book, is particularly to prove it to be
without regard to the Right of the Government; leaving the question of Law in
great measure to his Case of Resistance, the chief design of which, was to show
that the Scripture requires Obedience to the Prince that has Right by Law,
without regard to any other Law, but that which settles his Title: This was a
giving up the Cause, as to what he would enforce from the 13th. to the Romans;
for tho he had then asserted, that that Chapter and the whole Scripture, where
ever it speaks of Higher Powers, always means the Authority of a Person, not of
a Law: To serve his turn then, he would allow no Man to be Gods Ordinance in an
Case of Resistance, p. 113.
Hereditary Monarchy, but the next Heir in the Line: in Consequence of which,
the Scripture speaks of no Higher Power, but what is Legal. This point he is
forced to give up, as to the next Heir; and yet finds another Heir, according
to his fancied Law of the Monarchy; but in the main, keeps to his Fundamental
Error, that the Scripture means, Persons and not Laws, where it speaks of
Higher Powers: Nay, and must be of Persons alone, without regard to Laws; for
otherwise the Scripture affords no proof, that God ever sets up Persons without
regard to Laws, and makes them his Ordinance.

Now the Doctor, all along supposing, that their Majesty's did not come to the
Crown, according to the Law of the Government, finds it convenient, that the
Scripture should be held to have no regard to the Law, which shows who have
right to govern: and yet even in that respect it is evident, that he must own
the 13th. to the Romans; not to speak of Persons, barely as invested with
Natural Power, that is Force; but Moral, that is, Legal Power: for he will not
yield that the People, who have the most Natural Power, have in any case Right
to Govern. It must therefore be meant, of Persons in Authority; and none can be
in Authority, but they that have Right to Govern: Which shows, that if the word
(...), may be applied indifferently, either to Natural or Moral Power; It must
here be confined to Moral, notwithstanding all the Doctor's labor Page 19.
to the contrary.

Having Dispatched this Question, in relation to the Right to Govern; it will
be much more easy to silence all pretenses, to enforce from that place of
Scripture, a Right to Govern, by Gods Authority, without regard to Law. For it
is evident, that he, who of himself assumes a Power, which no Law gave; is not
Gods Ordinance, or any Power, in that respect: And when the Constitution of a
Government, had placed the Power in King, Lords and Commons; that is Gods
Ordinance: Whoever Invades that Share or Manner, in which it is enjoyed by
either; acts not only without, but against Gods Authority. And it Modus habendi
potestatem. Vid. Grot.
is evident, that where the King has not the Power so Absolutely in him, as to
make Laws of his sole Authority, he is not the Higher Power, for whose Security
our Doctor broached his Non-Resisting Doctrine.

The Doctor may, by some, be thought to be for halving that Doctrine, and to
have changed his half; which before was to serve Tyranny, now for that which he
counts an Usurpation upon the Tyrant. But indeed he now joins both halves
together; for without that he sees it is impossible to make any thing for his
turn, of the 13th to the Romans: for the one half must needs be excepted by the
same reason that the other is.

If a Layman may attempt to explain the 13th to the Romans, these particulars
may farther be observed upon it, in relation both to the Right of Government,
and the Law of the Government.

1. That the word (...), which the Apostle uses where he requires Obedience,
implies a Regular Subjection; and determines the meaning of (...), if otherwise
doubtful, to regular, that is, Legal Authority.

2. The Doctor himself, owns, in effect, that Obedience is not due to the
Person, but to his Authority: or at least, not to the Person alone, but for the
sake of his Legal Power or Authority: that is, to, or for the Law, and not the
Person alone: When the Doctor elsewhere says, it is to the Person, and not the
Law.

But whether he does not admit the Law, to deserve a Place, let the World judge.

To what particular Prince, says he, we must pay our Allegiance Page 54.
the Law of God does not tell us, but this we must learn from the Laws of the
Land.

Nay, tho sometimes he tells us the King's most illegal Acts have the Authority
of Sovereign Power, at others he Case of Res. page 191.
owns that his personal Commands have not; for if they had, they would justify
his Instruments who should act by such Authority against the Law: in which Case
he confesses his Command will not excuse them: and tho he contends that all
Kings settled in Possession have God's Authority, which in the nature of the
thing cannot be limited by humane Laws, yet he says, when driven to it, that
the King has no Right but by Law, and Page 65.
the Law may determine how far his Right shall extend.

3. It is to be considered, that tho it be for the Doctor's purpose to have it
believed, that the Powers in Case of All. page 30. Case of Res. page 24.
being when the Apostle required Subjection, were not legal Powers; it is plain
that they were, both as to the Right and Exercise of that Government, to which
Subjection was required. Our Savior, as himself says elsewhere, left Sovereign
Princes in the quiet Possession of what he found them possessed of. Case of
Res. page 55.


4. When our Savior and his Apostles gave Rules for Subjection, there was no
Competition between Princes or Powers about Right, or Titles to the Government;
wherefore, had it been usurped, or never so arbitrary and tyrannical, there was
no choice but that, or Tyranny; Submission, or Confusion.

5. Whereas the Doctor, in Confirmation of his Sense of Romans xiii. says, that
the Romans themselves were great Page 21.
Usurpers,

1. This is not to the purpose in that place, the Epistle being to the Romans
themselves.

2. If he means it in relation to the Jewish Christians, the Doctor will hardly
prove the Roman Power over them an Usurpation: for this I would refer him to
the Consideration of Herod's Will, and how far he submitted his and his
Childrens Rights to the pleasure of Augustus Caesar. Vid. Joseph.


The Doctor's next Attempt upon Scripture, to my thinking is very bold; nor do
I well know by what term I ought to call it, but shall fairly represent it.

Which is this, That the Scripture never speaks of the bare permission of any
Events, but makes God the Author of all the Page 12.
good or evil which happens either to private Persons or public Societies, (he
foresaw that the Objection to this is obvious,) have not then Pirates and
Robbers as good a Title to my Purse as an Usurper has to the Crown? This he
answers by an Evasion, The Dispute, says he, is not p. 34.
about humane and legal Right in either Case, but about Authority.

But it is plain, that it is between Humane and Divine Right; and tho I had
humane Right on my side, the Robber has the Divine, in the Doctor's Sense,
Providence having given it him: by consequence, tho the right Owner may
endeavor to force it from him, as he who is dispossessed of his Throne may, if
we believe the Doctor, fight against the Possessor; yet against all other Men
but the Owner, the Robber would have a Right. If the Heirs or Executors of the
Party have a Right, by the same reason would Heirs or Assigns of a dispossessed
Prince: and if it be lawful for a Prince who came to Possession by undue means,
to defend his Possession after it had been settled; upon the Doctor's way of
arguing, so would it be lawful for the Robber. But the Doctor, in not having
determined that a Prince may defend a wrongful Possession, leaves that matter
as doubtful for the Robber. Thus he makes Robberies and Usurpations, which
indeed are but greater Robberies, to be authorized by God Almighty.

But says the Doctor, The Scripture is express, That Kingdoms Page 34.
are disposed by God; some no doubt have been by an evident Manifestation of
God's Will; and then I hope he will not say it is an Usurpation, no more than
it was Robbery in the Israelites to spoil the Egyptians. But if the Doctor will
say, that God directly gives it to an Usurper, 1. it argues that God's Gift
cannot give a Right; for if he did, it would cease to be an Usurpation. 2. He
who came by undue means to a Throne, may have so acted as to obtain God's
Favor, and God may give him an Establishment, tho he did not give the Throne;
and therefore God did not authorize the Usurpation, which was the Man's Sin. 3.
However, public Good may require his Establishment. 4. If the Scripture be not
so taken as to discharge God from authorizing the Sin in the Usurper; by the
same Rule we shall be bound to believe, that he authorizes private Robberies,
and the dispossessing Men by Wrong; for the Scripture says, God has made of
one blood all Nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the Earth, and
Acts 17. v. 26.
has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
Habitations: according to which, in such a literal Sense as the Doctor puts
upon Texts relating to the Changes of Governments, God has appointed those very
bounds which an ill man gets by Violence, or an unjust Neighbor by a false
Land mark.

Upon the whole, tho God permits the Sins of Men, his Authority gives no
Sanction to them, but it does to humane Laws; and when Necessity, for the good
of Communities, sets aside particular Provisions made for that end, God
authorizes that Act declaratory of the Supreme Law. The general Rule of
Scripture, if a Layman may say so, in relation to the Duty both of Prince and
People, is, to seek Peace and ensue it. Whoever therefore, after a Government
is once settled by the Submission of a People, and the main ends of Government
are preserved; be it the ejected Prince or other, shall attempt to break the
Peace, and deprive Communities of those Comforts which God in great mercy gives
them; he sins against God's Establishment: for, as the Doctor says upon another
Account, the Preservation of humane Society will P^g. 40.
justify what it makes necessary.

Dean Hicks I must needs think is in this particular more Orthodox than our
Doctor; but the Dean had learnt his Orthodoxy from the Lawyer Fortescue, who
has these memorable Words. Jovian, p. 253.


All Laws published by Men have also their Authority from God, for as the
Apostle says, all Power is from the Lord God; wherefore, the Laws that are
made by Men which thereunto have received Power from the Lord, are also
ordained of God. This the Dean receives, and improves his way, having supposed
that he had shown by our Law, that the King is irresistible in all Cases.

If, says he, all Laws of Men be the Laws and Ordinances of God, then I suppose
the Common and Statute Laws of every Empire, which absolutely forbid the
Subject to resist the Sovereign, are so too.

If our Doctor had attended to this Passage, in the most plausible Book that
ever was written, for Passive Obedience to absolute or Imperial Power,
superior to the Political; the Doctor might have avoided many Inconveniences
which he has run himself into.

1. He need not have contradicted himself, sometimes making every King to have
Authority from God, without regard to Right or Law; at other times, that the
Law must teach who is King, and what his Authority.

2. If he had supposed God to have given the Sanction to Laws, but not to
Usurpations, he would not have charged God foolishly.

3. He would never have put God Almighty to the Necessity of a Miracle, to
justify the Instruments in freeing Oppressed Nations, if he would have allowed
Men, in many Cases, to have been the first Agents, or at least to have
cooperated with God, without Sin: as if so good an end as the Preservation of
Religion, and the fundamental Laws of Societies, were never to be accomplished
by good means! But in making God always the first Agent, and to act alone, in
the disposition of Kingdoms, he makes him too much the Author of those Sins,
which Men may commit in some Changes. And yet this serves the Doctor better
than the yielding, that God has in any Case lodged any Power in Communities,
and that they may dispose of it as they shall think fit; for if they could, he
owns it would imply a Trust, and would render Kings accountable to them for
notorious Violations. Indeed, when he is not aware of this Consequence, he
grants, that God sometimes Page 13.
leaves a free People to choose their own King. And therefore, unless there can
be no limited Monarchy, but God has assertain'd the Rights of all Kings as
such; by his own Confession, elective Kings are accountable: but that would
justify the Revolution, if this Monarchy should prove in any Sense elective;
and be sure the Doctor will keep off from that, till the King of France is less
formidable.

4. He might have spared his Objections, or rather Page 24.
Sir Robert Filmer's, against the force of the Choice and Consent of the
People, to make a Prince, or indeed any Laws; for if God gives the Sanction and
Authority to such Consent as is agreeable to his Word, and that natural Law
which he has given all Mankind, with regard to the Constitutions of respective
Governments; then there is no force in the Objection that the Majority cannot
conclude the rest, nor our Ancestors by their Consent bind us. And observe how
little the Doctor attended to the Consequences of this Objection.

1. If the Majority cannot conclude the rest, how can the Submission of the
People make a Settlement? and yet he owns that it does.

2. If our Ancestors could not bind us, how comes that Agreement which he
supposes to have made this an Hereditary Monarchy, to leave a Legal Right to
one, against the present Interest and consent of the Nation?

3. How can our Submission to their present Majesty's bind our Successors?

And would not his Notions effectually unhinge all Governments?

Thirdly, But if the Doctor had pursued, as he ought, those true Principles,
which he sometimes falls upon unawares; he would have given the World more
Satisfaction of his Sincerity, and would not, by Halting between two Opinions,
leave it as a Doubt, what is his real Judgment.

I hope he will not say I misrepresent him, when I draw from his own
Concessions, such a Scheme of Government, contrary to his Doctrine of Passive
Obedience, as will, with great clearness, prove their Majesty's to be Lawful
and Rightful King and Queen.

Hitherto you have been entertained with a Melancholy Scene of a poor injured
Prince; who for the Exercise of a Power which God had given him, was, according
to the Scope of the Doctor's Book, and of those Canons which converted him to
this Government, thrust from his Throne by a Fortunate Usurper, and Rebellious
Subjects; and Providence was put to great Difficulties to assert his Right.

But now another Scene opens, that King for whom the Doctor bespoke your
Service (and for the sake of whose Right he would have it thought a Duty in
all, like himself, not to be hasty and forward in their Compliances with Gods
Providence, Page 16.
upon a single Decision; least they should h^lp to give Advantages against the
Right) is fled out of another Kingdom; and has but one more to try his Fate in;
so that there is two to one on the side of the Possessor. Now therefore he who
had the Right, has justly Forfeited. And the Supreme Law, the public Good,
warranted a Revolt from him; and meeting our Deliverer as a Blessing from
Heaven.

All this may be little expected from the Doctor, but tho it may startle and
surprise you, I shall prove it, Page 3.
and show from him.

1. That our Monarchy is limited, and the King has no Authority but what the
Law allows him, Page 30. Page 65.
which sets Bounds to Sovereign Power: As I before observed, he owns that the
King has no Right, but by Law, and the Law may determine how far his Right
shall extend. And thus Man's Law limits Gods Authority. This is more than he
would own expressly, that I can find in the time of C. 2. but even then he
admitted, that he who Governs by Ca^e of Resist. p. 197.
Arbitrary Will, is a Tyrant, and no King: Yet he then left it to his pleasure,
whether he, whom he calls the Law maker, would Govern by Laws or Sovereign
Will. Case of Resist. p. 196.
This was suitable to the use he then had for the 13th. to the Romans; but now
it serves only to countenance, what he will have, an Usurpation. And yet it
will be a question, how he can be an Usurper, who, as the Doctor confesses, as
he is King, receives his Right from Law, having no Right, but by Law. And what
he says, in another Page 42.
respect, as far as he quits his Government, he quits the Allegiance of the
Subjects, might be easily improved here.

2. That if Kings receive their Authority from Men, and Humane Laws; their
Power is a trust, of which they Page 36.
must give an account to those who entrusted them, etc. tho no express
Provision were made in the Law, to call them to account.

3. That King James notoriously violated the Subjects Rights, and broke the
Constitution upon which himself page 27.
stood, and struck at the Dearest things, their Religion established by Law,
and their Properties; is almost as plainly signified by him, as if he had named
the Man.

4. He is express in relation to the late Revolution, that a Prince Forfeits
the Affections and Legal Defense of Page 30.
his Subjects, by the Exercise of an Illegal and Arbitrary Power. Where 1. he
owns a Forfeiture: And 2. of what is essential to the Sovereignty, that, Love
or Filial Duty to Princes, which our Clergy tell us, is required under the
Honor due to Parents. 3. A Legal Defense is certainly due by Law, to a King,
as such; and therefore when that Defense is no more a duty, Allegiance ceases;
especially the Subjects having Sworn to this: And if the Oaths, taken to the
Prince are discharged, as to any part, by a Forfeiture; it will be difficult to
show, why that Forfeiture ought not to extend to the whole.

5. He as good as yields, that the late King Absolved the Subjects from their
Allegiance to him. Speaking Page 48.
of the late King, and his People; and their chief Interests, in comparison
with former times, which he would make greatly to differ from the present.

The bold steps, says he, and extraordinary Methods he had taken, gave them
great Apprehensions, that all these were in danger, even the Rights and
Prerogatives of the Crown it self (the Preservation of which, was a main end of
the Oath of Allegiance) by his Submission to the Sea of Rome, and rejecting the
Oath of Supremacy; and as far as he could, absolving his Subjects from it. Add
to this, what he said elsewhere, The Defense of Monarchy, and the Rights and
Prerogatives of the Crown, will appear a very page 51. page 47.
material part of the Oath of Allegiance. It must be considered, that all which
he makes requisite, for transferring the Legal Right of Government, to an
Usurper who obtains a settled Possession, is the Submission, or Consent, of a
Legal Prince. Since, therefore, the Prince, in this, consented, as far as he
could to divest himself of his Supremacy; which, I hope, he will say, is
essential to his Sovereignty; it may seem, that his Sovereignty may as well be
transferred to the People, as to any Prince, being the Doctor, and the
Convocation, have no Scruples upon the Degeneracy of the Form of Government:
And therefore our Parliament justly affirmed the Power to have been The Act
about the Law proceedings.
devolved upon the People, when they ordered Indictments for Offenses, during
the Vacancy, to be laid Contra pacem Regni.

He grants farther, That the Safety of the People, is the Supreme Law: That it
will be hard to convince any considering Men, that that which is necessary to
preserve a Nation, is page 41.
a Sin. This indeed he applies to Submitting to an Usurper. But the reason of
it goes farther: He admits, That we have no Direction in Scripture, at all,
about page 22.
making or unmaking Kings. To which I may apply, what he brings to another
purpose: That when we page 45.
are to learn our Duty, not from any express Law of God, or Nature; but from
the Reason and Nature of things: It is a sufficient Argument, that it is not my
Duty which will expose me to great Sufferings, without serving any good end;
nay, which exposes me to Sufferings, for contradicting the natural End and
Intention of my Duty. And soon after he admits, That Men were not made for
Princes, to be their Slaves and Properties; but Princes were made for the
Government of Men. That necessity of Preservation may absolve Subjects from
their Oaths to their Prince. And that page 42.
the Preservation of Humane Societies, is the ultimate end of Government, and
will justify what it makes necessary. page 40, 41. page 33.
Farther yet, and more particular, I do not think, says he, the Right and
Interest of any Prince, so considerable as the Safety and Preservation of a
Nation, and the Lives and Fortunes of all his Subjects.

I shall not enquire, how far this agrees with his Assertion, That if a Limited
Monarch were not as irresistible Case of Resist. p. 208.
as the most Absolute; the most Absolute and Despotick Government, is more for
the Public Good, than a Limited Monarchy. But certain it is, had the Doctor
taken as much time, to consider the direct Consequences of these Noble Truths,
for justifying the Shakeing off a Tyrannical Power, Usurped over the Subjects,
as he did; for bringing himself to submit to what he will have to be an
Usurpation upon a Legal Prince; he could not but have seen, that they who
contributed toward this Revolution, discharged their Duty to God and their
Country, much better than they; who were Unnatural to their Country, in
adhereing to the Interest of one, whom the Doctor Page 2. An Oath to fight for
the King, does not oblige us to Fight against our Country; which is as
Unnatural as to Fight against our King.
describes as a Tyrant, and Unnatural Lord.

Besides the former Particulars, which in Justifying the Revolution, prove
their Majesty's to have been Rightfully declared King and Queen; tho the Doctor
will have the Dispossessed Prince to remain Legal King, and to have Right to
the Government, the Doctor shows their Majesty's Right to be Legal, now they
are settled. He affirms, that [the Law it self] as well as the Principles of
Reason and Religion, have annexed Page 59.
the Authority of Government to the Possession of the Throne; that no
Authority, but the States of the Realm, page 52, 53.
can take Cognizance of the Titles and Claims of Princes; and the disposal of
the Crown; that private Subjects ought to submit to their Determination; that
no Law binds us to disown a King, whom the Estates have owned: That such a
Possessor is a True and Rightful King; and has the True and page 14.
Rightful Authority of King: Surely then he is a Legal King: and less Subtle
Wits would not free themselves from a Contradiction, in saying, that the Rival
is the Legal King still.

He has a doubtful Passage, where he may seem positively to deny that the
ejected Prince continues a legal Prince: he admits that he and his Friends have
been in a Mistake, but whether in relation to the legal Prince, or the nature
of the Allegiance due to him, you may take which you please; There is nothing,
says he, to prejudice any Man against the present Government, or to Page 50*
make the Restoration of the dispossessed Prince necessary, but a mistaken
Notion of Allegiance to that Prince, whom we suppose to have the legal Right
tho he be dispossessed, and another established in his Throne; which I have
already proved to be a Mistake.

It was necessary for him to leave this with two Handles, lest what he has
driven at all along should be taken for his positive Assertion, that he and his
Party suppose, that it is believed, That the late King has the Right still, and
this King is an Usurper. Yet I take the genuine Sense to be thus; We have had
mistaken Notions of the Allegiance due to King James, whom we suppose to have
the legal Right.

But however, he, as I before observed, admits that in some Cases God may leave
a free People to choose their own Page 13.
King; says withal, That the late King in some sense left his Page 50.
Throne vacant, and yields what infers it absolutely. In which he shows the
Submission of the People to Their Majesty's to be full and legal, and that the
Law of the Monarchy is preserved: and one would think this should make them
legal and rightful King and Queen.

And yet this may be proved more evidently out of the Doctor's own Concessions
upon the Submission of the People: Himself makes nothing wanting Page 51. He
begins to doubt whether this is requisite, and uses it but as the Objection of
others. Page 9. He says inded, it may be thought necessary; and the whole Book
and Preface show that himself thinks so.
but the Submission or Consent of the legal King, to transfer a legal Right to
the Possessor. He says indeed it is nonsense to suppose the Consent of the King
Page 59.
de jure: but if the Law shows that he consented, I hope it is good Sense and
Reason to say that he has consented: nor must the Doctor cavil if he yields
such Law to be in force.

He tells us, the Stat. 11 Hen. 7. which says in the Preamble, That Subjects
shall be obliged to pay Allegiance to the Page 62.
King for the time being, is an authoritative Declaration of the Page 63.
Law; and himself shows, That this has been admitted for Law in the Reigns of
legal and rightful Kings. Page 53.


He must farther yield, when pressed to it, that King James has directly
consented to that Law, and that as much as if it had been particularly recited
to him; not only in accepting the Government under the legal Limitation, but in
swearing to maintain the Laws in general, and to suffer them to have their
course. If then this be the Law, he has submitted and consented to it; and his
leaving the Government was as good as a recommending the Execution of it to his
People.

And if he has consented that they should pay their Allegiance, where they
should make their Choice and Submission; it follows, that he has consented to
the Translation of that legal Right to their Allegiance which he once had: But
that which legally transfers the Allegiance of the Subject, must transfer the
Right of the King; and he who has no Right to their Allegiance, has no Right to
be their King.

I hope when the Doctor has considered this matter, he will say that the late
King has no manner of Right; and that their Majesty's are our only Lawful and
Rightful Sovereigns.

Fourthly, His Excuse for holding so long off, and Account of his Behavior
while he did, is very lame and unsatisfactory.

I. It manifestly appears, that he held off, and came in, upon the same
Principles; and it may seem very strange, that a Man should be so long in
understanding what necessarily flows from his own Doctrine: what he now
retracts, is evidently contrary to his own Sense of the 13th to the Romans,
Preached and Published six Years since; and if a Jewish Example An. 1684.
made him then bring in an Exception to his Rule, Vid. the examample of Joash.
Pref. p. 6. Book p. 34, 35.
he might have had as full an Example to set aside the Exception, in the Case
of Rehoboam; who, for slighting that Constitution by which he was to govern,
was adjudged, by God himself, to have forfeited his Right, and particularly
commanded not to claim it by Arms. The Government established upon that Revolt
was more plainly God's Ordinance, than the Doctor's Usurpers and Tyrants.
Wherefore, for all the Jewish Presidents, he might have kept throughout to his
own Interpretation of the Text, and have believed that it made Usurpation as
well as Tyranny, God's Ordinance; especially since it is evident, that the Text
relates to both, or neither.

Obj. Indeed I meet with an Objection to this in both his Treatises of
Government; viz. That only the Kingdom of Judah had been entailed on David's
Posterity, Case of Resist. p. 131.
and that nothing could justify an Usurpation against his Posterity within
that Kingdom, tho it might be justifiable Case of All. p. 35.
as to that of Israel: but in truth, the Doctor here comes to his Rule from
Success; they kept Judah, but lost Israel, which had been included within the
first Settlement. God Almighty, by his Prophet, told Solomon, If 1 Kings, 9. 4,
5.
you will keep my Statutes, and my Judgments, then I will establish the Throne
of thy Kingdom upon Israel for ever; as I promised to David thy Father, saying,
There shall not fail thee a man upon the Throne of Israel. And it appears by
two Texts mentioning what had been promised to David, that 1 Cron. 22. 2. Sam.
7. 12.
it was without any Condition expressed; yet it seems subject to the
Limitation, or Law of that Government, which was appointed to take place when
they should set a King over them. Yet you must understand, that what Samuel
Deuteronomy. 17. 14. to the end.
foretold would be the Manner of the King, must, with the Doctor, needs have
been their Right: and then God's Severity to Rehoboam could not so well be
accounted for.

God had acquainted Jeroboam who was chosen in the stead of the Descendant from
David, with his purpose to give him Ten Tribes, and to leave one to Rehoboam:
but this 1 King. 11. 35, 36.
was but a Prophecy of the Event, no Promise made to that he should keep Judah:
and as to the Revolution, did Rehoboam
but foretell what God would bring about by a free Election of the People, in
which Rehoboam was wholly c. 12. v. 20.
passive.

I must confess, it is not unsuitable to the Doctor's Hypothesis, to make every
Prophecy of an Event to confer a Right; which would excuse them who were
accessory to our Savior's Sufferings; which were not only foretold, but as the
Words may seem to import, inflicted by God's Command, in that of the Prophet
Zacariah, Smite the Shepherd; which our Savior shows to have been meant in
relation to his own Suffering. Zach. 13. 7. Mat. 26. 31.


But the Case of Rehoboam, if the Doctor had taken the pains to compare the
Texts of Scripture, might have had more weight to bring him in to this
Government at the beginning, than the Case of Joash, which himself answers,
could to keep him off: especially since that Case was an Exception to his Sense
of the 13th to the Romans, which he thought meant of the Authority of Persons,
without Limitation to Law; and Page 13.
with the very same way of Reasoning he must needs have concluded meant of
Persons in Authority, without regard to Right: which he now lays down for a
Principle.

II. He pretends in taking the Oath now, to submit to the venerable Authority
of a Convocation. But,

1. The Presumption is very strong that he had seen Bishop Overal's Book some
Months before he had forfeited his Preferments; but King James was then
powerful in Ireland, Presbytery not fully settled in Scotland, and the
Church-Rebels there were in a Body, and in daily Expectation of Aid from France
and Ireland; but it is to be hoped that no Man here had Expectations from
either.

2. He pretends to submit to the Authority of the Church, that is, Churchmen,
or rather some one leading Man like himself, who dictated and gave Laws to the
rest: but it is plain, he follows only his own headstrong Reason, which has
rarely been Pref. p. 15.
cramped with the Apprehensions of Novelty and Singularity.

The Church says, The Pharisees, in refusing to bind Case of Alleg. page 7.
their Allegiance and Faith to Caesar by an Oath, did thereby show themselves
traitorously affected toward him.

The Doctor brings himself as an Exception to this Rule; for he Prayed for
their Majesty's as put in Authority by God's Hand: yet would not Swear to it.

That founds the Authority of all Princes in the Patriarchal; the Doctor makes
this as obscure and uncertain as he renders our Law, both for the bounds of
Kingdoms and Page 11.
extent of Power, and sets up an Authority of God's immediate Gift, without
limits.

That shows that the Rump Parliament, if ever settled, had God's Authority: he
would seem not to admit this.

That makes it at least doubtful whether a Government can be settled while the
rightful Prince, who once had Possession, lives: this he would evade.

Had not the Love of Tyranny been more deeply rooted with the Doctor, than his
Aversion to Usurpation; the venerable Authority of his Church, I cannot say of
the Church of England, might have satisfied him, that in some Cases it may be
as lawful to resist the Person of a Tyrant, as to submit to an Usurper.

When the Thread of their Canonical History, drawn up out of Ethnic and
Apocryphal Writlngs, brought to accompany the Sacred Scriptures, led them to
the Story of the Maccabees; they say, That Mattathias, moved with the monstrous
Cruelty and Tyranny of Antiochus, made open Resistance, and they assign a
Reason, or rather Justification of this, viz. The Government of that Tyrant not
then being either generally received by Submission, or Overall 's Convoc. p. 67.
settled by Continuance: which is a manifest Confession, that a Tyranny which
neither we nor our Forefathers have consented or submitted to, is not God's
Ordinance; but Page 30. Himself says, the Law ha^ set Bounds to Sovereign Power.
that limited Prince, who attempts to introduce it, may be resisted by force;
till he is strong enough to compel a Submission to his most arbitrary Exercise
of Power.

The Sense of the Church, if we believe what the Doctor declared of it when
time served, is, that they who exercise Vid. Sermons of Church Communion.
their Ministry without such Qualifications as the Law requires, are guilty of
Schism; and they who communicate with them, communicate in a Schism: but the
Doctor, after he was convinced that their Majesty's had Power from God to make
Laws in Parliament, did exercise his Ministry before he had qualified himself
as the Law requires; which perhaps may drive him to a new Notion of Schism, and
satisfy him that he has Taught one Error more than he has thought fit to
recant.

III. By his own Confession, their Majesty's were in full Possession of the
Throne, and Administration of the Government, by a National Submission; as soon
as the Convention, at least the following Parliament, had declared for them;
and he grants that such Consent and Submission makes a Settlement.

According to this, he ought to have taken the Oaths, as soon as some Men's
Hopes, in the New Parliament, were disappointed; and to have done it then, had
not been such a Forward Compliance as he condemns.

The Submission of the People, and Determination of the Estates of the Realm,
he owns to be conclusive Page 50, 51, 52, 53. page 18.
to all Private Subjects; yet did not pay entire Obedience and Allegiance, even
in his own Sense, till the late King had left Ireland; so that he seemed to
stay till he might see the Power of the Dispossessed Prince broken; which ^i^
express words make material: And he, it seems, thought it doubtful, whether
Providence had page 17.
settled the Possessor in the Throne, while the other had a formidable Army.
Upon which it is observable.

1. That this argues him to be more than a Private Person, or not to have been
a Subject, till he Swore Allegiance. 2. If the Power be no more broken now,
than it was at the beginning, that Argument fails. 3. If it were as much broken
at the beginning, as now, that was not the Argument, but some more private
Motive. 4. If that Argument cannot have full force now, himself, in holding out
so long, and others of his opinion, in coming into this Government, with the
same opinion, and retaining it; may be thought, in great measure, the occasion.
Tho Providence had made a Settlement early, it was prudent, not to venture too
far on its side; and to see whether it was any more than a pattern or platform,
to be pulled in pieces presently, as soon as God Almighty had taken a view of
his Handiwork.

Or rather, tho this was a Settlement which bound the Laity, the Clergy, Gods
peculiar Lot and Inheritance, had an Exemption; till himself had spoken to them
by his Church. At least they ought to stay till they saw the Church of England
secured; and that there was no Page 50.
prospect of securing it by any other means: then their Interest obliged them;
to pretend to Loyalty with the forwardest: Shall they ungratefully reject this
Blessing from Heaven!

While they keep up an Empire within an Empire, the Changes of Civil Government
will not bind them, till they are subdued upon the Struggle, and by Providence
condemned to Affairs truly Spiritual Good God! How long shall Men be made
Slaves, and the Peace and Settlement of Kingdoms, P. 45.
Properties, to an equivocal Word!

When they have to deal with those of Rome, then in pious Condescension, and
Christian Charity to Vid. Dr. Sherlock, of the Unity of the Church, compared
with his Sermons, and Tracts of Church Communion, and Union with Christ Jesus.
themselves, the Laity shall be called in to their Aid.

When a turn of theirs is to be served or colored, then Churchmen alone,
without a King, are as good Authority as can be urged, to the Members of the
Church of England. For the most part Churchmen, with a King at the Head of
them, are the page 10.
Supreme Authority, and Judges in all Controversies about Civil, as well as
Ecclesiastical Matters; and neither can ascribe too much to the other, while
they hold together: Sometimes Constantine and his Arrians, at other times he
and the Orthodox, are the true Church: But Orthodoxy, like Civil Government,
went along with the Power.

Tho the right Faith, like the Dispossessed legal King, may retain the Right
still unaltered; yet Error carries on the Name of Church, as well as the other
does that of Government; and ought to be submitted, subscribed, and sworn to,
as long as it has Power to Crush the Obstinate Refusers.

Gods Authority, if not Infallibility, attends the Chair, when it stands
guarded in Conjunction with the Throne; and no Man ought Saucily to Affront the
Powers, by preaching up the True Religion, where a False one is settled. Nay,
they ought to pray, that God would keep and strengthen the Power in that False
Worship. And according to some Men's Reasons, Error in the Chair is more Gods
Ordinance, than Truth out of it. All the Stories of Miracles wrought at the
Tombs of Martyrs, must be looked on as lying Legends; for who can think that
God would give such public Approbation to their Affronting his Ordinance and
Authority!

Fifthly, It is probable the Doctor did not perform his Duty to the late King,
upon his own Interpretation of Scripture and Providence, even before the
Abdication: But that he did not after, is evident; for, while he not only
thought him to have the Right, as it is to be presumed, he does still, but that
God had set up no other Government; he did not use the means in his power, for
the restoring him to full Possession: and preferred his own Safety to the
Obligation of his Oath, to maintain and defend his Right; which whether
possible or no, the event only could show: but it is a safe Rule to run no page
16.
Hazard. He still leaves him a Right to contend for his lost Crown; but sets up
the Supreme Law, common Safety, against that Sacred and unalterable Right.

I shall forbear to draw together, into full light, all those Instances,
whereby it appears, that he is far from serving their Majesty's: But in one
respect he has not followed the Rules of Prudence, in relation to his own
Interest.

How much soever W. I. might grasp at an Absolute Power, it is plain from
History and Records, that he would not pretend to the Name of Conqueror, least
he should create a Jealousy in his People. And had the Clergy of that Age,
Flattered like others since, he would have certainly shown Marks of his
Displeasure; if it had been for no other reason, but that he might demonstrate
to his People, that they ought to have no Apprehensions of losing their Rights
and Liberties upon the Change. I shall run the Parallel no farther, than to
say, That no Man can reasonably expect their Majesty's Favor, who tells them,
or the World, that they are invested with an Absolute Power of the Gift of God,
without regard to Right, without regard to Law.

Arbitrary Power, tho it is a Plant which rises toward Heaven; as it pretends
a Descent from thence; is not likely to overtop King William's Laurels.

It is a Contradiction to the end, and effect of his coming, an Enemy to his
Crown and Dignity, a Friend and Creature of France and King James; Nursed up
here for their Service. And as it gave Rise to that Power, with which its Chief
Patron has plagued Mankind; its Teachers cannot but expect a Reward, or more
easy Servitude than others, if he should accomplish that Universal Tyranny,
for which it is calculated.

The Doctor affirms, with great Assurance, that his are the only Principles,
which in such Revolutions, as page 43.
he treats of, can make Government easy both to Prince and People. And, says
he, if Government must be preserved in all Revolutions, those are the best
Principles, which are most for the Ease and Safety of it: But,

1. If the Government be limited, it is not for its Ease and Safety, that the
Prince should be thought to have an Arbitrary Power of Gods Gift.

2. If the Person of the Prince be the Government; it is not for his Ease and
Safety, that no Laws, no Submission of the People, can engage his Subjects to
this Prince, against a supposed Legal King.

3. It it much more easy to persuade Men to refer the Determination of Legal
Rights, to the Legal Authority page 52.
of the Estates of the Realm, which the Doctor owns to be conclusive; than to
satisfy them that they ought to Swear Allegiance to a King, while a Legal
Right remains to his Rival.

4. How much soever Subjects may be harangued into a Neutrality, they who
assist neither, are likely to be treated as Enemies, which side soever prevails.

But the Philosophy of Hobbs, or Divinity of the Graver Stoics, agree neither
with our Constitution, nor with Gods Methods, in governing the World.

If the first shut God out of the Government, the other brings a Deity upon the
Stage, as Familiarly as Poets with their Fictions, or Players in their
Machines. And it is observable, that tho God is made the Actor and Authorizer
of the Event, he is rendered a Nonassister of either of these Kings, as well as
the Subjects are; Divine Right, and Divine Providence, poizing the Scales.

According to that of the Poet.

Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed victa Catoni. Where the Hero has a more noble
and generous Character than his Gods.

But that I may not only overthrow the Doctors Startleing Scheme of Government,
without advancing page 3.
another, I conceive these Propositions may do more good in the World.

1. That Allegiance is a Legal Bond or Tie, importing Active, as well as
Passive Obedience, to Legal Authority.

2. That he to whom Allegiance is not due, is not Legal King, nor has Right so
to be; or ever can be, without a new Submission of the People, either of Free
Choice, or by Constraint: unless it be by the visible Designation and
Appointment of God Almighty.

3. That no Divine Law, or just Inference from thence, sets aside Humane
Constitutions suitable to Christianity, and beneficial to Civil Societies.

4. That no Divine Interposition, or Act of God, which is not so visible as may
satisfy all Men, before the Success, what is the Will of God; can be said
Authoritatively to alter or diminish Rights to Crowns, or the Liberties or
Properties of Subjects.

5. That Humane Constitutions may be vertually Repealed or Suspended; when they
cease to answer the main end, or Law, the good of the respective Societies.

6. That they who contributed toward our present Settlement, did what had been
justifiable, tho they had failed of Success; the late King having long before
ceased to be a Legal King.

7. That Their Majesty's are our sole Lawful and Rightful King and Queen,
according not only to the Supreme Law, the public Good; but to the positive
Laws and Constitutions of this Government, known and declared, as there has
been occasion, in all Ages from the first Foundation of this limited Monarchy.

8. That they no more consult the Honor and Interest of their Majesty's, than
the common Safety; who now advance the old decanted Doctrine of Non-Resistance
and Passive Obedience, to a Power exercised without any regard to legal Right,
or humane Laws.

Dr. Sherlock owns it, as it was taught by himself and Dean Hicks, to be a mere
Jacobite. The Doctor now sets it forth in a new shape, with King William's
Livery; but it is only a Picture in a Scene, which cannot stir to help in any
Exigency. He makes it the Doctrine of Fate, which was taught by one Sect among
the Heathens, and laughed at by all others. He, who has baptized it by the
Christian Name of Providence, can find no other Godfather to it but himself;
yet is far from promising and vowing in its Name, that it shall manfully resist
the Devil and all his Works, it is enough not to assist: If the Devil and his
Agents get the better, their Authority is God's Ordinance; and it is no Sin to
follow whither Fate draws.

But the Doctor has taken it from common Drudgery, and honorably confined it to
the Government of States and Kingdoms: in private Robberies it gives not the
Robber Authority over Persons, as it does to Usurpers; he has only Right to
what it puts into his hand. Page 24.


This Doctrine, which is always attendant upon Fate or Providence, is the
Clergie's Writ of ease, the Prince's false Friend, and changeable Courtier; but
professed Enemy to the rest of Mankind.

It served the King-craft of James I. though he had not the Courage to give
Sanction to those Canons, which would enforce it by Spiritual Thunder: proved
Fatal to his Son; enabled the two Brothers to Revenge the Contempt of it;
seemed to expire under the last; but gave dangerous Symptoms of Life and Vigor
upon the Abdication.

Since this evil Spirit now haunts the Land again; it is a Task worthy of your
Pen, to send it well whipped to the place from whence it came; and to (...) it
to its native Shades, that it may never rise in dark Clouds to blacken our
Deliverance. Pref. Page 4.


This the World expects from you, and is earnestly desired by,

Sir, Your Faithful Friend and Servant.

FINIS.
Page 32. Line 7. Read, that is, believe.


