Advice for the Poor by way of Cure and Caution.
Being very sensible that it is impossible for all the Physicians now in London
Effectually to attend the Cure of this Sickness in Person; And that the
necessities of people are such, that it requires all that can be done for them
both in Person and Paper; and also finding nothing of this nature has as yet
been Printed, I have therefore for public use and benefit so plainly laid down
the manner of Cure in this Paper, that any Nurse may do as much for the Sick
she attends for less then 12 d. as is necessary, or the Disease will permit. I
also assure my self that if care could or rather WOULD but be taken, that every
private family, especially the poorer sort, for whom it is chiefly intended
might have but a Paper delivered to them By Public Authority, not only the
Patient but Physician (if he be candid and without reserve will find it a great
help to him in his practice.

The use I make of it my self in Practice is when people come to me, I bid them
read the Paper, and do as they are there directed in the Cure; and by this
means I do relieve and help them more then otherwise (had I Twenty hands) it
were possible for me to do.
By T.COCK.
The CURE God Permitting.
FOr all Persons so soon as they find themselves ill or infected, EXPULSIVES.
(Excepting the very Aged and Consumptive) is imediately to The best way of
Vomiting will be to put two or three Ounces of Oximel of Squill, into a Pint or
Quart of Carduus Posset, and drink it all off; This will cost about six pence.
Vomit, especially if Repletion, or any Surfeit was the cause, or they find any
inclination to it: In this case don't dispute it but imediately But if there be
any sharp or pricking pains about the Groynes, etc. or the Disease lie much in
the Head* or has assaulted and weakened the heart, then only Sweat; and at the
some time apply outwardly Warm, to the Forehead, Temples, and Heart, Bole
Armoniack, and Oil of water Lillies of each one penny worth, with as much
Vinegar as will make it a soft Paste (...) ^f you add a little Camphere and
Salt Peter it will be the better. This Medicine being of great use, (when the
violence of the Disease lies much in the Head) is therefore to be had i(...) a
readiness at those Apothecaries hereafter mentioned,
Vomit, with a Draught of warm water, and 2 or three spoonfuls of Salt
dissolved in it, using the Finger or a Feather, dipped in Oil to provoke it, if
it come not away presently.

Within one quarter of an hour after, whether you Vomit or no, go into a warm
Bed and sweat Fifteen or Twenty hours (if it can possibly be endured) with two
or three pennyworth of London Treacle, (more or less, accordig to to the Age
and Constitution of the party) dissolved in five or six Spoonful of warm
Vinegar; Or Elect, de. Ovo 2 Drams, or a Scruple, or Sir Walter Rawleighs, or
Mr Dixons Sudoriffique, or rather Dr Burgess Sulpher auratum against the
Plague, which does both Vomit, Sweat, and Purge.
and as often as they Thirst during their Sweat, let them Drink freely hot
Posset Drink, or Mace Ale, a little Rosemary and Sage boiled in it, and Drink
no other Drink for two or three days; nor any cold Drink for four or five days
or more: An hour or two after the Sweat is over, and the Body well dried with
warm Clothes, they must wash their Mouths and Hands with warm water and
Vinegar, and then (if their stomach will permit) they may refresh themselves
with some convenient food; as Mutton Broth, Egg Candle, Water-Gruell, or
Panada, with a sprig of Rosemary, Mints, or Thyme, boiled in it.

This being done they may go to sleep, and at the same time they go to rest, to
put on the Vesecatories You must spread the Plaster upon Leather, and cut it
into six parts, those two for the Ears no bigger then a half Crown; the other
each of them about the bigness of a hand: Those that are so extreme poor that
they muct rather beg then buy, rather then they shall want so necessary a
help, are to have the Plaster gratis; others to pay six pence.
or Blistering Plaster of Cantharides, (which may be had at any Apothecaries)
under the Ears, Arm-holes, and Groines, and let them lie on six or eight hours,
then take them off and clip the Blisters if they be not broke, and keep them
running till the Disease be over, which may be done by buying at any
Apothecaries a peny-worth of Melliolote Plaster, commonly called the Green
Plaster; and applying it to each Blister, and renewing it as often as
conveniently you can: And if at any time there be in any part of the Body any
Those that can make use of an Apothecary, the best way will be to anoint the
swelling with Oil of Roses, Lillies, or Unguent of Althea; and then put upon
the Tumor, the Plaster of Diacalum cum Gummis, or Mr. Dixons Plaster.
swelling apply the said Green Plaster constantly to it, and continue the
taking of And use this for a Cordial, a quart of Claret burned; and afterward
put into it almost a quarter of a pint of Vinegar, and this makes a very
pleasant and profitable Cordial Julip. The Richer sort may instead of Vinegar,
use Spirit of Vitriol, Syrup of Citrons or Lemmons, (...)o much as will make
the wine sharp and pleasing to taste; neither need a better be provided, (...)f
they use Zeduary instead of Ginger when they burn the Wine.
Cordials, or the former Posset Drink of Sage until they be well come forth or
break; and when they are broke keep them running as long as you can, by
applying the said Green Plaster to them: And take great notice, That when you
have Running Sores, there is great hopes of life; but the least Cold being
taken, it is certain death, and Hundreds have miscarried by going abroad too
soon: In such cases therefore (upon the forfeiture of Life) keep Warm within
doors for two or three Weeks, or until the Sores be perfectly well: Also if the
Disease lie much in the Head and the body be bound, you may safely at any time
give this Suppository, viz. a Fig slit and filled with Salt, and so put up into
the Body, putting up after it a small piece of Candle if two or three inches
long: Or if there be any violent Looseness, great burning heat, or Drowth,
boil then in their Posset Drink, Plantaine, Sorrel, or Knot grass; where these
cannot be had Vinegar may be permitted, so much as to make the Posset Drink a
little sharpish.

These few and plain Directions designed and contrived for the poorest and
meanest Persons and Capacities, being carefully observed may with Gods blessing
be the mean of preserving such as shall use them, neither (waving in such
Exigencies as these, all Rites and Ceremonies) can more be done, PREVENTIVES.
where the Physician Can or Cannot be consulted. And I do solemnly require all
that are concerned in my Practice, as they respect their lives to advise with
this Paper to all Intents and Purposes, as if I were personally present.

A Necessary Caution.
THe Great Mistake that I find about Preventives against the Plague has
occasioned the Publishing of this Paper for Public use and benefit; it being
not only my own, but the Judgment of those that ought most to be Trusted, That
those Hot Medicines of One pound of the Conserve of Wood Sorrel, of London
Treacle, and Bole Armoniack; Sirup of Vinegar, or Sirup of Citrons, of each one
Ounce, is undoubtedly a far more safe and Sovereign Preventive, taken morning
and night, the quantity of a large Nutmeg. The poorer sort may put the Bole and
London Treacle in a pint of Vinegar, and take a Spoonful Morning and Night,
first shaking it.
Sir W. Rawleigh, Dr. Burgess, Mr. Dixon, and some others so much taken notice
of, are, without exception, of very great Worth for such as are Infected, Yet
so far are they from being Preventives of This present Infection, That they are
rather great promoters of it, by Exalting Blood, and disposing of it for
Fevers, especially in Young, Lean, Sanguine, Cholerique, Constitutions and
Persons: But Corpulent, Rheumatique, Aged and infirm people and No others, may
safely be permitted the moderate use of them, and other Hot Medicines, as
Zeduary, Angelica, Rue, etc.

Those that appoint, or shall plead for the promiscuous use of them, either
mistake themselves and good Authors, or do not consult the Causes of this
present Contagion, but judge of it as of former Pestilencies, proceeding from
Putrefaction, by an Intemperies of those first qualities, Heat and Moisture;
whereas (things rightly examined) an Arsenickfome by a Dyscrasy of Heat and
Dryness will be found concerned in it; And as this Consideration is (in the
behalf of better judgments) propounded; So also (till solid reasons be
produced to the contrary) it is desired that the great Error of Hot and Dry
Medicines for Preventives may be Reformed.

The great business to prevent the Plague is to prevent By avoiding all
things, that may inflame, over heat, and exasperate Blood as Salt Diet, and
strong-Drinks.
Fevers and By Temperance, and not cooling the Blood too fast after it is
heated, by a too sudden and eag^r use of Cold and crude things, as small Beer
and Fruits.
Surfets; and therefore the College in compliance with his MAJESTY'S great
care of His people, have prohibited the use of all Green, raw Crude and
unindigested Fruits, especially Cucumbers, Mellons, and Cherries, other Fruits
moderately used may be permitted: Neither are they to be understood where they
advise hot Medicines, that there hot Medicines are to be used as Preventives
but Expulsives; that is for Sick, not for well persons.

The provision I make for my self is to live Temperately, to wash my hands and
mouth frequently with Vinegar and Water, and to make the best provision that
may be to supply by Within doors you cannot, nor is there a better Fume to be
used, both for the Preventing Infection, and securing persons Infected, then
Sulphur and Nitre, that is Brimstone and Saltpeter, with a little Assa Fetida,
Stone-pitch, Mirrh, Labdanum or Olibanum, and upon very good grounds I judge it
to be no ways inferior to that commonly called St Giles's Powder, which is
common Saltpeter disguised, and sold for 16 shillings the Pound; how much it
is now improved is left to an impartial judgment to determine, which with the
addition (things rightly managed) may be afforded at two shillings the Pound.
Burn this Fume in infected houses four or five times a day, about a spoonful
at a time, in Houses that are not infected, twice a day will be enough, and
good to be used in Taverns, Coffee-Houses, and Churches, and places of common
resort. Also I cannot but commend, as the best of Preventives, the use of a
little Diascordium rubbed in the inside of the Nostrils when people walk the
streets or visit the Sick.
Artificial Fumes and Sents, the defects of a sound, wholesome and well
constituted Air.

(...) Take of (...) prepared Oriental Bol(...) Florentine orrice, of eac(...)
half a pound, Sugar tw(...) pound, Tormentil roots on(...) Ounce, Mirrh in
powder ha(...) an Ounce, with Gum Dragon dissolved in Vinegar make a past for
Lozanges

Those that would have(...) more ample satisfaction o(...) the great worth of
this mea(...) Medicine, let them read Gallen, lib. nono, de Med. facult. who in
the great and dreadful Plague at Rome left this Observation to posterity, that
very few miscarried that mad(...) use of it. Those that shall except against
the Authority of so worthy a person as GALLEN, were but people in such
Controversies competent Judges, they would not suffer themselves under the
notion and noise of Chemistry to be so easily deceived; but because they
neither are, nor can be, they ought to confide (as a thing most reasonable) in
those Persons, an(...) that Practice that has undergone by the best of men the
test and trial of so many Ages,


in the Mouth, and let down into the Stomach (by a Stiptick property, it has
to close the Orifice of the Stomach and passages that lead to it) they resist
the Attraction of Malignancy into the inward parts, by strengthening the Lungs,
and wonderfully assisting the Heart (by fixing Humors) to resist sudden Death:
The use of which are of very great benefit for Lawyers, Clergymen, and
Citizens, who have public converse and concernments with people: I take no
other my self, who am not ignorant of most that are Extant.

An ADVERTISEMENT.
The Fume and Lozanges mentioned in this Paper, are to be had at 12 pence the
Paper, each Paper of the Fume containing half a Pound, each Paper of the
Lozange containing two Ounces, at every Parish Clerks house in and about London
and when those Clerks are unprovided of any of the said Medicines, they or any
other Persons may be supplied at these Apories, viz. Mr Wilkinson at the Pestel
and Mortar in Finch Lane over against the French Church. And Mr Reeds at the
Queens-Armes in Fan Church-street, and nowhere else at present: Also all, or
any of the Medicines mentioned in this Paper are to be had at the same
Apothecaries at reasonable Rates, with the Paper and Directions how to use them
(gratis.)

At the Cockpit, Aug. 4th. 1665.
HAving received very good Testimonies of the Abilities of Dr Thomas Cock, and
his readiness to do good to the people in this time of Infection, by his
Directions and Remedies in a Paper by him published. I do therefore hereby
recommend the said Papers unto public use, and do desire that the
Churchwardens of their respective Parishes, do take such quantities of them to
be distributed to each several Family as shall be thought fit and convenient.

Given under my hand and Seal at the Cockpit this 4th day of August, 1665.
ALBEMARLE.

August the Third 1665.
Midd. ss.
HAving very well informed our selves of the benefit of that may be had by the
use and careful observance of the Directions and Remedies in this Paper; We do
therefore recommend them and the said Papers of Dr T. Cock to public use, and
desire that every Parish Clerk whom it shall concern, may have delivered to
them a sufficient quantity thereof, and they to deliver them to every
respective Family in their said Parishes, especially the poorer sort, that they
may not be left destitute of all good and necessary helps.

Given under our hands and Seals this Third day of August in the 17th year of
His MAJESTY'S Reign. Present, The Right Honorable the Lord Craven. Edmond
Warcupp. John Underwood. Thomas Wharton.


A Directory for the Poor, against the Plague and Infectious Diseases.
Published for the Common good.
SInce it has pleased God to bestow a small Talent upon me, Christianity
obliges me not to hide it in a Napkin, but to bestow it upon my fellow
Christians, who are not able to purchase the advice of those who will
communicate nothing gratis. Therefore, that every one may know how to prepare
for themselves that means of preservation that God has given us, and the
dictates of Nature prompts every one to seek after, I have here published such
Remedies, as, being timely used, will preserve all such as God has appointed
for life. And such as are not able to make it themselves, though the charge be
very small, I hope Christian charity will move their Neighbors of more ability
to provide it for them, and not suffer them to perish for want, and thereby
endanger* not only a greater calamity, but draw down a just Judgment upon
themselves.

The Cordial Antidote against the Plague.
Take Sage, Rue, of each one handful, Masterwort root, Butter-bur root,
Angelica roots, and Zedoary of each half an ounce, Virginia Snakeroot a quarter
of an ounce, Safron 20 grains, Contra Yerva a dram (at the Herb shops and
Drugstors you may have them all) Malago Wine a quart, bruise the herbs, and
pound the roots, and put them in a Pipkin close covered, and set it to the
fire, and let it stand hot, but not boil, for the space of an hour or better,
then strain it out, and put in a quarter of an ounce of Mithredate, and as much
Venice Treacle, which dissolve in it. Take hereof half a Spoonful every
Morning first, and every Night last, for preservation; but if one be taken
sick, then let them drink a quarter of a pint, and cover them to sweat. This
drink will powerfully fortify the vitals, and by sweat throw out the Malignity
of the distemper. If you see that the party sweat not enough, you may give as
much more; and so you may take a larger quantity then before is prescribed for
Prevention, as you see cause, and the Constitution requires.

A Drink for all Malignant Fevers.
I recommend unto you a Posset drink to drink after it, wherewith I have cured
many hundreds, in the time of the late unhappy Wars, of desperate Fevers
Cousin (German to the Plague) which was then an Epidemicall disease, and used
no other Medicine.

Take Carduus Benedictus, Scabious and Butter-bur roots, and boil them in
posset drink, and let them drink largely of it; and be not too sparing of your
ingredients, for they are easy enough to be had.

It may be objected, That it will be so bitter you cannot drink it: To remedy
that, boil it in the milk first, and the longer it boils, the less bitter it
will be; and when the bitterness is gone, strain it, and set it on the fire
again, and when it boils, put in your drink, and let it stand to raise the
curd, which take off.

This posset drink has stayed violent Vomitings and Looseness: by drinking
largely of it many have been cured in 24 hours, when nothing but death has
been expected.

An outward Application for the Plague.
I will likewise give you an outward Medicine, as good as you shall find in any
sort composed, which you may make your selves. Take Bay Salt if you can get it,
and pound it small and burn it in a Fireshovel till it leave crackling; if you
cannot get Bay Salt take White-salt, and powder it very fine, then take
Castle-sope, slice it thin, and pound it in a Mortar; add to it as much oil of
Lillies, as will make it soft to an ointment, then take two parts of Soap, and
one of Figs, and one of Salt, and another of Mithridate, and mix them together.

This will not deceive you in your expectation, for it will break any
Pestilentiall Bubo, or Swelling, and turn out a Carbuncle, and strongly draws
out the Malignity, and makes it fit to be cured by any ordinary Medicine.

I would admonish all, not to suffer any thirst in any of those that are sick,
but forbid small and cold drink; but let them drink Beer of a reasonable
strength, heated as hot as they can drink it, the hotter the better; and such
as can attain unto it, may moderately drink fragrant generous Wine, and
Cordial Waters.

There is one main cause of Diseases, by which many people are spoiled, and all
are in danger to be infected with some foul distemper or another. Nay, there is
none in safety, but his life, or at least health is in danger of it, from him
that sits on the Throne, to him that grindeth at the Mill, and that is the
Butchers in blowing their meat, when nothing is more usual then for stinking
fellows to blow up the meat with their filthy Pockey, Stinking, Putrified
Breath, whereby they putrify the flesh; and thereby are unknown Diseases
communicated to the people, which is the cause of so many calamitous and
strange distempers. It were therefore heartily to be wished, that the Right
Honorable the Lord Major and the rest of the Magistrates were well informed
hereof, that by their pious care the Laws made against these Pestilent
Offenders were duly put in execution, which would conduce much to the health
and safety of the people, which God preserve.

Roger Dixon.
From my House in Water-lane near the Custom House, 16 June 1665.
FINIS.

