A DISCOVRSE Presented to those who seek the Reformation of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND: WHEREIN IS SHOWED THAT THE new CHVRCH Discipline is Dangerous both to
Religion, and also to the whole state.

TOGETHER with the OPINIONS of Certain Reverend and Learned Divines,
Concerning the Fundamental Points of the true Protestant Religion.

WITH A short exposition upon some of DAVID'S Psalms, pertinent to these times
of SEDITION.

Printed for W W. and I B. 1642.

A DISCOVRSE to them who seek the Reformation (as they term it) of the CHVRCH
of ENGLAND.
BRETHREN,
THe wisdom of governors you must way. The rather, for that they have seen
already some small beginnings of the fruits thereof in them, who concurring
with you in Judgment, about the necessity of that Discipline, have adventured
without more ado to separate themselves from the rest of the Church, and to
put your speculations in execution. These men's hastynesse, the waryer sort of
you do not Commend, you wish they had held themselves longer in, and not so
dangerously flowne abroad before the feathers of the cause had been grown.
Their error with merciful terms ye reprove, nameing them in great
commiseration of mind, 1. Pet. 22.
your poor Brethren.

2. They, on the contrary side, more bitterly accuse you as their false
Brethren, and against you they plead, saying, From your breasts it is that we
have sucked those things, which when ye delivered unto us, ye termed that
heavenly, sincere, and wholesome milk of Gods word, howsoever ye now abhor
as poison, that, which the virtue thereof has wrought and brought forth in us.
Ye sometimes our Companions, Psalm. 55.13.
Guides, and familiars, with whom we have had most sweet consultations are now
become our professed Adversaries, because we think the statute-Congregations
in England to be no true Christian-Churches, because we have severed our
selves from them, and because without their leave or license that are in civil
Authority, we have secretly framed our own Churches according to the
platform of the word of God. For, of that point between you and us, there is
no controversy. Alas! what would you have us to do? At such time as ye were
content to accept us in the number of your own, your teachings we heard, we
read your writings: and though we would, yet able we are not to forget with
what zeal ye ever have professed, that in the English Congegations (for so many
of them as be ordered according unto their own Laws) the very public
service of God is fraught, as touching matter, with heaps of intolerable
pollutions, and as concerning form, borrowed from the shop of Antichrist;
hateful both ways in the eyes of the most holy: the kind of their Government
by Bishops and Archbishops Antichristian, that Discipline which Christ has
essentially tied, that is to say, so united unto his Church that we cannot
account it really to be his Church, which has not in it the same Discipline,
that very Discipline, no less there despised, Pref. against Docter Baner.
then in the highest Throne of Antichrist; all such parts of the word of God,
as do any way concern that Discipline, no less unsoundly taught and
interpreted by all authorized English Pastors, the^ by Antichrists factors
themselves; at Baptism Crossing, at the lords supper kneeling; at both, a
number of other the most notorious badges of Antichristian recognisance usual.
Being moved with these, and the like your effectual discourses, whereunto we
gave most attentive ear, till they entered even into our souls, and were as
fire within our bosoms, we thought we might hereof be bold to conclude,
that since no such Antichristian Synagogue may be accounted a true Church of
Christ, ye by accusing all Congregations ordered according to the Laws of
England, as Antichristian, did mean to condemn those congregations, as not
being any of them worthy the true name of a Christian Church; Ye tell us now,
it is not your meaning. But what meant your often threatenings of them, who
professing themselves the inhabitants of Mount Sion, were too loath to depart
wholly, as they should, out of Babylon; Whereat our hearts being fearfully
troubled, we durst not, we durst not continue longer so near her confines,
least her plagues might suddenly overtake us, before we did cease to be
partakers with her sins: for so we could not choose but acknowledge with
grief that we were, when they doing evil, we, by our presence in their
Assemblies, seemed to like thereof, or, at leastwise not so earnestly to
dislike as became men heartily Zealous of Gods glory. For, adventuring to erect
the Discipline of Christ, without the leave of the Christian Magistrate,
happily Ye may condemn us as fools, in that we hazard thereby our estates
and persons, further then you (which are that way more wise) think necessary:
but of any offense or sin therein Committed against God, with what Conscience
can you accuse us, when your own positions are, that the things we observe,
should every of them be dearer unto us then 10000 lives? that they are the
peremptory Commandments of God; that no mortal man can dispense with them,
and that the Magistrate greivously sins, in constraining thereunto; Will Ye
blame any man for doing that of his own accord, which all men should be
compelled unto, which are not willing of the^ selves? when God Commands,
shall we answer that we will obey, if so be Caesar will grant us leave? Is
Discipline an Ecclesiastical matter, or a Civil? If an Ecclesiastical, it
must of necessity belong to the duty of the Minister. And the Minister (Ye
say) holds all his Authority of doing whatsoever belongs unto the
spiritual Charge of the house of God, even immediately from God himself,
without dependency upon any Magistrate. Whereupon it follows as we suppose,
that the hearts of the people being willing to be under the scepter of Christ,
the Minister of God, into whose hands the Lord himself has put that scepter,
is without all excuse, if thereby he guide them not. Nor do we find that
hitherto greatly ye have disliked those Churches abroad, where the people with
direction of their Godly Ministers, have even against the will of their
Magistrate, brought in either the doctrine, or discipline of JESUS CHRIST. For
which cause we must now think the very same thing of you which our SAVIOR
did sometimes utter, concerning falsehearted Scribes and Pharisees, THEY SAY
AND DO NOT. Thus the foolish Barrowist deriveth his schism, Mat. 3.23.
by way of conclusion, as to him it seems, directly and plainly out of your
principles. Him, therefore, we leave to be satisfied by you from whom he has
sprung. And if such, by your own acknowledgment, be persons dangerous,
although as yet, the alterations which they have made are of small and tender
growth; the changes likely to ensue within this land, in case your desire
should take place, must be thought upon.

3. First, concerning the supreme power of the highest, they are no small
Prerogatives, which now thereunto belonging, the form of your discipline will
restrain it to resign. Again, it may justly be feared, whether our English
Nobility, when the matter came in Trial, would contentedly suffer themselves
to be always at the talye, and to stand to the sentence, of a number of mean
persons, assisted with the presence of their poor Teacher, a man (as sometimes
it hapeneth) though better able to speak, yet no whit apter to judge, then the
rest, from whom, be their dealings never so absurd (unless it be by way of
complaint to a Synod) no appeal may be made unto any one of higher power, in
as much as the order of your discipline admits no standing inequality of
Court, no spiritual Judge to have any ordinary superior on Earth, but as many
supremacies as there are Parishes and several Congregations.

4. Neither is it altogether without cause, that so many do fear the
overthrow of all Learning, as a threatened sequel of this your intended
discipline. For, Sapien. 6.24.
if the Worlds preservation depend on the multitude of the wise; and of that
sort the number hereafter be not likely to wax overgreat, Eccle. 26 29.
when (that wherewith the son of Syrack professes himself at the heart
greived) men of understanding are already so little set by: how should their
minds whom the love of so precious a Jewel, filled with secret Iealousy, even
in regard of the least things, which may any way hinder the flourishing estate
thereof, choose, but misdoubt least this discipline which always you match with
divine doctrine, as her natural and true Sister, be found unto all kinds of
knowledge a stepmother? seeing that the greatest worldly hopes, which are
proposed unto the chiefest kind of learning, ye seek utterly to extirpate as
weeds; and have grounded your Platform on such propositions, as do in a sort
undermine those most renowned habitations, where through the goodness of
Almighty God, all commendable Arts and Sciencies are with exceeding great
industry hitherto (and so may they for ever continue) studied, proceeded in,
and professed. To charge you as purposely bent to the overthrow of that wherein
so many of you have attained no small perfection, were injurious; only
therefore I wish that your selves did well consider how opposite certain your
positions are unto the state of Collegiate Societies, wherein the two
Universities consist. Those degrees which their Statutes bind them to take,
are by your laws taken away; your selves who have sought them ye so excuse,
as that ye would have men to think ye Judge them not allowable, but
tolerable only, and to be borne with for some help which ye find in them
unto the furtherance of your purposes, till the corrupt estate of the Church
may be better reformed. Your Laws forbidding Ecclesiastical persons utterly
the exercise of Civil power, musts needs deprive the Heads and Masters in the
same Colleges of all such authority as now they exercise either at home, by
punishing the faults of those, who, not as Children to their Parents by the Law
of Nature, but altogether by Civil authority are subject unto them, or abroad,
by keeping Courts amongst their Tenants. Your Laws, making permanent
inequality amongst Ministers, a thing repugnant to the Word of God, enforce
those Colleges, the Seniors whereof are all or any part of them Ministers,
under the government of a Master in the same vocation, to choose as often as
they meet together a new President. For, if so ye judge it necessary to do in
Synods, for the avoiding of permanent inequality amongst Ministers, the same
cause must needs, even in these Collegiate Assemblies, enforce the like. Except
peradventure ye mean to avoid all such absurdities by dissolving those
Corporations, and by bringing the Universities unto the form of the School of
Geneva. Which thing men the rather are inclined to look for, in as much as the
Ministry, whereinto their Founders with singular providence have by the same
Statutes appointed them necessarily to enter at a certain time, Humb. motion
to the L. L. P. 50.
your laws bind them much more necessarily to forbear, till some parish
abroad call for them.

Your opinion concerning the Law Civil is, that the knowledge thereof might
be spared, as a thing which this Land does not need, Professors in that kind
being so few, ye are the bolder to spurn at them, and not to dissemble your
minds concerning their removal: in whose studyes, although my self have not
much been conversant, nevertheless exceeding great cause Isee there is to
wish, that thereunto more encouragement were given, as well for the singular
treasures of Wisdom therein contained, as also for the great use we have
thereof, both in decision of certain kinds of causes, ariseing daily within
our selves, and especially for commerce with Nations abroad, Whereunto that
knowledge is most requisite.

5. The reasons wherewith ye would persuade, that Scripture is the only rule
to frame all our Actions by, are in every respect as effectual for proof,
that the same is the only Law whereby to determine all our Civil
Controversies. And then what does let, but as those men have their desire, who
frankly broach it already, that the work of Reformation will never be
perfected till the Law of Jesus Christ be received alone; so pleaders and
Counselors may bring their books of the Common Law, and bestow them as the
Students of curious and needless Arts did theirs in the Apostles time? Act.
19.19.
I leave them to scan how far those words of yours may reach, wherein ye
declare, that whereas many houses lie waste through inordinate suits in Law,
Humb. motino P. 74.
This one thing will show the excellency of Discipline for the wealth of the
Realm, and quiet of Subjects; that the Church is to censure such a party who
is apparently troublesome and contentious, and without REASONABLE CAUSE upon a
mere will and stomach does vex and molest his Brother, and trouble the
Country. For my own part I do not see, but that it might agree very well with
your Principles, if your discipline were fully planted, even to send out your
writs of surceace unto all Courts of England besides, for the most things
handled in them. A great deal further I might proceed, and descend lower.

6. But for as much as against all these and the like difficultyes your answer
is, Counterp. 6. P. 108.
that we ought to search what things are consonant to Gods word, not which be
most for our own ease; and therefore that your discipline being (for such is
your error) the absolute commandment of Almighty God, it must be received,
although the world by receiving it should be clean turned vpside down, herein
lies the greatest danger of all. For whereas the name of divine Authority is
used to countenance these things which are not the commandments of God, but
your own erroneous collections; on him you must father whatsoever ye shall
afterward be led either to do, in withstanding the Adversaries of your cause,
or to think, in maintenance of your doeings; and what this may be God does
know: In such kinds of errors, the mind once imagining it self to seek
execution of Gods will, labors forthwith to remove both things and persons
which any way hinder it from taking place, and in such cases if any strange or
new thing seem requisite to be done, a strange and new opinion concerning the
lawfullnesse thereof is withal received and broached under countenance of
divine Authority.

7. One example herein may serve for many, to show that false opinions touching
the will of God to have things done are wont to bring forth mighty and violent
practices against the hindrances of them; and those practices new opinions
more pernicious then the first, yea most extremely opposite unto that which
the first did seem to intend, where the people took upon them the Reformation
of the Church by casting out Popish superstition, they having received from
their Pastors a general instruction, Mat. 15.13.
that whatsoever the heavenly Father has not planted must be rooted out,
proceeded in some foreign places so far, that down went Oratories and the
very Temples of God themselves. For, as they chanced to take the compass of
their Commission stricter or larger, so their dealings were accordingly more or
less moderate. Among others, there sprung up presently one kind of men;
Anabaptists.
with whose zeal and forwardness the rest being compared, were thought to be
mavelous cold and dull. These grounding themselves on rules more general;
that whatsoever the Law of Christ commands not, thereof Antichrist is the
Author, and whatsoever Antichrist or his adherents did in the world the true
Professors of Christ are to undo; and found out many things more then others
had done, the extirpation whereof was in their Conceit as necessary as of any
thing before removed. Hereupon they secretly made their doleful complaints
every where as they went, that albeit the World did begin to profess some
dislike of that which was evil in the kingdom of darkness, yet fruits worthy
of a true repentance were not seen; and that if men did repent as they ought,
they must endeavor to purge the truth of all manner of evil, to the end there
might follow a new World afterward, wherein righteousness only should dwell.
Private repentance they said must appear by every man's fashioning his own
life contrary unto the custom and orders of this present World, both in
greater things and in less. To this purpose they had always in their mouths
those great things, Charity, Guy des Bres contre l'erreur des Anabapt. page 4.
Faith, the true Fear of God, the Cross, the Mortification of the flesh, All
their exhortations were to set light of the things in this World, to count
riches and honors vanity, and in token thereof, not only to seek neither, but
if men were possessours of both, even to cast away the one and resign the
other, page 5.
that all men might see their unfeigned conversation unto Christ. They were
sollicitours of men to fasts, to often meditations of heavenly things; and as
it were conferences in secret with God, page 16. page 118. page 119.
by prayers not framed according to the frozen manner of the World: but
expressing such fervent desires as might even force God to hearken to them.
Where they found men in diet, attire, furniture of house, or any other way
observers of Civility and decent order, page 120. page 116.
such they reproved as being carnally and earthly minded. Every word otherwise
then severely and sadly uttered, seemed to pierce like a sword through them.
page 124.
If any man were pleasant, their manner was presently with sighs to repeat
these words of our Savior Christ, Luke 6.12.
Woe be to you which now laugh for you shall lament. So great was their
delight to be always in trouble, that such as did quietly lead their lives,
they judged of all other men to be in most dangerous case. They so much
affected to cross the ordinary custom in every thing, page 117.
that when other men's use was to put on better attire, they would be sure to
show themselves openly abroad in worse, the ordinary names of the days in the
week they thought it a kind of profaneness to use, and therefore, accustomed
to make no other distinction then by number; the 1, 2, 3, day.

8. From this they proceed unto public Reformation. First, Ecclesiastical,
and then Civil. Touching the former they boldly avouched that themselves only
had the truth. page 40.
Which thing upon peril of their lives they would at all times defend; and
that since the Apostles lived, the same was never before in all points
sincerely taught. Wherefore that things might be brought again to that ancient
integrity which Jesus Christ by his word requires, they began to control the
Ministers of the Gospel, for attributing so much force and virtue unto the
scriptures of God read; whereas the truth was, that when the word is said, to
engender faith in the heart and to convert the soul of man, or to work any
such spiritual divine effect, these speeches are not thereunto appliable as it
is read or preached, but as it is ingrafted into us by the power of the Holy
Ghost, opening the eyes of our understanding, and so revealing the mysteries of
God, according to that which Jeremy promised before should be, Ier. 31.34.
saying, I will put my law in their inward parts, and I will write it in their
hearts. The book of God they notwithstanding for the most part so admired, page
29.
that other disputation against their opinions, then only by allegation of
scripture, they would not hear, page 27.
besides it they thought no other writings in the World should be studied,
insomuch that one of their great Prophets exhorting them to cast away all
respects unto humane writings, so far to this motion they condescended that
as many as had any Books, save the holy Bible, in their Custody, they brought
and set them publicly on fire.

9. When they and their Bibles were alone together, what strange fantastical
opinion soever at any time entered into their heads, their use was to think the
spirit taught it them. Their frensies concerning our Saviors Incarnation: the
state of souls departed and such like, are things needless to be rehearsed.
And forasmuch as they were of the same suit with those, of whom the Apostle
speaks, saying, 2. Tim. 3.7.
They are still learning but never attaining to the knowledge of truth, it was
no marvel to see them every day broach some new thing never heard of before,
which restless levity they did interpret to be their growing to spiritual
perfection, and a proceeding from faith to faith. page 65. page 66.
The differences among them grew in a manner infinite, so that scarcely was
there found any one of them, the forge of whose brain was not possessed with
some special mystery. Whereupon, page 135.
although their mutual contentions were most fiercely prosecuted among
themselves, yet when they came to defend the common cause, common to them all
against the Adversaries of their factions, they had ways to lick one another
whole, the sounder in his own persuasion excusing The dear Brethren, page 25.
which were not so far enlightened, and professing a charitable hope of the
mercy of God toward them, notwithstanding their swarving from him in some
things. page 71.
Their own Ministers they highly magnifyed, as men whose vocation was from
God: the rest, page 124.
their manner was disdainfully to term Scribes and Pharisees, to account their
calling an humane creature, and to detain the people, as much as might be,
from hearing of them. page 764.
As touching Baptism administered in the Church of Rome, they judged to be an
execrable mockery, and no Baptism, both, because the Ministers thereof in the
Papacy are wicked Idolaters, lewd persons, Thieves and Murderers, cursed
creatures, ignorant beasts; and also, that for to baptize is a proper action
belonging unto none but the Church of Christ, whereas Rome is Antichrists
Synagogue. page 748.
The custom of using Godfathers and Godmothers at Christnings they scorned.
Baptizing of Infants, page 512.
although confessed by themselves to have been continued even sithence the very
Apostles own times, yet they altogether condemned, partly, page 518.
because sundry errors are of no less antiquity: page 722.
and partly because there is no commandment in the Gospel of Christ which
says Baptize Infants, but he contrariwise saying, Go preach and Baptize, does
appoint that the Minister of Baptism shall in that action first administer
doctrine, and then Baptism, as also in saying, whosoever does believe and is
Baptized, page 688.
he appoints that the person, to whom Baptism is administered, shall first
believe, and then be Baptized; to the end that believing may go before this
Sacrament in the receiver, no otherwise then preaching in the giver, since
equally in both, the law of Christ declares, not only what things are
required, but also in what order they are required. page 38.
The Eucharist they received (pretending our Lord and Saviors example) after
Supper: and for avoiding all those impieties which have been grounded upon the
mystical words of Christ, This is my body, this is my blood, they thought it
not safe to mention either body or blood in that Sacrament, page 122.
but rather to abrogate both, and to use no words but these, Take, eat, declare
the death of our Lord; Drink, show forth our Lords death.

In Rites and Ceremonies their profession was, hatred of all conformity with
the Church of Rome: for which cause they would rather endure any torment, then
observe the solemn festivalls which others did, in as much as Antichrist (they
said) was the first Inventor of them.

10. The pretended end of their Civil Reformation was, that Christ might have
dominion over all; that all Crowns and Scepters might be thrown down at his
feet; that no other might reign over Christian men but he; no Regiment keep
them in awe but his discipline; amongst them no sword at all to be carried
besides his, the sword of Spiritual Excommunication. For this cause they
labored withal their might in overturning the Seats of Magistracy, because
Christ has said, page 841.
Kings of Nations; in abolishing the execution of Justice, because Christ has
said, resist not evil; in forbidding Oaths the necessary means of Judicial
Trial, because Christ has said, Swear not at all; finally, in bringing in
community of goods, page 849.
because Christ by his Apostles has given the World such example, to the end
that men might excel one another, not in wealth, the pillar of secular
authority, but in virtue.

11. page 40.
These men at the first were only pitied in their error, and not much
withstood by any; the great humility, zeal and devotion, which appeared to be
in them was in all men's opinion a pledge of their harmless meaning. The
hardest that men of sound Judgment conceived of them, was but this, Lactant.
O quam honesta voluntate miseri errant; with how good a meaning these poor
souls do evil! Luther made request unto Frederick Duke of Saxony, that
within his dominion they might be favorably dealt with and spared, Just. lib.
5. cap. 19.
for that (their error exempted) they seemed otherwise right good men. By
means of which merciful toleration they gathered strength, page 6.
much more then was safe for the state of the Commonwealth wherein they lived.
They had their secret corner-meetings and assemblies in the night, the people
flocked unto them by thousands. The means whereby they both allured and
retained so great multitudes were most effectual; Page 4.20.
first, a wonderful show of zeal toward God, Page 55.
wherewith they seemed to be even rapt in every thing they spoke. Secondly, an
hatred of sin and a singular love of integrity, which men did think to be
much more then ordinary in them, by reason of the Custom which they had to
fill the ears of the people with invectives against their authorized Guids,
as well Spiritual as Civil. Thirdly, the bountyfull releife wherewith they
eased the broken estate of such needy Creatures as were in that respect the
more apt to be drawn away. Fourthly, a tender Compassion which they were
thought to take upon the miseries of the Common sort, over whose heads their
manner was, Page 6.7.
even to power down showrs of tears, complaining that no respect was had unto
them, that their goods were devoured by wicked Cormorants, their persons had in
contempt, all liberty both temporal and spiritual taken from them, that it
was high time for god now to hear their groans and to send them deliverance:
Lastly, a cunning slight which they had to stroke and smooth up the minds of
their followers, as well by appropriating unto them all the favorable Titles,
the good words and the gracious promisies in Scripture; as also by casting the
contrary always on the heads of such as were severred from that retinue.
Whereupon, the Peoples common acclamations unto such deceivers was, These are
verily the men of God, these are his true and sincere Prophets. If any such
Prophet or man of God did suffer by order of law condign and deserved
punishment, were it for Felony, Rebellion, Murder or what else, the people (so
strangely were their hearts enchanted) as though blessed Saint Stephen had been
again Martyred, Page 27.
did lament that God took away his most dear servants from them.

12. In all things being fully persuaded, that what they did it was Obedience
to the will of God, and that all men should do the like; there remained after
speculation, practice, whereby the whole world thereunto (if it were possible)
might be framed. Page 6.
This they saw could not be done without mighty opposition and resistance:
against which to strengthen themselves, they secretly entered into a league of
association. And peradventure, considering that although they were many, yet
long wars would in time wast them out; they began to think whether it might
not be that God would have them do for their speedy and mighty increase, the
same which sometime Gods own chosen people, the people of Israel did. Glad
and feign they were to have it so: which very desire was it self apt to breed
both an opinion of possibility, and a willingness to gather arguments of
likelihood that so God himself would have it. Nothing more clear unto their
seeming, then that a new Jerusalem being often spoken of in Scripture, they
undoubtedly were themselves that new Jerusalem, and the old did by way of a
certain figurative resemblance signify what they should be and do. Here
they drew in a Sea of matter by applying of all things unto their own company,
which are any where spoken concerning divine favors, and benefits bestowed
upon the old common wealth of Israel, concluding that as Israel was delivered
out of Egypt, so they spiritually out of the Egypt of this Worlds servile
thraldom unto sin and superstition; as Israel was to root out the
Idolatrous Nations, and to plant instead of them a people which feared God, so
the same Lords good will and pleasure was now, that these new Israelites should
under the Conduct of other Ioshuas, Sampsons, and Gideons perform a work no
less miraculous in casting out violently the wicked from the earth, and
establishing the kingdom of Christ with perfect liberty: and therefore as the
cause why the Children of Israel took unto one man many wives, might be,
least the casualties of war should any way hinder the promise of God
concerning their multitude from taking effect in them, so it was not unlike
that for the necessary propagation of Christ's kingdom under the Gospel, the
Lord was content to allow as much. Now whatsoever they did in such sort collect
out of Scripture, when they came to justify or persuade it unto others, all
was the heavenly fathers appointment, his commandment, his will and charge.
Which thing is the point, in regard whereof I have gathered this declaration.
For my purpose herein is to show, that when the minds of men are once
erroniously persuaded, that it is the will of God to have those things done
which they fancy; their opinions are as thorns in their sides, never suffering
them to take rest till they have brought their speculations into practice; the
rests and impediments of which practice, their restless desire and study to
remove, leads them every day forth by the hand into other more dangerous
opinions, sometimes quite and clean contrary to their first pretended
meanings; so as what will grow out of such errors as go malked under the
cloak of divine Authority, impossible it is that ever the wit of man should
imagine, till time have brought forth the fruits of them; for which cause it
behooveth wisdom to fear the sequells thereof, even beyond all apparent cause
of fear. These men in whose mouths at the first sounded nothing but only
mortification of the flesh, were come at the length to think they might
lawfully have their six or seven Wives a piece. They which at the first,
thought judgment and justice it self a mercylesse cruelty; accounted at the
length their own hands sanctified, with being imbrued in Christian blood;
they, who at the first were wont to beat down all dominion and to urge against
poor Constables, Kings of Nations, had at the length both Consulls and Kings
of their own erection; finally, they which could not brook at the first, that
any man should seek, no not by law, the recovery of goods injuriously taken or
withheld from him; were grown at the last to think, they could not offer unto
God more acceptable service, then by turning their Adversaries clean out of
house and home, and by enriching themselves with all kind of spoil and
pillage, page 41.
which thing being laid to their charge, they had in all readiness their
answer, that now the time was come, when according to our Saviors promise, The
meek ones must inherit the earth, Mar. 5.5.
and that their title hereunto, was the same which the Righteous Israelites had
unto the goods of the wicked Egyptians. Exodus 11.2.


13. Wherefore since the World has had in these men so fresh experience how
dangerous such active errors are, it must not offend you, though touching the
sequel of your present misperswasions much more be doubted, then your own
intents and purposes do happily aim at. And yet your words already are
somewhat, when ye affirm that your Pastors, Mart: in his 3. libel. P. 28.
Elders, Doctors, and Deacons, ought to be in this Church of England, whither
his Majesty and our State will, or no; when for the animating of your
Confederates, ye publish the Musters which ye have made of your own bands,
and proclaim to amount unto, I know not how many thousands; when ye threaten,
that since neither suits to the Parliament, nor supplications to our
Convocation. House, neither your defenses by writing, nor challenges of
disputation in behalf of that cause are able to prevayle, we must blame our
selves, if to bring in discipline some such means be used hereafter, as shall
cause all our hearts to ache. Demonstr. in the Preface.
That things doubtful are to be construed in the better part, is a principle
that ought not to be followed in matters concerning the public state of a
Commonwealth. But howsoever these and the like speeches be accounted as
arrows idly shot at random, without either eye had to any mark, or regard to
their lighting place: has not your longing desire for the practice of your
discipline, brought the matter already unto this demurrer amongst you; whether
the people and their godly Pastors, that way affected, ought not to make
separation from the rest, and to begin the exercise of discipline, without the
license of Civil powers, which license they sought for, and are not heard?
Upon which question, as ye have now divided your selves, the warier sort of you
taking the one part, and the forwarder in zeal the other; so in case these
earnest ones should prevail? what other sequel can any wise man imagine, but
this; that having first resolved, that attempts for discipline without
superiors, are lawful, it will follow in the next place to be disputed what
may be attempted against superiors, which will not have the scepter of that
discipline to rule over them?

14. Yea even by you, which have stayed your selves from running headlong with
the other sort, somewhat notwithstanding there has been done, without the
leave or likeing of your lawful Superiors, for the exercise of a part of your
discipline amongst the Clergy thereunto addicted. And least examination of
principal parties therein, should bring those things to light, which might
hinder and let your proceedings; behold for a bar against that impediment,
one opinion ye have newly added unto the rest, even upon this occasion, an
opinion to exempt you from taking Oaths; which may turn to the molestation
of your Brethren in that cause. The next neighbor opinion, whereunto when
occasion requires, may follow for dispensation with Oaths already taken, if
they afterward be found to import a necessity of detecting ought which may
bring such good men into trouble or damage whatsoever the cause be. O
merciful God! what man's wit is there able to found the depth of these
dangerous and fearful evils, whereinto our weak and impotent nature is
inclinable to sink it self, rather then to show an acknowledgment of error
in that, which once we have unadvisedly taken upon us to defend, against the
stream, as it were, of a contrary public resolution? Wherefore if we any
thing respect their error, who being persuaded even as ye are, have gone
further upon that perswation then ye allow, if we regard the present estate
of the highest Governor placed over us, if the quality and disposition of our
Nobles, if the Orders and Laws of our famous Universities, of the profession
of the Civil or the practice of the Common Law amongst us, if the mischieves,
whereinto even before our eyes, so many others have fallen headlong from no
less plausible and fair beginings, then yours are: there is in every of these
considerations most just cause to fear, least our hastiness to embrace a
thing of so perilous Consequence, should cause posterity to feel those
evils, which as yet are more easy for us to prevent, then they would be for
them to remedy.

15. The best and safest way therefore for you, The Concl. of all.
my dear Brethren, is, to call your deeds past to a new reckoning, to examine
the cause ye have taken in hand, and to try it even point by point, Argument
by Argument, with all the diligent exactness ye can; to lay aside the Gall of
that bitterness wherein your minds have hitherto overabounded, and with
meekness to search the Truth; think ye are men, deem it not impossible for
ye to err; fifth unpartially your own hearts, whether it be the force of
reason or vehemence of affection which has bred and still does feed these
opinions in you. If truth do any where manifest it self, seek not to smother
it with glosing delusion, acknowledge the greatness thereof, and think it
your best victory when the same does prevail over you.

16. That ye have been earnest in speaking and writing again and again the
contrary way, shall be no blemish nor discredit at all unto you. Amongst so
many so huge volumes as the infinite pains of Saint Augustine has brought
forth, what one has gotten him greater love, commendation, and honor then the
book wherein he carefully collecteth his own oversights, and sincerely
condemns them? Many speeches there are of Iobes, whereby his wisdom and
other virtues may appear: but the glory of an ingenious mind he has
purchased by these words only, Job. 39.37.
Behold, I will lay mine hand on my mouth, I have spoken once, yet will I not
therefore maintain argument: yea twice, howbeit for that cause, further I will
not proceed. Far more comfort it were for us (so small is the joy we take
in these strifes) to labor under the same yoke, as men that look after the
same eternal reward of their labors, to be enjoyed with you in bands of
indissoluble love and amity, to live as if our persons being many, our Souls
were but one, rather the^ in such dismembered sort, to spend our few and
wretched days in a tedious prosecutio^ of wearysome contentions, the end
whereof, if they have not some speedy end will be heavy even on both sides.
Brought already we are, even to that estate, which Gregory Nazianzene
mournfully described, saying.

G. Naz: Apol.
My mind leads me (since there is no other remedy) to fly and to convey my
self into some corner out of sight, where I may escape from this cloudy tempest
of maliciousness, whereby all parts are entered into a deadly war amongst
themselves, and that little remnant of love which was, is now consumed to
nothing. The only godliness we glory in, is to find out somewhat whereby we
may Judge others to be ungodly. Each others faults we observe, as matter of
exprobration, and not of grief. By these means we are grown hateful in the
eyes of the heathens themselves, and (which wounds us the more deeply) able
we are not to deny, but that we have deserved their hatred. With the better
sort of our own, our fame and Credit is clean lost. The less we are to
marvel, if they Judge vilely of us, who although we did well, would hardly
allow thereof. On our backs they also build, that are lewd, and what we object
one against another, the same they use to the utter scorn and disgrace of us
all. This we have gained by our mutual home-dissentions. This we are
worthyly rewarded with, which are more forward to strive, then becomes men of
virtuous and mild disposition. But our trust with the almighty is, that with
us, contentions are now at their highest floate, and that the day will come
(for what cause of despair is there,) when the passions of former enmity being
allayed, we shall with ten times redoubled tokens of our unfainedly reconciled
love, show our selves each toward other the same, which Joseph and the
Brethren of Joseph, were at the time of their intervew in Egypt. Our
comfortable expectation, and most Thirsty desire whereof, what man soever
amongst you shall any ways help to satisfy (as we truly hope there is no
one amongst you but some way or other will) the blessing of the God of peace,
both in this world, and in the world to come, be upon him, more then the
stars of the firmament in number.

AMEN.
ECCLES. POLIT. LIB. 5.. 79. ad fin.
Such is the general detestation of robbing God or the church; that whereas
nothing does either in peace or war more uphold men's reputation then
prosperous success, because, in common construction, unless notorious
improbitie be joined with prosperity, it seems to argue favor with God,
they which once have stained their hands with these odious spoils, do thereby
fasten unto all their actions an eternal prejudice; in respect whereof, for
that it passes through the world as an undoubted rule and principle, that
sacrilege is open defiance to god, whatsoever afterward they undertake, if they
prosper in it, men reckon it but Dionysius his navigation, and if any thing
befall them otherwise, it is not, as commonly, so in them ascribed to the great
uncertainty of casual events, wherein the providence of God does control the
purposes of men, oftentimes much more for their good, then if all things did
answer fully their hearts desire, but the censure of the world is ever
directly against them, both Novimus multa regna and reges eorum propterea
cecidisse, quia Ecclesias spoliav^runt, resque eorum vastaverunt, alienaverunt
vel diripuerunt; Episcopisque and sacerdotibus, atque quod majus est, Ecclesiis
eorum abstulerunt, and pugnantibus dederunt Quapropter nec fortes in bello, nec
in fide stabiles fuerunt, nec victores extiterunt, sed terga multi vulnerati,
and plures interfecti verterunt, regnaque and regiones, and quod pejus est,
regna coelestia perdiderunt, atque propriis haereditatibus caruerunt, and
hactenus carent, verba Caroli Mag. in Capital. Caral. l. 7. c. 104.
bitter and peremptory.

To make such actions therefore less odious, and to mitigate the envy of them,
many colorable shifts and inventions have been used, as if the world did hate
only wolves, and think the fox a godly creature. The time Turno tempus erit
magno cum optaverit emptum. Intactum Pallanta, and cum spolia ista, diemque
Oderit. virgil Aeen. lib. 10.
it may be will come, when they that either violently have spoiled, or thus
smoothly defrauded God, shall find they did but deceive themselves. In the
mean while, there will be always some skillful persons, which can teach a
way how to grind treatably the Church, with jaws that shall scarce move, and
yet devour in the end more then they that come ravening with open mouth, as if
they would worrie the whole in an instant. Others also who have wastfully eaten
out their own patrimony, would be glad to repair if they might their decayed
estates, with the ruin they care not of what, nor of whom, so the spoils were
theirs; whereof in some part if they happen to speed, yet commonly they are
men borne under that constellation, which makes them, I know not how, as unapt
to enrich themselves as they are ready to impoverish others; it is rheir lot to
sustain during life, both the misery of beggars, and infamy of robbers.

But though no other plague and revenge should follow sacrilegious violations
of holy things, the natural disgrace and ignominy, the very turpitude of such
actions in the eyes of a wise understanding heart, is it self (...). Demost.
Poenam non dico legum, quas saepe pe^rumpunt; sed ipsius turpitudinis quae
acerbissima est, non vident. Cic. Off. lib. 3. Impunitu credis esse quae invisa
sunt, aut ullum supplicium gravius existimas publico odio? Senec. de Benef. l.
3. c. 17.
a heavy punishment. Men of virtuous quality, are by this sufficiently moved to
beware, how they answer and requite the mercyes of God with injuries, whether
openly or indirectly offered.

By means whereof the church most commonly for gold has flanell, and whereas
the usual saw of old was, Glaucus his changeing, the proverb is now, A Church
bargain.

And for fear lest covetousness alone should linger out the time too much,
and not be able to make havocke of the house of God, with that expedition
which the mortal enemy thereof did vehemently wish, he has by certain strong
inchauntments, so deeply bewitched religion it self, as to make it in the end
an earnest solicitor, and an eloquent perswader of sacrilege, urging
confidently, that the very best service which men of power can do to Christ,
is without any more ceremony, Huc ventum videtur (quod non sine gemitu dixerim)
ut magna hominum pars credat sese tum demum vere regnum Antichristi evasisse,
si cum bonis Ecclesiae ludant pro libitu. Calvin. Ep. 33. vide etiam ep. 13.
65. 68. 108. vbi de hac sacrilega dissipatione queritur.

In the time of Popery, the Church of Geneva was very richly endowed with great
revenewes. At the reformation, Calvin and Farell called upon the magistrates,
as they would answer it to God, to employ all that holy stock only to pious and
holy uses, assureing them they could not any other ways bestow any part of it,
without the guilt of horrible Sacrilege. (So it is a degree of Sacrilege, any
way to alter the wills and intentions of founders, so far as they are
tolerable.) They promised fairly; but having possessed themselves of the
goods and patrimony of the Clergy, they set apart some small portions for the
University, and the ministers, bestowing the rest in fortifieing their walls,
and furnishing their magazine against the Bishop (the lord and owner of the
town) and other more base uses.

Calvin seeing this Sacrilege, and detesting it, was wont to say with great
grief, I see we have taken the purse from Judas, and given it to the Devil.
Several men of credit have heard this related by a grave learned French
minister yet liveing (or very lately) in England.


to sweep all, and to leave the Church as bare, as in the day it was first
borne; that fullness of bread having made the children of the househould
wanton, it is without any scruple to be taken away from them, and thrown to
dogs; that they which laid the prices of their lands, as offerings at the
Apostles feet, did but sow the seeds of superstition; that they which did endow
Churches with lands, poisoned religion; that Tithes and oblations are now in
the sight of God as the sacrificed blood of goats, that if we give him our
hearts, and affections, our goods are better bestowed otherwise; that Irenaeus,
Policarps disciple, should not have said, we offer unto God our goods, as
tokens of thankfulness for what we do receive; neither Origin, he that
worshippeth God, must by gifts and oblations acknowledge him the Lord of all;
in a word, that to give unto God is error, reformation of error, to take from
the Church, that which the blindness of former ages did unwisely give. By
these or the like suggestions received with all joy; and with like sedulity
practiced in certain parts of the Christian world, they have brought to pass,
that as David does say of man, so it is in hazard to be verified concerning
the whole religion and service of God; The time thereof may peradventure fall
out to be threescore and ten years, or if strength do serve, unto fourscore,
what follows, is like to be small joy for them, whatsoever they be that
behold it.

Thus have the best things been overthrown, not so much by puissance, and
might of adversaries, as through defect of counsel in them, that should have
upheld and defended the same.

FINIS.
THE DANGERS OF NEW DISCIPLINE, TO The STATE and CHURCH Discovered, FIT TO BE
CONSIDERED By them who seek (as they term it) the Reformation of the CHURCH
of ENGLAND.

COMPOSED BY A TRVE PROTEstant, a Loyal Subject, a Loving Fellow Member of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, who daily prays for KING and
PEOPLE and a Settled peace in all three KINGDOMS.

Printed for W. R. ANN. DOM. 1642.

PSALM. 69. V. 9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me.


Certain learned and wise men of old time, that had no understanding or savor
of God; when they considered with themselves, to what end and purpose mankind
was created and set in this world: after they had driven the matter as far as
they might by natural knowledge, at length they concluded; some, that man was
made to know the properties and qualities, the convenience or difference of
natural things, either in the air, or in the water, or in the earth, or under
the earth; Some other, that man was made to consider and behold the Sun and
Moon, the Stars, and course, and revolutions of the Heavens: And so they
judged, that man which either had most abundance of natural reason, or beheld
and considered the heavens best, to be most perfect of all others; and that he
came nearest to the end of his creation. Thus said they, as men without feeling
of God, only endued with the light of nature.

But (as God himself declares, who fashioned us, and made us, and knows us
best,) the very true end why man was made, was to know and to honor God:
Therefore whosoever knows him best, and honors him with most reverence, he is
most perfect, he comes nearest the end of his creation.

When Solomon had described the deceaveable vanities of the world, and said,
vanity of vanities, Eccl. 1.
vanity of vanities, all is vanity. When he had concluded by long discourse,
that riches, Empires, honor, pleasures, knowledge, and whatsoever else under
the Sun, is but vanity: he knitteth up the matter with these words, Eccles.
12.
Fear God, and keep his Commandments: for this is the whole duty of man:
that is, this is truth, and no vanity; this is our perfection; to this end are
we made: not to live in eating and drinking, not to pass our time in pleasure
and follies, not to heap up those things which are daily taken from us, or from
which we are daily taken away; but that in our words, in our life, in our
body, and in our soul we do service unto God; that we look above the Sun
and Moon, and all the heavens; that we become the Temples of the holy Ghost;
that the holy Spirit of God may dwell in us, and make us fit instruments of the
glory of God.

Therefore God gave his holy word, and has continued it from the beginning of
the world until this day: notwithstanding the Philosophers and learned men in
all ages, who scorned it out as the word of folly, (for so it seems to them
that perish;) notwithstanding the wicked Princes, and Tyrants, and high powers
of the world, who consumed and burnt it, as false and wicked and seditious
doctrine; notwithstanding the whole world and power of darkness were ever bent
against it, yet has He wonderfully continued and preserved it without loss of
one letter until this day: that we have whereby truly to know him the true and
only God, and his son Jesus Christ whom he sent.

Therefore have we Temples and Churches, places to resort unto all together; to
honor, to worship, and to acknowledge him to be our God; to join our hearts
and voices together, and to call upon his holy name. In such places God has at
all times used to open his Majesty, and to show his power; In such places God
has made us a special promise to hear our prayers, whenever we call upon
him: Therefore are they called the dwelling place and house of God; In such
places all godly men set their greatest pleasure; and thought themselves
miserable, when they were secluded or put off from the same: as the Prophet and
holy Prince David; Psalm. 122.
Laetatus sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi, in domum Domini ibimus: O (says
that holy man) my heart rejoiced within my body, when my fellows called upon
me, and said, let us go into the house of the Lord. Again, I am in love with
the beauty of thy house. And again, O how beautiful is thy Tabernacle, O
Lord, O thou the God of hosts: my heart longs and faints to come within thy
Courts. His spirits were ravished with the sight and majesty of the Tabernacle:
not for that the place it self at that time was so beautiful; for in David's
time it was almost rotten and ruinous, a homely thing to behold, nothing in
comparison to that Temple that was afterward built by Solomon: But therein
stood the show and worthiness of that holy place, that Gods truth and law was
opened and proclaimed in it; and the Sacraments and ceremonies so used, in such
form and order, as God had commanded them to be used, and the people received
them obediently, and lived thereafter.

Therefore when the Tabernacle was restored; when the Arc was fet home from
Obed-edom, and set in the mount Sion; when religion Revived, which through the
negligence and malice of Saul was forsaken; when he saw his Nobility, his
Bishops, his Priests, and all his people willing and forward, he could not
refrain himself, but brake out and sang, Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus,
exultemus and laetemur in ea: This is the day which the Lord has made, let us
be glad and rejoice in it: Let us be merry, and joy, that ever we lived to see
it. Even so Paul, when in his time he saw the Gospel take root and prosper,
and that the savor of life was powered abroad, that the kingdom of God was
enlarged, and the kingdom of Satan shaken down, his heart leaped, and sprang
within him; Ecce, nunc tempus acceptabile; behold, now is the acceptable time;
behold, God has looked down mercifully upon the world; behold, the day of
salvation is come upon us.

But the godly man, as he rejoices at the beauty of Gods house, so when
contrariwise he sees the same disordered filthily, when he sees the
Sacraments of God abused, the truth trodden under foot, the people mocked, the
name of God dishonored; he cannot but lament and mourn, and find himself
wounded at heart. When the good King Josias saw the book of God, which was so
long hid in the wall, and out of remembrance; when he considered the blindness
in which they had lived, and the unkindnesse of their forefathers, he could
not forbear, but fell a weeping: he feared least God should take vengeance
upon them for so great contempt of his word. When Jeremy saw the wilfulness
and frowardness of the people, which would not submit themselves and be
obedient unto God, he cried, Oh that my head were full of water, Ierem. 9.
and mine eyes a fountain of tears: that I might weep day and night etc. Such
care had they for Gods people. Thus the zeal of Gods house had eaten them up.

Zeal (if any man know not the nature of the word) is an earnest affection,
and vehement love: as is the love of a mother toward her children, or of the
natural child toward his mother: This zeal cannot abide to see that thing
which it loves, despised or hurt. Such zeal and care carries God over his
people; he loves them as a mother loves her children; he will not suffer them
to be hurt. Esaias. 49.
By the Prophet Esaias he says, can a woman forget her child, and not have
compassion in the son of her womb? Though they should forget, Zach: 2.
yet will not J forget thee. Zachary also says, he that touches you, touches
the apple of his eye. For God has said, they shall be my people, and I will be
their God. Such care likewise bear all the godly toward their God: they love
him with all their soul, with all their heart, with all their strength; they
reverence him as their father, they are grieved with any blasphemy, and with
any contempt of his holy name.

But as every man, be he never so wicked, yea even he that says in his heart,
there is no God; which is become filthy and abominable in all his doings, yet
in his talk outwardly, says, he has a God, and that he believes in him:
even so there is none so wicked, or so forsaken of God in his heart, but he
persuades himself he has the zeal of God: and what he does in self-love of
his own fantasy, he will bear in hand he does it for the love of God. The
overthrowers and wasters of the Church will seem to show a special care for
the Church: dissemblers, hypocrites, despisers, scorners, even such as sin
against the holy Ghost, which deny the truth of God after they have known it,
which witting and knowing fight against the truth, which say of Christ we will
not have him to rule over us, which work that sin which will never be
forgiven, in this world, nor in the world to come, yet notwithstanding will
pretend and seem to have the zeal of God.

Thus the Scribes and Pharisees set up their bristles against Christ; thy
Disciples keep not the common fast, thou suffer them to pull and to eat the
ears of corn, thou suffer them to eat with unwashed hands, thou breakest
the tradition of the Elders, thou breakest the law of God which he gave us by
Moses, thou art a seditious teacher, thou art a Schismatic, thou art an
Heretic. They said, We fast twice in the week, we have Abraham to our Father,
we are Moses Disciples. Therefore when they heard Stephen speaking those
heavenly words; Act: 7.
Behold, I see the heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right
hand of God, through zeal they gave a shout with a loud voice, and stopped
their ears, and ran upon him all at once.

Mark: 14.
When Christ had said, Ye shall see the Son of man sit at the right hand of
God, and come in the clouds of heaven: the high Priest, through zeal, rent his
clothes; and said, ye have heard the blasphemy; this naughty man speaks
blasphemy against God: he called a Council; the Scribes and Pharisees met
together; not one man amongst them, but of themselves: they looked about them as
if they only were the pillars and buttresses of the Church, and were only
zealous and careful for the house of God. But their meeting was (as David
forespake, and as Peter declares, and as We know) against the Lord, and
against his anointed: they were touched with the zeal of their own glory, and
not with the zeal of Gods truth; they sought their own praise, but not the
praise which is of God: they made cracks that they knew the Scriptures, that
they were the Temple of God, that they had the consent of all Antiquity: as
others have done since that time, and as we see many do this day: and in very
deed, these men have now even as much as they had then, as by proof and trial
it will appear.

There are others, which have a feeling of God, and a great care for his
Church: but such a feeling and care as comes either of their own fantasies, or
of some opinion and credit they have in their fathers which were before them;
not of the understanding of Gods pleasure. Such are they which offend God, not
of malice or wilfulness, but only for lack of teaching and understanding:
Such were they which withstood S. Paul in all his preaching, for that they took
him for an Heretic, and thought his preaching was against God. Rom: 10.
I bear them witness (says he) that they have the zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge: Such a zeal have many who forbid that which God
commands, and command that which God forbids: such a zeal had Paul
himself; I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, 1. Tim. 1.
and an oppressor: but I was received to mercy, for I did it ignorantly without
belief. Such a zeal have they who think they do God good service, when they
kill and murder the righteous and good servants of God. Such a zeal have
they, who (as says Nazianzen) defend Christ against Christ, and defend the
Church against the Church. And these things do they, not of malice, nor of
wilfulness, nor against their conscience; but because they know not God the
father, nor his Christ whom he has sent: therefore they stumble at Christ, and
spurn away the Gospel of God, and think ill and speak evil of the word of
life, because they know not the Gospel of God, nor the word of life. Thus they
persuade themselves, that they defend the Church, that they honor the son of
God, that they do God great service, and that they have the zeal of God.

But this pride was ever in the heart of man and it appeared even in our
grandsire Adam: whatsoever likes us well, we think that cannot but please God.
Such is the opinion we fondly conceive in our fantasies: in trust whereof,
whatsoever we do we think our selves sure and safe. Origin. in 10. Romans lib. 8.
Origin writing upon the place of the Apostle, Zelum Dei habent, sed non
secundum scientiam: they have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge:
says, similiter potest dicere Apostolus and de aliis, quod timorem Dei
habeant, sed non secundum scientiam; de aliis etc. in like manner the Apostle
may say of others, they have the fear of God, but not according to knowledge;
of others they have the love of God, but not according to knowledge; of
another, he has the faith of God, but not according to knowledge; and another
may be said to fast, but not according to knowledge: And so in all things,
whatsoever we do, unless we have knowledge and understanding, it may be said
unto us, that we have the zeal of a good w^rke, but not according to
knowledge. Ideo danda est praecipue opera scientiae, neres nobis infeliciter
accidat, ut in fide positi frustremur a fide, zelum habentes bonorum decidamus
a bonis: Therefore all heed is chiefly to be given to the attaining of
knowledge, least it go not well with us; least we fail from our faith, when
we think we believe; and thinking we have a zeal of good works, we be found
void of all good works. The wise man says, Wisd: 14
this was not enough for them, that they erred in the knowledge of God: but
whereas they lived in great wars of ignorance, those so many and so great
plagues they called peace. The zeal that they had, and the contentation of
their hearts, made them believe that all their superstition and idolatry, and
other enormities was Catholic unity.

This zeal, as on the one side it has many tokens of goodness, for that it
has a conscience, and a fear, and an obedience toward God; so on the other
side it is very dangerous, because it lacks knowledge: even as a ship, for
lack of a governor, is ever in danger of the Rocks; and as the body which has
no eye, is ever in danger of falling. Such kind of zeal the greater it is,
the worser it is; the more vehement it seems, the more vehemently it fights
against God. For our good meaning makes not our doings good: our zeal is not
a rule whereby we may measure out, either our faith, or our works: but only the
known will and pleasure of God. Therefore speaks God in this manner by the
Prophet Esaias; Esai: 55.
my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways. Therefore
says Solomon, Prove: 3.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thy own wisdom: in
all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy doings. This counsel
also does Moses give; Deuteronomy. 5.
take heed that ye do as the Lord your God has commanded you: turn not aside
to the right hand, nor to the left.

But the true and godly zeal proceeds not from hypocrisy, or intention, but
is led and trained by understanding; and is molten into the heart; and the
vehemence and heat of it, no man knows, but he that feels it: It takes
away the use of reason: it eats and devoureth up the heart; even as the thing
that is eaten, is turned into the substance of him that eats it; and as iron
while it is burning hot, is turned into the nature of the fire: so great and so
just is the grief that they which have this zeal, conceive, when they see
Gods house spoiled, or his holy name dishonored. 1. King. 19
So says Elias; J have been very jealous for the Lord God of hoasts: for the
children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, broken down thy Altars, and
slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life
to take it away. So when Moses found that the people had forsaken God, and were
fallen down before a molten Calfe, and did put their trust in the work of their
own hands, his wrath waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hand, Exodus
32.
and brake them in pieces beneath the mountain: his heart was so inflamed with
zeal, that he considered not what he had in his hand, nor what he did. Jeremy,
when he saw the disorder of the people, and how they were not mended with his
preaching; and would inwardly conceal the grief he conceaved; and purposed,
not to make mention of the Lord, nor to speak any more in his name; yet could
he not: for his zeal found way, Ierem. 20.
and brake out; His word, says he, was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up
in my bones, and I was weary with forbearing, and J could not stay.

And, albeit there is much likeness between the rage and fury of hypocrites,
and the godly zeal of good men; for either are hot, either are vehement,
either wishes redress: yet this is an evident difference; godly zeal is
tempered and seasoned with charity; the ungodly is joined with bitterness and
revenge; the godly seeks to win, the ungodly to kill and to destroy; the
ungodly have their hands full of blood; they kill the Prophets; they say we
have a law, and by our law He must dye; they say, come let us destroy them,
that they be no more a nation; Let not the name of Israel be had any more in
remembrance; they burn the holy books of the Scriptures, as did Aza and
Antiochus; they say, ransack it, pull it down, raze it to the foundation, let
not one be left alive; they dig up the bodies of the dead out of their graves,
they show their cruelty upon the bones and ashes which were long before
buried, and well nigh consumed; It grieveth them when they lack upon whom they
may whet their bloudthirstie and cruel zeal; It grieveth them, no one thing
else so much, that they did not work surely, and cut up the root. Such is the
zeal of the ungodly: even such a zeal as was in Nero, in Caligula, (of whom
it is reported, he wished that all the Romans had but one neck, that he might
cut off all their heads at one stroke;) as was in Herod, in Annas, and Caiphas,
and the like murderers.

But the godly, when they see any disorder, they do nothing like the other:
they mourn in their hearts, to see that the truth is not received; and to see
the minds of their brethren so obstinately hardened: they make prayer to God
for them; they are deeply touched with the feeling of such calamities, which
God lays upon other. The zeal of Moses could not like the Idolatry of the
people: yet he went unto the Lord again, and said, Exodus 32.
Now if thou pardon their sin, thy mercy shall appear: but if thou will not,
I pray thee raze me out of thy book which thou have written. Christ lamented
over Jerusalem: o Jerusalem, Jerusale^ which killest the Prophets, Mat. 23.
and stonest them which are sent to thee: how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not: behold, your habitation shall be left unto you desolate. Paul
suffered much at the hands of the wicked Jews: they troubled the Church of
God, they hindered the course of the Gospel, they were enemies of the Cross
of Christ, they were dogs, they were Concisio^: yet he says, I have great
heaviness, Romans 9.
and continual sorrow in mine heart: for I would wish my self to be separated
from Christ for my brethren that are my kindsmen according to the flesh, which
are the Israelites.

David says, Psalm. 118.
Mine eyes gush out with rivers of water, because they keep not thy law. And
again, My zeal has even consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy
words. Again, I saw the transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not
thy word. And when he saw the whole nation of Israel wasted by the enemies, how
mournful a complaint made he to God? O God, the heathen are come into thine
inheritance: Psalm. 19.
thine holy Temple have they defiled, and made Jerusalem heaps of stones: the
dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fowls of the
heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints unto the Beasts of the earth. At this time,
when the Tabernacle was lost, when Saul was unquiet, and the Priests were
slain, and the Prophets despised, and the people left without all comfort, he
powers out his heart in these words; Zelus domus tuae comedit me: O Lord the
zeal I bear unto thy house, has eaten me up; it inflameth my heart, dries
my blood, consumes my marrow: such a care had he for the house of God; it was
death unto him to see it so destroyed and laid wast.

So Christ, when he saw the Temple of God foulely and unseemly abused; that
they made the holy place a place for their unlawful and unhonest gain by
usury; that they turned Religion into robbery, sold Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, and
kept their banks for exchange in the Temple; when the Priests and Levites,
which should serve God, were become Merchants, and served themselves; when the
Temple or house of God (which David purposed, and Solomon finished, and
Ezechias and Esras and other godly Princes preserved, in which was kept the
book of the law, whither all the people assembled together to serve God) was
not used like Gods house, but like a common fair or market, and was made a
den of thieves; when these gross abuses were suffered, and things were let
run to such extremities, and all this under pretense of holiness; as if it
were not only lawful, but needs it must be so: moved with zeal, he could not
abide it; he made a scourge of small cords, Ioh. 2.
and drove them all out of the Temple, and poured out the mony-changers, and
overthrew the tables, and said, make not my fathers house a house of
merchandise: And his Disciples remembered that it was written, the zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. This was no frantic or melancholy passion, neither in
Moses, nor in David, nor in Christ: Numb. 12.
Moses was a very meek man, above all that were on the earth; David was a man
that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproves; And Christ said, learn
of me, for I am humble and meek: when his Disciples James and John grew
wrothful against the Samaritanes that would not receive him, Luke 9.
and said, Lord will thou that we command that fire come down from heaven, and
consume them, even as Elias did? He turned about, and rebuked them, and said,
ye know not of what spirit you are: yet through zeal for Gods house, Christ
whipped out the buyers and sellers, David shed forth tears abundantly, and
Moses dashed in pieces the tables of Gods Commandments. All men ought to be
patient and gentle in matters appertaining to themselves: but in Gods cause no
man must yield or be patient.

In our days, upon whom the end of the world is come, when we did lately see
those times whereof our Savior foretold so long sithence, that desolation
should be in the holy place; and such confusion, ignorance, and blindness, that
men should stumble at noon-daies; that truth should be a stranger upon earth;
that men should forsake wholesome doctrine, and give ear unto fables; that the
mystery of iniquity should work; and the very elect (if it were possible) be
deceived, what trial was made of true and godly zeal? How notably did it show
it self against the rage and fury of the wicked? What should J speak hereof?
The examples are fresh: you cannot forget them, you heard of them so late, it
is so late since you did behold them. What moved so many, so learned, so
virtuous, to yield their backs to the scourge, their necks to the tormenters,
their bodies to the fire; to forsake their goods, their friends, their parents,
their wives and children, but the zeal of Gods house? Neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come, was able to separate them
from the love of God: they continued steadfast unto the end. The zeal of Gods
house did eat them up.

But now God has restored us; he has taken away the desolation from us; he
has given us his truth; he has revealed the man of sin; he has raised up a
banner of hope: we see and enjoy such things as many Kings and Prophets would
have enjoyed, and could not: what remains, but that we take the zeal of the
Lords house into our hearts, and seek by all means the glory of the same? As
our good fathers and brethren showed the vehemence of their love in disliking
the disorders which troubled the Church of God, so in this blessed peace which
God gives to his Church, let us witness our earnest zeal in seeking that it
may be made beautiful and established for ever.

Let our next care be, to continue possession: Kingdoms are preserved by the
same means, by which they were first gotten: that which is conquered by zeal,
by careful zeal must be kept. It was said of Anniball, that he knew how to
get the victory, but how to use it he knew not: Many have lost that by
negligence, which they had by diligence won. Therefore we ought, as our
hearts were careful and desirous to see these days, so by our thankfulness
to God for so great a blessing, and by christian and godly providence foresee
such means whereby we may long hereafter enjoy the same. When Phydias had made
the pourtraiture of Jupiter Pisanus, he overlaid it with oil, that it might
continue fresh and green, and never putrify: When God gave order to Noah for
making the Arc, he said, thou shall pitch it within and without with pitch,
that it might be sound and sure and abide the waves.

He which challenges to himself that proud and wanton name, to be called the
head of the universal Church, after by little and little he was gotten into
possession, was not behind hand by all means to maintain and keep the same:
In this policy he took away the reading of the Scriptures from the people; he
made Noblemen and Princes his Cardinals; he threw down, and set up, and
changed whom and what he would; The Kings and States of the world, the
Bishops, Professors, and Scholars in Universities, and Preachers, were
brought to swear allegiance and obedience unto him: I devise not this, the
stories hereof are abroad, and the oath which they took is known; his authority
grew greater then the authority of general Counsels; nothing might be decreed
in Councels, but what pleased him; none might be admitted to speak in Councels,
but such as were sworn to him; he had all law in his breast. There was
sometimes a proclamation made in Rome that, for considerations, no man should
erect or build up any Theater; and that if any were set up, it should be rased
and pulled down: Pompeius, a Gentleman of great wealth and noble courage, did
build a Theater; such a one as before had not been seen, which would receive
2500 men, contrary to the Proclamation and order taken: But doubting least the
next Magistrates should destroy it, he caused a place of religion to be set
upon it, and called it the Temple of Venus: whereby he provided, that if any
would overthrow it because it was a Theater, they might yet spare it for the
Temples sake: for to pull down a Temple, was sacrilege. Even so there have
been proclamations and Canons that no man should be called the chief or the
head of all Churches, or usurp such authority over others: but when the Pope
built up his supremacy against the meaning of such Canons, he pretended
religion for his doing; he said it was de jure divine that no man should
presume or attempt against it, and that so his power might continue for ever.

If they have been thus careful to maintain falsehood, how much more careful
should we be to maintain the truth? If they to advance their own kingdom, how
much more we to set forth the kingdom of God, and to build up the Church of
Christ? And if they sought to do that by lies, and by false means, why should
we be slack to use the right, and true, and good means, whereby that good
thing which God has wrought for us may be established? And albeit there be
many ways, by which the kingdom of God may be maintained; as the favor and
countenance of the Prince, which so comfort and cherishes the Church, as
the sun beams comfort and cherish the earth; and knowledge, and learning, and
discipline, which are as the life and the sinews, and without which the Church
must needs fall asunder: at this time, I will leave to speak of the rest, and
only stay upon Learning, which may truly be called the life or the soul of the
Church, and of Christian Religion.

How necessary a thing they have counted Learning to the setting forth of
Religion, the stories of our old Fathers, of Heathens, and Christians in all
ages do witness: They thought that neither Religion might stand without
knowledge, nor knowledge were to be esteemed without Religion. Charles the
great, that he might the better plant Religion in Saxony and Helvetia, did
erect many places for increase of Learning: he knew well that there was no
other way better to establish Religion. The Cathedral Churches, before such
times as ignorance and blindness grew over all the world and brought in an
universal corruption, maintained Schools of learning, that the doctrine which
was taught in those places, might be defended against the gainesayers by such
learned men as were there bred up. The Princes of Germany, and the free
cities, after they had received the Gospel, they dissolved their Monasteries,
which had been harbourers for such as lived in idleness: and set up Schools
and Colleges, which should be nurceries to breed up learned men that might be
able to teach the people, and to maintain Religion: whereby it came to pass,
that in short time they had great store of worthy and learned men.

This did they well see, that have been the enemies of Religion: and therefore
used all means to hinder the increase of Learning, that they might have the
better way to overthrow Religion: For if Learning decay, it is likely that
Religion cannot abide. Bear with me, if I speak that which may seem more fit
for some other place, then for this audience: the best here understands me
well. In other Countries the receiving of the Gospel has always been cause
that Learning was more set by, and learning has ever been the furtherance of
the Gospel. In England I know not how it comes otherwise to pass: for since
the Gospel has been received, the maintenance for learning has been decayed,
and the lack of Learning will be the decay of the Gospel. Would God it were
not so; or that yet, before the fault be incurable, there may be some redress.

Loath I am to speak; yet the case so requires that it is needful to be
spoken. J trust J shall speak in the hearing of them that will consider it.
Maintenance of Learning, whereby an able and sufficient ministry may grow and
be established in all the Churches of this Realm, is to be wished for: The
good estate of this noble Kingdom, the comfort of posterity, the stay of
Religion, the continuing of the Gospel, the removing of darkness hangs upon
it. One asked sometimes, how it was that in Athens, so goodly and great a
City, there were no Physicians? To whom this answer was made, because there
are no rewards appointed for them that practice Physic. The same answer may be
made for our times: the cause why the Church of God is so forsaken, is the want
of zeal in them that should either for their courtesy, or for their ability,
be fosterers of learning, and increase the livings where occasion is, and give
hope and comfort to learned men. What said J? increase? nay the Livings and
provision which heretofore were given to this use, are taken away.

Have patience, if any such be here, as I well know there are, whom these
things touch: suffer me to speak the truth; it is Gods cause. The livings of
such as are in the Ministry, are not in their hands to whom they are due: all
other laborers and artificers have their hire increased double as much as it
was wont to be: only the poor man that labors and sweateth in the Vineyard
of the Lord of hosts, has his hire abridged and abated. J speak not of the
Curates; but of Parsonages and Vicarages, that is of the places which are the
Castles and Towers of fence for the Lords Temple: They seldom pass now adays
from the Patron, if he be no better then a Gentleman, but either for the Lease,
or for present money: Such Merchants are broken into the Church of God; a great
deal more intolerable then were they who^ Christ chased and whipped out of the
Temple. Thus they that should be careful for Gods Church; that should be
Patrons to provide for the consciences of the people, and to place among them a
learned Minister (who might be able to preach the word unto them out of season
and in season, and to fulfill his Ministry,) seek their own, and not that
which is Jesus Christ's; they serve not Jesus Christ, but their belly. And this
is done, not in one place, or in one country, but throughout England: A
Gentleman cannot keep his house, unless he have a Parsonage or two in farm
for his provision.

O merciful God, whereto will this grow at last? If the misery which this
plague works would reach but to one age, it were tolerable: but it will be a
plague to posterity; it will be the decay and desolation of Gods Church.

Young men, which are toward and learned, see this; they see, that he which
feeds the flock, has least part of the milk; he which goes to warfare
has not half his wages: Therefore they are weary and discouraged, they change
their studies, some become prentices, some turn to Physic, some to Law, all
shun and fly the Ministry. And besides the hinderance that thus grows by
wicked dealing of Patrons by reason of the Impropriations, the Vicarages in
many places, and in the properest market-townes are so simple, that no man can
live upon them: and therefore no man will take them. They were wont to say,
Beneficia sine cura; Benefices without charge: but now may be said, Cura sine
Beneficio; Charge or cure without Benefice. J speak not this of myself: many
here present know I speak the truth: and my self know the places which have
continued still these many years without a Minister resident among them, and
have provided themselves as they might with their own money.

Your Graces subjects had hope of amendment, in your Graces late Visitation:
but yet it stands still in case as miserable as it did before. I know, your
Grace hears not of these matters: And I hope, God will work in Your Gracious
heart, to provide some remedy against them. For otherwise, the Schools will be
forsaken, the Church desolate, the people wild and dismayed, the Gospel
discredited: otherwise, we shall see that wrought against the house of God,
that never any Jeroboam, or Julian, or Licinius could have brought to pass
against us. This noble Realm, which ever was famous for the name of Learning,
is like thereby to come to such Ignorance and Barbarism, as has not bin heard
of in any memory before our time.

I know, that there are grievous complaints made, that the Bishops appoint
Priests and Ministers that are ignorant, and have no understanding in the
Latin tongue. Would God it were not true: or would God that they which be the
causers hereof, would somewhat help to amend it. But alas, are we able to make
learned men upon the sudden? Or can we make others then such as come unto us,
or will come to live in misery?

But there are many which can say, such as be Ministers in the Church, should
teach freely, without hope of recompense or hire for their labor; Our
preachers are no better then Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles; they are
no better then the holy Prophets, who lived poorly; poverty is a commendable
estate. So say some, in like devotion as did Judas, What needed this wast? this
might have been sold for much, and given to the poor: not that he cared for
the poor, but because he was a theife and had the bag, and bare that which was
given. J doubt not, there are many which teach Christ for Christ's sake; which say
in their soul, the Lord is my portion; who in that heavy time, from which God
delivered the^, if they might have received their life only for a recompense,
would have been glad to take the pains; who seek you, and not yours; which
have forsaken all they had, to follow Christ: I doubt not there are such.

But for the hope of posterity, I report me to all you which are Fathers, and
have children for whom ye are careful. Although your selves have a zeal and
care for the house of God, yet will you breed them up, keep them at school
until 24 years old to your charges, that in the end they may live in glorious
poverty, that they may live poorly, and naked, like the Prophets and Apostles?
Our posterity shall rue that ever such fathers went before them: and Chronicles
shall report this contempt of Learning among the punishments and murraines and
other plagues of God. They shall leave it written in what time, and under whose
reign this was done. Or if we grow so barbarous, that we consider not this, or
be not able to draw it into chronicle, yet foreign nations will not spare to
write this, and publish it to our everlasting reproach and shame.

In the mean time, what may be guessed of their meaning, which thus ravin and
spoil the house of God? which decay the provisio^ thereof, and so basely
esteem the Ministers of his Gospel? they cannot say to God, the zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. Howsoever in other things they do well; howsoever they
seem to rejoice at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the safety and
preservation of the Lords anointed, yet needs must it be that by these means
foreign power (of which this Realm by the mercy of God is happily delivered)
shall again be brought in upon us. Such things shall be done unto us, as we
before suffered: the truth of God shall be taken away; the holy Scriptures
burnt and consumed in fire; a mavelous darkness and calamity must needs
ensue. For if the tempest be so dark in the sea, that the load-star loose her
light, and the needle fail to give token of the North Pole, no marvel though
the ship lose her course, and be swallowed up in the sands.

The Gospel of Christ is the fountain of light and of knowledge: It cannot be
maintained by ignorance and darkness; these be the props of their kingdom,
which take away the Scriptures; which hold the people in blindness; which fly
the light; which have their Common Prayers, administer the Sacraments, marry,
bury their dead in a strange tongue, that the people may understand nothing;
which make a famine of hearing the word of God; which stop up the springs of
the water of life; which take away the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would enter; which say,
ignorance is the mother of devotion; and the Church is then in best order, and
the people most devout, when they are hood-winkt, and blinded, and see nothing.

These are not fit instruments wherewith we may overcome the adversaries; this
is not the sword of the Spirit; these are not the spiritual weapons which cast
down holds and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God.
What man, that would keep out his enemy, will pull down his holds? What
Captain that means to give a forcible assault upon the enemy, will discourage
his fighting soldiers? but our soldiers are out of courage; our Castles are
fallen: therefore that which we fear, will fall upon us.

The Ox that treads out the corn is mussled; he that goes to warfare,
receives not his wages; the cry hereof goes up into the ears of the Lord of
hosts. He will not abide so great contempt of his word and preachers: his own
name is thereby dishonored. Our Savior says, Luke 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
he that despises you, despises me. And St Paul, he that despises these
things, despises not man but God. And think we, that he will suffer his holy
name to be despised? nay, his wrath is already kindled; he has already begun
his judgments, and therefore many places are left desolate. There is none that
can warn them of their sin, none that can move them to repentance, none that
can preach unto them forgiveness through Christ, none that can instruct them
in the comfort of everlasting life: because they work such things against the
Lord, the hearts of many are astonished; though they hear, they understand
not; they scorn and jest at the word of salvation; it is unto them a savor of
death unto death; they are earthly minded; whose God is their belly, and whose
glory is their shame.

For this cause you live still in your sins, in adultery, in covetousnes, and
in pride, without any feeling of conscience, without any fear of God. Your
daughters, your Heirs, to whom you shall leave your lands, are stolen away
from you. Robberies and thefts are so common, as if it were not only lawful,
but also commendable; as if sin were no sin, and hell fire but a fable.

Thus we provoke God to anger: many walk, of whom we cannot think but with
weeping: they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: the name of God is
blasphemed through them. Many are so ignorant, they know not what the
Scriptures are, they know not that there are any Scriptures, they call them
heretical and new Doctrine: many will believe neither side, whatsoever they
allege; bring they truth, bring they falsehood; teach they Christ, teach they
Antichrist, they will believe neither, they have so hardened their hearts: Be
the Preacher rough or gentle, learned or unlearned; let him use authority of
the Scriptures, of the Doctors, of the Councels, of Decrees or Decretals, of
Gods law, of man's law, nothing will move them, nothing will please them,
because the Ministry of God, and thereby God himself is despised.

These words happily seem sharp and overvehement: but the darkness of our hearts
against God, and the lack of zeal to his house, enforce me to them. We are
almost fallen into the lowest pit: we are left without zeal, as senseless men,
and as if we had clean forgotten our selves, as the heathen, which know not
God. Therefore, unless we repent, the kingdom of God shall be taken away from
us: he will send upon this land a famine of the word: Jerusalem shall be
overthrown, and made an heap of stones: the man of sin, and they which have
not the love of the truth, shall prevail with many, and withdraw them from
obedience to the Prince: this noble Realm shall be subject to foreign
nations. All this will the zeal of the Lord of hosts bring to pass.

I could have spent this time in opening some other matter: but nothing, in my
judgment, is more worthy your good consideration, and speedy redress. I would
be loath, rashly or rudely to abuse the reverence of this place: but unless
these things be cared for; unless we show forth greater zeal then hitherto; if
the years to come eat up and take away from the Ministry, as the late years
have done, there will not be left, within a while, any to speak the word of God
out of this place, the Pulpits shall have none to use them, the people shall
grow wild and void of understanding.

When Xerxes beheld the great company of Soldiers, sudde^ly he brake into
tears and wept bitterly: one said to him, o Sir, you have cause to rejoice,
you have a goodly company, they are able to fight for you against any nation:
But what shall become of them, says Xerxes? after a 100 years not one of all
these shall be left alive. If the view of the small number of Preachers might
be taken, how few they are, and how thin they come up, we have greater cause
then Xerxes to lament, if we have any zeal to the house of God: for of the
Preachers which now are, within few years none will remain alive. And Xerxes
his soldiers left issue behind them, which might afterward serve their
country: But there is like to be small increase for the supply of learned men.
The Lord shall lack men to bring in his harvest: the little ones shall call for
bread, and there shall be none to give it them. They that shall come after us,
shall see this to be true; there is no house so spoiled, as the house of the
Lord; there is no servant so little rewarded, as the servant of Christ, and the
dispensers of the mysteries of God.

Oh that your Grace did behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church: or that
you might foresee the calamities which will follow. It is a part of your
Kingdom, and such a part, as is the principal prop and stay of the rest.
Cyrill: Epist: ad Theodos: and valent.
I will say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors
Theodosius and Valentinian, Ab ea quae erga Deum est pietate Reipub: vestrae
status pendet; the good estate and welfare of your Commonwealth hangs upon
true godliness. You are our governor, you are the Nurce of Gods Church; we
must open this grief before you. God knows if it may be redressed, it has
grown so long, and is run so far: but if it may be redressed, there is no
other beside your Highness, that can redress it.

J hope, I speak truly, that which I speak without flattery; that God has
endued your Grace with such measure of learning and knowledge, as no other
Christian Prince: he has given you peace, happiness, the love and true hearts
of your subjects. Oh turn and employ these to the glory of God; that God may
confirm in your Grace the thing which he has begun. To this end has God
placed Kings and Princes in their State, as David says, that they may serve
the Lord; that they may see, and cause others to see to the furniture of the
Church. The good Emperor Justinian cared for this, as much as for his life:
Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, and other godly Princes called themselves
Vasallos, the subjects and bond-servants of God: they remembered that God
furnished them in their houses; and were not unmindfull to furnish his house.

When Augustus had beautified Rome with setting up many fair buildings, he
said, Jnveni lateritiam, marmoream reddidi: I found it made of brick, but I
leave it made of marble. Your Grace, when God sent you to your inheritance and
the right of this Realm, found the Church in horrible confusion: and in
respect of the true worship of God a Church of brick; or rather, as Ezechiel
says, daubed up with unseasoned mortar. Your Grace has already redressed the
doctrine: now cast your eyes toward the Ministry; give courage and
countenance unto Learning, that Gods house may be served: so shall you leave to
the Church of God, a testimony that the zeal of the Lords house had eaten you
up.

And you, o dearly beloved, if there be any such which are neither hot nor
cold; which do the work of the Lord negligently; which esteem the word of God
but as a matter of policy; which are ashamed to be called Professors of the
Gospel of Christ: pray unto God, that he will increase your zeal. Let us
continue rooted and built in Christ, and stablished in the faith: let us have
care for the house of God. Whosoever is not after this sort zealous, is a man
of a double heart. We may not halt between two opinions: If the Lord be God,
follow him; but if Baal be he then go after him: he that is not with Christ,
is against him. Many talk of the Gospel, and glory in their knowledge: but it
is neither talk, nor knowledge, which shall save them in that day. He that
fears the Lord, and serves him with a pure heart, and may truly say, the
zeal of thine house has consumed me, he shall be saved. If they shall not
escape which have zeal without knowledge, what shall become of us, which have
knowledge without zeal?

And you, whosoever you are that by such means have decayed the Lords house,
and abridged the provision and maintenance thereof, and see the miserable wrack
of Gods Church: if there be any zeal of God in you, if you have any fellowship
of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, if you love God, if you desire the
continuance of the Gospel, Oh remember you have the Patrimony due unto them
that should attend in the Lords house. You take unto your selves wrongfully
that which was not lotted for you. Give unto Caesar those things which belong
to Caesar, and unto God the things which appertain to him, and make for the
beauty and furniture of his house. Enrich your selves by lawful means, and
without the spoil and wast of Gods Church. Let not the Ministry by your
means be despised: you enriched them which mocked, and blinded, and devoured
you; spoil not them now that feed, and instruct, and comfort you. Let us seek
the glory of God; let us at length serve the Lord, and not our belly and
greedy wantonness.

So shall God bless you, and prosper you in all your affairs: so shall he
strike a terror of you into all foreign Princes that dwell about you: so
shall your heart be kept steadfast in the hand of God: so shall your heart be
perfect before the Lord: so shall you leave such as shall always praise the
Lord in Sion: so shall you see your childrens children, and peace upon Jsrael.

And thou, o most merciful Father, grant that thy words be not spoken in vain:
in is thy cause. Thou art our Father, we are as clay in thine hands. Thou have
the key of our hearts. give zeal to them that have knowledge, give knowledge
to them that have zeal; that they may be enflamed and ravished with the love
of thy house, to sorrow for the decay thereof, and to do all their endeavor
to build up and establish the same for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
PSALM. I. Beatus Vir.
1 BLessed is the man that has not walked in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor
stand in the way of sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the scornful.
2 But his delight is in the Law of the Lord: and in his Law will he exercise
himself day and night.
3 And he shall be like a Tree planted by the water side that will bring forth
his fruit in due season.
4 His leaf also shall not wither: and look whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper.
5 As for the Ungodly it is not so with them: but they are like the Chaff,
which the wind scatters away from the face of the earth.
6 Therefore the Ungodly shall not be able to stand in the judgment: neither
the Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous.
7 But the Lord knows the way of the Righteous: and the way of the Ungodly
shall perish.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis First and Foremost Psalm, be it but an Introduction to the rest, as some
will have it; or a Psalm it self, and one of the rest, as all in a manner are
of opinion, certain it is, that as it yields us good Instruction, so was it
framed to that purpose. In the which the Psalmist endeavoring to describe the
Felicity of the Godly, he both proposes unto us, and opposes between
themselves, the Godly, and the Wicked. Concerning the Godly he declares unto us
their Condition, and their Reward. Their Condition, in that abhorring Impiety,
as it is in the First Verse, they follow religious courses, as it is in the
Second: Their Reward, in that they participate of the manifold Blessings of
God, as the same Blessings are intimated to us in the Third, and Fourth Verses.
Concerning the Wicked he proclaymes unto us both their State, and their End,
their State in the Fifth Verse, their End, in the Sixth, which State, and End of
theirs to be most miserable, he proves from the Day of Judgment, and that in
the Seventh and last Verse.

And thus much briefly of the Concerning this Analysis, as also all the rest,
they are for the most part taken out of Huldericus Herlinus his Analises
Synopticae printed 1603.
Analysis, or Resolution of the whole Psalm into those several Parts, whereof
it does consist. Come we now to the word^ themselves verse by verse, and let us
rub them as S. Austen Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 14.
speaks, like Ears of Corn in our hand, Vt ad latentia grana perveniamus,
that so we may come to the wheat that lies hid in those words, as it were in
the husk.

Verse. 1. Blessed is the Man that has not walked in the counsel of the
Ungodly, nor stand in the way of Sinners, and has not sit in the seat of the
Scornful.] It was Pindarus his (...). Pind. Od. 6.
observation, that in beginning any work, the Forefront thereof should be
made glittering and glorious. And I may truly say of this First Psalm whether
we respect the Psalm in general, or the very first word of it in particular,
it is most glittering, most glorious. Blessed is the Man! Quam aptum, quam
opportunum principium, Ambros. in hunc. Psalm.
says St Ambrose, how meet and convenient a beginning. For as they, says he,
that take upon them to exhibit Games, are wont to propose a Reward, and the
Excellency of a Crown, that they which come to the Games may strive the more
earnestly to obtain the same, so our Lord Jesus Christ has proposed the Glory
of an heavenly Kingdom, the benefit of perpetual Rest, the Blessedness of
eternal Life to the best endeauours of men. And as a General, says he, going
to warfar, promises a Donatiue to the Soldier, and Promotions to his
Captains, Vt spes commodi furetur laborem, and metum abscondat periculi: that
the hope of gain may both steal away their labor from them, and hide and
conceal the fear of any danger that may betide them: so David as the Herald
of that great General, exhorts the Soldiers, calls the Combatants to the
Lists, and proposes the Reward in these words, Blessed is the Man which has
not walked in the Counsel of the Ungodly. A Praemio coepit, vt pondu^ futuri
certaminis eleuaret. He begins with the Reward to make the burden of that
which they should afterward endure the lighter. He proposes the wages that
every man leaping over in his heart the troubles and vexations of these present
worldly affairs, should contend with most speedy desire to the happiness of
things to come. Blessed, says he, is the Man: and what could more be given to
Man then which nothing greater by the Apostle himself could be given unto God.
For God is called by the 1. Tim. 6.15.
Apostle the Blessed, and only potentate, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords;
Beatitudinis tamen non supergreditur potestatem, and yet for all that, God goes
not beyond the pre-eminence of blessedness. Now this word BLESSED as it is the
first word, and auspicious beginning of this First Psalm, so is it likewise of
Five more which begin with the self same word, as, Ps 32.1.
BLESSED is he whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered,
Ps. 41.1.
BLESSED is he that considers the poor and needy. Ps. 112.1.
BLESSED is the man that fears the Lord. Ps. 119.1.
BLESSED are those that are undefiled in the way, and walk in the Law of the
Lord. Ps. 128.1.
BLESSED are all they that fear the Lord, and walk in his ways. But whereas
in the English, the word BLESSED is still an Adjective, in the Hebrew both here
in this Psalm, as also in the rest, it is always, ASHRE, Blessings, or
Beatitudes, not only a Substantive and in the Abstract, but also in the plural
number.

First for the Abstract, it shows that they are Blessings Substantial,
subsisting by themselves, and that it is much more significant so to speak, So
the Poet, Non vitiosus homo es Zeile sed vitium. Martiol. l. 11. Epig. 93.
then to call a Man Blessed by the Adjective only. Like as the Apostle
speaking of our Savior, and us, uses the Abstract, not the Concrete, the
Substantive, not the Adjective, in both: 2. Cor. 5.21.
He has made him to be Sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him. He says not Sinful, or Righteous; but
Sin, and Righteousness.

The Plural shows an heap of Blessings that betyde such a man, not as Esaw
Genesis 27.38.
said to Isaac, Have thou but one blessing my Father? No: but as Leah in an
other case, A troop Genesis 30.11.
says she, comes, and she called his name Gad. For what is Blessedness
indeed, but a troop or company of Blessings, intimated by the 1 Cor. 2.9.
Apostle in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, and specified by Deuteronomy 2.3.
Moses in his Book of Deuteronomy. Some make it to consist of the Goods of the
Body, the Goods of the Mind, and of external and outward Goods, but our
Savior slyes a far higher pitch. For, beginning his Sermon on the Mount with
Mat. 5.3,
Blessed are the pure in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; he
adds thereunto, Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted;
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth; Blessed are they that
do hunger and thirst after Righteousness, for they shall be filled; Blessed are
the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy; Blessed are the pure in heart, for
they shall see God; Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God; and lastly, to show that where Blessedness ends, there it does
as it were begin again, Blessed are they says he, that are persequuted for
Righteousness sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: so that a primo ad
vltimum: there is in this Blessedness, first the kingdom of heaven; secondly,
all comfort; thirdly, inheriting the earth; fourthly, a filling full, or fully
satisfying; fifthly, obtaining mercy; sixthly, a seeing of God; seauenthly, a
Multi in Imperio Romano sunt, sed maiorem Imperii gratiam, qui propiores
Imperatori sunt, consequuntur. Ambros. sup. Luc. l. 5. c. 13.
nearer tie unto him, as namely to be called the Children of God; eighthly and
lastly, to begin again, and to have in propriety and perpetuity, the kingdom
of heaven. Incrementa Virtutum, Incrementa Praemiorum: the augmentation of
Virtues, Ambros. Ib.
says St Ambrose, is the augmentation of Rewards, Plus est enim Dei esse
Filium, quam possidere terram, and consolationem mereri. For more it is to be
the Child of God, then to possess the earth, and to be comforted.

But what? is Man only? is not Woman blessed to? Yes doubtless; for the word Man
includes both. Hominis appellatione tam foeminam quam masculum contineri non
dubitatur. There is no doubt De Verb. significat. nu. 152.
says the Civil Law, but this word Homo compriseth the Female, as well as the
Male; and, Viris and Mulieribus commune nomen Homo. Homo Clem. Alex. Paedag. l.
1. c. 4.
says Clemens Alexandrinus, is a common Name to Men and Women both. And if so
be reply be made, that the word in the vulgar is not Homo, but Vir, and in the
Greek, not (...), but (...), (about which two Greek words was Vid. Act. and
Mon. edit. 4. p. 1456. col. 2.
once no small ado, concerning Women's receiving the Communion.) Saint Ambrose
Ambros. in hunc Ps.
replies again, that by the word Vir, a Woman may be understood to. In Homine
signatur vterque in Viro sexus exprimitur. Sed quemadmodum cum Homo dicitur,
vterque comprehenditur: ita cum Vir nominatur, and mulier cuius Vir ille sit,
intelligitur. And going on in the same place: Besides that their Nature being
one says he, their operations must not be severed, and whose work is equal,
their reward must be equal to. Like to this Bas. in hunc Ps.
has St. Basil, The Creation of Man and Woman were both alike, therefore their
wages and hyre must be both alike to.

Man and Woman then being both of them capable of Blessedness, you will happily
demand what Man? what Woman? The word Man is here indefinite, and signifies
not this, or that Man, this, or that Woman in particular, but any, or every
Man, any, or every Woman, as the Indefinite signifies generally throughout the
Scripture. And therefore that saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 27.26.
Cursed is he (or, cursed is the Man) that confirms not all the words of this
Law to do them: the Apostle Saint Paul expounding that place, Cursed is every
one Gal. 3.10.
says he, that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of
the Law to do them. Now what Men, and what Women thus are blessed, we shall
see by and by, in the mean time let us consider why the time present is here
used, seeing Blessedness is to be hereafter, and yet the Prophet here says,
Blessed is the Man.

It is an undoubted truth, there is no Felicity in this World; he that thinks
of a Worldly Happiness, erres as far as the World is wide. In the World Ioh.
16.33.
says our Savior, ye shall have tribulation, and yet to sweeten those words
again, Be of good cheer, says he, I have overcome the World. Non armato
milite, sed irrisa cruce, not by means of men at arms Aug. in Psalm. 62.
says St Austen, but by means of my Cross that was scorned at by men at
arms; and as himself led the way in this case, so must every one of his,
endeavor to follow him. Now for every one in this his following, is assured
that at the length, it shall be happy with him hereafter, being a member of
that Body, whose Head Christ Jesus has passed the waves of this world: hence
it is that his Blessedness being thus begun in this World, he is styled
already Blessed, for he tends to that Blessedness hereafter. Like as the Apostle
St Paul, Our Conversation is in heaven Philip. 3.20.
says he, when yet the Apostle, and his Philippians were still upon earth.
Indeed we have here the Pledge of Happiness, or rather the Earnest thereof. For
as Aug. de Verb. Apost, ser. 13.
St Austen very wittily, When a thing is restored, the Pledge is taken away,
but the Earnest is part of the bargayne, which shall never be taken away: so is
it in this case, Nescit naufragia, qui semperin portu tranquillitatis est. Come
what come can, he cannot make Shipwreck Ambros. de Jacob, and vita beata c. 6.
says St Ambrose, that is always in a quiet harbor, the same in effect that
our Savior Mat. 7.25.
says of the wise Man that built his house upon a Rock. But now let us see
what Men, and what Women are thus Blessed, or rather what Man, or what Woman:
That has not walked in the Counsel of the Ungodly, nor stand in the way of
Sinners: and has not sit in the seat of the Scorneful.

First for the word Stand used here in the Praeterperfect tence, as also in the
Praeterpluperfect in an other Psalm, where it is Ps. 106.23.
said, He would have destroyed them had not Moses his chosen stand before him
in the gap, whereas we in these days would have said stood in both places, I
cannot but think that it is the phrase of speaking in some of our Shires here
in England, in regard that Mr Fox also a modern wrighter to speak of, does so
use the word. Speaking of B. Gardener, Such a platform Act. and Mon, p. 1787.
col. 2,
says he, to build his Popery upon, as he thought should have stand for ever,
and a day. I once thought it to be the old English, for that old Heywood so
Heywood Epig. upon Proverb. Epig. 67. New broom sweepeth clean, which is thus
understand: New broom sweepeth clean in the clean sweepers hand.
uses it, in one of his Epigrams, though it be in the Present tence Passive
that he so uses it, and in the word Understand; but having seen in our great
Library an old Manuscript of the Psalms in English, that uses the word Stood,
I was contented to stand no longer in that opinion. But from Words let us come
to Matter.

There is in these words a threefold Gradation, or as it were three Degrees.
First of Persons; Secondly of Actions; Thirdly of the Objects of those Actions.
The three Degrees of Persons, are the Ungodly, Sinners, and Scornful; the
three Degrees of Actions, are Walking, Standing, and Sitting; the three Degrees
of Objects, are Counsel, Way, and Seat. By the Persons are employed all the
wicked whosoever; by the Actions all correspondence with them whatsoever; by
the Objects, all iniquity and impiety committed, howsoever. Concerning the
Persons, no man at first dash in the Superlatiue degree of being wicked. Nemo
repent fuit turpissimus Iuvenal. Sat. 2.
says the Poet, no man in a tryce as bad as bad may be. Even good Emperors, as
the Emperor Traian Procul differ cunctos Principes Neronis quinquenaio. Sex.
Aurel. Vict. de Caesar. in Neron.
observed, came far short of Neroes first five years, and he who when
Offenders were to be condemned, wished so solemly that he could not a Senec. de
Clem. l. 2. c. 1.
letter on the Book, how shamefully did he afterward murder his own Mother.
But we need not go to Rome for most abominable Persons, our own Nation will
afford us stoare enough. And because some Popish Catholic may here be prying,
to see what I will say, hoping for somewhat against our Religion, I will relate
unto him a Story which Sir Thomas Moore has avowched, and is of his own
setting forth, though it be not in his printed Works, Verily Sir Thomas Moore
in the Book alleged before in the Epistle to the Reader, Epistolae aliquot
Eruditorum. p. N. 3.
says he, I know one by the institution of his life, a Religious person, and
of that kind of the Religious, that is accounted at this day, and truly so
accounted, as I believe, the most Religious of all the other Orders. He not
being now a Nouice, but having spent many years in Religious Obseruances, as
they call them, came at length to that Promotion, that he became the Prior of
the Monastery, yet more neglecting the Precepts of God, then Monastical Rytes
and Ceremonies, he fell from Vice to Vice, and came at length so far, that he
purposed in his mind Scelus omnium atrocissimum, and supra quam credi posset
execrandum, a most outrageous Villainy, and much more execrable then can be
believed, and not a simple Villainy nether, but such as was fraught with many
besides, as one that had fully determined to add Sacrilege to Slaughter and
Parricide. Who when he saw himself not able alone to perpetrate so many wicked
Acts, he got him certain Ruffians to be his Followers. They committed the most
villainous deed, and the most outrageous that ever I saw. Being taken they are
cast in prison. And yet am I not purposed to reveal the thing it self, and I
abstain from telling their names, least some old Envy should be renewed
against that harmless Order. But to come to the point whereupon I began this
Story, I my self did hear of those wicked Russians, that when they came to
the Chamber of that holy Prior of theirs, they never consulted about any
wickedness, until being brought into his private Oratory, they said as the
manner is, the Ave Mary on their knees, and when that was said and done, then
presently did they rise, and went about their villainy. Thus far Sr Thomas
Moore, and thus much of the Persons.

Concerning the Actions they are three Degrees too, and therefore Arnobius: Our
Consent, Ambros. in hunc Ps.
says he, shall be happy, if so be it walk not; or if it walk, it stand not;
or if it stand, it sit not; that is, persist not in the Seat of the Scornful.
Quanto examine, Scripturae diuinae verba ponuntur. With how great heed, Ambros.
in hunc Ps.
says St Ambrose, are the words of holy Scripture set down unto us. For
because we are all of us in sin, the Scripture here exacteth not that which
is above our Nature, that we sin not at all, for an Infant of a day old is
not without sin, but it requires that we abide not in Sin as it were in a
daily Station. And this it is that here is meant by Walking, Standing, and
Sitting, though Standing be more then Walking, and Sitting more then Standing
The Hebrew style and manner of discurse as the Doway Bible in hunc Ps.
Rhemists observe, differing here from other Nations, in mentioning first the
less Evil, and the greatest last. Whereas we would say in the contrary order,
He is happy that has not Sit, that is, has not settled himself in wickedness*
nor finally persisted obstinate: more happy that has not Stood, that is any
notable time continued in sin: and most happy that has not Walked, that is,
not given any consent at all to evil suggestions.

So likewise concerning the Objects: First of all there is Counsel, and that
is one degree unto wickedness; then is there the Way of the Wicked, that is
another; then is there the Seat of wickedness, and when men are once settled
there, then are they top and top gallant. They are then as Ier 48.11.
Moab was, settled on his lees; then do they do as 1. King. 21.20
Ahab did* sell themselves to work evil; then do they phrase it in Ioh, 19
10.
Pilates voice, Speak thou not unto me! know thou not that I have power
to crucify thee, and have power to release thee! Rugitus saeuit Leonis, tument
colla serpentis: It was the roaring of a Lion, Aug. Hom. 35.
says St Austen, and the throat of the Serpent began to swell. Such Walkers as
here are spoken of, were they of whom the Apostle writes in his Epistle to the
Philippians, and he wrote it with tears in his eyes, Phil. 3.18.
Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that
they are the enemies of the Cross of Christ; Such Standers were they who stood
with Corah and his Accomplices, and withstood Moses, as we read in the Nom. 16.27.
Book of Nombers; In a word such Scorners also were they, who when good king
Ezechias had abolished Idolatry, and made a Reformation, and sent Poasts to
certain Cities to call the People to serve the Lord, they laughed his Poasts
to skorne, as we read in the 2. Chron. 30.10.
Book of Chronicles. And in this case it will not be amiss to join the New
Testament, and the Old together, and so shall we see the true nature of
skorning what it is. For that which Moses delivers in the Old, how Sarah saw
the son of Hagar the Egyptian which she had born unto Abraham. Genesis 21.9.
Mocking: the Apostle St Paul in the New does deliver it as a Persequution. As
then, Gal. 4.29.
says he, he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne
after the spirit, even so it is now. And it is so now indeed, Mali persequuntur
Bonos, si non ferro and lapidibus, certe vita atque moribus: The Bad do
persecute the Good, Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 24. and Hom. 10.
says S. Austen, though not by dint of sword and stoning them, yet by their
lewd living, and by their behavior toward them, And again in another place,
Aug. in Ps. 127.
Christians are not in these days free from Persecution, because the Devil
sets not upon them by means of persecuting Tyrants, do but begin to lead a
godly life, and thou shall easily find that all that will live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. So Saint Chrysostom, Quid ^is? Non adest
Martyrij tempus? To one that should say, It is not now the time of Martyrdom,
but if it were, then would he do, I marry would he (like as many Protestants
say now adays) What say thou, Chrysostom. in 2. a^ Cor c. 1. Hom.
says S. Chrysostom, is it not now a time of Martyrdom? Nay that time is
never absent, but is always before our eyes, did we but open our eyes to see
it, and he proves it there in that place by the Example of Job.

I should here end this First Verse, but that in all good congruity, somewhat
would be said to Beyerlincke, who Laurent. Be^erlinck Tract. Synod c. 12 p.
139. and p. 144.
misapplyeth so much this Parcel of Scripture concerning the Seat of the
Scornful, to that sacred Synod held at Dort, for the composing of
Controversies about the Arminians, who might have reserved that Term,
Cathedram pestilentiae, The Chair of Pestilence Vid. Iuels Defense of the
Apol. Part 6. c. 6 Divis. 3. p. 676.
for Petrus Asotus, and Hosius, and Harding, of his own side, that said so
blasphemously, that The sentence of death pronounced in Council against our
Savior Christ Jesus, was just, and true, to whom he might have joined also the
Author of that Marginall Noat upon the Did. 13. Item in Margin.
Decrees, Iudaei mortaliter peccassent, nisi Christum crucifixissent: The Jews
had committed mortal sin, had they not crucified Christ Jesus. As for those
Reverend Men at Dort, not one of them but might say as Tull. Phil^p. 2
Tully in another case, In huius me Consilij societatem, tanquam in equum
Troianum includi cum Principibu^ non recuso. But I have been too long upon
this first Verse, and yet before we part from it, let me briefly tell you two
Stories concerning the word BLESSED.

The First is this. When Petilian the Donatist (like Beyerlinck) had alleged
this Psalm against the Orthodox Christians: St Austen answering for them, Who
cannot discern, Aug. cont. lit. Petil. l. 2. c. 46.
says he, in the Scriptures between these two kinds of men, the Good and the
Bad, but you Cursed as you are, Paleae crimina etiam Frumentis obijcitis the
faults of the Chaff you object to the Corn it self, and being your selves the
only Chafe, you make your boast that you are the only Corn. Well, I advise
you to read this first Psalm in Greek, so shall you not dare to object as a
crime to the whole world, that it takes the part of Macarius. For thereby you
may happily understand what Macarius that is, that has a part in all the
Saints, who throu^hout all Nations are blessed in Abraham's seed. F r that which
is written in Latin, Beatus Vir, in the Greek it is, (...) Now that MACARIVS
who displeases you so much if so be he were a bad man, he is not in this lot,
nor is he any hinderance thereunto. But if he were a good man let h m try his
own work, that so he may have the praise in himself, and not in another.

The other is this. When one of the Priests in Constantines time, had Eusebius. de
Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 48. Graece. p. 154.
called him Happy to his face, as one in this life that was full worthy to have
the Government of all the World, and to reign afterward with Christ:
Constantine was ill pleased with the hearing hear of, and willed him never to
use any such speech any more, but rather to pray to God, that both in this
life, and in the next, he might be thought worthy to be but a Servant of God:
who yet afterward when he was baptized: Eusebius. Jb. c. 63. Graece. p. 255. b.
(...). Now of a truth, says he, I know my self to be BLESSED* and that I am
counted worthy to enjoy hereafter everlasting life, and that I am made partaker
of heavenly light.

Verse. 2. But his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law will be
exercise himself day and night.] Nobis initium bonorum, abstinentia peccatorum
est. To us, Ambros. in hunc. Ps.
says S. Ambrose, the beginning of good things, is an abstinence from sins,
and therefore we read, Ps. 37.27.
Fl^e from evil, and do the thing that is good. The Prophet in the former
verse has taught us to flee the evil, but because that is not sufficient, he
teaches us now a new Lesson, namely to do the thing that is good. That is, to
delight in the Law of the Lord, and to exercise our selves therein.

First for the Law of the Lord. The Latin word Lex which signifies the Law,
is Vid. Vrsi^. Catech. Angl. edit. 1611. p. 886.
derived from Lego, which has two significations, namely to read, and publish,
or else to choose. With the former der^vation agrees the Hebrew word Thorah,
with the later (...) the Greek. In the Hebrew the Law i^ called Thorah,
Doctrine, because L^wes are published unto all, that every one may learn them.
The Greek (...), comes from a Wotd that signifies to divide and distribute,
and therefote the Law is so called, because it distributeth unto every one
proper charges and functions. Now the Law as it is sometimes taken in holy
Scripture for the whole Old Testament in general: so sometimes again for the
Books of Moses only, as here in this place. Moses wrote Five in all, winch
were therefore called the LAW, for asm^ch as all the Laws that belonged to
the Jews, Moral, Ceremonial, and Judicial, were comprised in those Books.
The Moral Law is a Doctrine, agreeing with the eternal Wisdom, and Justice
of G d, discerning things honest and dishonest, known by nature, and
engendered in reasonable Creatures at the Creation, binding all the reasonable
Creatures to perfect obed^ence, both Internal and External, promising the
favor of God, and everlasting Life to those which perform perfect Obedience,
and denouncing the wrath of God, and everlasting Pains and Punishments unto
them, who are not perfectly correspondent thereunto. The Ceremonial were Laws
derived from God by Moses, concerning Ceremonies, that is, External solemn
Actions and Gestures, which in the public Worship of God, were to be
performed, binding the Jews until the coming of the Messiah: that they
should distinguish that People and the Church from others, and should be
Signs, Symbols, Types, or Shadows of spiritual Things to be fulfilled in the
New Testament by Christ. The Judicial, were Laws concerning the civil Order,
or civil Government, or maintenance of external Discipline among the Jews,
according to the tenor of both Tables of the Decalogue, that is, of the Order
and Offices of Magistrates, of Judgment, Punishments, Contracts, and of the
distinguishing and bounding of Dominions, delivered from God by Moses, for the
settling and preserving of the Jews Commonwealth. And these are that Law here
intimated by the Prophet, and whereof he speaks so much in his 119. Psalm. It
is the longest and largest Psalm in all the Book, consisting of 176. Verses,
and not one of all those Verses (one only There are in the English five more,
the 84. the 121, the 132, the 149, and the 156. but in the Latin they have one
of these Words, according to the Latin.
excepted, namely the 122) but makes mention of this Law, or by that very name,
or by the name of Testimonies, Way, or Ways, Word, or Words, Commandments,
Statutes, Judgments, Ceremonies, Righteousness, or Truth. In these Laws it
should seem the Jews were so perfect, that Josephus speaking of them: Every
one Joseph. cont. Appian. l. 2.
says he, of our Nation, being demanded of our Laws, can answer as readily
as he can tell his own Name. For every one of us learning them as it were, so
soon, as we come to the use of Reason, we have them as it were written, and
printed in our minds, and by this means offend we much more seeldome, and
when we offend, we are sure to be punished,

Secondly, where it is said, His delight is in the Law, it may very well be
taken for continual Reading the same Law. Orationi Lectio, Lectioni succedat
Oration: Let her pray, and read, Hieron. ad Lect. de Instit. Filiae.
says St Ierom read, and pray: wrighting to a Gentlewoman, concerning the
bringing up of her Daughter. And writing to an other, Let the Book of sacred
Scriptures Hieron. ad Rust. Monach.
says he, be never out of thy hands, or from thine eyes. Discatur Psalterium
ad verbum. As for the Book of Psalms, get that in thy memory word by word. For
such is our Nature Aug. Quaest. mixtim qu. 120.
says St Austen, as that it becomes dull and heavy, if we accustom not our
selves to reading. For as iron if it be not used, gathers rust, so the Soul
unless it be frequent in reading divine Scriptures* is surrounded with Sin,
as it were with rust.

Thirdly after Reading he meditates thereupon, and therefore is it here added,
And in his Law will he exercise himself day, and night.] Excellent things they
are, that are spoken of Meditation, and it is strange what in this case Authors
report even of Bruit Beasts. This Plin. Not. Hist. l. 8. c. 3.
says Pliny, is known for certain, that on a time there was an Elephant, not
of so good capacity as his Fellows to take out his Lessons, and to learn that
which was taught him. Whereupon being oftentimes beaten for that blockishnesse
of his, was found studying and conning those Feats in the night, which he had
been learning the day before. The same Plin. l. 10. c. 42.
Pliny tells us the like of Pyes, and Stares, and Nightingales: and Plutarch.
de Solert. Animal.
Plutarch tells of a Pie, that to learn certain Tunes which she heard
Minstrels play, waxed dumb many days after. At length upon the sudden, she
brake forth into the same Tunes which those Minstrels had played before, to the
astonishment of all that heard her, and thought she would never have sung
again. But to return unto my purpose.

Meditation is that in the Old Law which was signified by Chewing the Cud. For
as there the Swine was Levit. 11.7.
unclean to the Israelites, because it chewed not the Cud, howsoever it
divided the Hoof: so howsoever we read the Word, and divide our times to that
purpose, yet unless we Meditate thereupon, and do as the Blessed Luc. 2.51.
Virgin did, lay it up in our hearts, as in good ground, either the wicked One
comes, and catches it away: Mat. 13.15.
or Tribulation, or Persecution arises, and by and by we are offended; or the
care of this World, and the deceitfulness of Riches choke it, and so we become
unfruitful. So that Meditation implies a long time, before we come to the
Perfection of Happiness here spoken of. The very seed-time may teach us that
we are not to sow and reap at once. Nay, that which comes up suddenly, has
not only the prejudice of a Proverb against it, the effect of Experience, Soon
Ripe, soon Rotten, but the prejudice of Experience it self, the cause of that
Proverb, and that Experience upon many in the Eyes of every Age. Sunt aliqui
quorum fructus quia minus propere, minus prospere oriuntur. Some there are,
Bern. Sermon. de Sanct. Benedicto.
says St Bernard, whose fruits, for they ripen too soon, become at length too
too sour: They are like those Figs the Prophet Jeremy Ier. 2.43.
speaks of, The evil, very evil, that cannot be eaten they are so evil. Now
as I told you before from the Poets mouth, Nemo repent turpissimus, no man in
a tryce as bad as bad may be; so let me tell you from the mouth of St Bernard,
that Nemo repent Bernard. de S. Andr. Ser. 1.
sit summus, no man in a tryce as good as good may be. Ascendendo, non volando
apprehenditur summitas scalae: We come to the top of a Ladder, says he, by
ascending thither step by step, not by flying thither at once; wherefore in
such sort let us clyme, and that by the benefit of both these Feet,
Meditation, and Prayer.

Thirdly, this Exercise or Meditation, it must be Day and Night, that is, Aug.
in hunc Ps.
says St Austen, either continually without intermission; or, Day says he,
that is, in the time of Prosperity: Night, that is, in the time of Adversity.
And in very deed at both times admirable is the Benefit that every of us may
reap by reading the Holy Scriptures. For if Tull. pro Arch. Poet.
Tully could say of Poetry, that it was a Profession for all Ages, Youth, and
Old Age: a Profession for all Times, Prosperity, and Adversity: a Profession
for all Places, both at Hoame, and Abroad: how much more truly may we say of
Gods Holy Scriptures, that they confirm our younger Years, they delight our
old Age; they are an Ornament to us in Prosperity, a place of Refuge in
Adversity; yielding us Comfort in such Extremities, they afford us Pleasure at
Hoame, they no whit hinder us abroad, they watch with us all Night; if we
travail, they travail with us, if we husband it in the Country, they will
husband it with us.

Or if Day and Night be here taken, for Continually without intermission, that
is, if Day be taken for Day indeed, and Night for Night indeed, then have we
our Prophets own example, for exercising himself in the Scriptures, both in
the Day time, and in the Night. First for the Day, Lord Ps. 119*
says he, what love have I unto thy Law, all the day long is my study in it.
Secondly for the Night, Ver^^ ^
I have thought upon thy Name O Lord in the night season, and have kept thy
Law. And the Night indeed brings many opportunities of deeper Meditation:
Quinetiam in noctibus syncerius cogitamus, we more sincerely in the Nightime
bethink our selves Ambr^^. de bono Mortis p. 245.
says S. Ambrose. There are that endeavor to T^uanu^ Hist. l. 16.
prove that studying in the Noctem Euphronam dixe^unt Graeci a been
intelligendo. Plut. de Curiosit.
Night is not so dangerous to the Body, as many take it to be, but rather
healthful for it, which if in profane Studies it be true (for at those they
aim) how much more in these, when Healthfulnesse shall be had both of Body and
Soul.

And here I cannot but remember that worthy choice which our most worthy
Sigillum IOANNIS HOVVSON Episcopi Oxoniensis.
Diocesan has made of these Words Diebus and Noctibus for his Episcopal
Imprese, which of all places of holy Scripture, seeing he has made such
special choice of, as to have it always in his Eye, how does he thereby
intimate both what himself does in this kind, and what by others is to be
done, to attain to that Happiness which is to be had both in this World, as
also in the World to come.

But what will some say, and is this all to make men BLESSED? Are there no more
Ingredients to true Happiness then this? To delight in the Law of the Lord, and
in that Law to be exercised day and night? Is there nothing required but this?
Nothing in effect, forasmuch as in this, all other things are comprised. Like
as King Porus Plut. de F^rt. Alex. Orat. 1.
answered in an other case, who being King Alexanders Captive, and asked by the
said Alexander how he would he entreated? how, says he, but as Kings should
be. Being asked again, what else besides he would have done? Nay nothing else,
said King Porus, for to be in treated like a King, compriseth all Offices, and
all respectiuenes whatsoever. Excellent are the Verses which Mart. l. 10. Epig
47.
Martial has of a Blessed Life; there is in our English Tongue also a My Mind
to me a Kingdom is, Amongst Mr Byrds Psalms, Sonets, and Songs of Sadness and
Piety. Song. 14. Printed 1589.
Sonnet to that purpose, but when all comes to all, true Felicity indeed, is
that which is delivered by our Prophet here in this place, and whereat our
Savior no doubt did aim, when speaking to the Woman that said unto him,
Blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou have sucked: Yea
rather Luc. 11.28.
says he, blessed are they that hear the word of God, and keep it. I but
here me thinks some Naaman will reply, 2 King. 5.12
Are not Abana and Pharphar Rivers of Damascus, better then all the waters of
Israel? May I not wash in them, and be clean? So, are not PROFIT, PLEASVRE,
and PREFERMENT, the three great Rivers of the World, better then all this
Delighting in the Law of the Lord? May I not baske my self in any of those,
and so be blessed? Oh no: this Jordan must be the River, or thou will never
have true Happiness. To which purpose let us view every of these in particular.

First for PROFIT, wherein I comprehend all worldly Wealth whatsoever, I know
the World is set upon it, nothing more.

Pecunia ingens generis humani Bonum
Cui nec voluptas Matris, aut blandae potest
Par esse Prolis, nec sacer meritis Parens.
Money Senec. Epist. l. 21. Ep. 116.
says Bellerophon, is all in all, and to be preferred before Parents, Wife, or
Child. A speech which though perhaps be as odious to us in the hearing, as it
was to those that heard him: yet every man now is a Bellerophon in the acting,
and St Paul's Words never more true, Phil. 2.21.
Omnes quae sua sunt, quaerunt, All seek their own. And yet how little makes
Wealth to Man's Felicity! The Emperor Constantine to a covetous Wretch, showed
the same, no man better. I pre thee, Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 4. c. 29. 30.
says he, how long shall we endeavor to fill this bottomless Gulf of
Avarice! Then making upon the ground, the full breadth of a Man with the Per ea
adhuc tempora Reges Hastas pro diademate habeb^t quas Graece (...) dixere
Iust^n l. 43.
Spear he had in his Hand: Had thou says he, all the Wealth of this World
in thy Cofers at hoame, yet shall thou enjoy no more Ground then I have here
allotted thee out, if yet thou enjoy so much.

Concerning PLEASVRE what difference betwixt the very Bruit Beast and Man, but
that Man speaks the Beast does not. And yet, Lact. Justit. l. 3. c. 8.
says Lactantius, an Ass, a Dog, a Swine, had they the faculty of speaking,
and a Body should inquire of them, why so furiously and outragiously they seek
their Females, and will not be driven from them with any violence whatsoever,
what other answer would they make, Nisi summum Bonum esse corporis Voluptatem,
eam se appetere, vt afficiantur suavissimis sensibus, eofque esse tanti vt
assequendorum causa, nec laborem sibi vllum, nec vulnera, nec mortem ipsam
recusandam putent. Their answer would be this, that the Pleasure of the Body
is the chiefest Good of all, that thereby they desire to be transported with
that most exquisite and delicious pleasure of the Senses, and that the same is
so to be accounted of, as that to attain unto it, they are persuaded that no
Labor, no Stripes, no nor Death it self is to be refused.

PREFERMENT indeed is that which bewitcheth men nothing more, and I dare say,
not the Ambitious only, (such as Senec. Theb. Act. 4. Sc. In me arma.
say with him in the Poet, -- Pro Regno velim
Patriam, Penates, Coningem flammis dare,
Imperia pretio quolibet constant been.
Preferment is good at any rate, what ever the Price be,) but even those also
that are of a more settled disposition. But I cannot give such a better Item,
then tell them that tale of Ariosto concerning the Folly of such as should by
Preferment think themselves so over happy, which for it may perhaps affect
them as much as it did my self when I first read it, I will not be scrupulous
to set it down in a Ariost. seven Satyrs Sat. 3. Printed 1611.
Translation, I take it not much inferior to the Original. Then when this
World was in her Infancy,
And men knew neither Sin nor Treachery.
When Cheaters did not use to live by wit,
Nor Flattery could each great Man's humor fit,
A certain Nation which I know not well,
Did at the foot of an high Mountain dwell,
Whose top the Heavens counsails seemd to know,
As it appeared to them that lived below.
These men observing how the Moon did rise,
And keep her Monthly progress through the skies,
And yet how with her horned forehead she
Altered her Shape, her Face, and Quantity,
They straight imagined if they were so hie
As the Hills top, they easily might epsy,
And come where she did dwell to see most plain,
How she grew in the Full, how in the Wayne.
Resolud thereon they mount the Hill right soon
With Baskets, and with Sacks to catch the Moon,
Striving who first unto the top should rise,
And make himself the Master of the prize.
But mounted up, and seeing that they were
As far off as before, and nere the near,
Weary and feeble on the ground they fall,
Wishing (though Wishes are no help at all)
That they had in the humble Valley staid,
And not like Fools themselves so much dismayed,
The rest of them which did remain below
Thinking the others which so high did show
Had touched the Moon, came running after them
By troops, and flocks, by twenties and by ten,
But when the senseless misconceit they found,
Like to the rest they weary fell to ground.
He that will not be moved with Verse, I refer him to Senecaes Prose, Senec.
Epist, l. 10. Ep. 77.
Nemo ex istis quos purpuratos vides, Foelix est. Or for I speak of Prose, I
refer him to Boethius his Prose, who speaking of Preferment. Boeth de
Consolat. l. 3. Pros. 4
Number vis ea est Magistratibus, vt vtentium mentibus Virtutes inserant, Vitia
depellant? At qui non fugare, sed illustrare potius nequitiam solent. Is there
such virtue in Preferment, says Boethius, that it may plant Virtues in the
minds of them that have it, and suppress Vices? Nay, but oftentimes so far
it is from suppressing them, that it makes those Vices more known unto the
World. But now to the Text again.

Verse. 3. And he shall be like a Tree planted by the water side, that will
bring forth his fruit in due season.] That Man is like a Tree, but a Tree
turned vpside down, has been a saying of old, and is discoursed of by
Scaliger, in regard of many resemblances. Trees, Scal, de Subtle. Exerc. 140..
2.
says he, have their Branches upwards, we our Branches, that is, our Legs, and
Arms, downwards: We enclosed in a skin, they in a barck or rind: They their
mouth in the earth, we have ours toward Heaven, that as they from thence have
all their being, so we should draw from Heaven all the beginnings of our
Actions. But it is not in these respects, that the Godly man in this place is
compared to a Tree. The prophanest man that is, may in this sort be like a
Tree, but to be like a Tree in the Prophets meaning, Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.
Hoc opus, hic labor est, Few they are that so may be.

First then let us consider what Tree it is, is here meant, for all
Interpreters are not of one and the self same mind. Some take it to be the
Olive Tree, but Hesiod the Poet, who was so skillful in Husbandry, sets so
infamous a mark on that Tree, that of all Trees bearing fruit, a Godly man me
thinks, should not in any case be like that Tree. His Noat is this, as Plin.
Not. hist. l. 15. c. 1.
Pliny relates it to us, That to that day a man was never known to have
gathered the Fruit of that Olive Tree which himself had planted, so late of
growth were those Trees in his time, and so slowly came they forward. But I am
of their mind who take it to be the Palm, or Date Tree, whereof in that Land
there was such plenty. Pliny speaking of the Palm, or Date Tree, It loves,
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 15. c. 1.
says he, to grow by some Rivers side, where it may have (as it were) one
foot in the water, and be ever drinking all the year long especially in a dry
season.

Secondly, where it is said, He shall be like in the Future Tence, the Future
in this place signifies the Future, and Present Tence both. It is like the
Lawyers Oportebit. Verbum Oportebit, tam praesens quam futurum tempus
significat. The word Oportebit, De Verb. signif. nu. 8.
say they, signifies as well the Present, as it does the Future Tence. So that,
He shall be like in this place, signifies indeed, that like he is already: and
then, he Is, and shall be too, what is it but a continuance in that happy
estate of his, without any intermission at all.

Thirdly, whereas he is likened to a Tree that will bring forth his Fruit, it
is apparent that here he is likened to a Fruitful Tree. And not only here, but
elsewhere, for seldom or never shall we read in Scriptures, that a Godly man
is likened to any other. And therefore S. John the Baptist, Mat. 3.10.
Now the Axe is laid unto the root of the Tree, therefore every Tree which
brings not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the fire.
Concerning the Fruitless Tree, it is the Masters question in the Gospel, Luc.
13.7.
Why cumbreth it the ground? And though the Dresser of the Vineyard make
answer for it, Lord let it alone this year also, till I shall dagge about it,
and doung it: yet his Conclusion there is (to show his Justice as well as Mercy)
If it bear not this year, then after that, thou shall cut it down. The
Fruitless Figtree had not such respite, but in a moment, in a tryce, in the
twinkling of an eye, Mat. 21.19.
Let no fruit grow on thee hence forward for ever: And presently the Fig Tree
withered away.

Fourthly, this Fruit here specified must be in due season to, that is, such as
is ripe and rellishing, and of a good and wholesome taste. Behold, Esaias 28.16.
says the Lord in Esaias, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried
stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believes shall not
make have. Indeed as Liuy Liu. Dec. 3. l. 2.
speaks, Festinatio improvida est, and caeca: Have or speed has no foresight,
but is blind, and as we usually say in our English Proverb, Have makes Wast: so
Have in this case makes wast of Faith, and therefore those Seeds that made such
have to spring up, because they had no deepnesse of earth, our Savior Mat.
13.5.
shows how they were scorched and withered away because they had not root. I
verily think, Senec. de Tranquil. Vit. l. 1. c. 1.
says Seneca, that many might have attained to wisdom indeed, but that they
thought themselves sure of it to to soon: and it was an excellent Hist. of
Spain translated by Mr Grimst. l. 28. p. 1069.
saying of Charles the fifth in his Instructions to his Son, that Wise men
must not disdain to go forwards by insensible degrees, for so, says he, the
Sun goes about the whole World. But of this kind of argument I spoke of, in
the Verse going before.

Fifthly and lastly, the Season here specified, is not so to be taken, as if
now, very now were not a seasonable time of bringing forth some Fruit. Ever
since we have had the means to come to the knowledge of saving Truth, the
Time and Season has been to Us, nor can any man make excuse, that he has not
heard of the Gospel of Christ. For as the Apostle in like case, Romans 10.18.
Have they not heard? Yes verily, their sound went into all the Earth, and
their words unto the ends of the World: So may we say of all Christians, that
as many as have but heard the Word at any time preached to them, are answerable
for the bringing forth of such Fruit as will be required at their hands.

His Leaf also shall not wither: and look whatsoever he does, it shall
prosper.] Having done with the Fruit, he comes now to the Leaves of the Tree,
which Nature that does nothing in vain, has not placed in Trees to no
purpose. Some be for Shade, some for Medicine, and some (as Pliny Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 16. c. 24.
observes) may be given as fodder to Beasts. All for Ornament, insomuch that
the Poet observes, that Trees without Leaves are as Et Foliis viduantur Orni.
Horat. Carm. l. 2. Od. 9.
Widows. The same Plin. Ib. c. 22.
Pliny relates, that all Trees (except some that he had named before, whereof
the Date Tree was one) do loose their Leaves in Winter; and he tells of some
of a wild sort, that be green all the Year long: but then are they
fruitless Trees, as the Fur, the Juniper, the Cedar, the Box, the Holly, the
Yew, and so forth. But seeing it is said of the Godly man here, that His Leaf
shall not wither, let us see what that Leaf may be.

Some think by Leaves in this Verse, the Godly man's Words should be
understood, as his Works in the Verse before, and there is indeed the same
correspondence between Fruit and Leaves, that is, between Works and Words.
Howbeit me thinks it is more probable to say with Tremell. in hunc Ps.
others, that as in the Verse before, His plantation by the water side, might
signify his Regeneration in Christ, who is indeed the water of Life: His
bringing forth fruit in due season, his Sanctification: so in this Verse, The
not withering of his Leaf, what should it be but his Constancy, his
Stedfastnes, his Perseverance to the end. For he it is that shall be saved, as
Mat. 10.22.24.13.
speaks our Savior, once and again. Or if Leaves be taken here for his
temporal estate, his worldly Goods, and so forth, even these also may be said
not absolutely to wither (if so be they be taken away) which in good and
convenient time may be as Job. 42.12.
Jobs Goods were, restored to him again. He that nombreth the Mat. 10.30.
Hairs of our head, so that not Act. 27.34.
one of them shall fall, nombreth these Leaves to. And that which St Austen Aug.
Confess. l. 7. c. 6.
says of Providence in general, that the World is governed thereby, Vsque ad
Arborum volatica Folia; to the very Leaves that fell from Trees, may be applied
to the Godly man in this case, that the least little belongs unto him, is not
despised, or unregarded with God.

Whereas it is here added, And look whatsoever he does, it shall prosper: First
for the Word [Looke] as much as Ecce, Behold; I grant it is not in the
Original, nor yet in the Greek, or Septuagint, no nor yet in the last
Translation, nor in that other that was before; yet being in a Translation that
was before both these, I mean a Translation Printed by my FATHER, and William
Seres Ao D. 1549.
set forth in King Edwards time, it seems it came from thence, if not from the
English Psalter which was in King Edwards days. But whenever, or howsoever,
the Word [Looke] came first in, here it is to good purpose, lest we should
pass over such a passage as this, without any observation at all. But now to
the matter it self.

According as the Actions of Men are, so are Men most commonly esteemed of, in
the World. For Man, as speaks the Arist. Ethic. l. 3. c. 5.
Philosopher, (...): he is the F^untaine and Father of his Actions, as of his
Children. As then it cannot be but a special joy unto him, to see every thing
thrive with him that he takes in hand, so has he a Promise made him, that so
it shall be. So was it with Genesis 30.27.
Jacob, when he served under Laban: so was it with Genesis 39.23.
Joseph, when he served in the Prison And yet this universal [whatsoeuer] we
must in some sort restrain to, as being to be understood of those things that
he does according to his Vocation. So that if he follow his Vocation, and keep
himself within those bounds, then may he build on this Promise, then shall the
Lord make him plenteous in every work of his hand, as Deuteronomy. 30.9.
Moses speaks: then Psalm. 32.11.
Mercy shall embrace him on every side, and the Psalm. 91.11.
Angels shall be charged with him, to keep him in all his ways, as speaks the
Prophet David. But thus much of the Godly: come we now unto the other sort
against whom they are opposed, I mean the Wicked, whom the Prophet shows
next, as the Plutarch. de Ira cohibenda.
Lacedaemonians did unto their Children their drunken Helots, to teach them to
beware of the Vice of Drunkenness the better.

Verse 5. As for the Ungodly it is not so with them, but they are like the
Chafe which the wind scatters away from the face of the Earth.] It might
have been thought that the Prophet in this place would have held on his
Metaphor, and have compared as the Good, to a Good Tree. So the Wicked to a
Tree to, though it were but to a fruitless Tree, and so St Jude does, These
are Trees without fruit Jude v. 12.
says he, twyse dead, plucked up by the roots. Howbeit the Prophet here
compares them with that which is much worse. They are says he, Like the
Chafe. It is Motz in the Original, and Motz signifies the husk, or hull,
wherein the Corn lies when it is brought into the Barn. It is likely St John
Baptist alluded hereunto, when speaking of the Wicked, he compares them to
Chafe to, and Mat. 3.12.
says, that our Savior shall gather his Wheat into his Garner, but will burn
up the Chafe with unquenchable Fire. And as the Wicked here are compared unto
Chafe, so are the Judgments of God compared here to the Wind. The Wind is an
Frytschius de Meteoris.
Exhalation, hot, and dry, elevated by the Sun to the middle Region of the
Air, by reason of the Coldness whereof being driven downwards again, and
meeting with other Exhalations, it is driven sidewayes upon the Earth in the
lowest Region, which it fanneth up and down, lest the Air should be corrupted
by too much stillness. It is called by this our Prophet elsewhere, Ps. 18.15.
The breath of Gods displeasure, so powerful against all withstanding, that we
read of goodly Edifices, nay Towns, and Cities, that have been ruinated
thereby. And how may Chafe then stand before it? Wherefore as the Rulers of
Iezreel said concerning Iehu, 2 King. 10.4.
Behold, two Kings stood not before him: how then shall we stand? So may the
Wicked say, if his Judgments be like the Wind, and our selves but to Chafe,
seeing so great Buildings cannot stand before the Wind, much less Chafe, how
shall we be able to stand? The same which in the next words the Psalmist says
by way of Conclusion.

Verse 6. Therefore the Ungodly shall not be able to stand in the judgment:
neither the Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous.] The Judgment here
spoken of, is likely to be the last Day, when they shall say to the Mountains
and Rocks, Romans 6.16.
Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb, for the great Day of his wrath is come, and who
shall be able to stand. And it is the more likely to be that Day, because it is
here said, The Congregation of the Righteous, for otherwise here in this World
there is no such Congregation of them, they are rather dispersed through the
World. Some are tortured, as Heb. 11.35.
speaks the Apostle, others have trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea
moreover of bonds, and imprisonment. They are stoned, they are sawen asunder,
are tempted, are slain with the Sword: they wander about in sheepe-skinnes,
and goat-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted, tormented. Of whom the World is
not worthy, they wander in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens and Caves
of the Earth. But, Horat. Carm. l. 2. Od. 10.
Non si male nunc, and olim sic erit: There will be a Day when they shall at
length be gathered together. He shall send his Angels, Mat. 24.31.
says our Savior, with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather
together the Elect from the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other.
It is not unlikely our Savior in that place alluded to that of Ezechiel, where
Life being put into dead bones, They lived, Ezech 37.9.
says the Prophet, and stood upon their feet, an exceeding great Army. In this
great Congregation then, in this great Assembly, wherein We must al appear 2
Cor. 5.10.
before the Judgment seat of Christ that every one may receive the things done
in his Body according to that he has done, whether it be Good or Bad, how
shall the Ungodly be able to Stand. And if the Righteous scarcely be saved, 1
Pet. 4.18.
says S. Peter, where shall the Ungodly and Sinners appear. If any hidden
Crime of ours, Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Romans Hom. 5.
says S. Chrysostom, should now at this time be notified unto the
Congregation here met, would not he, whose fault it were, rather dye in the
place, and wish the earth would swallow him up, then to have but so many
witnesses of his Fault as now are present? And in what case then shall we be,
Wretches as we are, when all shall be laid open to the whole World in such a
glorious great Th^ater as that shall be, consisting partly of those we know,
partly of those we know not. And yet why, says he, do I terrify you with
this opinion of Men, when it is much more convenient to do it, with the
Terrors and Judgments of God.

Verse. 7. But the Lord knows the way of the Righteous and the way of the
Ungodly shall perish.] Drusius Observat. l. 14 c. 4.
A Man is called Righteous or lust four manner of ways. First, by Imputation:
Secondly, by reason of the Virtues he has in him: Thirdly, by way of
Comparison: Fourthly, and lastly, in a Judicial kind of form. By Imputation,
as the Prophet Habakuk, Hab. 2.4.
The Just shall live by his Faith; By reason of the Virtues he has, as this
our Psalmist in another place, Ps. 11.3.
What has the Righteous done? And King Solomon in this sense, Prove. 10.7.
The memory of the Just is blessed, and oftentimes in that Book, where also
in the name of Righteousness, Virtue is understood, as in that sentence of his,
Prou. 16.31.
The hoarie head is a Crown of Glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness. By way of Comparison, as in Habakuk again. Hab. 1.13.
Wherefore hold thou thy tongue, when the wicked devoureth the man that is
more Righteous then he, speaking of the Jews, who in comparison of the
Chaldaeans were honest and just men. Lastly, by way of a Judicial kind of
form, and so is he called Just that has in Judgment a just cause, as in the
Prophet Amos, Amos. 2.6.
They sold the Righteous for Silver. So the Prophet David, Psa. l. 7.8
Give Sentence with me O Lord, according to my Righteousness, understanding by
Righteousness, nothing else but the Righteousness of his Cause, as if he had
said Give sentence with me O Lord, according to my Righteous Cause. For the
better explaining of the Premises, There nether is, Mr Hookers learned
Discourse of Iustificat. Works etc. p. 2.
says Reverend Hooker, or ever was, any mere natural man absolutely
Righteous in himself, that is to say, void of all Unrighteousness, of all
Sin. But we are absolutely Righteous in Christ, says he. So that the World
must show a Christian Man, otherwise it is not able to show a Man that is
perfectly Righteous. And a little after. There is a Glorifying Righteousness of
men in the world to come, and there is a Justifying and a Sanctifying
Righteousness here. The Righteousness wherewith we shall be clothed in the
world to come, is both Perfect and Inherent. That whereby we are here justified
is Perfect, but not Inherent. That whereby we are Sanctifi^d, is Inherent but
not Perfect. The Prophet Abakuk, says he, does term the Jews Righteous men,
not only because being justified by Faith they were free from Sin, but also
because they had their measure of Fruit in holiness. Thus the Prophet here in
this place, though speaking elsewhere of Men in general, Ps. 14.4.
They are all gone out of the way, says he, they are altogethe become
abominable, there is none that does good, no not one, (which he seems there
to speak with reference unto God, whose eyes are Ecclus. 23.19.
ten thousand times brighter then the Sun, beholding all the ways of men,
and considering the most secret parts) yet speaking now in regard of the
Wicked, who are so notoriously bad, he acknowledges some that have a measure
in the Fruit of Holiness, and a right unto the Title of Righteous Men.

Secondly, concerning the Way here, The Way of the Righteous, and The Way of
the Ungodly, we are to understand by these Ways, Counsails, Actions, or
Endeauours of the Righteous: and the Counsels, Actions, or Endeavors of the
Ungodly, for so in holy Scripture are Ways sometimes taken. Like as the
Prophet Jeremy Ier. 10.23.
speaks, I know that the way of Man is not in himself, it is not in Man that
walks, to direct his steps. Intimating thereby, that Men are fowly deceived,
if so be they suppose that the event of things, is in their own hands, for let
them consult never so wisely, yet if God bless not their consultations, all
things happen under foot.

Thirdly, by Knowing here in this place is meant approouing, and to be pleased
with, and by intimating He knows not the way of the Ungodly, (for that also
is here intimated) his not approouing of their Way. Otherwise take Knowing for
that, for which commonly it is taken, and he knows the way of the Wicked more
then the Wicked are aware of. And therefore to them that say, Ps. 73.11.
Tush, how should God perceive it, is there knowledge in the most Highest? His
answer is in another place, Ps. 10.15.
Surely thou have seen it, for thou beholdest Ungodliness and Wrong. And
again, Ps. 94.9.
He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? Or he that made the eye, shall
he not see? The Lord knows the thoughts of man, that they are but vain.

Fourthly, and lastly, concerning the Way of the Ungodly, whereas besides the
intimation given, that it is not approved of God, it is directly here
pronounced that it shall utterly perish: Hoc eis eveniet, Arnob. in hunc Ps.
says Arnobius, in sine saeculi, quod in fine Psalmi Sermo Propheticus
comminatur: that shall happen to the Ungodly in the end of the World, which the
Prophet here threatens them in the end of this Psalm. It it an excellent
passage which the Book of Wisdom has to this purpose, whose Author
discoursing of the miserable end of the Wicked: They shall be utterly, Wis. 4.19.
says he, laid wast, and be in sorrow: and their memorial shall perish. And
when they cast up the accounts of their sins they shall come with fear: and
their own iniquities shall convince them to their face: Wisd. 5.1.
Then shall the Righteous man stand in great boldness, before the face of such
as have afflicted him, and made no account of his Labors. When they see it,
they shall be troubled with terrible fear, and shall be amazed at the
strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all that they loaked for. And
they repenting and groaning for anguish of spirit, shall say within themselves,
This was he whom we had sometimes in dirision, and a proverb of reproach. We
Fools accounted his life madness, and his end to be without honor. How is
he remembered among the Children of God, and his lot is among the Saints. And
again, a little after: V. 8.
What has Pride profited us? or what good has Riches with our vaunting
brought us? All those things are passed away like a shadow, and as a Poast
that hasted by. Much more they speak to that purpose, but it is high time now
to come to the Second Psalm.

PSALM. II. Quare fremuerunt Gentes.
1 Why do the Heathen so furiously rage together: and why do the People
imagine a vain thing?
2 The Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his Anointed.
3 Let us break their bonds asunder: and cast away their cords from us.
4 He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have
them in derision.
5 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.
6 Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
7 I will preach the Law whereof the Lord has said unto me: Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee:
8 Desire of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance: and
the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy possession.
9 Thou shall bruise them with a Rod of iron: and break them in pieces like a
Potters vessel.
10 Be wise now therefore Oye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the Earth.
11 Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence.
12 Kiss the Son least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right way, if
his wrath be kindled (yea but a little) blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis Psalm is one of those Three that besides the ordinary saying of it the
first day of the Month, is appointed to be read in the Church at Morning
Prayer on Easter day. Why it was selected to that purpose, we shall perceive by
the Annotations, and especially the Annotation at the end of this Psalm. In
the mean time supposing this Psalm to be meant of our Saviors Kingdom, let
us consider Verse by Verse the Prophets Method in this Psalm. The Prophet then
after the Description of the Enterprises of the Wicked against that Kingdom:
First in the Peoples opposition, and that in the First Verse; Secondly in the
Counsels, and Endeauours of the Magistrates, and that in the Second and Third
Verses, he observes two points: First he proposes to them certain
Conclusions: Secondly, he deals friendly with them by way of persuasion. The
Conclusions he proposes, are partly in respect of the Lord, and things to be
done by his power: partly in respect of Men, and things to be taught them by
the Gospel. The things to be done by the Lord power, are: First, that he
little reckons of these their Attempts, and that in the Fourth Verse:
Secondly, that in time he would crush them every one, and that in the ^ift
Verse, The things that by the Gospel are to be taught unto men, are, that
Christ being a King appointed by the Lord himself, as it is in the Sixth Verse,
the Lord first proclaimed it to the whole World, as it is in the Seventh, and
then endowed him with the Possession of it, as it is in the Eight and Ninth
Verses. At length descending to persuasion, he deals with the Magistrates,
whom it principal^y concerned to be wiser then the rest, and that in the Tenth
Verse: First, that they would presently serve the Lord, as it is in the
Eleventh Verse; Secondly his Anointed, that is, his only begotten Son Christ
Jesus, whom in his own s^eed he had placed over them, as it is in the Twelfth
and last Verse.

Hyper. de Rat. Stud Theol. l. 2. c. 27. Obseruat. 3.
Hyperius makes this whole Psalm as it were a kind of Dialogue, wherein are
many Speakers. First, the Prophet. Secondly, the Wicked. Thirdly, God the
Father, Fourthly, and lastly, God the Son. First the Prophet he begins by way
of Admiration, and that in the First Verse; then by way of Narration, and that
in the Second. The Wicked they speak tumultuously, and that in the Third; The
Prophet he replies, and that in the Fourth, and Fifth Verses; God the Father in
the Sixth; God the Son in the Seventh; God the Father again in the Eight; and
Ninth; The Prophet again by way of Exhortation, in the Tenth, Eleventh, and
Twelfth Verses.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse 1. Why do the Heathen so furiously r^ge together, and why do the
People imagine a vain thing? First, as touching the Heathen here, it is in the
Original Goijm, Gentes, by which appellation the Jews call all those Nations
that were not of their Religion. The Heathen then here meant in respect of
David, might be the Iebuzites, the Philistians, the Moabites, the Syrians, and
the Ammonites, with whom King David had so much to do. In respect of our
Savior Christ, all the Nations of the World, might here be meant, Gentiles and
Jews to. For how did the Gentiles rage against his Kingdom? how did the
Jews? -- Senec. Herc. Fur. Act. 2. sc. O Magne.
Nunquid immunis fuit
Infantis aetas?
King Herod heard no sooner of his Birth, but himself was Mat. 2.3.
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. And how like a Fox he went about to
have surprised him, the Story is manifest.

The People are Horat. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 1.
Bellua multorum capitum, a Beast with many heads, who if they be once up in
arms, Virg. Aeneid. l. 1.
Iamque Faces and Saxa volant, furor arma ministrat. Fire brands and Stones fly
about the Streets, and that is a Weapon that com s next to hand. Where the
People are principal Actors, Dr Fentoa Sermon 6. Wisd. of the Rich. p. 81.
says a good Divine, there is a dangerous piece of work toward. How many
several times is it said in the Book of Judges upon occasion of great
misdemeanors in the Kingdom of Israel, Judge. 17.6.18.1.19.1.21.25.
In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was
right in his own Eyes. How furious popular Tumults have been in this case, no
History whatsoever but has Examples thick and threefold, but of all Histories
that of Josephus concerning the Wars of the Jews, is in my mind most
remarkable. But what is this Vain thing here imagined by the People?

Concerning the Word [Vaine] Aulus Gellius A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 18. c. 4.
tells of a great Controversy between two notable Grammarians, about the
propriety of the Word. The one of them maintaining that Vanity and Folly were
both one, the other, that Folly is one thing, and Vanity an other. But
howsoever they dissented, the meaning of the Word in this place may well be
agreed upon by us all, that all that was done in this case, or by the Heathen,
or by the People, was done to no purpose at all. So St Austen, Pro eo dictum
est, vt quid? ac si diceretur Frustra. It is here Aug. in hunc Ps.
said, Why do they so? to intimate unto us that it was but lost labor that so
they did, it being most true which the Prophet Esaias has, Esaias 8.10.
Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught: speak the Word, and it
shall not stand, for God is with us. And again, Esaias 40.15.
Behold the Nations are as a drop of a Bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the Balance, behold he takes up the Yles as a very little thing.
Verse. 17.
All Nations before him are as Nothing, and they are counted to him, less then
Nothing, and Vanity.

Verse 2. The Kings of the Earth stand up, and the Rulers take counsel
together: against the Lord, and against his Anointed.] Before was Fury, and
Folly, and both in the People, now the Prophet shows unto us that the
Magistrates themselves began to take the matter in hand. So that where formerly
there was small likelihood of bringing ought to pass in that kind, the People
but an headstrong multitude, and unable to perform their Designs: now Wit,
and Cunning, and Policy, begin to play their parts, and a Body would now think
that all should be as they would have it. Lo here an Unity such at it was, but
Unit as Facinoro sorum, as Bernard. de Assumpt. Mariae Ser. 5.
speaks St Bernard, an Unity not of Saints, but of Sinners, Peruersa and
execranda talis Vnitas, such an Unity as that, says he, is both praeposterous,
and execrable. Amat and Auaritia Vnitatem. Quod amat bonum est, sed vbi amandum
sit, nescit. Even Covetousness it Self Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 20.
says St Austen, does love an Uniting together. Now the thing she loves is
good, but she knows not where to place her Love. Right so is it a blessed
thing that the Magistrate, and the People, should both agree together, but when
they shall agree in that which is notoriously bad as here they do in this place,
it aggrauates eithers fault, and b^th are liable to the more exception. And
that so they do here in this place, witness the words of this Verse: for it is
First, against the Lord, Secondly, his Anointed.

First, concerning the Lord, though commonly in holy Scripture LORD be put for
the second Person in Trinity, God the Son, yet here is it set for God the
Father, who is the Lord, as the Prophet Amos, Amos. 5.16.
speaks, and the God of Hosts It is in the Original, the Name (...), and God
is therefore called Lord, because as S. Ambrose Ambros. in ep. (...) C^lo^s. c.
4.
says, he has dominion both ov^r our Bodies, and over our Soul^; because, as
^act. ^n^it. l. 4 c. 3.
Laectantius, he has the greatest power that can be, both in correcting and
punishing. And our Savior indeed instructing us how great his Power is, Fear
not them which kill the Body, Mat 10.28.
says he, but are not able to kill the Soul: but rather fear him which is
able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell, St Gregory speaking of the diverse
Appellations that are in holy Scripture given to God. When he will be feared,
Greg in Cant. Cantic. Prol.
says he, then does he name himself LORD, when he will be honored FATHER
when he will be beloved, HUSBAND, though in the Old Testament the two
Appellations F^th r, and Hu^b^nd, are seldom mention^d Lord, most often. Many
thin^s, Aug. de Ser. Dom. in Mont. l. 2.
such S. Austen, are d^liuered in holy Scripture to be spo^^n in Gods praises,
(...) s^all ^ou find it to ^aue been commanded to the P^^pl^ o^ Isr^el that
s^ea^^^g unto God they sh uld s y OUR ^ATHER, or that they should p^ay unto God
a^ a Gr^tius Nomen est Pieta^^, quam Pote^at* Tertull. Apolog. c. 34.
FATH R but he is (...) LORD, to put them in mind (...) Servants to ^im. And
yet our S^^^ ur C^^is^, God and M^n, He^c^f^rth I call you not (...), Ioh.
15.15.
s^i^h he, for the S^^u^nt k^^weth not what hi^ Lord (...) I h^^^ c^lle^ (...)
FR^NDS: for all things that I ^au^ ^^^rd of my Father, I have made known unto
you.

Secondly, conc^^ning An^oint^d, that is here set for the Second Person indeed,
Christ Jesus our Savior, who was to be our Prophet, our Priest, and Prince,
and therefore is said in holy Scripture to be Anointed by God. Not that at
any time he was Anointed with material Oil, Act. 4.27.
but as S. Peter in one place Act. 10.38.
With the Holy Ghost, and with Power; And as our Ps. 45.8.
Psalmist in another, With the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows. The time
of this his Anointing was no doubt in the time of his Conception, even before
he was b^rne, and therefore he was no sooner borne, but an Angel said unto the
Shepherds: Luc. 2.10.
Behold I bring you good Tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People, for
unto you is borne this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ, the
Lord: CHRIST, that is, Anointed.

And thus is this Scripture alleged by the Church in the Acts of the Apostles,
who upon the report Peter and John made of their usage by the Rulers of the
Jews, they lift up their voice to God with one accord, and said, Act. 4 2^.
Lord thou art God which have made Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and ^ll that
in them is. Who by the mouth of thy Servant David have said, why did the
Heathen rage, and the People imagin^ vain things? The Kings of the Earth stood
up, and the Rul^rs were gathered together against the Lord, and against his
Christ. For of a truth against thy holy Child Jesus, whom thou have annoin^ed,
both Herod, and Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles, and the People of Israel,
were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy Hand, and thy Counsel
determined before to be done. Thus was it Exodus 14.26. Ioh. 19.36.
said of the Paschal Lamb, that not a Bone thereof should be broken, and it
was applied to our Savior by the Evangelist S. John; It was said of the
Israelites, Hos. 11.2. Mat. 2.5.
Out of Egypt have I called m^ Son, and it was a^plied to our Savior by the
Evangelist S. M^thew; It was said of King Solomon, 2 Samuel 2 14. H^b. 1.5.
I will be his Father, and he shall be my Son, and it was applied to our
Savior by the Apostle S. Paul. These two Senses of the Scriptures, there are
that call them the one, a Literal, the other, a Mystical Sense, but Dion.
Carth. in Mat. 2. Art. 5
Dionysius Carthusianus, Tossed. in Deuteronomy. 18. qu. 6,
Tostatus, and the Rhem. in 2. King. 7.14. in marg.
Rhemists in the Doway Bible, do make them both Literal. Tostatus gives the
Reason, Nam vna Litera been potest importare duos sensus, quando vnus
subordinatur alteri. Having spoken of a place of Scripture that might be
understood either of our Savior, or of his Prophets, Sensus literalis est
vterque. Either, says he, is the Literal sense. For one, and the self same
Letter in Scripture, does well import two Senses, when one is subordinate to the
other. And of this mind with them, was that worthy Professor of ours, most
worthily afterward Bishop of Salisbury, D. Abbots Sermon upon 1. Cor. 10.32.
not printed.
D. Abbots, who, in a Sermon of his to the University, not only has the
Premises, but he has this passage also: Rightly to understand this double
Sense we must distinguish, Subjectum a Praedicato: the thing whereof any thing
is said, from the thing which is said, or affirmed of it. The Subject is
Transient and Ambulatorie; one thing named not so much for it self, as for
another intended and signified thereby, but whither we respect the one, or the
other; the Praedicatum, or thing affirmed, or spoken, is Really and Literally
understood and meant of both. He makes instance in the three Examples before:
that of Exodus, and of S. John; that of Hosea, and S. Matthew; that of Samuel,
and S. Paul. And to this double Literal sense, Hieron. in Ierem. c. 11. in fine
says he, S. Ierom was feign to fly, though he expressly name it not, to rid
himself of much difficulty in the Interpretation of Scriptures.

Verse. 3. Let us break their Bonds asunder: and cast away their Cords from
us.] He that keeps his Mouth, Prove. 13 3.
says Solomon* keeps his Life, but he that opens wide his Lips shall have
Destruction. Here is an opening of the Lips so wide, that they set upon Heaven
it self, and they will by no means endure to hear that our Savior by Bonds
and Cords, that is, by his, Ordinances, and his Laws, should fasten, and tie
them to himself. These Sons of Belial, D. Fenton Ser. 1. Want of Discipline.
p. 67
says a good Divine, who cannot abide a Negative, will break them. I, but yet
they can be contented with Esaias. 5.18.
Cords of Vanity, and to be bownd with Satan's Cart-roaps, and they are no
whit troubled therewith. Indeed Religion is a Bond, and therefore Lactantius,
Being tied, r says he, Lact. Instit. l. 4. c. 28.
with this Bond of Piety, Deo relegati sumus, we are tied unto God, from the
which kind of Tie, Religion has her Name, not as Tully will have it, A
Relegendo, of reading again, Tully de Not. Deor. l. 2. So S. Austen. de Civ.
Dei. l. 10. c. 4.
or remembering. And again in the same Chapter, We have said that the name of
Religion is deduced from the bond of Piety, inasmuch as God has tied Man to
himself, and bownd him by Religion. So, that as the Poet in another case,
Senec. Troas Act. 4. sc. Quicunque
Profuit multis capi, it has been Happy for Many that they have been taken
Captives, so especially may we say in this Case, where the 1. Io. 5.3.
Yoke is so easy and the Burden light, Mat. 11.30.
where his 1. Io. 5.3.
Commandments are not grievous, and as we are taught by the Church to
acknowledge, Commun. Book Sec. Coll. for Peace.
His Service is perfect Freedom. The same which Boethius has in his Book of
Consolation, Boet. de Consol. l. 1. Pros. 5.
Cuius agi Fraenis, atque obtempe-Iustitiae, summa Libertas est.

Verse. 4. He that dwells in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn: the Lord
shall have them in derision.] Nihil horum sapere oportet carnaliter, Aug. in
hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, This Scorn and Derision here spoken of, we must not so
understand, as if such Affections were in God. To Scorn, and to Deride, are
Properties peculiar unto Men, and indeed to the worst of Men, such as come
within Horace his Verge, -- Horat. Sermon. l 1.
Hic Niger est, hunc tu Roman caueto He is a Black one with a witness, it is
good to beware of such a Fellow. Yea but how then come these terms to be
applied unto God? To show Calv. in hunc Ps.
says Calvine, that when the World is up in Arms against him, he needs no
Munitions, no Fortifications, or Engynes in behalf of himself, but that he
can bridle them in an instant, with as much facility and ease, as a Man is said
to laugh, who laughs by nature. Now it is here said in this place, He that
dwells in Heaven: in opposition unto that which formerly was spoken, of the
Kings of the Earth, as being no less difference between them (indeed there is
much more) then is in common estimation between Heaven and Earth. And he is
said to be in Heaven, not for we enclose him wholly within the Circle of
Heaven, Behold the Heaven, 1 Kings 8.27
says Solomon, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee: but for that the
Heaven is his Throne, as Esaias 66.1.
speaks the Prophet Esaias.

Verse 5. Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure.] The Word Then in this place, signifies the fittest time and
opportunity that the Judgments of God were to come upon those Heathen, and upon
the People. It is as if the Prophet had said: After that the Lord has suffered
awhile their Attempts, and Oppositions against the Government of his Son, he
shall in a time convenient to speak unto them in his wrath, as that he shall
utterly confound them. Which Speaking of his, is not so to be taken, as if
himself would vouchsafe to talk with them Face to Face, as 2 Ioh. 1.12. 3
Ioh. 1.14.
speaks the Apost^e St John, as it may be thought, he spoke with Genesis 3.17.
Adam, with Genesis 4.10.
Cain, and others: no, but sometimes by his Ministers, as he did by the
Prophets of old: sometimes by Plagues, and Punishments, as he did to the
Egyptians, and sometimes by both. Job. 33.14.
For God speaks once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not. In a Dream, in
the Vision of the Night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumbring upon
the bed: then he opens the E^res of men, and seals their Instruction, that
he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man. Verse 19.
He is chastned also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude of his bones
with strong pain. So that his Life abhors bread, and his soul dainty meat.
His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were
not seen, stick out. And thus the Lord sometimes speaks in the Fire of his
Jealousy, and in his Fury, and in his Jealousy, and in the Fire of his Wrath,
as the Prophet Ezech. 36.1. Verse. 6. Ezech 38.19.
Ezechiel tells us: and therefore the Israelites to Moses? Exodus 20.19
Speak thou with us, and we will hear* but let not GOD speak with us, least
we die.

I am not ignorant that instead of these words, Tunc loquetur ad eos in ira
sua, Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath; Others Drusius Observat. l.
7. c. 25.
say it should be read, Tunc occidet fortes eorum: Then shall he slay their
strong men; the word Iedabber in the Original coming of Deber, that sometimes
signifies the Plague or Pestilence. But seeing it is not so in this
Translation, nor in the last Translation of the Psalms, I for my part have no
Commission to commend that reading unto you.

Verse. 6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion.] As much to say, as
notwithstanding all this: maugre the Folly and Fury, and Vproares of the
People: maugre the Wit and Policy, and Cunning of the Magistrate: I, God the
Father, the First Person in Trinity, Uncreate, Incomprehensible, Eternal,
Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all things Visible and Invisible,
and disposer of all things to their truest ends: Have set my King, that is, my
holy One, my beloved Son in whom I am so well pleased, upon Sion, to wit, the
Church, upon my holy Hill of Sion, my holy Catholic Church. For Aug. in Joh.
Tract. 115.
Sion ille, and Mons ille, non est de hoc Mundo. This Sion, and this Hill is
not of this world. Quod est enim eius Regnum, nisi Credentes in eum. Non ait,
Nunc autem Reguum meum non est hic, sed non est hinc. For what is his Kingdom,
Aug. in Joh. Tract. 115.
says S. Austen, but those that believe in him. He says not, My Kingdom is
not here, but my Kingdom is not hence.

Concerning the Hill of Sion, there is much speech in holy Scripture. The Hill
of Sion, Ps. 48.2.
says our Prophet in another place, is a fair place, and the joy of the whole
earth: upon the North side lies the City of the great King, God is well known
in her Palaces as a sure refuge. Again, Ps. 68.15.
As the Hill of Basan, so is Gods Hill, even an high Hill as the Hill of Basan.
Why hop ye so ye high Hills? This is Gods Hill, in the which it pleases him
to dwell, yea the Lord will abide in it for ever. And yet again, Ps. 78.68.
He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe of Ephraim, but
chose the Tribe of Judah: even the Hill of Sion which he loved. And there he
builded his Temple on high, and laid the foundation of it like the ground which
he has made continually. Now it is here said, that the Lord has placed his
Anointed, upon this Hill of Sion, for that Sion and Jerusalem were the very
first places in the World, from whence this Gospel did first begin. Come
ye, Esaias. 2.3.
says the Prophet Esaias, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the
House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk
in his Paths: for out of Sion shall go forth h^^ Law, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. It is called here Holy Hill, or in regard of that peculiar
presence which the Lord at that time afforded to it, like as he said to Moses,
Exodus 3.5.
The place whereon thou stand is holy Ground, or in regard of the Temple,
and divine worship therein exercised, like as Jerusalem is termed The holy
City, both by Esaias. 48.2.
Esaias the Prophet, and by Mat. 4.5.
S. Matthew.

Verse. 7. I will preach the Law whereof the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee.] The Prophet in the Verse before declared
unto us what the Father said of the Son concerning the Kingdom: in this
Verse he declares concerning the said Kingdom what it is, the Son himself
says. Which is thus much in effect: I for my part shall be far from
opposing force to force, I will not seek human helps and encounter in like
sort with the Folly, or Fury, or Policy of mine Enemies, I will only rely on
that Word which the Lord has said concerning me, and it shall be powerful
enough against all resistance, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. This Word, this Law, this Decree of God above, is powerful enough, and
much more sharp then any two edged Sword. It is mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong bolds. 1. Pet. 1.24.
Al Flesh is as Grass, and all the glory of Man as the Flower of Grass: the
Grass withers, and the Flower thereof falls away, but the Word of the Lord
endures for ever.

Concerning the words here, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee,
the Arrians laid hold upon them to impugn thereby the Eternity of our Savior,
and all for because forsooth mention is here made of Hodie, this day. Whereupon
S. Austen, Quid me stimulas Arriane and rides cum audis hodie. Arrian, Aug. de
quinque Haeresib. c. 4.
says S. Austen, why do thou iog me on the elbowe, and laughest in thy
sleeue, when thou hear these words, This day? Why man, with God it is never
to Morrow, nor Yesterday, but always this Day. The Year is not turned about
with the Circles of the Months, the Month is not passed over with Days that
are still coming, and still going, the Hours are not changed, the Times and
Moments are not altered, the Day is not finished with bonds and limits, nor
begun with any beginning. Again, in his Confessions, speaking unto God, Thy
Years Aug. Confess. l. 11. c. 13.
says he, nether come nor go, but these of ours, both go and come, that all
at length may come. All thy Years are altogether, and all for because they
are, nor they that go are excluded from them that come, because they pass
not: but these of ours shall all of them be, when as all shall not be. Thy
Years are one Day, and thy Day is not [Quotidie] every Day, but [Hodie] this
Day, because thy [Hodie] this Day, gives not place unto to Morrow, the reason
is for that it succeeded not Yesterday. Thy [Hodie] this Day, is no whit less
then Eternity it self, and therefore thou did beget one Coeternall to thy
self, whenas thou said, This Day have I begotten thee. And yet again in
another place, The Baptism of Christ, Aug. Enchirid. ad Laurent. c. 49
says S. Austen, is not in water only, as was the Baptism of John, but also
in the Holy Ghost, that whosoever believes in Christ might be regenerated by
that Spirit, by whom Christ being regenerated, needed no Regeneration.
Whereupon that voice of the Father that came unto him at his Baptism; This day
have I begotten thee, pointed not out that one Day of time wherein he was
Baptized, but that of immutable Eternity, thereby to show that his being a Man,
pertained to the Person of his only Begotten. For where the Day is nether begun
with the end of a former, nor is ended with the beginning of any that
follows, there is always This Day.

There are that Vid. D. Boys Festiv. Thursd in Easter week
interpret these Words: Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, of
the day of our Saviors Incarnation: the Apostle S. Paul, he interprets it of
the Day of his Resurrection: Act. 13.33.
We, i says he, declare unto you glad Tidings, how that the Promise which was
made unto you by the Fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto us their
Children, in that he has raised up Jesus again, as it is also written in the
Second Psalm, Thou art my son this day have I begotten thee. The same Apostle
to the Hebrews shows the excellency of this Name, Son; For unto which of
the Angels, Heb. 1.5.
says the Apostle, said he at any time, Thou art my Son this day have I
begotten thee. And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son. True it is the Name Son has been given unto many. God calls Israel
his Exodus 4.22.
First Borne, and consequently his Son; all the Romans 8.14.
Elect are the Sons of God; Ps. 45.17.
Magistrates are his Sons; and Job. 1.6.
Angels his Sons too; but Israel because his People, the Elect by adoption
and grace, the Magistrate because he executes the Judgments of the Lord; the
Angels by Creation, none of them all according to the worthiness of their own
Nature: but by Nature, Substance and Eternity (as the Apostle S. Paul means
in that place) there is none the Son of God, but CHRIST alone, and therefore
Aug. Hom. 32
S. Austen, Vnus est Vnicus de illo genitus: He alone is the only one begotten
of God. And again, Aug. Quaest. sup. Deuteronomy qu. 23.
He calls him the First borne whom he calls his only Begotten, for we also
are the Sons of God, but he calls him only Begotten, because he alone is of
the Substance of the Father, and Equal, and Coaeoernall to the Father.

Verse 8. Desire of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance: and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession.] The
Words again of God the Father concerning the Propagation of the Kingdom of
his Son CHRIST JESUS, namely that not the Jews only, but the Heathen, that
is, the Gentiles also, should be his Inheritance, and Possession. Quis
Christianus vnquam dubitavit hoc de Christo esse praedictum. What Christian
ever doubted Aug. de Unit. Eccles. c. 8.
says St Austen, that this was forespoken of CHRIST, or by this Inheritance
here spoken of, understood any thing else but the CHVRCH.

Josephus indeed Joseph. de Bell. Iudaic. l. 7. c. 12
showing the causes that moved the Jews to fight with the Romans, alleges
this amongst the rest, for that there was a doubtful Prophecy found in the
holy Scriptures, that at the same time one in their Dominions should be Mo^arch
of the whole World, and many Wisemen were deceived says he, in this
interpretation, making account that he should be one of their own Nation, yet
indeed thereby was foretold Vespasians Empire. Josephus expresses not in that
place what that Oracle might be, but Eusebius making answer unto him
concerning that Passage of his, shows that Vespasian ruled not the whole
World, but the Roman Empire only. This Oracle therefore Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l.
3. c. 8.
says Eusebius, may better be referred unto Christ, unto whom it was said of
the Father, Desire of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession, the Psalm.
19.4.
Sound of whose Apostles went at the very same time throughout the Earth, and
their words to the end of the World. Here concerning the Word Inheritance, it
is not amiss to observe with that learned and worthy Sr JAMES SEMPLE, of
Sacrilege. Part. 1. c. 7.. 3.
KNIGHT, that Gods Inheritance in Scripture is twofold: His PEOPLE whom he
created to his own Image: and his TITHES which he separated to his own
Service; and it is worth the while to consider, how this double Inheritance
has in Scripture Language, a Prerogative above the Civil Custom, in that the
Son inherits jointly with the Father. A good Observation for Many, that
seeing they hold of the One, I mean the Former Inheritance, they would not
withold the Other, I mean their Tithes. But I go forwards.

Concerning the Gentiles, and their calling, many and manifold were the
Prophesies that were in the Old Testament, the performance whereof was in the
New. It was necessary Act. 13.46.
said Paul and Barnabas, that the Word of God should first have been spoken to
you (meaning the Jews) but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthy of everlasting Life, lo we turn to the Gentiles. And from that day
forward the Gentiles believed indeed. The Jews as St Austen Aug. Quaest. super
Iud. qu. 49. and de Temp. Ser. 108.
speaks in diverse places of his Works, were like to Gedeons Fleece. For as
at the first, the Deaw was only upon that, and all the Earth besides was dry,
and afterward the Fleece was dry only, and the Deaw on all the Ground besides:
so the time was when the Jews only, and none but they were in request, I am
not sent Mat. 15.24.
says our Savior, but to the lost Sheep of the House of Israel, howbeit now
the case is altered, and as Luc. 1.53.
spoke the Blessed Virgin, He has filled the Hungry with good things: and the
Rich he has sent empty away. And now as Aug. in Ps. 45.
speaks St Austen, The Bible is a Book, wherein we read the same, the World is
a Book, wherein we see the same.

But how is it said in this place, Desire of me? Was our Savior to ask it at
Gods hands? Nulla res carius constat quam quae precibus empta est. Prayers
Senec. de Benef. l. 2. c. 1.
says Seneca, oftentimes is a dear peny-worth. Molestum verbum est, onerosum,
and demisso vultu dicendum, Rogo. This Word Rogo, Id. c. 2.
says he, I ask or crave, is a difficult or irksome Word, it is burdensome
to him that speaks it, it is to be spoken with a bashful countenance.
Properet licet: sero Beneficium dedit, qui Roganti dedit. Make all the speed he
can, he comes but tardy with his good turn, that graunts it not until it be
asked. Indeed with Men it is many times so, but not with God, for we are bound
both to ask, and not to ask amiss, and therefore St James, Ye have not Iam.
4.2.
says he, because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss. But concerning our Saviors asking, That Christ as the only begotten
Son of God, Mr Hooker his Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 48.
says Reverend Hooker, having no Superior, and therefore owing honor unto
none, neither standing in any need, should either give thanks, or make
Petition unto God, were most absurd. As Man what could be seem him better,
whether we respect his affection to Godward, or his own Necessity, or his
Charity and Love toward Man. Again a little after: Some things he knew should
come to pass, and notwithstanding prayed for them, because he also knew that
the necessary means to effect them, were his Prayers. He makes instance in
these very Words: Desire of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. That
says he, which here God promises his Son, the Son in the Ioh. 17.1.
Seventeenth of John prays for; Father, the Hour is now come, glorify thy
Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee, according as thou have given him
power over all Flesh.

Now our Savior himself thus praying, how does it behoue us also to pray for
that which we would obtain at Gods hands. To rely on Gods Providence only,
and to make that lazy Resolution, That that shall be, shall be, without any more
ado, is unchristian Stupidity, To them which asked long ago, what need there
was of Prayer, seeing God did know beforehand what was necessary for us, St
Austen makes this answer, Aug. de Sermon. Dom, in Mont. l. 2.
That the Intention of Prayer does purge and purify our Heart, and makes it
more capacious to receive those divine Gifts that are spiritually powered into
us. For it is not the Importunity of our Prayers that causes God to hear, who
is always ready to give, not only his temporal, but intellectiuall, and
spiritual Light, but we are not always ready (but by Prayer) to receive it,
being inclined, and addicted to many other things, and darkened with the Desire
of Things that are Temporal.

Verse 9. Thou shall bruise them with a Rod of Iron, and break them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel.] The Words are still the Words of God the Father, who
declares in this Verse, how Victorious his Son should be against his
Enemies. He compares here those his Enemies to a Potters Vessel, made of
Clay, then which there is almost nothing more frail and brittle. Concerning
the breaking of such a Vessel the Prophet Jeremy thus Ier. 19.11.
speaks Thus says tho Lord of Hosts, even so will I break this People, and
this City, as one breaks a Potters Vessel that cannot be made whole again.
Whereupon St Gregory, A Potters Vessel Greg. in Quint. Psalm. Poenit.
says he, after it is once broken, can by no means be repaird again, and
what then is meant by the breaking of Potters Vessels, but final Damnation.

But what is the Instrument wherewith such Vessels shall be broken? A Rod of
Iron? what? but Potters Vessels? why a Wand were sufficient, a Stick, a Staff.
It is St John Harringt. in the Life of Ariosto. p. 420.
reported of Ariosto the Poet, that he served a Tradesman in such sort, who
passing by his Shop, and hearing him singing his Verses, and marring them in
the singing, with a little walking-stick he had in his hand, brake diverse of
his Pots, just after the example of Philoxenus, who doing the like upon like
occasion, Thou Diog. Laert. de Vit. Philos. l. 4. in Arcesil.
says he, marrest my Workmanship, and I will mar thine. And indeed it is a
less matter then a Rod of Iron that would serve the turn, but the Severity of
his Judgment is better aggravated by the Sh^rpnes, and Rigor of the Weapon.

That which is here called A Rod of Iron, is the same which is intimated by the
Apostle St John in two several places of his Rev. 2.27. Rev. 19.15.
Revelation, and it signifies literally, An Iron Scepter, Metaphorically, an
austere Government, such as should break them, if they would not bow. This
Iron Scepter is that which the Apostle 2 Thessalonians. 2.8
St Paul to the Thessalonians calls The Spirit of his mouth: the Prophet Esaias
11.4.
Esaias, The Rod of his Mouth, and the Breath of his Lips. Princes make their
Conquests by Fire, and Sword, by the Mouth of the Sword, as the Prophet Jeremy
In ^re Gladii Ier. 21.7. Vulg.
speaks, but our Savior shall conquer his Enemies with the Sword of his
Mouth. Thus did he with Pharao, and his Host: Thou did blow with the Wind
Exodus 15.10
says Moses, the Sea covered them, they sanke as Lead in the mighty Waters.
Thus did he with 2 Kings 19.35.
Senacherib, of whose Host he slew in one Night, one hundred fourscore and
five Thousand. And thus shall he do with Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
The Lord shall consume him with the Spirit of his Mouth.

Verse 10. Be wise now therefore O ye Kings: be learned Ye that are Judges of
the Earth.] The Prophets inference upon the Premises. Is it so that God so
little reckneth of these their Attempts? Is it so that he laughs them to
Scorn, and has them in Derision? Is it so that he will destroy them, and
break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel? Then does it behooue them to be
Wise, and Learned, that so they may the better be obedient to his Laws.

First for Kings and Judges (Judges, that is, inferior Magistrates) they are
here put in this Place, or simply for themselves, as being Heads of the People,
or else by the Figure Synecdoche they are put for the People also, of whom was
mention made before. But I am rather of opinion, that here they are put for
themselves only, that if this Counsel prevail with them, it will be easy
enough to bring the People to the right bent they should be at. Excellent are
the Verses that Claudian. de 4. Consul. H^n^r.
Claudian has to this purpose.

In commune iubes si quid, censesque tenendum
Primus iussa subi, tunc observantior aqui
Fit Populus, nec far negat cum viderit ipsum
Auctorem parere sibi, componitur Orbis
Regis ad exemplum: nec sic inflectere sensus
Humanos Edicta valent, vt Vita Regentis.
THE ENGLISH: If thou bidst ought to them that stand in awe,
And think it fit they should observe thy Law,
Observe it first thy self, then will they all
Be readier much to keep it, Great and Small.
They ill not refuse to bear the Burden, they,
When the Commander does himself obey.
The whole wide World takes sample of the King,
His Life more force to Law, then Law does bring.
And this is the very Counsel which the His Majesty's (...). l. 2. p. 155.
Best of Kings gave to his Eldest Son Prince HENRY of blessed memory, who
teaches us also that Plato in Polit.
Plato has the like, and how that which Plato had, was expressed by this Poet.

Secondly for Judges, that is, Inferior Magistrates, they also are named with
Kings, as upon whose Shoulders commonly the Burden of a Kingdom lies. These
are Gods curious parcel Guilt, Vessels of 2 Timothy 2.20.
Honor in his House, whether of the Priests, or of the Laity. For even they
also are raised on high for the benefit of their Brethren. But what must these
Kings? what must these Judges do? Intelligere and erudiri; they must be Wise,
and be Learned.

First for the Wisdom here meant, it is no Machiavellian Wisdom, that is
Hypocrisy. Satis est Principem externa specie pium and religiosum videri,
etiamsi ex animo non sit. It is sufficient for a Prince Machiavel de Princ. c.
18.
says Machiavel, to seem in outward show Devout and Religious, though in
Heart he be not so, and he had wont to be the Oracle of Princes. But he that
so palpably taught Hypocrisy in those days, no vnlikelyhood but he has by
this time his Portion with Hypocrites, Mat. 24.51.
where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth. The next way to obtain true Wisdom
indeed, is to follow that Counsel which the Lord gave to Joshua: This Book of
the Law, Josh. 1.8.
says God, shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall meditate therein
Day and Night, that thou may observe to do all that is written therein, for
then thou shall make thy Way prosperous, and then thou shall have good
success: or as it is in the Margent, as agreeing to the Original, And then
thou shall do wisely.

Secondly for Learning here, it is not that high Speculation, or Humane
Knowledge, or Skill in the Liberal Arts and Sciences, that in this Place is
required (which yet is very necessary in time, and place) but the Instruction
and Reformation of their minds in Romans 15.4.
Godliness, and indeed the Ephesians. 4.20.
Doctrine of CHRIST. Where by the way what shall we say of them, that so
generally have maintained, that Vid. B. Jewels Defense of the Artic. Art. 27.
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion. No, Ignorantia Iudicis, plerunque est
Calamitas Innocentis. The Party Innocent Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 19. c. 6.
says St Austen, many times smarts for the Ignorance of the Judge: and Origin
speaking of Devils, Possident omnes qui versantur in Ignorantia; They possess
themselves of all, Orig. in Number. Hom. 27.
says he, that remain in Ignorance. Indeed concerning the Heathens Mysteries,
it was the saying of (...). Vid. Casaub. Exerc. 16. c. 43. p. 550.
Synesius, Ignoratio Mysteriorum, est illorum veneratio: propterea Nocti
creduntur Mysteria. The Ignorance of those Mysteries, was the Honor and
Reverence of them, and therefore were they always performed in the Night: but
it is not so in Heavenly Mysteries. Nay even in their own Vulgar they may read
it themselves, 1 Cor. 14.38.
Si quis ignorant, ignorabitur, Who so knows not, shall not be known.

I cannot here forget how this parcel of Scripture we have in hand, was
alleged by S. Austen against the Donatists in behalf of Christian Princes for
dealing in Church Affairs. Gaudentius the Donatist of old (as Papists now
adays) taking much exception against it; Our Lord Christ, Aug. Cont. 2.
Gaudent. Epist. l. 2. c. 26.
says he, the Savior of Souls sent Fishermen, not Soldiers for the
propagation of his truth. God never expected the aid of worldly Warriers,
seeing it is he only that can judge both of the Living, and of the Dead. To
whom as S. Austen then answered, so may we to our Adversaries in like case:
Hear therefore the holy Prophets, as also the holy Fishermen* and you shall
not find religious Princes obnoxious to you. For I have showed before, says
he, that it appertained to the care of a King that the Ninivites appeased God,
whose anger the Prophet Jonas had declared to them before. And therefore as
long as you your selves do not hold that Church which the Fishermen
foreshewed, the Apostles planted: so long Kings that hold the Church, judge it
most rightly to appertain to their care, that you escape not scot-free in
rebelling against the same. And again a little after: God expects not the
aid of worldly Warriers, seeing to Kings he gives this benefit, that he
inspires into them a care that his Laws be kept in their Kingdoms. For they
to whom it is said Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be learned ye that are
Judges of ^he Earth, serve the Lord in Fear, acknowledge that their Power
ought so to serve the Lord, that they ought to be punished by that Power which
will not obey the will of the Lord. But whereas you bring their Soldiers into
envy, doubtless if this care appertain to Kings, as in holy Scriptures has now
been showed, by whom shall those Kings perform so much either against
rebellious Circumcellions, and their mad Accomplices, or Ringleaders, but only
by Soldiers that are their Subjects.

Verse. 11. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him with reverence.] A
specifying of that Wisdom, as also of that Learning, that was spoken of
before, namely, Fear and Reverence. Wisdom and Learning are no other, but
each of these, Fear, and Reverence. A serving with Fear, a Rejoicing with
Reverence. First for Fear, it is the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and End of
Wisdom: the Beginning, as Ps. 111.10.
David the Father teaches us; the End, as Eccles. 12.13.
Solomon the Son in his Ecclesiastes, or the Preacher. But it is no Servile
Fear. The Apostle S. John, speaking of that Fear, There is no Fear in Love,
1. Ioh. 4.18.
says he, and Fear has Torment: No, but this is a Filial Fear, it is a
pleasant Garden of Blessing, and there is nothing so beautiful as it, as the
Son of Syrach Ecclus. 40.27
tells us. Of this kind of Fear S. Gregory speaking, As Fear in the way of
this World, Greg. M^^^. l. 5. c. 13.
says he, begets Weakness: so in our Iourny and Course toward Heaven,
Fear begets Fortitude. Now this kind of Fear is so far from having
Torment, that it has Rejoicing annexed with it, as we see in the next words.

Secondly, for Reverence, it is in a manner the same with ^eare, for it is a
holy Fear of the Heart toward God, witnessed by all seemly Behavior,
Gesture, Attire, Countenance, Attention, and such like. And Rejoicing is here
annexed with it, as it were to season every of these, to show indeed they are
all done, not Formidine Poenae, for Fear of After-claps, but Virtutis Amore,
in Love to Virtue, as the Horat. Epist. l. 1. ep. 16. ad Quint.
Poet observes well: making a difference in this respect between the Good and
the Bad. I cannot before I go from this Verse, but remember those excellent
Passages which S. Austen has hereupon. How do Kings serve the Lord with
Fear, Aug. Ep. 50.
says he, but by forbidding, and punishing with a religious severity, those
things which are done against the Laws of God. He makes instance in the King
of Ninive, in Darius, in King Nabuchodonosor, and then goes forward in these
Terms. For the King serves God one way as a Man, another way as a King. As a
Man, by living faithfully, as a King, by making Laws with convenient Vigor to
command that which is Right. And again in another place, Aug. contr. Cresc.
Gram. l. 3. c. 51.
Kings do serve God in this as Kings, of in their own Realm they command
Good Things, and forbid Evil, not only concerning the Civil state of Men, but
the Religion of God also.

Verse. 12. Kiss the Son least he be angry, and so ye perish from the right
Way. If his Wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed are all they that put
their trust in Him.] Concerning Kissing here in this place, I will say as
Lipsius did when he wrote a Chapter De Osculis, and Lips. Ele^^. l. 2. c. 6.
began with these Words, Abi Venus, fallam ego te, quae ipsa multos, and de
Osculis Caput scribam and inscribam, in quo tamen nihil tibi loci, aut iuris.
Venus avaunt, I shall now deceive thee, as thou thy self have deceived many: I
shall Wright and Entitle a whole Chapter concerning Kisses, wherein thy self
shall have no place, or right at all. This Passage of Holy Scripture, though it
be of Kissing, yet concerns it Venus never awhit, no more then do the
Canticles, whose very Beginning is this; Cant. 1.1.
Let him Kiss me with the Kisses of his Mouth, for thy Love is better then
Wine. Nor is the Kiss here meant such an one as a Queen of France (they say)
once gave to a famous Chancellor in that Kingdom, History of Lewis 11.
translated by Mr Grimston. l. 1. p. 26.
who passing in the Court by a Chamber, where the Chancellor lay asleep, went,
says the Story, and Kissed him, and to her Ladies that marvailed thereat: I
kiss not the Man, quoth She, I kiss that Mouth, from whence have issued
forth so many excellent Discourses. I nothing doubt, but that Kiss was chaste
enough, yet is this another then that: though I am not neither of Drusius his
mind, who will have it only to be Drus. Observe. l. 2. c. 16.
Civil. S. Bernard pleases me much better, who speaking of this Kiss: Foelix
Osculum ac stupenda dignatione mirabile, in quo non os ori imprimitur, sed Deus
Homini vnitur. This, Bernard. sup. Cantic. Ser. 2.
says he, is an happy Kiss, and admirable in regard of the favor God shows
us therein, for that hereby Mouth is not joined unto Mouth, but God is united
unto Man. Come we to Kisses in that other kind, Mouth to Mouth, and Judas kissed
our Savior, no man nearer, even Judas Iscariot kissed the Son, but did his
Kissing ought avail him, or was it the Kissing here meant? No: but it came to
be a Byword, and is the Summum Genus, as it were, to all treacherous Kisses
ever since, and so shall be to the Worlds end, A IVDAS KISS. Now if the
Kissing here be not such a Kiss, Mouth to Mouth, much less is it a Kissing of
his Image, or his Rellicks, as our Adversaries the Papists Vid. Drus. Observat.
l 2. c. 16.
following the Superstition of the Gentiles, use to do. Judas yet had a nearer
proximity then so, in that he Kissed our Saviors own Lips, but his advantage
thereby was small.

By Kissing, then is here meant the Honoring and Obeying of our Savior, as
Kings themselves would be Honored, and Obeyed by their Subjects, a 2. Kings.
18.6
Cleaving to the Lord, and a Keeping of his Commandments. So Pharaoh unto
Joseph, Genesis 41.40
According unto thy Word shall all my People be ruled; It is in the Original,
All the People shall Kiss thy Mouth. And as here Kings, and Princes were put
in mind of this Duty, so was it Prophesied by Esaias, that so it should come to
pass, in regard of that great Honor they should perform to his Church.
Kings, Esaias. 49.23.
says he, shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing Mothers,
they shall Bow down to thee with their face toward the Earth, and lick up the
Dust of thy Feet. And again in another place, Esaias. 60.16.
Thou shall also suck the Milk of the Gentiles, and shall suck the Breasts of
Kings, and thou shall know that I the Lord, an^ thy Savior, and thy Redeemer.

Why, but is it not enough will some say, to Honor the Father, except we honor
the Son too? If so be the Son must needs be Honored, does not the Honor
redownd to him, that is done unto the Father? Are not the Father and the Son
both one? There is a memorable Story in Theodoret concerning this point.
Theodoret. l. 5. c. 16.
Theodosius the Emperor, when neither by Bishops, nor Councels could be got to
remove the Arrians from their Churches, Amphiphilochius alone with his witty
behavior, and answer. wan him to it. For Amphilochius entering the Palace, and
finding Arcadius the eldest Son of Theodosius lately designed Emperor, and
sitting with his Father, Amphilochius did his duty to the Father, but made of
his Son that sat by him, no account at all. Theodosius thinking the Bishop
had but forgotten himself, willed him to salute his Son, to whom the Bishop
again replied, that what he had done to the Father was sufficient for both.
Whereat when the Emperor began to storm, and to conster the contempt of his
Son, as dishonor done to himself, the wise Bishop made reply: And art thou
so grieved, O Emperor, to see thy Son neglected, and so much out of patience
with those that reproach him? Assure thy self then that Almighty God hates
the Blasphemers of his Son, and is offended with them as with ungrateful
wretches against their Savior and Redeemer.

But what is the Consequence of the Sons Anger here in this place? suppose he
should be angry, what then? And so ye perish from the right way.] Here then is
the Consequence, here is the effect of his Anger; Perishing* and a perishing
from the Right Way, not a missing of it only, for many may miss, and at
length come in again, but a Perishing, but an Undoing, but an utter consuming
of themselves. For there is no other Act. 4.12.
Name under Heaven whereby they might be saved. Again, He says not here in
this place, Aug. de Not. and Great. c. 33.
says S. Austen, least the Lord be angry, and he show you not the right Way,
or he bring you not into the right Way, but walking therein already, he is
able so to terrify them, that he says, Least ye perish from the right Way.
How? by what means? Even for that Pride is to be taken heed of, and that in
our Good Deeds, that is, in the Right Way, least that Man repute that to be his
own, which is Gods, and loosing that which is Gods, come to that which is his
own. The like to this he has in another Aug. de Correp. and Great. c. 9
place.

Howbeit here forsooth Exception is taken, for adding the Word Right. The Book
of Common Prayer, Abridgment of that Book which the Minist. of Linc. Dioces.
del^uered to his Majesty, Dece^b. 1 1605. Reprinted A^ 1617. p. 15.
say Men of our own Coat, appoints such a Translation to be read in the
Church, as does add both Words, and Sentences to the Text, as part of the Text,
and without any neat of distinction from it, and that sometimes to the changing
or obscuring of the meaning of the holy Ghost. As in the Book of the Psalms Ps.
2.12. this word, Right, is added; Ps. 4.8. this word Oil; Ps 13.6 these words.
Yea I will praise the Name of the Lord most High; Ps. 14. three whose Verses
are added, Viz. 5.6.7; Ps. 22. these words, Look upon me; Ps. 22.31. this word
My, etc. Concerning the rest when we come unto them. But as touching the word
Right, whether it be added or no, doubtless they are in the wrong. For if it
be so in the Septuagint, I mean in the Greek, (...). Ps. 2.12.
and indeed so it is, then is it not added, the Translators following them, and
not the Hebrew. But suppose it be added, yet is there an additament of
explication, which illightneth the meaning of the holy Ghost, as this does in
this place. Now God forbid that every such Addition should be that adding to
the Scripture, which the Scripture forbids, and they intimate. Oh but it
implies a Contradiction to that Tenet of ours concerning the Certainty of
Salvation: for if a man may perish from the Right Way, then is he not certain
to persist in it, if not certain to persist, then not certain of his
Salvation. Nay, but the meaning here is not, of them that are effectually
called, and have their Conversation in Holiness (such as they are that from
the Word of God have that Certainty) but of Christians in general, of whom
some may perish indeed. I make no doubt but of all men living, Protestants are
in the right. The Faith that we profess, is doubtless the Right Way. Howbeit,
for many Protestants live so loosely and licentiously as they do, how are they
likely to perish from this Right Way, and to come to utter destruction both of
Body and Soul.

That which is here annexed, If his wrath be kindled, yea but a little, blessed
are all they that put their trust in him: is a Caveat the Prophet gives, that
they should not move by their wicked behavior the Son of God to Wrath or
Anger. He says not here as in another Ps. 103.8.
place (and as every man is ready to say, and most of all they, to whom least
of all it appertains) The Lord is full of Compassion and Mercy: long
suffering and of great Goodness, and so forth. No, but, If his Wrath be
kindled yea but a little: and with that he makes a stop, a kind of Apostopesis,
Quintil. Instit. l. 9, c. 3.
Quid taceat incertum est, we know not what it is he suppresseth, but he
shuts up all with this Conclusion, Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him. It seems, Dr Fentons Persume against the Plague. p. A. 7. b.
says a worthy Divine that when the Prophet did but thus think of the Wrath
of God, it put him into such a Passion, that as men astonished, and half
frighted, use to bless themselves, so the Prophet here in this place.

S. Auston goes another way, and it is a good way too. The Prophet, Aug. in
hunc Ps.
says he, says not here, that they are safe and secure that put their trust
in him, as if this only were the profit that they reaped thereby, that when
Others were punished, they should escape, but he says they are Blessed, and in
this Blessedness is contained the Perfection and Consummation of all good
things whatsoever, that possibly can betide the Soul of Man. Indeed Gods
public Punishments Plague, Famine, Sword, and the like, sometimes light upon
the Godly, as well as upon the Wicked, and yet the Godly in midst of their
Miseries are Blessed, and Happy notwithstanding. S. Cyprian has an excellent
saying to this purpose: Some, Cyp. de Mortal.
says he, are at a stand, for that the Plague now raging, lays hold on us
Christians, as it does on the Heathen. As if Christians believed only to this
purpose that they might with hearts case in this present World be free from all
adversities; and enjoy their time here with much Felicity, and not rather
after they had suffered here all Sorrows whatsoever, be reserved for those
Joys which are in the World to come. No: a Man must make full account in this
world to taste of Bitter and Sweet, that so he may say as S. Austen Aug.
Confess. l. 10 c. 28.
says, Contendunt Laetitiae mea flendae, cum laetandis Maroribus, and ex qua
part stet victoria, nescio. My Reioycings to be Sorrowed for, contend for
superiority with my Sorrows to be Rejoiced at, and whether of which shall have
the Victory, I as yet know not.

And thus are we come at length to the end of this Second Psalm. A Psalm,
that besides the ordinary saying of it the First Day of the Month, is
appointed to be road in the Church at Morning Prayer on Easter Day. Easter
Day, is the Day of our Saviors Resurrection, when triumphing over Death and
Hell, he began that spiritual Kingdom of his, that shall never have end. And
this Psame, as it was in David's time, a Prophecy thereof, namely that such a
thing was to be: so is it now in these times, a Gospel (as it were) of the
same, wherein David shows no less that such a thing has been indeed, then
did the Evangelists themselves that wrote the Story. For what is this whole
Psalm but a Comment, as it were, on those words of the Evangelist S. Matthew,
Mat. 28.18.
All Power is given unto me in Heaven, and in Earth; and on those of S. Mark,
Marc. 16.16.
He that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, but he that believes not
shall be damned; and on those of St Luke, Luc. 24 46.
Thus is it written, and thus it behooued Christ to suffer, and to rise from
the dead the third day: and on those of St John; Ioh. 18.36.
My Kingdom is not of this World: My Kingdom is not from hence. True it is,
that David here did in a literal Sense mean himself, against him it was that
the Heathen so furiously raged, and the People imagined so vain things,
howbeit David as he was herein a Figure of our Savior CHRIST, so did he mean
no doubt in this very Psalm, our Savior CHRIST to. Witness the Apostles of
our Savior, who in the Act. 4.21.
Acts of the Apostles not only so took it, but the Apostle St Paul also, in
his Epistle to the Heb. 1.5.5.5.
Hebrews. Our Savior then thus meant, and this Psalm being an Exhortation
unto all such as should live in our Saviors Time, that they should all of them
take special notice of the Kingdom of our Savior, and submit themselves
wholly thereunto; now that the Kingdom is thus spread, and the whole World, as
it were, in Belief, what better befitteth us Christians, then when we
solemnize such Feasts, to say this Psalm amongst the rest, which sorteth so
exceeding well, both with the Mystery, and the Season.

PSALM. III. Domine quid.
1 LORD, how are they increased that trouble me! many are they that rise
against me.
2 Many one there be that say of my soul: there is no help for him in his God.
3 But thou O Lord, art my Redeemer: thou art my Worship, and the lifter up of
my Head.
4 I did call upon the Lord with my Voice: and he heard me out of his holy Hill.
5 I laid me down and slept, and rose up again: for the Lord sustained me.
6 I will not be afraid for ten thousands of People: that have set themselves
against me round about.
7 Up Lord, and help me O my God: for thou smitest all mine Enemies upon the
Cheek bone, thou have broken the Teeth of the Vn^odly.
8 Salvation belongs unto the Lord: and thy blessing is upon thy People.
THE ANALYSIS.
What occasion the Prophet David had, of writing this Psalm, is evident by
the Title, as the Title is specified in the Hebrew, and in some Translations
thereof. Quomodo Ianna introducit in Domum, sic Titulus Psalmi introducit in
Intellectum. As the Gate Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 20.
says St Austen, lets in to the House, so does the Title of a Psalm to the
Understanding thereof. In the Vulgar it is thus: A Psalm of David when he did
fly from the Face of Absolon his Son. The Story is in the Second of Samuel,
and is in effect to this purpose. Absolon, wicked Absolon had made against his
Father David, a maine Conspiracy. Absolon 2. Sam. 15.10.
says the Scripture, sent Spies throughout all the Tribes of Israel, saying,
As soon as ye hear the sound of the Trumpet, then ye shall say, Absolon
reigns in Hebron. David upon the news hereof, fled from Jerusalem, and
betook himself unto the Wilderness, at which time (as it is not unlikely) he
composed this Psalm.

The Psalm is framed unto God by way of Petition, that in regard his Enemies
were so many, as it is in the First Verse; and so maliciously bent against him,
as it is in the Second; and yet his Faith in God was very firm, as it is in
the Third Verse; Again in regard the Goodness of the Lord had been formerly
such unto him, that he never made his Prayer unto him, but he was heard
effectually, as it is in the Fourth Verse; and therefore still relied on him
with much Security, as it is in the Fifth; and Confidence as in the Sixth Verse;
his Petition, I say, is to God that he would now also deliver him, as it is in
the Seventh Verse; especially, for he alone was able to effect it, as it is in
the Eight Verse.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse I. Lord, how are they increased that trouble me: many are they that
rise against me.] It was a memorable saying of King Solomon, Prove. 16.7.
When a man's Ways please the Lord, he makes even his Enemies to be at peace
with him: and it is as true again on the contrary, that when the Ways of a
man please not the Lord, he makes even his Friends to be at Enmity with him.
What ways they were that David took, before these Troubles did befall him, is
recorded in holy Writ: namely, first the Way of Concupiscence, then the Way of
Adultery, next the Way of Dissimulation, afterward the Way of Murder, and how
displeasing these Ways were unto the Lord, witness the Words of Nathan to
David. Thou 2 Samuel 12.9.
says he, have killed Vriah the Hittite with the Sword, and have taken his
Wife to be thy Wife, and have slain him with the Sword of the Children of
Ammon. Now therefore the Sword shall never depart from thy House, because thou
have despised me, and have taken the Wife of Vriah the Hittite to be thy Wife.
Thus says the Lord, Behold I will raise up Evil against thee, out of thine
own House, and I will take thy Wives before thine Eyes, and give them unto thy
Neighbor, and he shall lie with thy Wives in the sight of this Sun. For thou
did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the
Sun. Hence then that Increase of those that troubled him: hence those Many that
rose against him. His complaint here in this place was not of the Philistians,
the Idumaeans, the Moabites, and such like, utter Enemies to the Church of God,
and consequently to himself, but of his Subjects, his Servants, his
Counselors of Estate, all in a manner falling from him, and adoring now the
Sun rising, for so they took Absolon his Son to be. In this his speech
then, and in these words, is both Admiration, and Astonishment. Admiration, for
that it was strange, that such great Friends a little before, should prove such
Enemies unto him, and grow in a tryce from one Extreme unto another:
Astonishment, for that they were such as himself not long before, had promoted
to the Honors and Dignities they did enjoy. But this is no new thing
now-a-dayes, such ungrateful Wretches as these, the World has such stoare of,
as there be Moats in the Sun. Nay even at that time it seems they were so
many, that David himself could not number them, only the Scripture will
inform us, (and by that we may guess the Multitude was exceeding great) in
that no less then 2 Samuel 18.7.
Twenty Thousand of them were slain in one Day. Besides the Captain and
Ringleader of them Absolon him self, who how he was taken up between the
Heaven, and the Earth, Some say, by the Hair, the Scripture says, by the
Head, remains a Spectacle for all undutiful, and ungracious Children to their
PARENTS, for ever to behold. It shall not be amiss here to remember that
Epitaph, or Epigram, which Strigelii Loc. Theolog. a Christoph. Pezel. edit.
Part. 3. p. 385.
Pezelius has made upon him.

Degener immerito rap^ Sceptra Parenti,
O Iuvenis, Patriae Pestis acerba tuae.
Dignatuis coeptis sed Poena secuta, vagantem
Frondibus arboreis implicuere Comae.
Hasta Ioab maduit forti vibrata Lacerto,
Sanguine, transfixo Pectore, tincta tuo.
Has Scelerum Poenas pulso dedit ille Parente:
I nunc, and Patrijs insidiare Bonis.
THE ENGLISH.

Disloyal Princox, Plague of native Soil,
Thou undeservedly did Scepter wring
From Fathers hand, and made the same thy Spoil,
When afterward it did due Vengeance bring:
The Trees themselves thee punished, for thy Hair
Tangled therewith, they hoyst thee in the Air.
Nor only so, but Ioabs Dart beside
Eftsoons bereft thee of thy Life's strong Fort,
Into thy Bowels it did swiftly glide,
And made thy Blood gush forth in ample sort.
These were thy Punishments, this was thy Fate,
Go now, and undermine thy Fathers State.
But to return again to my purpose. This is the First Psalm of many others
that have the Word LORD in the Vocative, a Word so oftentimes used in all these
Psalms. It is in the Original, that peculiar Name of GOD, consisting of four
Letters, commonly called (...), whereof as many have spoken much, so I. Drusii
Tetragram. c. 14.
Drusius has written a whole Treatise, showing that it is the proper Name of
the DIVINE ESSENCE, and that it has no proper Vowels, and therefore that it is
left vnpronounceable, to show the better that the Essence of God is
incomprehensible. And yet where ever the Jews found it, they took the Vowels
either of Adonai, or Elohim, and so pronounced it. It is always in our last
Translation translated LORD, and the Word LORD is always printed in Capital
Letters, but if it be the Word Adonai in the Original, which signifies Lord
to, or Elohim, then is it printed in smaller Letters. An example hereof we have
Ps. 8.1. O LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the Earth! And
indeed it was long ago the Counsel of Antonitu Rodolphus Cevallerius in an
Epistle to the Bishop of Eli that then was, B. Cox (it should se^me) that where
ever that Word of four Letters was in the Original, Characteribus maiusculis.
the Translation should be in Capital Letters, as I. Drus. ib. c 1^.
Drusius witnesses in his foresaid Book, and our Translators have most exactly
observed in our English Word LORD, ^hroughout their whole Translation, not once
naming the Word JEHOVAH, for ought I have observed, but only Exodus 6.3. and
17.15. And as our English Translators, so the Septuagint translate it to, as
Zanch. de Not. Dei, seu de divin. Attrib. l. 1. c. 17.
Zanchius has observed. Indeed Illyr. Clau. Script. Tract. de Rat. cognosc.
sac. Lit. p. 45. and De Nomine Jehova p. 622.
Illyricus mislikes it, and says that the Name DOMINVS, LORD, does obscure the
nature of that other Name, howbrit since the Apostles themselves as Calv.
Instit. l. 1. c. 13.. 20.
Calvin observes, translated it by this Name to, (...), Dominus, Lord, their
Example in this case, may be for us a sufficient warrant. The Word is a Name
of Relation, and does intimate unto us, that there is a mutual consequence, or
a kind of dependence between GOD, and him who styles him LORD. Whereupon St
Austen, As he cannot be a Servant Aug. de Trin. l. 5. c. 16.
says he, that has not a Lord: so cannot he be a Lord, that has not a
Servant. And Thomas Aquinas to this purpose, Deus non fuit Dominus antequam
habuit Creaturam sibi subiectam. Though GOD o says Aquinas be before his
Creatures: Aquin. Sum. Part. 1. ^u 13. Art. 7. Ad Sextum.
yet forasmuch as in the signification of Lord, it is comprehended that he has
a Servant: and so contrariwise, these two Relations, Lord, and Servant, are by
nature extant together, therefore GOD was not the Lord, before he had the
Creature subject unto him. He that will see more in this case, I refer him to
that Question Zanch. de Not. Dei. l. 1. c. 10.
handled by Zanchius, That seeing God is everlasting and immutable, and nothing
happens to him anew, whither there be any Names that so agree unto him by
reason of Time, that they could not be his Names from everlasting. In the
handling of which Q^estion he shows how St Austen discoursed like an
Orator, Aquinas like a Schooleman, upon one and the self-same Point. But now
to the Many here, Many are they that rise against me.]

Many in this Verse, and Many in the next, whereby we may perceive that it is
not always the safest way that Many go. Whereupon St Austen, Esteem not of
their number Aug. in Ps. 39.
says he, I grant they are Many, who is able to number them? Few they are that
go the straight way. Bring me hither the Skales, begin to weigh, see what a
deal of Chafe is hoysed up in one Skale, against a few Barley Corns in the
other. And again in another place, Aug. in Ps. 128
The Church was sometimes in Abel alone, and Abel was overcome by his wicked,
and divelish Brother Cain; The Church was sometimes in Enoch alone, and Enoch
was translated from the Society of the Wicked; The Church was sometimes in
Noah's House alone, and Noah endured all those that perished by the Deluge; The
Church was sometimes in Abraham alone, and we are not ignorant what Wrongs the
Wicked did unto him; So likewise the Church was sometimes in Lot, his Brothers
Son, and only in his House, amidst the whole City of Sodom, and he bare with
the Iniquities of the Sodomites so long, till at length God delivered him from
the midst of them. Thus Nazianzen, speaking of his own Time, Where are they
now Greg. Naz. ad Arian. and de seips. Orat. 24.
says he, that vpbraid us with our Poverty, and boast so much of their own
Wealth? who define a Church by Multitude, and contemn a small Sheepfold.
Lastly, St Chrysostom, I pray you Chrysostom ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 40.
says he, what profit or advantage is it, to be rather a great deal of Chaff,
then a few precious Stones? Multitude consists not in the quantity of number,
but in the quality, and efficacy of Virtue? Elias was only one, and the whole
World it self was not worthy to be weighed with him. Thus the Fathers, and
yet Bell. de Eccles. Milit. l. 4. c. 7.
says Bellarmire, The fourth Note, or Mark of the Church, is Amplitude, or
Multitude, and Variety of Believers.

Verse 2. Many one there be that say of my Soul: there is no help for him in
his God.] We saw in some sort the Many before, but now we see them far
better, in that we not see them only, but hear them. According as Socrates to
one that stood mute before him, Loquere, vt te videam, Speak Eras Apopth.
says he, that I may see thee. Indeed Speech as Plut. de Lib. educand Laert.
in Democrit.
said Democritus, is the Shadow of Action: or the Image, and Representation of
our Works, as Laert. in Solon.
Solon was wont to say, and Seneca to this purpose, Senec. Epist. l. 20. ep.
115.
Such is Man's Speech as is his Life. Non potest alius esse Ingenio, alius Animo
color. He makes instance in no worse Man then Mecaenas himself, and an
hundred pities it was, that so good a Man in one respect, was so bad in so
many. The Prophet here sees them no man better, and therefore describes them by
the impiety of their Words. First concerning the Word Soul, Soul in holy
Scripture is taken diverse and sundry ways. It is taken for the whole Man
consisting of Body and Soul. So the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.20
The Soul that sins, it shall dye. It is taken for the Will and Affections,
where of the Soul is the Seat, so is it said in holy Scripture, that the Soul
of Jonathan was 1. Sam. 18.1.
knit with the Soul of David. But here in this place it is taken for Life, and
his Enemies now thought that they had him at such a lift, that Safety it self
could not have saved him. Witness their very Words, There is no help for him
in his God. What? not for David? what? not in God? what? not in his God? Satan
himself durst never have said it, and shall his Miscreants speak that which
Satan dares not? But why no Help? why not for David? why not in God? why not
in his God? Why? but for they saw forsooth themselves so Many, they saw David's
Friends so few. David's Army in respect of them, were like two little 1 Kings
20.27.
Flocks of Kids, they themselves filled a whole Country. I told you in the
Verse before, that we might guess how great an Army Absolon had, when two and
twenty Thousand of them were slain. An Army consisting of 30000 Foot, and
4000 Horse is sufficient some Gener. Hist. of Spain, transl. by Mr Grimst. l.
28. p. 1057.
say, for the execution of any worthy Enterprise whatsoever. Nay the Cardinal
of Sion was wont to Guicciard. Hist. l. 12.
say, that an Army of 40000 Swissers, was a Power able to meet in the field
with the whole residue of the World, joined in one strength. By much likelihood
Absolons Army came not much short of the greater of these two Nombers. What
David's was, the Scripture tells us not, only Josephus e^formes us in the (...).
Joseph. Antiq. l. 7. c. 9.
Greek that it was but 4000, I say in the Greek, for that the English Josephus
so much mistaketh, and reads 40000. Now being but 4000, and his Enemies so
many, and calling to mind our Saviors Luc. 14.31.
Proportion of Ten, to meet with Twenty Thousand how unequal it is, well may
we think they had cause to be so confident, and to think but meanly of David,
but to think as meanly of David's God to, and that he could not, or would not
help, it was Blasphemy to say he could not, and to say he would not,
Incredulity. And was not all this verified in our SAVIOVR upon the Cross? It
is the Observation of Arnobius, What say they here which the Jews said not,
Mat. 27.43.
He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him. But what says
David to all this? was he of the same mind? Nay: for it follows:

Arnob. in hunc Ps.
Verse 3. But thou O Lord art my Defender, thou art my Worship, and the Lifter
up of my Head.] Faith, Heb. 11.1.
says the Apostle St Paul, is the Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence
of things not seen. Lo here the force of Faith, which whatsoever Men, or
Devils say to the contrary, is fixed in God above, and assures it self of
those things which are not as yet seen. He had scarcely retired himself in
these his Meditations unto God, whenas immediately he began to feel a secret
working of the Spirit, and an invisible presence of G^d above. David could not
but remember how he had betaken himself to his heels, and how he did fly
from Absolon, and yet he here acknowledges God his Defender; he was not
ignorant how full of Infamy and Obloquie he was, and yet he here acknowledges
God to be his Worship; lastly he lies prostrate as it were, and groueling on
the Ground, and yet he acknowledges God to be the Lifter up of his Head, that
is, as Drus. Observat. l. 3. c. 5.
Drusius observes, to make him go with a glad and merry countenance, opposite
whereunto is that of God to Cain, Genesis 4.6.
Cur concidit Vultus tutes? why is thy Countenance fallen, that is, why go
thou so sad and heavily? Thus whatsoever befell David, he had by Faith a Salve,
and Remedy for the same. Oh the excellency of Faith? the invincible Strength
and Force thereof? These bodily Eyes Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 10.
says Chrysostom, that see things visible, cannot possibly do so much as the
Eyes of the Spirit may. For the Eyes of the Spirit are able to see the things
that be not seen, and that have no being at all. And again in an other place,
The Eyes of the Mind Chrysostom. de Verb. Esaiae Vid. Dom. Hom. 3.
says he notwithstanding they find Walls, or Mountains, or the Bodies of the
Heavens themselves opposed against them, yet they for all that, will easily
pass them through.

Verse. 4. I did call upon the Lord with my Voice, and he heard me out of his
holy Hill.] We saw in the Verse before the Excellency of Faith, we may see in
this Verse the Excellency of Prayer. David was now at Deaths door, chased out
of his own Kingdom, robbed and bereft of his Royal Dignity, forsaken of his
Friends and Familiars, his Enemies railing on him, his own Son seeking his
Life, and yet he for all this gives himself unto Prayer. That time which
others would wholly have bestowed, or in breathing out Slaughter and Revenge; or
in giving the bridle to the Tongue, in Cursing, and wicked Speaking, and
Railing on their Enemies, he spends in his Soliloquies unto God, and in his
Meditatio^s unto him, accordingly as he says in another of his Ps. 109.3.
Psalms, For the Love that I had unto them, lo they take now my contrary
part, but I give my self unto Prayer.

But it is here said he did call upon the Lord with his Voice, intimating that
his Prayer, was not Mental, but Vocal, and so indeed oftentimes ought Prayer
to be. The eis, P. Martyr. in 1. Sam. 1.12.
says Peter Martyr, no need at all of Voice, when we make our private Prayers
unto God, in regard that God hears, and beholds our Hearts, and Minds. And
yet sometimes, says he, it may be used to very good purpose, because it may
fall out that we may languish in our Prayers, and our Minds may be wearied,
which the Voice again will refresh, and give thereunto a new Vigor. It
follows, And he heard me out of his Holy Hill.]

The Hill here me^nt was Mount Sion, whereupon was placed at that time the Ark of the Lord. The Story is 2. Sam, 15.25.
recorded in the Second of Samuel, where we shall read, that whenas David flew
from Absolon, the Levites went with him, and Abiathar the Priest, and carried
the Arc with them. Howbeit David in many respects would none of all this, and
therefore caused them to return again to the City of Jerusalem where Sion
was. This that here then he says in these words, is to this effect, that
howsoever by distance of Place he was deprived of the sight of the Arc, yet
was that no cause at al, but that the Lord might give him the hearing, he being
Ps. 145.18.
Nigh to all such as call upon him faithfully. Why Holy Hill, see Exposit. in
Ps. 2.6. p 41.
before.

Verse. 5. I laid me down and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord
sustained me.] Philip King of Macedon having slept a sound sleep, and waking
at the last, and seeing Antipater by him, No marvel, Plutarch. Apopth.
quoth he, I slept so soundly, seeing Antipater was by, and watched. It had not
like to have fallen out with King Saul so well, 1. Sam. 26.15
when he on a time fell asleep, howsoever Abner was near him that loved him
as well as ever Antipater did King Ph lip. But no such Keeper indeed as the
Lord God of Hoasts, not Abner, not Antipater. Had Judge. 4.21.
Sisera, and Iudyth. 13.8.
Holofernes, so been kept, they had not miscarryed as they did. Not a Night
goes over our heads, but it may be our own case, such a Death, or such like.
But as our Enemy ever watches to play Iael, or Judith with us, so he that
keeps Israel, he that keeps us, Ps. 121.4.
will neither slumber, nor sleep. It is strange how the Lord of Heaven has
kept Many of his Servants whenas they were in a dead sleep, and none by to
watch them, but only the Murderers themselue^. I have read of One in Queen
Mary's time (whom since I had good cause to know, as being between us both
(to speak in S. Ieroms words) Nomina Pietatis, Hieron. de Vitand. suspect.
Contubern.
Officiorum Vocabula, Vincula Naturae, secunda post Deum Foederatio, that being
on a time in bed in an Inn, and One that had been his Servant lying near
unto him, and coming at Midnight to have murdered him, the Master was
dreaming at that instant, that the Bed whereon he lay was all on Fire, whereat
starting up, and crying to God for help, the Murderer was so affrighted, that
he desisted from his purpose, craved pardon for the attempt, and presently
revealed to him who they were that set him on work. But concluding this point
with that of Moses, Exodus 15.2.
The Lord is my Strength, and Song, and he is become my Salvation: he is my God
and I will prepare him an Habitation, my FATHERS God, and I will exalt him, I
return unto my purpose.

The Prophet could not better make known unto us the tranquillity of his
mind amidst the many dangers he was in, then by these effects he here tells
us, of Lying down, and Sleeping, and Rising up again. For as when the mind
of Man is much troubled by reason of any imminent danger, or he goes not to
Bed at all, or if he goes, he sleeps not soundly: so if so be nothing trouble
him, then does he freely take his rest, and much refreshed by that rest, he
rises again with much alacrity. When thou lie down, Prove, 3.24.
says Solomon, thou shall not be afraid: yea thou shall lie down, and thy
sleep shall be sweet. This sweetness of Sleep, as it is not the meanest of
those Blessings that God bestows on us, and many would give much for the
purchasing thereof, so the Ovid. Met. l. 11.
Poet describes it accordingly, Somne quies rerum, placidissime Somne Deorum,
Pax animi, quem Cura fugit, qui corpora duris
Fessa ministerijs mulces, reparasque Labori,
and so forth. But the Prophet here, not only slept, but rose again, which
Sleeping of his, and Rising again he ascribes to the Lord. And indeed as S.
Austen Aug. Hom. 28 Vid. Greg. in Evang. Hom. 1.
speaks Nonne multi san^ dormierunt and obduruerunt? Have not many gone to
Bed safe and sound, and been found stark dead by the Morning? What need we
Examples of old, as the Exodus 12.30.
First Borne of the Egyptians, Saraes Tob. 6.13.
Seven Husbands, the whole 2. King. 19.35.
Camp of the Assyrians being an Hundred, Fourscore, and Five Thousand, I
suppose no Man living but may call to mind some one Acquaintance or other, that
has miscarried in this kind. Now for it may be any man's case, which has
been the case of so many* hence is it that our Mother the CHVRCH teaches all
and every of her Children to pray against sudden Death, importing therein, as
that Worthy M. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 46.
Devine observes a twofold Desire. First, that Death when it comes may give
us some convenient respite: or Secondly, if that be denied us of God, yet we
may have wisdom to provide always before hand, that those Evils overtake us
not, which Death unexpected does use to bring upon careless Men, and that
although it be sudden in it self, nevertheless in regard of our prepared
minds it may not be sudden. And here I cannot but remember that thrice
worthy He died Ian. 25. 1617. according to the Churches Computation, otherwise
1618, and gave above a 1000 Pound toward the new Building of the Forefront of
the College.
Doctor in his Faculty, and as worthy a Governor in the University, the Right
Worshipful Mr Dr Blencow forty years Provost of Oriel College, who died thus
suddenly (untimely to many) most untimely to my self) and yet to whom in
regard of his prepared mind appearing by his last Will and Testament, Death no
doubt was not sudden. He had the first two Letters of both his Names who
some 300 years before, was the First Provost of that House and a most
principal Benefactor, insomuch that upon the Death of the Latter, these Verses
were made on Both.

A.B. Praepositus primus, sed and Vltimus A.B.
Auspicium Tecto magnum EDOVARDE tuo.
Ambos quos vidit disiunctos Nestoris ^^as,
Aedificatores nunc habet vna Domus.
Vna Domus Terris habet illos, ^nica Coelis,
Copula ter faelix COELO* eademque SOLO.
THE ENGLISH. That A. B. stood for Provost First,
and for the Last likewise,
K. Edw. the Second, Founder of ORIEL College. Adam Brown, Almoner to the
King, the first Provost thereof.
EDWARD: it showed unto thy House,
what Fortune should arise.
Those Two whom space of Hundred years,
thrice told, did so much sever,
One House holds Both, Both Builders are,
and Both she holds together.
One House in Earth, in Heaven one House,
neither holds one alone,
Thrice happy Couple whom both HEAVEN
and EARTH thus join in one.
But to return to my purpose.

Having thus far spoken of this Fifth Verse, I might seem to have done with
it, and not to need to go any farther, but that there are of the Fathers that
seem to see more therein, then as yet we have seen. Arnobius, and S. Austen,
they see in these words our Saviors Passion, and his Resurrection both. Our
Savior, Aug. de Genesis cont. Manich. l. 2. c. 24.
says S. Austen, took his rest with the Sleep of his Passion, that his
Spowse the Church might then be framed, and fashioned to him, which Sleep of
his he thus sings in the ditty of the Prophet, I laid me down and slept, and
rose up again, for the Lord sustained me. Nay upon this very ground S. Austen
Aug. in hunc Ps.
says it more appertains to the Person of Christ, then it did to the Person
of David. Jesus* Arnob. in hunc Ps.
says Arnobius, cried with his voice unto God, and he was heard, insomuch that
he esteemed of Death as of a Sleep. From whence arising, he feared no more
but now upon Corruptible putting on Incorruptible, and upon Mortal,
Immortality, he fears not Thousands of People that set themselves round about
him. And so indeed it here follows.

Verse. 6. I will not be afraid for Ten Thousands of People, that have set
themselves against me round about.] An excellent Fruit of an excellent Faith:
Boldness and undaunted Courage against all Opposition whatsoever. Such a
Courage had Elisha, who when his Servant saw such a mighty Host compassing the
City where his Master was, and thereupon fell a crying: Fear not, 2. King.
6.16.
says Elisha for they that be with us are more then they that be with them.
Ezechiah upon the like words, concerning the King of Assyria, yields his
reason, With him is an Arm of Flesh, 2. Chron. 32.7.
says he, but with us is the Lord our God to help us and to fight our
Battails. So the Apostle Romans 8.31.
S. Paul, What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us who can be
against us? And again a little after, V. 35.
Who shall separat us from the love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distres or
Persecution, or Famine, or Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword? Nay in all these
things we are more then Conquerers, through him that loved us. As if all those
had been but Fleabytings. But then in a strain beyond all admiration; I, says
he, am persuaded, that nether Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor
any other Creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. Which yet notwithstanding is not so to be
understood, as if the Godly Man were thus continually courageous in this sort:
Pray for me, Act. and Mon. edit. 4. p. 1724. col. 1.
says Father Latimer, in his Conference with Ridly, for I am sometime so
fearful that I would creep into a Mouse-hole, sometimes God does visit me
again with his Comfort. So he comes and goes, to teach me to feel and to
know mine Infirmity, to the intent to give Thanks to him that is worthy,
least I should rob him of his due as many do, and almost all the World. Thus
was it with our Prophet himself, who as courageously as he speaks here, is
elsewhere in his Book of Psalms in Father Latimers Tune and Taking. As, Ps.
42.6.
Why art thou so full of heaviness O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted
within me? And again, V. 14.
Why art thou so vexed O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me?
And again the Ps. 43.5.
third time, Why art thou so heavy O my soul: and why art thou so disquieted
within me? Like our Savior in the Garden, Mat. 26.39.
O my Father if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me, nevertheless, not
as I will but as thou will; And again, V. 42.
O my Father, if this Cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy
will be done: and he prayed the V. 44.
third time, saying the same words. But to return unto my purpose.

Our Prophet here thus courageous what is it that he does? Does he now set
down and rest him, and makes no more ado? Nay but he prays to be helped
notwithstanding, he give not over Prayer, and therefore says as here it
follows,

Verse. 7. Up Lord and help me, O my God, for thou smytest all mine Enemies
upon the Cheeke-bone, Thou have broken the Teeth of the Ungodly.] First in that
the Prophet here, so particularly speaks of God, in calling him his God, and
saying O my God, it is partly the Fruit of Faith and Love, partly in answer to
his Adversaries. First concerning that Fruit. God, Aug. de Ovib. c. 16.
says S. Austen, is the God of all, and yet I wot not how, a Man shall hardly
dare to say MY GOD, unless it be such an one as believes in him, and also
loves him, such an one says [MY GOD] Thou, whose thou thy self art, have
made him thine. This it is that he does love. Thou in the sweetness of thy
affection, and upon the confidence of thy Love say, DEVS MEVS, MY GOD, Thou
say it securely, thou say it truly, because he is thine indeed, and yet
thou have not made him that he is not others too. For thou use not to say (in
particular sort) MY GOD, as thou use to say, My Horse. The Horse that is
thine, is no other man's besides, God is not only thine, but his besides that
says as thou do, DEVS MEVS, MY GOD. So S. Chrysostom, It is the manner of
the Prophets, Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 34.
says he, to say, MY GOD, notwithstanding he is the God of all the World. But
this is the special and singular office of Love of things common to make them
proper. So S. Bernard, who speaking of the Prophets appropriating of God unto
himself in another of his Psalms, Here the Prophet, Bern. in Ps. Qui habitat.
Ser. 2.
says he, says MY GOD, but why not, OUR GOD? Because as touching Creation,
Redemption, and all the rest of those his other like Benefits besides, he is
the God of all, but as touching their Temptations, every one of all the Elect
has him as it were peculiar to himself. For he is so ready to raise up every
one that falls, and to recall him again, that flies from him, that it
seems he leaves all other, and addicts himself to one alone. To this purpose
S. Austen, O Gracious Omnipotent, Aug. Confess. l. 3. c. 11.
says he, who so curest every of us, as if thou only curedst him, and curest
all in general, as if all were but one in particular.

But that the Prophet here says, O my God, it is partly as I said, in answer
to his Adversaries. His Adversaries had said before, There is no help for him
in his God: whereupon the Prophet in this place, Up Lord, and help me O my
God. As if so be he had said, it touches now thine own Honor. Thy own Might,
and Majesty, and Power is now called in question. They seem to acknowledge
thee a God, for they say thou art My God: but Power they acknowledge none in
thee, none at all, for they say there is no Help in thee, Up therefore, and
Help me, O my God. But now concerning the Words, Up Lord.

First, what the Prophets meaning may here be, by saying Up Lord, we may gather
by another place. For in an Ps. 44.23.
other of his Psalms, speaking in these words, Up Lord, why sleep thou,
awake and be not absent from us for ever: he may be thought to intimate that
the Lord by reason of differring his Help, had been as it were asleep. And
yet himself knew full well, and professed it accordingly, that He that keeps
Israel (and who are the true Israel, Ps. 121.4.
but the Gal. 6.16.
Godly) shall neither Slumber nor Sleep.

Secondly, whereas he says, Up Lord, it is to be observed, that he goes not
to Saints for help, but directly to the LORD, a point of Divinity which the
Church of Rome will in no wise learn. No doubt Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and
Moses, were for Saints as much accounted of by our Prophet, as ever Peter, and
James, and John, and the Blessed VIRGIN in the estimation of Christians could
have been, yet goes our Prophet to none of them all, but directly unto God. I
will lift up mine Eyes to the Hills Psalm. 121.1.
says he, from whence comes my help. Mine help comes even from the Lord,
which has made Heaven and Earth. And again, Psalm. 73.24.
Whom have I in Heaven but thee: and there is none upon Earth that I desire in
comparison of thee. If the holy Angels and Saints in Heaven were at all to be
implored, Vid D. Abbots True Ancient Romans Cath. Part. 1. p. 356.
why did not David in all his Psalms implore their help? The Apostle St Paul
stood in need of other men's Prayers, and therefore craves the help of the
Romans 15.30.
Romans, and hops by the help of the 2. Cor. 1.11.
Corinthians Prayers, to be delivered from great dangers: but did he ever
desire the help of the Saints that were dead, as more charitable and desirous
of Gods Honor, and our spiritual Good, more forward to pray for us, and more
gracious in Gods sight to obtain our Requests? No, he knew no such Prayers,
who no doubt had he known them, would have imparted them to the Church, no man
sooner. I could in this case produce Aug. in Ps. 64 and cont. Epist. Parmen. l.
2. c. 8.
St Austen, Orig. cont. Cells. l. 8.
Origin, Theodoret. in Coloss. c. 2.
Theodoret, and Tertul. de Trin.
Tertullian, but I had rather send you unto Vid. D. Abbots Answer to D.
Bishops Epistle to the King.. 9.
Him, who produces them at large, and discourses so learnedly of them in his
Answer to D. Bishops Epistle to the King.

But how comes it to pass, that having said in the Fourth Verse before, I did
call upon the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy Hill; And
again in the Fifth Verse, The Lord sustained me; And again in the Sixth Verse,
I will not be afraid for ten Thousands of People that have set themselves
against me round about: how comes it to pass, I say, that here in this place
he seems to be somewhat d ffident, Up Lord, and help me, as if now, very now,
he were afraid to loose his Life. The Answer is, that the Security which the
Godly have amidst their Troubles, and a Contempt in some respects of the Life
they here enjoy, and the Petitions in this kind of saving the same Life, if it
stand with Gods Pleasure, may well accord and agree together. For although they
are far in love with the Life that is to come, insomuch that they may say as
Tul. Some. Scip.
Laelius in Tully, Quid moror in terris? why stay I longer on the Earth? or
with the Apostle St Paul rather, Philip. 1.23.
I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ: yet cast they not off all
ca^e concerning th^s Life. They know that this Life present is a sin ula^ Gift
of God, and that it is against all good Military Discipline, to leave their
Retinendus Animus in custodia Corporis, nec iniussic eius, a quo ille est nobis
datus, ex hominum vita migrandum est, ne munus humanum assignatum a Deo
defugisse videamini. Tul. Some. Scip.
Station, before their General discharge them. In which case Paul himself who
contemned his Life no man more, would be beholding to a 2. Cor. 11.33.
Basket to save it: and David to save his Life, would be beholding unto 1. Sam.
21.13.
Madness, at leastwise to a dissembling and counterfaiting thereof. Elisha bade
2. Kings 6.32.
shut the Door when a Messenger came from the King to take away his Life: who
before, when Horses, and Charets, and a great Host compassed the Place where
he was, and purposed to take him, Fear not Verse 16.
says he to his Servant who was much affrighted therewith, for they that be
with us, are more then they that be with them.

But why cries the Prophet here for Help unto the Lord? He yields the Reason
here himself, For thou smitest all mine Enemies upon the Cheeke-bone, thou
have broken the Teeth of the Ungodly; where First let us see what it is, To
smite upon the Cheeke-Bone: Secondly, To break the Teeth: Thirdly, the
dependence that these Words have with them that went before.

Percutere Maxillam figura quasi Proverbiali significat Paenam cum Ignominia,
and Dedecore coniunctam. To smite upon the Cheeke-Bone I. Drus. Observat. l. 3.
c. 5.
says Drusius, signifies in a Proverbial kind of speech, a Punishment joined
with Discredit, Reproach, and Infamy. But of that more hereafter.

Concerning Breaking of the Teeth, it is that which aggravates the manner, and
magnitude of their Punishment. For as the Cheeke-Bone may be smitten, and the
Teeth, safe enough, like as Micaiah was 1. Kings 22.24.
smitten by Zedekiah the false Prophet: so if with the Blow, the Teeth be
struck out, besides the violence, it is the disfiguring of a Man. Teeth Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
says Pliny, serve not only to grind our meat for our daily food and
nourishment, but necessary also they be for the framing of our Speech. The
Fore-teeth says he, stand in good steed to rule and moderate the Voice by a
certain concent and tuneable accord, answering as it were to the stroke of the
Tongue; and according to that row and rank of theirs wherein they are set, as
they are broader, or narrower, greater, or smaller, they yield a distinction
and variety in their words, cutting, and hewing them thick, and short, framing
them pleasant, plain, and ready, drawing them out at length, or smuddering,
and drowning them in the end: but when they be once fallen out of the Head, Man
is bereaved of all means of good utterance, and explanation of his Words. The
like to these Phrases here of Smiting the Cheek-bone, and Breaking the Teeth,
the Prophet has in an other Psalm, where he prays it may be done to some
other of his Enemies. Ps. 58.6.
Break their Teeth, O God, in their Mouths, says he, smite the Iaw-bones of
the Lions, O Lord. And Job to this purpose, Job. 29.17.
I brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth.

Lastly, concerning the dependence of these Words with the former, they do not
Aug. in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, so depend, as if the Lord therefore saved him, in that he
smote his Enemies on the Cheek-bone, but the Prophet being saved before, his
Enemies were smitten long after. And indeed it oftentimes comes to pass that
many of Gods Servants, being delivered from their Enemies, they see or ever the
time grows long, how those their Enemies by untimely coming to their End, are
smitten (as it were) on the Cheek-bone, and their Teeth burst asunder,
disinabled ever after to bite again. There is to this purpose a memorable
Story in the Ecclesiastical History. Narcissus, a Bishop of Jerusalem, was
accused of a certain Crime by three false Witnesses that had taken their
Oaths against him. The One wished that he might perish by FIRE, if he swore
not true; The Other, that if he swore not true, his BODY might pine away; The
Third, that he might loose his EYES if so be he swore not true to. It was not
long after, but all Three sped accordingly. The First by reason of a little
Spark of Fire that fell amiss, had his whole House set on fire, himself, and
Family burnt. The Second had an incurable Disease, whereby he pined and wasted
away. The Third to see both these Examples before his Eyes, wept so abundantly,
as that he lost both his Eyes. And this may be a Smiting of the Cheek-bone here
meant, and a Breaking of the Teeth, namely when such public and notorious
Calamities as these, do light upon our Adversaries that have been maliciously
bent against us. One perhaps stands in the Pillory, either for thine, or some
others cause; an Other is sent unto the Iayle; a Third holds up his Hand at
Bar, and is prosequuted so far, as that he takes his farewell of the World
in some conspicuous, and eminent Place, suppose Tyburne, or elsewhere. For
likely it is, that when the Lord has scourged thee sufficiently by thine
Enemies, he will as Parents do, Proijcere Sarmentum in Ignem, cast the Rod
into the Fire, as Aug. in Psalm. 73.
speaks S Austen. Thus Achitophel might be said to have been smitten on the
Cheeke-bone, when he haltred himself as he did, and Absolon to have his Teeth
broken, when slaughtered as he was by Ioab, he verified the old Saying, Mortui
non mordent, Absolon now could bite no more.

Or if our Enemies still live, and make no such public ends for Reasons best
known to Gods al-knowing Wisdom: yet may they be smitten on the Cheek bone,
and their Teeth broken an other way, as David's Enemies here might be, and so
might David mean too. That is, God might so repress, and hamper them in such
sort, as that they should have no power at all to hurt, though their Minds
perhaps should be as malevolent as ever. Been quod Malitia non habet tantas
vires, quantos conatus. Perierat Innocentia si semper Nequitiae iuncta esset
Potentia, and totum, quicquid cupit, Calumnia praevaleret. It is well Hieron.
Apol. advers. Ruff.
says S. Ierom, that Malice is not so powerful as wrathful, and Innocence
were undone, if Wickedness should still have power to do what she list, and
Detraction should prevail as far as she desired. And this is the more likely
to be the meaning here in this place, for that the Prophet elsewhere explicating
unto us what he means by Teeth, I lie Ps. 57.5.
says he, among the Children of Men, whose teeth are Spears, and Arrows, and
their Tongue a sharp Sword. And again in an other Ps. 64.3.
Place, Which have whet their Tongue like a Sword, and shoot out their Arrows,
even bitter Words. So that Railing, and Reviling, being sometimes meant by
Teeth, the Linguam ita ligatam habere, vt inutire non a^^e^nt. Plutar. ex Pind.
De cap ex Host. V^il.
curbing of their Toungs, and putting them to silence, that they dare not be so
lavish as formerly they were, even this is a Smiting on the Cheek bone, and
Breaking the Teeth of the Ungodly.

Verse 8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord, and thy Blessing is upon the
People.] By SALVATION in this place outward Safety and Deliverance from outward
Dangers and Enemies is meant. And this belongs so peculiarly to God above, that
the Man is cursed, Ier. 17.5.
says Jeremy, that trusts in Man, and makes Flesh his arm. And again, Ier
3.22.
Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Truly in vain is
Salvation hoped for from the Hills, and from the multitude of Mountains: truly
in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel. Agreeable whereunto is that of
our Prophet in an other Psalm, Ps. 36.7.
Thou Lord shall save both Man and Beast. It seems the Prophet Jonas borrowed
this Speech, Salvation belongs unto the Lord, of this our Prophet, when in
the last words of his Prayer he said, Ion. 2.9.
SALVATION IS OF THE LORD: as it is in the last Passage of this Psalm. Much
may be said hereof, but I will content my self with that which I find so
ready to my hand, in a worthy Prelate of our Church, concerning this Scripture.
Salvation is the Lords, My Lord of London upon Jonas, Lect. 29.
says he, is the Sum of the whole Discourse of Jonas his Prophecy, the
Moral of the History. It is the Argument of the whole Prophecy, and might
have concluded every Chapter therein. The Mariners might have written upon
their Ship instead of Castor and Pollux, or the like Device, Salvation is the
Lords. The Ninivites in the next Chapter, might have written it on their Gates:
and whole Mankind, whose Cause is pityed and pleaded by God against the
hardness of Jonas his heart, might in the last Chapter have written it in the
Palms of their hands. It is the Argument of both the Testaments, the Staff
and Supportation of Heaven and Earth. They would both sink, and all their
joints be severed, if the Salvation of the Lord were not. The Birds in the Air
sing no other Noat, the Beasts of the Field give no other voice, then Salus
Iehovae, Salvation is the Lords. The Walls and Fortresses to our Country
Gates, to our Cities and Towns, Bars to our Houses, a surer Cover to our
Heads then an Helmet of S^eele, a better Receipt to our Bodies then the
Confection of Apothecaries, a better Receipt to our Souls then the Pardons of
Rome, is Salus Iehovae, The Salvation of the Lord. The Salvation of the Lord
blesses, preserves, vpholdeth all that we have, our Basket, and our Stoare,
the Oil in our Cruises, our Presses, the Sheep in our Fold, our Stals, the
Children of the Womb, at our Tables, the Corn in our Fields, our Flores, our
Garners. It is not the Virtue of the Stars, nor Nature of the things
themselves, that gives being and continuance to any of these Blessings. The
World is my Theater at this time, and I neither think, nor can feign to my
self any thing that has not dependence upon this acclamation, Salvation is
the Lords. Thus much that worthy Prelate, and a great deal more to this
purpose, but I haste to an end, and therefore come unto the last Words, And thy
Blessing is upon the People.]

Blessing? what Blessing? People? what People? What? Blessing upon the People,
that thus revolted from him? the People, that as Pompey Plutarch. Apopth.
Occidente^ ab eo de^en, Orientem spectari. Tacit. Annal. l. 6.
spoke, adored the Sunne-rising, and turned so treacherously their backs on
him, whom now they thought in Setting? whom yet they could not but acknowledge
that he was the LORDS ANOINTED? Gods Blessing on such a People? Marry bless
them with an Halter would some have said, and been as charitable as one Brown
a Papist was (Papists forsooth are very charitable) who when one William Hunter
was to be burned for Religion, and desired the Peoples Prayers, Acts and Mon.
edit. 4. p. 1538. col. 2.
professed he would pray for him no more, then he would pray for a Do^. Henry
the Third, King of France, Predecessor to the last HENRY, both in his Kingdom,
and in his Death, showed himself of an other Spirit then this our Prophet was
of, upon like occasion offered him. He at the Barricadoes flying from Paris,
toward Chartres, when he came to Chaliot, from whence he might see the City,
turned (they say) toward the same, and in the bitterness of his Soul, I give
thee my Curse John de Seres his Hist. of France, transl. by Mr Grimst. in Hen.
3. p. 851.
said he, disloyal, and ungracious City; a City which I have always honored
with my continual abode; a City which I have more enriched then any of my
Predecessors, I will never enter within the compass of thy Walls, but by the
ruin of a great and memorable breach. King David here flew as he did, but
with Wings more like a DOV^. He knew there were Many amongst the People that
were deceived by the rest, Calvin. in Ez^^h. c. 3.
Semper aliquos esse sanabiles, etiam si totum Populi Corpus videtur
desperatum, that though the whole Body of the People, as Calvin speaks, were
desperately sick, yet that some of them were curable; that there were Degrees
of Offenses, and that they did not all deserve alike; that the Ringleaders,
indeed, were to be punished, the rest to be pityed, and lamented. At an other
time, and upon an other occasion, Lo 2 Samuel 24.17.
says he, I have sinned, and I have done wickedly: but these Sheep, what have
they done? Let thy Hand I pray thee, be against me, and against my Fathers
House. And thus was David toward his People here, his disloyal, and
ungracious People, even as if in this he had been a Type of our Savior, who
persecuted as he was, and reviled on the Cross, Father Luc. 23.34.
says he, forgive them, for they know not what they do. The Prophet speaks
not here, as Zacharias did, who yet was a Prophet to, 2 Chr. 24.22
The Lord look upon it, and require it: or as Joshua did in encountering his
Enemies, Josh. 10.12.
Sun stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon in the Valley of Aialon,
until I be avenged of mine Enemies: or as Sampson in the Book of Judges, a
Type of our Savior to, Judge. 16.28.
O Lord God remember me I pray thee only this once O God, that I may be at once
avenged of the Philistians: No, but he prays with S. Stephen rather, Act.
7.60.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. And hence it is that Tremelius
renders it, not as it is here in this place, Thy Blessing is upon the People:
but Tremel. in hunc loc.
super Populum tuum sit Benedictio tua: Let thy Blessing be upon the People. As
if so be he had said, God prosper them, and all their Affairs, that (saving
this Quarrel) all may have good success, and turn to their Good. Oh how
truly might David have here said, which he did in an other Psalm, Ps. 109.3.
For the love that I had unto them, lo they take now my contrary part, but I
give my self unto Prayer.

PSALM. IV. Cum invocarem.
1 Hear me when I call, O God of my Righteousness. for thou have set me at
liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my Prayer.
2 O ye Sons of Men, how long will ye blasspheame mine Honor: and have such
pleasure in vanity, and seek after leasing?
3 Know this also, that the Lord has chosen to himself the Man that is
godly: when I call upon the Lord he will hear me.
4 Stand in awe and sin not: commune with your own heart, and in your
Chamber and be still.
5 Offer the Sacrifice of Righteousness: and put your trust in the Lord.
6 There be many that say: who will show us any good?
7 Lord lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us.
8 Thou have put Gladness in my Heart: since the time that their Corn, and
Wine, and Oil increased.
9 I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only,
that make me dwell in s^fty.
THE ANALYSIS.
Whether this Fourth Psalm was made upon the same occasion that the Former
was, or upon some other like unto it, Interpreters are at odds, and the
Controversy as yet not fully ended. The best is who has the better, is not
much material for us to know, we may say of this, as was said of the Blind
man in S. John's Gospel restored to sight, Some said this is he: Ioh. 9.9.
others said he is like him. So some Interpreters are of opinion that this
Psalm was framed upon the same occasion that the Former was: some others upon
an occasion somewhat like thereunto, but this, as I said, is not much material.

The Psalm it self is here framed, partly by way of Petition, and partly by
way of Instruction. That is, the Prophet both Petitioneth in this Psalm to God
above, and yields withal such Instructions as might recall his Adversaries
from the Plots, and Practices against himself which at that time they had in
hand. First then, the Prophet imploring the help of God, as it is in the First
verse, he turns him next unto his Adversaries whom he endeauoreth to
instruct in true Piety, and Godliness. This that he might the better effect,
he calls their Sin first to mind, and that was Treason against himself, and
that in the Second Verse; Secondly, he shows unto them his lawful calling to
the Kingdom, and that in the Third Verse; Thirdly he counsels them to
repent, and to turn from their wicked ways, and that in the Fourth Verse;
Fourthly, to show unto the World the Fruit of that repentance, and that in the
Fifth Verse. These things thus premised, he teaches them to aim at true
Felicity, concerning which seeing it was a great Question even in those days
wherein it did consist, as it is in the S^xt Verse; He showed that it consisted
in the favor of God toward Man, as it is in the Seventh Verse; and
amplifieth that favor of his, in respect of the Effects that follow which are
Gladness of heart, as it is in the Eight Verse; and fearelesse Security, as it
is in the Ninth.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse. 1. Hear me when I call O God of my Righteousness, for thou have set
me at liberty when I was in trouble, have mercy upon me, and harken to my
Prayer.] Between the Throne of God in Heaven, and his Church upon Earth here
militant, Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5...23.
says Reverend Hooker, If it be so that Angels have thelr continual
intercourse, where should we find the same more verified, then in these two
ghostly Exercises, the one Doctrine, the other Prayer. For what is the
assembling of the Church to hear, but the receiving of Angels descended from
above? What to pray, but the sending of Angels upward? His heavenly
Inspirations, and our holy Desires, are as so many Angels of Intercourse, and
Commerce between God and us.

Now that our Prophet here, though in exile had this Angelical Attendance
about him, and an Heaven (as it were) upon Earth, in regard of those Troops
celestial, what more pregnant Proof unto us then those many Prayers in this
Book, and this amongst the rest of singular good importance. The Prayer it
self is not many words, it is short and cutted, but of which we may say as
Tull. Epist. Fam. l. 11. Ep 24.
Tully in another case, Quam Multa, quam Paucis? How much in how few words? The
Christians upon this Example made their Prayers, it should seem, of this
mould. The Brethren in Egypt, Aug. Ep. 121. c. 10. Vid. Hooker Eccl. Pol. l.
5.. 33.
says S. Austen, are reported to have many Prayers, sed eas tamen brevissimas,
and taptim quodammodo jaculatas, but al of them very short, as if they were so
many Darts thrown out with a kind of sudden quickness, least that Vigilant
and erect attention of Mind, which in Prayer is very necessary should be
wasted or dulled through continuance if their Prayers were, few, and long. Such
a darted Prayer was the Publicans, Luc. 18.13.
Lord be merciful to me a Sinner. Such another was S. Stephens, Act. 7.59.
Lord lay not this Sin to their charge. And such a short one was that of our
Saviors, when being upon the Cross, Luc. 23.34.
Father, says he, forgive them, for they know not what they do. Where by the
way may be noted, the obliquity of Him who finding fault with many our Church
Prayers used at Divine Service that are not much longer, will not afford them
the name of Prayers. Instead of such Prayers, Cartwright^ Reply to D. Whitegift
l. 1. p. 108.
says he, as the Primitive Churches have used, and those that be reformed now
use, we have diverse short Cuts, and Shreddings, which may be better called
Wishes, then Prayers, which he speaks to as good purpose, as if he should say
in defense of some that would stab Men with their Daggers, they used short
little cutted Things and Shreds of Iron which may better be called Daggers,
then Weapons. Otherwise what is a Wish, but a thing much desired, a Request, a
Prayer, which the Poet might have taught him by joining them both together, --
Virg. Aeneid. l. 6.
Cessas in Vota, Precesque
Tros, ait, Aenea? cessas?
And yet the Prophet here in this place terms these few Words, as short a
Cut, and as small a Shredding as they seem to be, a PRAYER. Have mercy upon
me, says he, and hearken unto my Prayer. But to come unto my purpose.

The Prayer here in this place, as it is but short and brief, so let me
briefly consider therein: First, for what it was: Secondly, to whom: Thirdly,
why to him, to whom it was made. It was first for a Day of Hearing, and for
Mercy on that Day, whenas that hearing should be. Which yet is not so to be
taken as if the Court of Heaven were like some earthly Courts where the
Petition may be put in to day, and a day of hearing a Tweluemonth after, I,
twain, I, Only the Areopagites went beyond such Judges, who posted off a
matter till an hundred years after. A. Gell. No^t. At. l. 12. c. 7. Valor.
Max. l. 8. c. 1.
twenty. Nor mean I in Vtopia, but perhaps in Eutopia too, where all things
are, or should be, not Been only, but Optime, by reason of the GOSPEL: No:
God hears in a moment and the Petition is no sooner put up, but the Day of
Hearing is granted presently, nay sometimes before. Witness the Prophet, Esaias
65.24.
Before they call, I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaki^g I will
hear. Indeed the self same Prophet tells us that some others he will not
hear, Esaias 1.15.
When you spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when you
make many Prayers, I will not hear; marry then there was reason for it, for
what kind of Hands spread they forth? Puras Manus, as 1. Tim. 2.8. vulg.
speaks the Apostle in his first Epistle to Timothy, Pure and Clean Hands?
No, but they were bloody, nay they were full of Blood, for so it follows in
that place. And yet even that such also should not utterly despair, Wash ye,
make ye clean Esaias 1.16.
says he, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to
do evil, learn to do well, seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the
Fatherless, plead for the Widow. Come now, and let us reason together, says
the Lord; though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow,
though they be red like Crimsin, they shall be as Wool. And this is the Mercy
here petitioned in this place, without this Mercy what had the Prophet been,
but a Map of Misery? If thou Lord wilt be extreme Ps. 130.3.
says he, to mark what is done amiss, oh Lord who may abide it? And S.
Austen to like purpose, Aug. Confess. l. 9. c. 13.
Vae etiam laudabili vitae hominum si remota Misericordia discutias eam. Woe to
the Life of Man be it never so praise worthy, if God should examine it without
any Mercy at all; And, Just men, Greg. Moral. l. 8. c. 9. vid. D. Abb. Apol.
against Bishop. Part. 1. c. 8. p. 255. and p. 293.
says St Gregory, know before hand that perish they must without remedy, if
God in the judging of them set Mercy aside, because even that which seems our
just Life is but Sin, if Gods Mercy when he judge that does not excuse the
same. Behold, Job 4.18.
says Job, he put no trust in his Servants, and his Angels he charged with
^olly* how much less on them that dwell in H^uses of Clay, whose Foundation is
in the du^^, which are crushed before the moth.

The Party to whom the Petition is made, is God above, who is styled by the
Apostle S. Paul, 2. Cor. 1.3.
The Father of Mercies, which though it be a sufficient Reason why this
Petition is made to him, yet the Prophet here implies another, namely for that
the Lord had set him at liberty when ever he was in trouble: As 1. Sam. 19.12
First when Michol saved him; 1. Sam. 20.38
Secondly, when Jonathan; 1. Sam. 21.8.
Thirdly, when his own Policy; 1. Sam. 23.28
Fourthly, when the Messenger by bringing tidings to King Saul that the
Philistians inva^ed the land; 2. Sam. 17.11
Fifthly, and lastly when Hushai help him: Hushai, and the Messenger, and his
own Wit and Policy, and Jonathan, and Michol his Wise, being but so many
several Instruments which it pleased the Lord to use in saving of him. Ps.
115.1.
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the Praise, for thy
loving Mercy, and for thy Truths sake.

I but how comes it here to pass that the Prophet in these words styles the
Lord, The God of his Righteousness? Hear me when I call, O God of my
Righteousness. Doubtless it was not in respect of any Righteousness of his own,
Not his Speeches are to well known even in this his Book of Psalms for any
confidence he had in that respect. As for example, where he says, Ps. 19.12.
Who can tell how often he offends, O cleanse thou me from my secret Faults;
And again, Ps. 130.3.
If thou Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, oh Lord who may
abide it! And yet again, Ps. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. What is his meaning then in these words, DEVS IVSTITIAE
MEAE, O God of my Righteousness. It may be taken two ways, as First, Thou O
God, who art the Redresser of my Right, or Revenger of my Wrong: or Secondly,
in regard of some righteous Cause he had in hand, mistaken by his Adversaries.
Much like to that which he says in another place, Ps. 7.3.
O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing, or if there be any wickedness
in my hands: If I have rewarded evil to him that dealt friendly with me: yea I
have delivered him that without any cause is mine Enemy: Then let mine Enemy
persecute my Soul and take me, yea let him tread my Life down upon the Earth
and lay mine Honor in the Dust. So that in regard of those many Slanders
raised against him by the Wicked, he calls God to witness of his Integrity in
those points, and therefore may seem to style him here, The God of his
Righteousness. Our Rejoicing, 2. Cor. 1.12.
says the Apostle, is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that in
simplicity and god^y Synceritie we have had our Conversation in the World. And
Conscience if it be bad, as it is a continual Torture, so is a good one, a
continual Secura Men's quasi judge Convivium. Prove. 15 15. Vulg.
Feast. The great Benefit of a good Conscience S. Chrysostom declares by this
Similitude: As if you let fall a little sparkle, Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom.
25.
says he, into a large plash of water, you presently extinguish it, so all
our Grief and Sorrow, if so be it light on a good Conscience it is most
easily driven away.

Verse. 2. O ye Sons of Men, how long will ye blasph^ame mine Honor, and
have such pleasure in Vanity, and seek after Leasing.] It may seem somewhat
strange that having spoken in the Words before to God alone, he should now
leave speaking with God (as it were) and apply himself to the Sons of Men.
But this is no novelty with David throughout his whole Book of Psalms, who
speaks sometimes to the Lord, sometimes to Himself, sometimes to the Godly,
sometimes to the Ungodly, and then to the Lord again, and that in one and the
selfsame Psalm. The less cause had Cartwright, and such as followed his
steps to find fault with our Church Service for intermingling Reading of
Scriptures and Prayers, one with another. We, T. C. vbi supra
says he, have no such Forms in the Scripture, as that we should pray in two
or three lines, and then after having read a while some other thing, come and
pray as much more, and so the twentieth, or thirtith time with pawses between.
If a man should come to a Prince, and keep such order in making his Petitions,
the Prince might well think that either he came to ask before he knew what
he had need of, or that he had forgotten some piece of his Suit, or that he
were distracted in his understanding, or some other such like cause of the
disorder of his Supplication. Lo here a Prayer even in two or three lines; and
after that, as it were a Lesson, namely an Instruction to his Adversaries;
Lastly somewhat concerning Himself, namely how joyful in Heart Himself was,
and secure in having nothing, when his Enemies had the World at will. Shall we
now say that David was distracted in this case? God forbid. Nay he spoke forth
the Words of Truth and Soberness, even as did the Apostle S. Paul, when he
also was Act. 26.25.
challenged by Noble Festus in like sort. As for the Similitude he brings of
petitioning before a Prince, and how unsavory it would be, to make Requests in
such sort, it is well Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 34.
answered by Reverend Hooker, and retorted upon himself, and al his Accomplices,
how much more unsavory it would prove, to pray in their fashion, who so much
mislike ours. Cartwright got nothing by that Similitude. But now concerning the
Words.

First, for the Appellation here, O ye sons of Men] it is in the Hebrew As
there is difference between Home and Vir in Latin, Non sentire mala sua non
est Hominis and non far non est Viri, Senec. de Consolat. ad Polyb. c. 36. so
in the Hebrew betwixt Adam and Ish.
BENI ISH, not ADAM, wherein S. Ierom was mistaken, as Drus. Observe. l. 3. c.
19.
Drusius observes, so that the Prophet here means the Peers and Potentates of
the Land. And what is it the Prophet in this place does lay unto their charge?
O ye sons of Men, how long will ye Blaspheame mine Honor: and have such
pleasure in Vanity, and seek after Leasing. So that the Points here laid to
their charge is their evil speaking of Him, and their Continuance therein.

First, for evil speaking, it is here called Blasphemy, and so Blasphemy
indeed is taken in diverse places of holy Tit. 3.2. 1. Pet. 4.4.
Scripture. Now it is a great sault and worthy much blame to speak ill of any,
much more of Princes, who are Gods Vicegerents here on Earth, and seated in
his own Throne to execute his Judgments. Honor in Princes, Mr Gossen his
Trumpet of War.
says a good Divine, is a curious Parcel Guilt, laid upon them by Gods own
Finger, and no wicked Tongue can lick it off again. Curse not the King, no
not in thy thought, Eccles. 10.20
says Solomon, and curse not the Rich in thy Bedchamber, for a Bird of the
Air shall carry the voice, and that which has Wings shall tell the Matter.

But besides their evil speaking, their continuance therein is that which is
remarkable to. Vsque quo? How long? And indeed in good things we are easily
stayed, but from performing of evil, how exceeding hardly are we drawn? The
Lord himself does note this Property in Men. For speaking of the Builders of
Babel, Behold, Genesis 11.6.
says he, the People is one, and they have all one Language: and this they
begin to do: and now nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
imagined to do. In truth since the fall of our first Father Adam, there has
issued from his Womb, as S. Austen Ex vtero eius. Aug Confess. l. 13 c. 20.
speaks, a salt Sea of Iniquity, meaning Mankind, profoundly curious says he
swelne and puffed up like the Waves, reeling and tottering to and from all
Inconstancy. Our Nature Calvin. Instit. l. 2. c. 1.. ^.
says Calvin, is not only bare and empty of Goodness, but also it is so
plenteous, and fruitful of all Evils, that it cannot be idle. And therefore in
the same place, This Perverseness says he, never cease in us, but continually
brings forth new Fruits, even the Works of the Flesh, like as a burning
Furnace blows out Flames, and sparcles, or as a Spring without ceasing
casts out Water. But when they had all done, what was the Issue of all? The
Prophet here tells it, Vanity, and Leasing. As much as if he had said, Vanity,
and Lying. And first concerning Vanity, it is that I have spoken of Exp^sit. on
Psalm. 2.1. p. 34.
before, and it signifies a thing that is of no force, or use. These things we
do esteem Vain Sr Francis Bacon, of the Advancement of Learning. l. 1.
says that excellent Author of the Proficience, and Advancement of Learning,
which are either False, or Frivolous, those which either have no Truth, or no
use at all. Lying, or Leasing (a Word that comes of an Lease. Falls Leasunga,
a Leasing, a Lie, Lease-g^witnes, False witness, Lease-witegas, False-Prophets
Verstegan his Restitution of decayed Intel. p. 226.
old Word, now out of use) how ill it becomes Great men, such as King David
here intimates, Solomon tells us in his Prove. 17.7.
Proverbs, and therefore Pope Alexander the Sixth, and the Duke of Valencia his
Son, are both of them Guicciard. Hist. l. 6.
branded to all Posterity, for like Father, like Son, in that the One of them
(the Father) never meant what he spoke, the Other (the Son) never spoke what
he meant.

Verse. 3. Kn^w this also that the Lord has chosen to himself the Man that is
Godly: when I call upon the Lord, he will hear me.] The Prophet now begins to
school them: he affoords them Instruction here. They for their parts supposed
he was utterly undone, that there was no way with him but one, and that Safety
it self could not have saved him. Nay but yet know says he, that howsoever
these Calamities come now so thick upon me, yet that I am not quite forsaken. I
for my part little thought of Crowns, and Kingdoms, I never dreamed of
Diadems, and wileding Scepters, the Lord elected and chose me to them, when as
I my self was minding no such Matter. I was in the Field, he sent for me; I
was the youngest of my Brethren, he advanced me above them; I was quite
forgotten of my Father, the Lord by the Prophet Samuel, or rather Samuel by the
Lord, 1 Samuel 16.13.
he anointed me in the midst of my Brethren. What? and is this all? The Lord
that has gone thus far with me Hand in Hand, will he suffer me now to go
alone? No: but over and above all this, whenas I shall settle my self to
Prayer, and call upon the Lord, he will hear me forthwith, that is, he will or
quite deliver me, and so restore me again to the state wherein I was, or in
the midst of these my Crosses he will give me PATIENCE to endure them, then
which what is more comfortable, And this, as it was an Instruction to those his
Enemies, so may it be to us, that are his Friends to, we in like Calamities may
learn to make the like Benefit. This our Life is a Vale of Misery, fuller of
Thorns, then of Roses: but seeing it is the Way to Heaven, and has been
trodden by all the Godly, who passed the self same way before us, let not us
that come last (for upon us as speaks the Apostle, the Ends of the 1 Cor.
10.11.
World are come) let not us expect a new Way to be made for us, who are nothing
comparable to those Worthies that went before us. We are but Dwarfes to them,
as speaks the Terra ma^os homines nunc educat, atque pusillos. Iuvenal. Sat. 15.
Poet in an other case, the Righteous being less Righteous, the Godly less
Godly then those before us. For needs it must be true what our Savior intimates
when he says, Luc. 18.8.
When the Son of man comes, shall he find Faith on the Earth? It is as if he
had said, he shall find no Faith at all. No Faith to speak of, none in
comparison: for among many uses of an Interrogation, one is Quintil. Instit. l.
9. c. 2.
says Quintilian, when we ask a Question that cannot be denied.

Verse. 4. Stand in awe and sin not: commune with your own Heart, and in your
Chamber, and be still.] That which the Vulgar has in this Verse, and the
Greek, and S. Ierom acco^dingly, Irascimini, and nolite peccare, Be angry and
sin not (agreeable unto that of the Apostle S. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians. 4.26.
Ephesians, where he has the selfsame words) is here read, and more exactly
according to the Hebr^w, Stand in awe, and sin not, the Word in the Original
being RIGNV, of RAGNAD, Tremuit, Trepidavit, unless it come of RAGAV rather,
which as the Barth. Scherei Itinerar. n^m. 997. and 1035.
Learned in that Tongue note, signifies indifferently to be moved either with
Anger, or with Fear. But Fear is that which is here set down, for Awe so
signifies, and by that which has been Exposit. in Ps. 2.11. p. 52.
said upon the Second Psalm, it may well be understood what kind of Fear is
here meant. For whereas in sundry places of holy Scripture, D. Abbots Defense
of the Reform. Cath. Part. 2. p. 323.
Fear is commended, and reprooved, forbidden, and enjoined again, the
Scriptures so speaking, intimate unto us diverse Fears. There is a doubting,
and distracting Fear, and that is reprooved, and forbidden, for it is opposite
to FAITH, and therefore God appoints his Ministers to call his Esaias
35.4.41.10.43.1.54.4.
People from it: but there is an awefull, and ragarding Fear, and that is
commended, and enjoined, as we see it here in this place, Stand in awe,]

But how is it the Prophet adds, And sin not.] Is Sin so easily avoided?
Nihil dictu facilius. It is quickly said indeed, but is it as quickly done?
Yes: as the Prophet here meant. For the Prophet no doubt meant what he spoke
more expressly in an other place, where speaking of the Wicked, I said unto the
Fools Ps. 75.5.
says he, deal not so madly: and to the Ungodly, set not up your Ho^ne, set
not up your Horn on high, and speak not with a st^ffe Neck. Howsoever then
from Sins of Infirmity they could not possibly be free (nor indeed can any
man living) yet from Sins of this Nature, Sins of The high arm shall be
broken. Job. 38.15.
Height, Sins of They have deeply corrupted themselves. Hos. 9.9.
Depth, Sins of Villainy, they might have been, and this it is, that is here
commanded them. For as S. Austen in his best Advisements, Vsque adeo Peccatum
voluntarium est malum, vt nullo modo sit Peccatum, si non sit voluntarium:
Sin, Aug Retract. l. 1. c. 13. Vid. c. 15.
says he, is so far forth a Voluntary Evil that unless it be Voluntary, it
is no Sin at all. Having then commanded them to stand in awe, and not to
sin, an Affirmative, and a Negative to; to the better effecting of both, he
advises them to a Retiredness also, as most commodious to that purpose.
Commune says he, with your own Heart, and in your Chamber, and be still. For
as there is nothing more hurtful, and obnoxious to Melancholy Humors then to
withdraw themselves from Company, and to delight to be alone (an Example
whereof we have in S. Marks Marc. 5.5.
Gospel, of him that Night and Day was in the Mountains, and in the Toombs)
so to some kind of Natures again, such as are all upon the hoigh, there is
nothing more hurtful, and prejudicial to their growth in Virtue, then keeping
Company. With Company, they spend that most precious Time, which cannot be
recalled again with all the Wealth, the World can afford; with Company they
carowse, and quaffe, and swill, and swagger, as if they would drink down
whole Cities; they walk in Lasciviousness, in Lust, in Banquetings, in
Revellings, as if they, and none but they, were the Worthies of the World.
Wherein they think it strange, as the Apostle 1. Pet. 4.4.
S. Peter observes, that Others run not with them to the same excess of
riot, and therefore speak evil of them. O nimis inimica Amicitia, cum
dicitur, Eamus, Faciamus, and pudet non esse impudentem. O too-too friendlesse
Friendship Aug. Confess. l. 2. c. 9.
says S. Austen, when such Copsemates shall say to one another, Come let us
brave it, and dare to do somewhat that shall be spoken of another day, and
ashamrd they are not to be Shameless. How much better were it for such, that
they would once Commune with their own Hearts, that so they may see those
Evils whereto they are poasting so hastily.

First, for the Heart of Man it is that which is all in all: only known unto
our selves, and to God the Giver of it. What is nearer to us then our Heart
Greg. Moral. l. 26. c. 29.
says S. Gregory, and yet if once it be set a wandering, what thing is it in
the whole World that is in a tryce so far from us? Our Savior speaking of
the Heart, he shows it to be the Fountain of all Evil, and that a Sin
cannot be named, which has not his forth from thence. For out of the Heart
Mat. 15.19.
says he, proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts,
False-Witnes, Blasphemies. Seven Heads of Vices in general, but under these
Seven how many Seventy times Seven are comprised? It behooues us then to look
unto it, and continually to examine it, how it stands affected unto God: the
rather for if our 1. Ioh. 3.20.
Heart condemn us, how much more shall He who is greater then our Heart, and
knows the Secrets of it far better then we our selves. Quid est Cor hominis
nisi sacculus Dei? Vbi dum studiose conspicimus per quanta deliquimus, Peccata
nostra quasi in Dei sacculo signata portamus. What is the Heart of Man Greg.
Moral. l. 12. c. 11.
says S. Gregory, but Gods Sachel? wherein when we perceive how far we have
gone astray, we carry our Sins about us, as it were sealed up in that Sachel.
Now that we may ransack our Hearts the better, it is expedient that sometimes
we Retire our selves apart, and meditate on such Particulars as shall be
behoofull to our Souls. If a man says a famous Erasm. Tom. 5 De Contemptu.
Mundi. c, 10. p. 1047.
Writer, and the None such of that Age, has leisure to peruse the sacred
Histories, he shall find that the greatest Miracles that ever were done, were
not done among Multitudes, and Assemblies, but in Privacy, and Retiredness,
and much he has in that Ib. c. 9. p. 1045
Book, concerning the Liberty, Tranquillity, and Pleasure of such a Life. In
this case may we say as Hieron. Ep. ad Rust.
S. Ierom did, Mihi Oppidum, Carcer: Solitudo, Paradisus. The City to me is a
Prison, and Solitariness is a Paradise, so much harmeful is it to be in
Company, so much Pleasure to be alone. The Virgin Mary was alone Ambros. Ep. l.
6. ep 41.
says S. Ambrose, and an Angel came and conferred with her. Luc. 1.35.
She was all alone, and by her self, when she wrought the Salvation of the
whole World, and conceived in her Womb the Redemption of al Mankind. Act. 10.9.
Peter also was alone, and the Mystery of all the Nations to be consecrated to
our Savior, was reveiled unto him. Genesis 3.6.
Adam was alone, and being alone he offended not, because his Mind claue fast
to God, but when the Woman was joined with him, then could he no longer obey
the Commandments of God.

The Retyrednes here spoken of, is called their Chamber. Where by Chamber, if the
Bed be meant (though Quae sunt ista Cubicula, nisi ipsa Corda. Vid. Aug. Tom.
4. De Ser. Dom. in Mont. l. 2.
S. Austen understand by Chamber, the Heart) as is specified in our last
Translation, Commune with your own Heart, upon your Bed] and it is very
probable indeed, that it was the Prophets meaning in this place, then may it
move us much more to meditate in this kind, the N ght being so fit in many
respects as it is. For then do we lie in those Beds, as it were within our
Graves; then the Sheets may put us in mind of the Winding Sheet we are to
have; then the Darkness that does compass us, may best teach us to call to
mind the Land of Darkness which we shall possess, a Land of Darkness, as Job
Job 10.21.
speaks, as Darkness it self; Vbi nullus ordo, where there is no order at all,
but we shall lie promiscuously one with another, and where the Light is as
Darkness. In a word, then the Judgment that has befalne Thousands in the
selfsame kind, may make us doubt, whether we shall increase that Number, or
to have the Happiness, to see the next Morrow Light. So S. Chrysostom, Let us
always endeavor to pray Chrysostom. in Genesis Hom. 30.
says he, both in the Day time, and in the Night, and rather in the Night, for
that no Body then is troublesome to us, then have we a great Tranquillity of
our Thoughts, when our Businesses are not troublesome, when there is none that
can hinder us from having access to God, when our Mind knitting it self
together, is able diligently to make reference of all to the Physician of
Souls. And again a little after, Behold the Doctor of the World says he,
fast in Prison, praying notwithstanding the whole Act. 16.25.
Night with Sylas, and nothing hindered from that Action of his, neither with
Sorrow, nor with Bonds, nay by so much the more did they show their Fervency of
Spirit toward the Lord.

But Stilnes is here enjoined to, Commune with your own Heart, and in your
Chamber, and be still. For as in bodily Vid. Zanch. de Redempt. l. 1. c. 13.
Diseases to be quiet, and still, is a great Ease and Help toward the
procuring of bodily Health, so is it also in the Soars of the Soul. And
therefore the Prophet Esaias 30.16.
Esaias, In Returning, and Rest shall ye be saved: in Quietness and Confidence
shall be your strength And Job to this purpose, (...) ^0.4.
I will lay my Hand upon my Mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer,
yea twice, but I will proceed no farther. Indeed it is not struggling that will
in this case serve the turn. The Bird that fluttereth in the Lime-twiggs, does
but entangle her self more and more, and the more impatient we show our
selves, the greater hold has Satan of us. Esaias 57.19.
Peace, Peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, says the
Lord, and I will heal him. But the Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it
cannot rest, whose Waters cast up Mire and Dirt.

Verse. 5. Offer the sacrifice of Righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord.]
A Sacrifice among the Jews, was a sacred Action, wherewith they worshipped
God, by offering some outward thing unto his Glory, thereby to testify, as his
Dominion over them, so their Submission to him again, Hence had they their
multiplicity of Offerings, as their Meat-Offring, their Burnt-Offring, their
Sinne-Offring, their Trespasse-Offring, their Peace-Offring, as they are all of
them specified by Moses in the Book of Nomb. 7.13.18.9.
Nombers, and Levit. 7.37.
Leviticus. Such Sacrifices were either Propitiatory, to procure Favor or
Pardon for a Sin committed; or Gratulatory, to give Thanks and Praise after
some Benefit received. Now for the most of them contented themselves with Opus
Operatum, that is, with performing of the Thing only, little caring how they did
perform it, so performed it were at all, hence it is that the Prophet here
puts them in mind how the selfe-fame Sacrifices should be offered, and that
they should not as they had wont to do, spill their Gifts in the bringing.
Offer says he, the Sacrifice of Righteousness, as if so be he had said, Offer
to God a right Sacrifice, which as he tells us Psalm. 51.17.
elsewhere, is A troubled Spirit, a broken, and contrite Heart.

What? will some say, and had the Jews so many Sacrifices, and had not the
Christians as well as they? Had they their Sinne-Offring, and their
Trespasse-Offring, their Peace-Offring, and their Burnt-Offring, and have we
no Offering at all? Yes, instead of all these, VNVM nos habemus, we have one
Aug. in Ps. 74. and de Temp. Ser. 251.
says S. Austen, and he means that of our Saviors on the Cross, which
though it be but only one, yet is it all-sufficient. So Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Heb.
c. 10.
S. Chrysostom, We do not offer an other Sacrifice, but ever the same, or
rather we continue the remembrance of that Sacrifice. So Theodoret. in Ep. ad
Heb. c. 8. vid. Bilson True Diff. p. 512. 513
Theodoret, It is clear to them that are instructed in our Mysteries, that we
do not offer an other Sacrifice, but continue the memory of that one, and
healthful Sacrifice, Yea, but where then shall we find the Sacrifice of the
Mass? It is excluded. By what Law? By the Laws of Protestants? No, but by the
Law of those Fathers, whose Sons our Romish Catholics would seem to be. And
indeed it has been Jewels Sermon. at Paul's Cross, Ao D. 1560. Dr Whitaker
Praefat. in Lib. advers Sanderum de Antichristo, and his Answer to Mr William
Rainolds. c. 7 Dr Fulke, Dr Bilson, Dr Sutcliffe, etc.
offered them, by some of our Side, that if they be able to bring any one
sufficient Sentence out of any old Catholic Doctor, or Father, whereby it may
clearly and plainly be prooved, either that the People was taught to believe,
Art. 5.
that Christ's Body is Really, Substantially, Corporally, Carnally, or Naturally
in the Sacrament: or Art. 17.
that the Priest had Authority to offer up Christ unto his Father, and that the
People were taught to believe both these, for the space of Six Hundred years
after Christ, they would be content to yield, and to subscribe. It is strange
to see what poor Proofs were brought by Harding, to that purpose, and by Such
as took his part, Rastal, Saunders, Stapleton, Rainolds, and Others. But to
return to my purpose.

Besides that One Sacrifice whereof S. Austen speaks, which is most truly a
SACRIFICE indeed. We have other Sacrifices to, as The Sacrifice of Prayer, The
Sacrifice of Praise, The Sacrifice of Alms, the Sacrifice of our own Bodies,
whereof the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 12.1
I beseech you Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies, a
living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God. In regard of which Four
Sacrifices, every Christian is a Priest, and therefore 2. Pet. 2.9
S. Peter, Ye are a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, which though it were spoken then to the 1 Pet. 1.1.
Strangers only, scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and
Bythinia, yet is it spoken to us in them, forasmuch as now at this time, there
is Gal. 3.28.
neither Jew, nor Greek, there is neither Bond, nor Free, there is neither
Male, nor Female, for we are all one in Christ Jesus. But to return where I
left.

As David here in this place puts them in mind of a Right Sacrifice, so
likewise the Prophet Esaias, or rather the Lord in that Prophet: To what purpose,
Esaias. 1.11.
says he, is the Multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, I am full of the burnt
Offerings of Rams, and the Fat of fed Beasts: and I delight not in the blood of
Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of he Goats. When ye come to appear before me, who
has required this at your hand to tread my Courts? Bring no more vain
Oblations, Incense is abomination unto me: the new Moons and Sabbaths, the
calling of Assemblies I cannot away with, it is iniquity, even the Solemn
Meeting. Your new Moons, and your appointed Feasts, my Soul hates, they are a
trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. No doubt the Lord required al these
things at their hand, even the Multitude of these Sacrifices: the burnt
Offerings of Rams, the fat of fed Beasts, the blood of Bullocks, and of Lambs,
as also of he Goats, and that the Offerers thereof should tread in his Courts.
No doubt he required Incense at their hands, the observation of new Moons, and
Sabbaths, and solemn Meetings and appointed Feasts, but it was the Manner he
misliked, not the Materials, and therefore in regard of that Manner if so be
they would mend their manners in washing themselves, and making clean, in
putting away the evil of their Doings from before his eyes, in ceasing to do
evil, and learning to do well, in seeking judgment, releeuing the Oppressed,
judging the Fatherless, and pleading for the Widow, it is a great Invitation,
and a Promise too, that follows after, Esaias. 1.1^.
Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord: though your Sins be as
Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red like Crimson, they
shall be as Wool. King Ahasuerus never held out his Esther. 4.11.
Golden Scepter to better purpose.

But besides the Sacrifices to be thus made, the Prophet here enioynes them one
point more, namely, To put their trust in the Lord. For as little Children when
they learn to go alone, feeling the feebleness of their own Feet are taught
by Nature to thrust out the Hand to the Wall, and trust to it to stay them: so
in regard of our own weakness and special acquaintance with it, Nature and
Religion both, teach us to trust to a stronger then our selves, least we
utterly miscarry. Now this stronger then our selves, it may not be the, Ier.
7.4.
Words of Man; no, nor the Ezech. 16.15
Bewty of Man; no, nor Ier 17.5.
Flesh, that is, the strength of Man; nor 1. Tim. 6.17.
Riches, which is the Wealth of Man; nor 2. Sam. 15.3.
Wit, that is, the Wisdom of Man; nor worldly Ps. 142.2.
Princes, and earthly Potentates, who are the best, of the best of Men; No, but
it must be He, who is to us all these, both Rev. 17.14.
Bewty, and Strength and Riches, and Wisdom, the Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, as he is styled by the Apostle S. John in his Book of Rev. 17.14.
Revelation. It is a desperate Vid. D. Abb. Apol. against. Bish. Part. 1. p.
247.
Doctrine of theirs then that teach us to Rely on Saints; that wills us to Pray
and make our Petitions unto them; to Offer unto them; to Swear by them; to
Give them the Honor of Temples, and of Altars; for what is it that God
himself does more expect at our hands, or that we must reserve for him? May he
not say in these cases as did King Solomon to his Mother, when she petitioned
for Adoniah, 1. King. 2.22.
Ask for him the Kingdom also? It is the Lord then that we must trust in,
the Lord of Lords, and the King of Kings, that as all Natural Effects have
recourse to their Causes when ever they stand in need, and they become the
stronger: the Fish distressed to the Water, and is relieved; the Bird to the
Dam, and is shrouded under her Wings; the Child to his Parents, and is
cherished by them: So let us to the LORD of Heaven, who is the Water of
comfort, the Hen that would gather her Chickens, and the truest Father, and
truest Mother that ever was. Esaias. 49.15.
Can a Woman forget her sucking Child that she should not have compassion on
the Son of her Womb? yea they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

Verse. 6. There be Many that say who will show us any good,] Mr. Hooker
Eccles. Pol. l. 1.. 8.
As every thing naturally and necessarily does desire the utmost Good, and
greatest Perfection whereof Nature has made it capable, so likewise Man. Man's
Felicity therefore being the Object, and accomplishment of his Desire, he
cannot choose but wish and covet it. This made Aristotle begin his Ethics with
that Universal Proposition, Arist. Ethic. l. 1. c. 1.
All Arts, all Learning, All Action, All Consultation have their reference to
some Good. Howbeit, Man when as he begins to propose to himself this Good,
then is he at a Maze. Quot Capita, Tot Sensus: so many Men, so many Minds. And
yet as that worthy Frenchman observes, Mornaeus de Verit. Rel. Christ c. 19.
When none of us know which way to go, scarcely not one of us but does
profess himself a Teacher and Directer of all others. One man he cries to the
Right Hand, another to the Left, a Third will up to the Mountains, a Fourth
will traverse the Fields. All alike certain, all uncertain of the Way. Varro
as S. Austen Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 19. c. 1.
tells us, setting himself aworke to number these Diversities of Opinions in
this kind, came to Two Hundred Eighty and Eight, so many By-waies has
wandering Error. Howbeit the Truth is but one. Now the Prophet here endeavoring
to bring us all to that Truth, proposes here the like Question, concerning the
Felicity of Man. There be Many, says he, that say, who will show us any Good?
Many among the Jews, many among the Gentiles. Many among the Gentiles, I
confess, but Many among the Jews? Why? They are Romans 9.4.
Israelites; to them pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants,
and the Giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the Promises; theirs are
the Fathers, and of them concerning the Flesh, CHRIST came, who is over all,
God blessed for ever; Many among them? Yes: among them, for as it follows
there in that place, V. 6.
They are not all Israel, which are of Israel, nether because they are the seed
of Abraham, are they all Children. Nether is he a Jew, Romans 2.28.
says the same Apostle, which is one outwardly, nether is that Circumcision
which is outward in the Flesh: but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and
Circumcision is, that of the Heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of Men, but of God. Where we see by the way that the Major Part
is not always the better Part, but thereof I have spoken Exposit. in Ps. 3.1.
p. 65.
before. Piscat. in hunc Psalm.
Piscator goes an other way, and makes the meaning of the Words of this Verse
to be this: Many] All for the most part, the common Sort of Men, weary of these
Troubles, when they hear that I am designed from Heaven to be their King, and
yet to be persecuted thus by Saul, say, Oh that some would bring it to pass,
that we might enjoy some Good, that is, Peace, and Worldly Happiness. Which
sense if the Reader will, he may take with good Probability. But what is the
Answer to the Question here? The Answer follows.

Verse. 7. Lord, lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance upon us.] Concerning
the Word Lord, I have spoken Expos. in Ps. 3.1. p. 64
before. The Answer here is not by way of Narration, but a great deal more
significantly by way of Obsecration. Would we then know wherein this Felicity,
this chief Good does consist? It is in the Light of Gods Countenance, that is,
in Gods Favors toward us. For as Men's Favor is declared by the Countenance
that they show, Imag^ Animi Vultus est, Indices Oculi: The Countenance, Tully
de Orat. l. 3.
says Tully, is the Image of the Mind, and that which paints out the
Countenance to us, are the Eyes: So by an usual Figure in holy Srripture, the
Countenance of the Lord, as it is said to be an Austere, and a Clowdy
Countenance unto the Reprobate, so is it Lovely and Gracious to his Children.
In the light of the Kings Countenance, Prove. 16.15.
says Solomon, is Life, and his favor is as a Clowd of the latter Rain. And
if it be so in a Kings Countenance, who oftentimes is pleased to Day, to Morrow
is displeased again, who at one and the self same time is contented that
Haman should be invited with him to a Feast, and before the Cloth be taken
away, Esther. 7.9.
gives him a pair of Galows for a Grace-cup; how is it in the light of the
Countenance of the King of Kings, Iam. 1.17.
with whom is no variableness, nether shadow of turning. Again, Heb. 13.8.
Jesus Christ the same Yesterday and to Day, and for ever. O put not your trust
in Princes, Ps. 146.2.
says David, nor in any Child of Man, for there is no help in them. S. Austen
has an excellent speech to the self same purpose we have in hand. Some places
of Refuge there are, Aug. in Ps. 45.
says he, whereunto if a Man fly, he is in worse case then he was before. As
for example thou retainest to some Great Man in the World, thereby to make him
thy Friend, and thou supposest thy self secure. And yet for all that, there
are such Tanta tamen huius Saeculi incerta sunt, and ita Potentum Ruinae
quetidiane crebrescunt: vt cum ad tale Refugium consugeris, plus ibi timero
incipias.
Vncartainties in this World, and the Falls of great Men are so common, that
when thou have gotten thee such a Refuge thou have a great deal more cause to
fear, then ever thou had before.

Verse. 8. Thou have put Gladness in my Heart, Since the time that their Corn,
and Wine, and Oil increased. An effect of the Light of the Countenance of God:
Delight, and Joy, and Gladness of Heart. Mihi creed, res severa est verum
Gaudium. Believe it, Senec. Epist. l. 3. ep. 23.
says Seneca, true Joy indeed is a matter of much Gravity. We may see it by
our Prophet here, who had not that Joy that is described by the Preacher, to
be as the Eccles. 7.5.
Crackling of Thorns under a Pot, or as a Ecclus. 21.20
Lifting up of the Voice with Laughter: No; but Joy he had notwithstanding, and
such Gladness of Heart, as that the Gladness of his Enemies, who had all
things in such abundance, Corn, and Wine, and Oil, was nothing comparable
thereunto. Even in laughter, Prove. 14.13.
says Solomon, the Heart is sorrowful; and the end of that Mirth is
Heaviness. Dronysius the Tyrant of Sicily, expressed this, no man better. The
Story is at large both in Tull. Tusc. Quaest. l. 5.
Tully, and Macrob. in Some. Scip. l. 1. c. 10.
Macrobius.

The Increasing here of their Corn, and Wine, and Oil thus specified, does
intimate unto us their time of Harvest. Which three Commodities were so great
in the Land of Canaan their Country, as that it was oftentimes called by the
Holy Ghost, Exodus 3.8.3.17.13.5.33.3.
A Land that flows with Milk and Honey. Now their Joy in Harvest was so great,
as that the Prophet Esaias, when he would express great Joy indeed, thought
good to fetch his Comparison from thence. They joy, Esaias. 9.3.
says he, before thee according to the joy in Harvest. Which Joy, no doubt, is
the greater, by reason of such Multitude^ as then Joy together. When many Joy
together, says Aug. Confess. l. 8. c. 4.
S. Austen, each Man's Joy is more Fervent, for that they inflame one another.
But yet when all comes to all, the Joy in Harvest is but Earthly Joy, and
therefore well may the Prophet here prefer his Joy before that. For howsoever
it be here read, Thou have put Gladness in my Heart, since the time that their
Corn, and Wine, and Oil increased: yet more agreeable to the Hebrew is that
in our last Translation, as also in the Former before, Thou have put Gladness
in my Heart, more then in the time that their Corn, and their Wine increased.
And again, Thou have given me more Joy of Heart then they have had, when their
Wheat and Wine did abound.

Yea but here The Abridgment of the Book which the Lincolneshire Minist.
delivered to his Majesty. p. 15.
Exception is taken for adding of Cyle, seeing it is not in the Hebrew. It is
true, it is not, but is it not in the (...) v. 5. Grace.
Greek, or in the Septuagint? Is it not in that from whence the Psalter is
translated for the most part, without reference to the Hebrew? Were it a matter
in controversy, and that the Greek, and the Hebrew were contrary, no doubt
but we should be tried by the Hebrew rather, but seeing it is about such
Additions, as more copiously explicate the meaning of the Text, what need so
much ado, about Trifles and Nifles only. Wherefore now to the Matter in hand.

Worldly Joy when it is caused by reason of Wealth, is commonly but brief, and
of a short continuance. How many Rich Men Yesterday, Aug. de Verb. Dom. Ser. 5.
says S. Austen, and to Day but Poor, how many have gone Wealthy to Bed, and
by reason of Thieves that have robbed them in the Night, have awaked in the
Morning as poor, as poor might be. Our Age has seen within the space of an
The lamentable burning of Teuerton, Ao 1612.
Hour, by casualty of Fire, and that at Midday to, the Wealthiest in a City
as poor as Job. Vae tibi Ridenti quia mox post Gaudia Flebis, is a Verse, one
Goclen. de Risu.
says, that comprehends in it all the Eight parts of Speech, like as
Plutarch. Platon. Quaest. Quaest. 9.
Homer in a Greek Verse comprehended the like. I shall not need now at this
time to examine that in the Latin, but sure I am it compriseth in it, all
Worldlings whatsoever, our Savior speaking to all, when he spoke unto them in
Prose, Luc. 6.25.
Woe be to you that Laugh now, for you shall Mourn. But is the Joy of the
Godly such, and shall it last no longer then so? Nay, but he says to them,
Your Heart shall Rejoice, and your Joy nee Man takes, that is, shall be able
to take, from you. Ioh. 16.22.


Verse. 9. I will lay me dow^e in peace, and take my rest, for it is thou Lord
only that make me dwell in safty.] The Prophet in the former Psalm told us
what he had done, I l^id me down, Ps. 3.5.
says he, and slept, and rose up again, for the Lord sustained me: he tells
us here what he would do. Both come to one reckoning, both intimating unto us
that for all our Nights past which we have slept heretofore, for all we shall
sleep hereafter, as long as our Lives shall last, we have been, we are to
be, beholding to the Lord. Except the Lord keep the City, Ps. 127.2.
says David, the Watchman waketh but in vain, and except the Lord keep our
Bodies at that time, the Cities of our Souls, the Sleepers sleep but in vain
nether. How quickly are we gone in the turning of an Hand? Truly as the Lord
lives, and as thy Soul lives, 1. Sam. 20.3.
says David to Jonathan, there is but a Step between me and Death. Truly many
times there is in this case not so much. Let but our Spittle mistake the
Passage, which is easily done in the Night time by reason of the Rewme, and how
irrecouerably may we be gone. The French Academ. Part. 2. c. 16.
The Epiglottis, or little Tongue that closes the amplitude of Larinx, or the
top of the Rough Artery, as the Cover of a Pot, how does it still save us from
daily and deadly Dangers? Howbeit the Dangers here meant are not so much in
regard of such Infirmities, as of the Cruelty of Enemies who would have done by
our Prophet, as Abishai would have done by King Saul when he found him fast
asleep, would but David have said the word. God, 1. Sam. 26.8.
says Abishai to David, has delivered thine Enemy into thine Hand: now
therefore let me smite him I pray thee, with the Spear even to the Earth at
once, and I will not smite him the second time. But I have spoken on this
Argument in the Psalm Exposit. on Ps. 3.5. p. 70.
before. I now conclude with that of David in another of his Psalms, Ps. 124.1.
If the Lord himself had not been on our side, now may Israel say, if the
Lord himself had not been on our side, when Men rose up against us, they had
swallowed us up quick, when they were so wrathfully displeased at us. Yea the
Waters had drowned us, and the Stream had gone over our Souls.

And thus much of this Fourth Psalm, concerning which, if any be desirous to
have more said of it then is, I refer him to that which S, Austen has in his
Book of Confessions, where speaking of the Psalms in General, and
Particularly of this Fourth Psalm: I would the Manichees, Aug. Confess. l. 9.
c. 4.
says he, had been by me (so I had not known of it) when I had occasion to
read the Psalms, especially the Fourth Psalm: and then he recites it wholly
word by word, and makes a Paraphrase thereupon: as if it touched those
H^reticks as near, as near might be. Nor can I here forget what Erasmus
says of this Psalm. This one Psalm alone, Erasm. Op. Tom. 5. in Ps. 4. p.
246.
says he, as short as it is, would suffice us for Salvation, did we but
Understand what we read therein, and what we Understand, did we but Practice in
our Lives. Indeed Practice is all in all. For have we in our Crosses and
Calamities that do betide us, any recourse unto the Lord? No surely not a
whit. Little difference now adays, nay none at all betwixt Turks and Infidels
once wronged, and those that bear the Name of CHRISTIANS. Every Man now quits
himself with like for like, and is his own Caruer. Or if he be of a brauer
Spirit then ordinary, then is he a Genesis 4.23.
Lamech straight, or a Examinat. and true Rel^t.. etc. of the Murder of S^
JOHN TYNDAL. Ao 1616.
Bertram, though he play the part of Mat. 27.5. Act. 1.18.
Judas too, in murdering himself when he has done. We are like for all the
World the Cat in the Aesop. Fab. Gr. and Lat. Fab. 172.
Fable, as demure as may be, till we are crossed, but then let a little Mouse
run by suppose some petty Injury not worth the speaking of, and all our
demureness is quite dashed, and straight we prove, Cat after kind. Strange
it is to consider upon what slight occasions, what Hurly burlies have been in
the World. Let me speak it in Michael Montaigne his Words, Nos plus grandes
agitations, ont des ressorts and causes ridicles. Pour la querelle d'vne
charrette de peaux de mouton. L' engraueure d' un ca^bet. Les Essates de
Michael. Seigneur de Montaigne. l. 3. c. 10
Our greatest Agitations, have strange Springs, and ridiculous Causes. What
ruin did our late Duke of Burgundy run into, for the Quarrel of a Cart load
of Sheepe-skins? And was not the grauing of a Seal, the chief Cause of the
most horrible Breach and Topsy-tu^uy, that ever this Worlds Frame endured? For
Pompey and Caesar are but the new Buddings, and continuation of two others. And
a little after: Poets have most iudicially looked into this who but for an Apple
have set all Greece and Asia on Fire and Sword. We learnt it in Tullies Offices
long ago, but we left it at School behind us as soon as we left the School,
Tull. Offic. l. 2
Convenit a Litibus quantum liceat (and nescio an paulo plus quam liceat)
abhorrentem esse. Est enim non modo liberale, paulum nonnunquam de suo iure
decedere: sed interdum etiam fructuosum. Which were it englished as it should
be, would teach English Men, how convenient it is as much as may be, and
happily more then well may be, to abhor BRABLING and Vid. D. Prideaux his Two
Sermons of Christ's Counsel for ending Law Cases.
LAWING. For that it is not only a point of Ingenuity sometimes to yield a
little of our Right, but there is also Profit in it. But thus much of this
Psalm.

PSALM. V. Verba mea Auribus.
1 POnder my Words, O Lord, consider my Meditation.
2 O hearken thou unto the voice of my Calling, my King and my God: for unto
thee will I make my Prayer.
3 My Voice shall thou hear betime, O Lord: early in the Morning will I
direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.
4 For thou art the God that have no pleasure in Wickedness: neither shall any
Evil dwell with thee.
5 Such as be Foolish shall not stand in thy Sight: for thou hate all them
that work Vanity.
6 Thou shall destroy them that speak Leasing: the Lord will abhor both the
Blood-thirsty, and Deceitful man.
7 But as for me I will come into thy House, even upon the Multitude of thy
Mercy: and in thy Fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.
8 Lead me O Lord in thy Righteousness, because of mine Enemies: make thy Way
plain before my Face.
9 For there is no Faithfulness in his mouth: their inward parts are very
Wickedness.
10 Their Throat is an open Sepulcher: they flatter with their Tongue.
11 Destroy thou them O God, let them perish through their own Imaginations:
cast them out in the multitude of their Ungodliness, for they have rebelled
against thee.
12 And let them that put their trust in thee, rejoice: they shall ever be
giving of Thanks, because thou defendest them, they that love thy Name, shall
be joyful in thee.
13 For thou Lord wilt give thy Blessing unto the Righteous, and with thy
favorable kindness will thou defend him as with a Shield.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis Fifth Psalm of David, as it is a Prayer in general, so is it a
Combination, and Bundle of Prayers, containing in it many Severals, as it were
so many several Suits. Here is a Prayer for Himself, here is a Prayer against
his Enemies, and here is a Prayer for the Church: or to go more particularly
to work as we have done in the former Psalms, Verse by Verse, our Prophet
performs in this Psalm three several Things; First, by the way of Preface,
he prepares, as it were, the Heart of the Lord to give him Audience now at
this time, and that in the First, and Second Verses. Secondly, he proposes two
Things: First, his Confidence, and Trust, that he has in the Lord, in regard
whereof he will be bold to approach unto Him, as it is in the Third Verse:
Secondly, his Arguments, and Reasons, confirming that his Confidence, drawn
partly from the Persons of his Enemies, who are hated, and detested of God, as
it is in the Fourth Verse, in regard whereof they shall not only not be able
to stand before him, as it is in the Fifth, but they shall be all of them
confounded, as it is in the Sixth Verse; partly from his own Person, for that
trusting in the Mercies of God, he will reverently come unto him, as it is in
the Seventh Verse. Thirdly, he makes his Petition to God, partly to direct him
in the Course of his Life, by reason of his Enemies, and that in the Eight
Verse; whom he describes inside, and outside in the Ninth, and Tenth Verses;
partly to destroy those his Enemies, as it is in the Eleauenth Verse; that so
the Godly may have comfort thereby, as it is in the Twelfe, and Thirteen
Verses.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse 1. Ponder my Words O Lord, consider my Meditation.] Concerning the Word,
LORD, I have spoken Exposit. on Ps. 3.1. p. 64.
before. Prayers Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 23.
says Reverend Hooker, are those Hosea 14.3.
Calves of Men's Lips, those most gracious and sweet Rev. 5.8.
Odours, those rich Act. 10.4.
Presents and Gif^s, which being carried up into Heaven, do best testify our
dutiful Affection, and are for the purchasing of all Favor at the Hands of
God, the most undoubted Means we can use. Now Prayer is twofold, namely
Vocal, by way of Voice, when as we use Words to that purpose: or Mental, when
we use no Words, but only the Conceits of our Minds. According to both these
ways did the Godly use to pray; and though most commonly the Former way, yet
sometimes the Latter to. So Exodus 14.15.
Moses, so 1. Sam. 1.13.
Hannah, and S. Austen speaking of himself, My Confession, oh my God Aug.
Confess. l. 10. c. 2.
says he, is made in thy Sight secretly, and yet not in secret, Tacet enim
strepitu, clamat affectu, it makes no noise at all by way of sound, and yet is
it clamorous by reason of her Love. And S. Gregory to this purpose, They are
not our Words Greg. in Job l. 22. c. 18.
says he, but our Desires, that yield a most forcible Sound in the most secret
Ears of God. For if we ask Eternal Life only with the Mouth, and desire it
not in Heart, Clamantes tacemus, for all our crying, we are indeed but dumb:
but if we desire it from the Heart, though we speak never a word, Tacentes
clamamus, though we hold our peace, yet we do cry. Thus the Prophet here in
this Place, he has his Vocal Prayer, and his Mental, he has his Words, and
his Meditation, and in our Private Devotions at Hoame, it is all one to God
above, whether we use the One, or the Other. As our Ears Aug. in Ps. 148 and
Hom. 16.
says S. Austen, are to our Words, so are Gods Ears to our Thoughts: and
again in an other place, We Aug. in Ps. 141.
says he, hear not One the other, without the Benefit, as of our Lungs, so of
our Toungs, Cogitatio tua Clamor est ad Dominum, thy very Thoughts are shrill
in Gods Ears.

But what says the Prophet here concerning these Words, and Thoughts? Ponder?
Consider? Ponder my Words? Consider my Meditations? Why? to whom does he
speak? to whom does he use these Words? Speaks he not unto the Lord? does he
not use them to God above? And is it fit that Dust and Ashes should thus speak
unto Him? Say but to thy Fellow Creature, if once he be above thee in
Authority, and I mean that Lawful Authority, Aug. ep. 160.
quam illi Deus Homini in Homines dedit, which to him being a Man, God has
given him over Men, Sir, Consider my Suit, ponder that I have spoken unto you,
weigh it well before you judge, and will he not presently take it in snuff,
and think you have done him great wrong, as if you did call his Wits in
question? But oh the Love of our Creator, that disdaines not to be called upon
even in these Terms, Ponder, Consider, that Magistrates may learn in like
sort to give poor Suitors leave, if sometimes transported, and carried away
with the eagernes of their Affections, they chance to forget good Behavior.
Memorable is that of a poote Woman, who having a Suit to King Philip of
Macedon, and hearing him say that he was not at leisure to hear her, Noli ergo
regnare Plutarch. Apopth.
said She, then be not at leisure to be a King; which bold, and audacious
Answer of Hers, the King admiring, and taking in good part, gave audience to
Her presently, and not to Her only, but also to Other besides. How many Petty
other Magistrates would have taken an other course, and have sent her where She
should have learned, at least wise have been taught better Manners. Yet would I
not have Suitors to be too bold neither. Davus never spoke better, then when he
said to his young Master, somewhat displeased with his Father, Terent. And.
Act. 2. Sc. 2.
Pater est Pamphile, difficile est. No more of that Pamphilus, if you love me.
Remember he is your Father, and there is no dealing with him in this kind. Now
Magistrates are as Fathers. And if the Apostle, speaking of Fathers, Heb. 12.10.
says, they chasten us after their own Pleasure, and yet we give them
Reverence, how much more should we perform the self same Reverence to the
Fathers, not of Us only, but also of our Country. Our Prophet goes on.

Verse 2. Oh hearken thou unto the Voice of my calling, my King, and my God,
for unto thee will I make my Prayer.] Did I say our Prophet goes on? Nay it
seems he is no farther then he was before, for what does he say in these
Words, which he said not in the Former? And yet there are not here those vain
Repetitions, such as our Savior finds fault withal in the Mat. 6.7.
Gospel of S. Matthew. There is no (...), no vain Babbling here, such as his,
who was the Primum Mobile, or rather the Primum Nobile in that kind:

Ovid. Met. l. 2.
Montibus (inquit) erant, and erant in Montibus illis: No: there is no
superfluity in these Words. Then is it to be accounted (...), vain Babbling,
Multiloquium tum adhibetur, cum citra ^idem etc. P. Martyr in 1. Sam. 1.12
says Peter Martyr, when as we multiply Words without Faith, and Spirit,
persuading our selves we shall be heard for our many Words sake. This was far
no doubt from our Prophet here, who was so far from being without Faith, that
as S. Thomas to our Savior Christ, when as our Savior had said unto him, Be
not faithless, but believing, said presently thereupon, Ioh. 20.28.
My Lord, and my God, so King David here in this Place, My King, and my God. In
which Words, let us consider both the Matter, and the Manner.

The Matter is, that he styles him, KING, and GOD: King in regard that he is
the Sovereign Emperor and Ruler over the whole World, and so he is as S. Paul
in his 1. Tim. 1.17.
Epistle to Timothy, a King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible: and he is styled
elsewhere by David, Ps. 24.7.8.9.10.
The King of Glory, and that oftentimes in one Psalm: God, in regard he is a
most powerful Spiritual Substance, Ineffable, Incomprehensible, of whom we
may more easily say, Aug in Ps. 85. and de Trin. l. 8. c. 2.
says S. Austen what he is not, then what he is. And again, All things Aug in
Ioh. Tract. 13.
says he, may be spoken of God, and yet nothing worthily may be spoken of him.
Nihil latius hac Inopia, Nothing more large and ample then this Scarcity, this
Want.

The Manner is, that he styles him here, My King, and my God. There is Luth.
in Gal. c. 1.
says Luther in Pronounes, much Vehemence, and Power. In worldly Affairs
Meum, and Tuum, Mine, and Thine, it is said, they mar all, sure I am they are
the Causes of much brangling in the World: but Meum in Spiritual Affairs is
so far from marring, that indeed it makes all. Of the Words, My God, I have
spoken Vid. Exposit. on Ps. 3.7. p. 75
before, but that the Prophet here says, My King to, it is much remarkable.
For what was the Prophet but a King himself? He then calling God his King,
resigneth (as it were) to God his Crown, and Dignity. So the four and twenty
Elders in the Revelation of S. John, they cast their Crowns before the Throne,
saying, Rev. 4.10.
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power: for thou
have created all things, and for thy Pleasure they are, and were created.
Indeed, Omne sub Regno graviore Regnum est, says Senec. Thyest. Act. 3.
One: and again an Horat. Carm. l. 3. Od. 1.
Other to this purpose, Regum timendorum in proprios Greges,
Reges in ipsos Imperium est IOVIS.
As Kings are over Men, so God is over Kings, and Kings though they have no
Superior here on Earth, yet they have One above, whose Eyes are over them in all their doings. Kings are free Ambros. Tom. 4 De Apolog. David.
says S. Ambrose, from being to be punished for their Offenses, their
Temporal Laws take no hold of them, by reason of the Power themselves have,
and yet howsoever they are safe in regard of that Power, they are
notwithstanding subject to God, in regard of Faith, and Devotion. And S. Austen
to like purpose, Kings of the Earth are terrible Aug. in Ps. 75
says he, yet He more terrible then all, that terrifies earthly Kings. Nor
means he the Pope neither. Nay, so far was he from acknowledging his
Vicar-ship from God, that he frankly acknowledges it in Earthly Kings, Rex
adoratur in Terris, Aug. Tom. 4. Quaest. ex Novo Test. qu. 91.
says he, quasi VICARIVS Dei. It is the King (not the Pope) that is adored
here on Earth as the VICAR of God, or Gods VICEGERENT.

Verse. 3. My Voice shall thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the Morning will
I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up.] The Hebrews Lyra in hunc Ps.
says Lyra, have not the Optatiue Mood, and therefore use the Future of the
Indicative instead thereof. So that Shall thou hear in this place, is as if
the Prophet here wished that the Lord would hear indeed, and that betimes.
Iansenius in his Noates hereupon, The Prophet says, Iansen. in hunc ^.
says he, thou shall hear, out of a certain Confidence he had, that God
would hear him, or else the Future is put for the Imperative, Hear thou. For
that is frequent with the Hebrews. And my Paraphrasis says he, shows both.
I have heard that some of our Schoolemaisters are like in the Latin Tongue to
loose us the Optatius Mood to, in that they teach it not their Scholars, but
cause them to skip it over, because of taking Gods Name in vain. Surely in my
opinion, such Schoolemaisters deserve such usage as the Schoolmaister in Live.
Dec. 1. l. 5.
Livy had, by that noble Camillus the Roman. But enough of this, least they
strike me with their Ferula. I proceed.

This Betimes, and this Earlines, the Prophet explicateth unto us more
particularly in an other Psalm. Ps. 130.6.
My Soul flees unto the Lord, says he, before the Morning Watch, I say
before the Morning Watch: it is as if he had said, before the Sun it self was
up. S. Ambrose alluding hereunto, Let a devoted Spirit Ambros. in Ps. 36.
says he, prevent the Morning, let it participate of the Night, that it may be
illightened by Christ, before the Earth be illuminated by the Rising of the
Sun. And indeed If Demosthenes were so Tull. Tusc. Quaest. l. 4.
aggreeved, that Handy-crafts-Men in a Morning should be at their Anuyles,
before himself could be at his Study, how much more should it grieve us to be
prevented by them, nay by Demosthenes himself in an early carriage of this
Business. The Night Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 42.
says S. Chrysostom, was not made to this purpose, that we should sleep all
the time, and lie lolling on our Beds. The manuary Trades, and Horse-keepers,
and Merchants, can witness so much unto us. The Church it self rises at
Midnight: Rise thou also as does the Church. Mark the Motion of the Stars, the
deep Silence of all things then being, their rest they then enjoy, and admire
the Providence of God above. Then is thy Soul more pure, more light, and
subtle, more lofty, and quick. The very Darkness it self, and that great
Silence, may induce thee to much Compunction. And again a little after: Look
toward the City, and thou shall hear no noise at all: cast thine Eye on thy
own House, and all thy Family shall seem unto thee as if they lay in their
Graves, or Sepulchers. All this may stir thee up to high, and heavenly
Meditations.

But what is meant here by the Prophets Looking up? Early in the Morning will
I direct my Prayer unto thee, and will look up. It is as if he had said, he
would expect, and hope for somewhat from above. Like as Peter, and John, going
into the Temple to pray, and saying to the Creeple that lay in their way,
(...). Act. 3.4.
Respice in nos, Look on us, they put him in good comfort, that he should
receive somewhat of them. Thus the Prophet Micah 7.7.
Micah, I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my Salvation,
the Prophet using the selfsame TSAPPAH. in Piel, TSIPPAH.
Word, that is used here in this place.

Verse. 4. For thou art the God that has no pleasure in Wickedness: neither
shall any evil dwell with thee.] It is His Note upon this place even in these
very Words, Calvin in hunc loc.
DEVM NON ESSE PECCATI AVTHOREM, God is not the Author of Sin, whom our
Adversaries with open mouth continually yolp against, as if he maintained that
he were. In saying, Rhem. in Mat. 13.15.
say the Rhemists, that they shut their own Eyes, which S. Paul also
repeateth, Act. 28, he teaches us the true understanding of all other Places,
where it might seem by the bare words that God is the very Author, and Worker
of this Induration, and Blindness, and of other Sins: which was an old
condemned Blasphemy, and is now the Heresy of Calvin. So Campian, who lays it
to the charge of us all, These, Camp. Rat. 8.
says he, are their own Axioms: God is the Author, and Cause of Sin,
Willing, Prompting, Making, Commanding, and Working it, and therein governing
the wicked Counsels of Naughty Men. The Adultery of David, and the Treason of
Judas, was as properly the Work of God, as was the Calling of S. Paul. And
Duraeus Duraeus in Whitak.
seconds him. But Dr Bishop out-strips them all, (I always except that PLVTO
of theirs, Wrights Articles answered in part by D. Barlow afterward Bish. of
Lincoln: wholly by D. Bulckley, and M. Wotton.
Wright the Priest, who shames not to say that we Protestants make GOD worse
then the DEVIL) but Dr Bishop has this Passage: An other Opinion Some of them
hold, D. Bishop Sec. Part of the Reformat. of a Cath. Praefat.. 10.
says he, to wit that God who has been always by Good Men esteemed the
Author of all Good, etc. is become the Author, Plotter, Promoter, and Worker of
all the Wickedness and Mischeef, that is, or has been, committed in the
World. This is the Doctrine, says he, of Zuinglius, with him agrees Bucer, of
the same accursed crew was Melancthon. But the Principal Procter and Promoter
of this Blasphemy is CALVIN. And who would not now think but that Calvin were
guilty indeed. Howbeit the Rhemists have had a FVLCK, as also a CARTWRIGHT;
Campian and Duraus a WHITAKER: Wright a BVLCKLEY, and a WOTTON: Bishop an
ABBOT: that have quitted Calvin, and Us of this stark staring Sclander. The
truth is we all teach, and that with uniform consent, as that worthy D. Abbots
Third Part of the Defense of the Reform. Cath. p. 63.
Doctor delivers, that Man's Sin is wholly of himself by corruption of
Nature, and that from his own Heart, as from a poisoned Root proceeds all
the Wickedness of his Life: to God we attribute no more but that he
voluntarily permits, and wisely ordreth, and justly uses to his purposes
the Sin of Man. For as the D Abbot. Ib. p 66.
Beams of the Sun draw from a dead Carrion a noisome and filthy savor,
whereof the Sun cannot possibly be said to be the Cause, which with the same
Beams causes from the Viols:, and the Rose a pleasing and delightsome smell,
but the whole matter thereof arises from the Carrion or Carcas it self: even
so God by the secret operation of his unsearchable Power finds means to
draw forth the Sin, and Wickedness of Man, which yet he in no sort works in
him, but the whole Contagion and Filth thereof arises from the Corruption of
Man himself. All that we say in this case may be proved by the Fathers, I by
our Adversaries themselves, as against that Bishop in name, that worthy Doctor,
since a Bishop indeed, D. Abbot. Ib. p. 81.
has well observed. And but that D. Bishop now of late has put Life into this
Sclander, I should think by the Doway Bible, and their Notes upon this place,
that his Puefellowes are half ashamed to cast it any more in our teeth. Even
this might have taught D. Bishop some modesty, but how should he have played his
Prizes then, and been so copious in this point, who I suppose had that of Tully
Tusc. Quaest. l. 1.
Tully in his mind when he began that Passage, Quia Disertus esse possem, si
contra ista dicerem. I will knit up all this with those excellent Words of an
other Prelate of our Church, who wrighting upon My L. of Land. on Jonas, Lect.
18.
Jonas; God is of pure Habac. 1.13.
Eyes, and can behold no Wickedness, he has laid Righteousness to the Rule,
and weighed his Justice in a Balance, his Soul hates and abhors Sin,
Esaias. 42.2^. Amos. 2^ 5.
I have served with your Iniquities. It is a Labor, Service, and Thraldom
unto him, more then Israel endured under their grievous Taskmasters; his Law to
this day curses and condemns Sin, his Hands have Smitten and Scourged
Sin, he has thrown down Angels, plagued Men, overturned Cities, ruinated
Nations, and not spared his own Bowels, whilst he appeared in the Similitude
of sinful Flesh; he has drowned the World with a Flood of Waters, and shall
burn the World with a Flood of Fire because of Sin. The Sentence shall stand
immovable, as long as Heaven and Earth endures: Romans 2.9.
Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does evil of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. Seeing God then abhorres all Wickedness, and
can by no means away therewith, how ought we also to frame our Lives
accordingly thereunto. Our Savior having showed that he came to fulfill the
Law, and interpreting the Law concerning KILLING, to be but Angry with our
Brother unadvisedly; and the Law concerning ADVLTERY to be but to Look on a
Woman lustfully; and the Law concerning SWEARING to Swear not at all; and the
Law of loving our NEIGHBOVRS, to Love even our Enemies, his Mat. 5.48.
Conclusion at length is, Be ye therefore perfect even as your Father which
is in Heaven, is perfect. Agreeable whereunto is that of the Apostle, Heb.
1^.14.
Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which (Holiness) no man
shall see the Lord.

Verse. 5. Such as be foolish shall not stand in thy sight: for thou hate all
them that work Vanity.] Who they are in Holy Scripture that are meant by
Foolish, is evident to such as are conversant therein. They are in very deed
Sinners and Wicked Men, who despising the Wisdom of the Word of God, follow
their own Lusts and sinful Appetites, and consequently betake themselves to
the Wisdom of the Flesh. Now the The carnal Mind. Last Translat. Romans 8.7.
Wisdom of the Flesh is Enmity against God: for it is not subject to the Law
of God, neither indeed can be. No marvel then though it be here said they
shall not stand in Gods sight, for what 2. Cor. 6.14.
Fellowship has Righteousness with Vnrighterusnes, and what Communion has
Light with Darkness. S. Austen gives the same reason, They shall not stand in
his sight, Aug in hunc Ps.
says he, for that their Eyes, that is, their Minds, are in regard of the
Darkness of their Sins reverberated or beaten back again by the Light of
Truth. Gerunt secum Noctem suam. They carry their Night about with them, that
is, not only the Custom of sinning more and more, but also the love of it. We
had the Phrase before in the Ps. 1.6.
First Psalm, and the Judgment there specified, is intimated here in this
place.

But the Reason is here annexed also why they shall not stand in his sight,
namely for that He hates all them that work Vanity. Where first concerning
Hating, if any be inquisitiue how the Lord is said to Hate, seeing God is
Love, 1. Ioh. 4.16.
says S. John, and where Love is in the Abstract, there can be no Hating at
all: he may be answered by Zanch. de Not. Dei, seu de divine. Attrib. l. 4. c.
7.
Z^nchius, that Hatred as it is a thing that is most commonly in Men, a Passion
and Feebleness of the Mind, so is it not in God, nor can be, for so is it
Vicious: but Hatred as it is a Purpose not to have Mercy on the Wicked; or as
it is a Decree to punish them; or as it is his Displeasure with them; so the
Scriptures do attribute it to him, and Truly and Properly it belongs unto
him. He makes instance in these very words: Thou hate al them, says he,
that work Iniquity, that is, thou do not only abhor them, but thou have
decreed to punish them, and so indeed thou do. Is it not the Property of God
to punish the Wicked, says he? Yes it belongs unto his Justice, and therefore
Hatred says he, in that Sense that the Scriptures attribute it unto God,
agrees truly unto God, and is properly attributed unto Him.

Secondly, concerning Vanity, it is that which in an other Word is called
Iniquity, and therefore shall he say in that day, Mat. 7.23.
Depart from me ye that work Iniquity. If the Question be here asked why
Iniquity is called Vanity, and the Workers thereof the Workers of Vanity? It is
therefore called Vanity for that Iniquity in it self is a thing of no esteem,
and serves to no use. They trust in Vanity, Esaias. 59.4.
says the Prophet Esaias, and speak Lies, they conceive Mischief, and bring
forth Iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice Eggs, and weaue the Spiders Web. Their
Webs shall not become Garments, nether shall they cover themselves with their
Works. Nor is this spoken in that sense as those Words of the Preacher were,
Eccles. 1.2.
Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.
For All there intimated to be Vanity, are all Temporal and worldly Things in
comparison of true Felicity, but the Vanity here meant is absolutely by it
self without any reference to better Things. In comparison of true Felicity,
Knowledge, Riches, Autho^ity (howsoever Gods good Gifts) be all of them but
Vain: but Mischief, and Inquitie have a deeper dye in Vanity.

Thirdly, whereas it is here said, Thou hate all them that work Vanity, the
Categoricall word [ALL] shows that he makes no difference at all, between
King and Subject, Master and Servant, Mistress and Maid, Bond, and Free. Of a
truth, A^t. 10.34.
says S. Peter, I perceive that God is no respecter of Persons, but in every
Nation he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is accepted with him.
Right so may it be said, Of a truth we may perceive, that God is no Respecter
of Persons, but in every Nation he that fears him not, but works Iniquity is
hated of him. Which word All, in this place, is not so to be taken neither, as
if all Sins and all Sinners were meant in general: No, there are Sinners and
Sins of Infirmity, and there are Sinners and Sins of I^iquity; Sinners and
Sins of Weakness, and Sinners and Sins of Wickedness, or Wilfulness. Be
not merciful to them, Ps. 59.5.
says our Prophet, that offend of malicious Wickedness, and Ps. 19.13.
keep thy Servant from presumptuous Sins. Here if any are desirous to know
how God could love us, who before our Conversion to Christ wrought Iniquity as
well as others, S. Austen will inform him, Aug. in Euang Joan. ^ract. 110
that God loved us whenas we wrought nothing but Unrighteousness against him,
and yet that it is said most truly here, Thou O Lord hate al them that work
Iniquity. For after a mavelous and heavenly manner, he loved us, even when
he hated us: for he hated us being such as himself had not made. And because
our Iniquity did not altogether deface his Work, he knew even in every of us
to hate that which we made, and to love that which himself made.

V^rs. 6. Thou shall destroy them that speak Leasing, the Lord will abhor,
both the Blood-thirsty, and Deceitful Man.] That Leasing is Lying, we heard
Exposit. in Ps. 4.2 p. 93.
before. That Lying and Deceitfulness are both joined here with Blood argues
the haynousnesse of both. But of Each in their several order.

First, concerning Lying, S. Austen has wrote two Treatises thereof, the One,
De Mendacio, the Other, Contra Mendacium, both in his Fourth Tome. In the
Former he shows in that Speech no less then Eight Parts. I mean he makes Aug
de. Mendacio c. 14. et c. 21.
mention of Eight sorts of Lies: The First in the way of Religion: The Second
when it is hurtful to some, and profitable to none; The Third, when it is so
Profitable to some one, that it hurts another; The Fourth, when it is made upon
custom of Lying: The Fifth, when it is made to please others withal; The Sixth,
when upon the demand of any man it profits some one, and hurts no body
besides; The Seventh, when upon the demand of the Magistrate it performs as
much; The Eight, when it hurts none, and yet seems to be profitable for the
preservation of Chastity. Now of all these he shows that no One of them is
lawful, and often there repeats this of the Prophet here, and part of that in
the Former Verse, Odisti Domine omnes qui operantur Iniquitatem, perdes omnes
quiloquuntur Mendacium. Thou hate all them that work Vanity, thou shall
destroy them that speak Leasing. Zanchius Zanch. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4.
makes three sorts of Lies: An Officious Lie, a Pleasant Lie, and a Lie
Pernicious. He shows how all condemn the Last; how the Middlemost is excused
by some, and the First and Foremost praised by others. But as he is utterly
against all three, so ought we also to be, whatsoever others have Vid. Alberic.
Gentil de Abusu Mendac. c 16
written in defense thereof. Aristotle herein shall have the precedence of such
Christians who speaking of a Lie, Arist. Eth. l. 4. c. 7.
shows that it is (...), per se malum and vituperabile, even in his own
nature naught and blameworthy. And therefore that which the Father here, David
delivers, his Son Solomon does second, when he shows that a Lying Tongue is
one of the Prou. 6.17.
Six things hated of God, and one of the Seven that is abomination unto him. I
will conclude this point with that of S. Austen, wherewith he concludes his
second Book against Lying, Aug. Contra Mendac. c. 21.
Aut cauenda Mendacia recte agendo, aut consitenda sunt paenite^do: non autem
cum abundent infaeliciter viuendo, augenda sunt and docendo. We are by well
doing either to beware of Lying, or by Repentance to confess our Lying, but in
no wise when by bad living Lies abound in us, we are to make them superabound
by teaching to Lie.

Concerning the Blood-thirsty, no marvel if the Lord abhor him to. Man is,
Gods Genesis 1.27.
Image, and if Man defacing a Princes Image, that is but stamped on his Coin,
is liable to sevearest Punishment, how much more is he to be, that defaceth by
Murder the Image of God. Blood Nomb. 35.33
says Moses, defiles the Land, and the Land cannot be cleansed of the Blood
that is shed therein, but by the Blood of him that shed it. Our Savior agrees
hereunto, for in the justest Quarrel that ever was, Put up again thy Sword
into his place Mat. 26.52.
says he, to Peter, for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the
Sword. Here might be entreated of that admirable Issuing forth of the Blood,
after it is settled in the Body, if he that slew it, appear in presence
thereof, within the space of certain Hours, but those that are desirous to
see it discussed at large, I refer them to Hier. Magius Mi^cell. l. 3. c 5.
Magius, and Cael Rhodig. Lect. Antiq. l. 3. c. 12.
Rhodiginus; as ^lso to And. Libavius de Ciuentatione Cadav.
Andreas Libavius, and Lemnius de occult Not. Mi^ac. l. 2. c. 7.
L^vinus Lemnius, both of them cited by my Lord of Canterbury in his My L. of
Cant. on Jonas, Lect. 7.. 21.
Lectures on Jonas,

Deceitful is a Word derived from Deceit, and Deceit does usually signify
Subtilty, Craft, and Cunning; when Men hide their evil Meanings by some
colorable Words and Deeds, that they may more easily entrap those with whom
they have to deal. It is Aug. in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, Deceit, when we make show of one thing, and do an other.
Much is spoken in holy Scripture against such kind of Men, as that the Prove.
19.15.
Deceitful Person shall be affamished; that he Prove. 12.27. Former Translat.
Rosteth not that he took in Hunting, that is, that he shall not enjoy the
Goods he has got; that he Mal. 1.14.
shall not live half his Days. And the Prophet Malachy, he reads (as it were)
the Church-Commination against him, x Cursed be the Deceiuer, which has in his
Flock a Male, and voweth, and sacrifices unto the Lord a corrupt Thing, and
yet we, as if we ioyed rather to be Lysandrians, then Christians, Ps. 55.25.
glory in nothing so much, as in Deceiving our Brethren. That one Speech of
Lysander, Plut. Apopth. and Lacon Apopth.
Vbi Leonina Pellis non sufficit, ibi adsuenda est Vulpina, Where the Lions
Skin will not serve, it must be peeced out with the Foxes Case, is of much
more force with Many, then an Hundred of such Passages as these in the Apostle
S. Peter, 1. Pet. 2.21.
Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that ye should follow his
Steps. Who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth.

Verse. 7. But as for me I will come into thine House, even upon the Multitude
of thy Mercy: and in thy Fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.]
Howsoever the Lord when time was, spoke by the Mouth of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias.
66.1.
The Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my Footstool: where is the House
that ye build unto me? and where is the Place of my Rest? In regard whereof
King Solomon had said long before, 1. King. 8.27.
Behold, the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee: how much less
this House that I have builded! Yet sure and certain it is, that as out of the
whole Mass of Mankind, the Lord has reserved Some to Himself, whom he
calls his Elect; out of the Times, and Seasons, Some which he calls his
Sabbaths, and Solemn Feasts; out of his Servants, and Attendants, Some whom he
calls his Ministers, and Priests; out of the Goods, and Wealth of Men, Some
which he calls his Tithes, and Oblations; so out of Houses and Habitations,
Some he reserueth, which he calls his own House, like as Jacob Genesis 28.22.
prophesied long before, This Stone which I have set for a Pillar, shall be
Gods House. First then, concerning the House here specified, no doubt but the
Sanctuary is thereby meant, and it is called the House of God, for that God had
said, he would Exodus 25.8.
dwell amongst them, and it was the Place Ps. 26.8.
where his Honor dwelt. Secondly, in that it is called here the Temple, (the
Temple as yet not being built) it is by the Figure Prolepsis, or Anticipatio,
and that Figure then is used, when a Place is called by a Name that it has a
long time after, not when formerly it is so called. As when it is said in the
Book of Numb. 32.9.
Nombers, Venerunt in Vallem Botri, it is so said, says Aug. Locut. de Numer.
l. 4.
S. Austen, by the Figure Anticipatio, not because that Valley was called so,
when the Israelites came thither, but for that it was so called, when the Book
was written. It is in the Original, HEICALL, which Vid. Ains. worth in hunc Ps.
signifies a Palace, and is attributed to the Places where Gods Majesty was
said to dwell, as the Tabernacle, and Temple, and Heaven it self. Thirdly, in
that it is called The Holy Temple, it is therefore so called, for that it was
set apart by Gods Ordinance, to holy Uses, and Offices. Thus the Priests, and
the Altar, and the Sacrifices, and the Shewbread, and the Fire, and the
Incense, were all of them Holy, even Jerusalem, as wicked as otherwise it was,
was in this respect, The Holy City, and so styled by Mat. 5.45.
S. Matthew. Fourthly, that David here did promise to come into this House, was
in regard of the great Benefits that occurred unto him thereby, what in respect
of the Parties that were present in that House, what in respect of the Things
performed by those Parties. Fifthly, in that he would come even upon the
Multitude of Gods Mercy, he thereby intimates the Multitude of his Sins. For
as S. Austen on an other Psalm, Aug. in Ps. 50.
Qui magnam Misericordiam deprecatur, magnam Miseriam confitetur: he that sues
for great Mercy, acknowledges great Misery: right so is it here in this Place,
he would come to that House even upon the Multitude of Gods Mercy, to diminish
thereby the Multitude of his Transgressions. Sixthly, and lastly, whereas he
says, And in thy Fear will I worship toward thy Holy Temple, no doubt but
that as Filial Fear is here understood, (whereof has been spoken Exposit. on
Ps. 4.4. p. 95.
heretofore) so a holy Preparation to Prayer is intimated also, according to
that of the Son of Syrach, Ecclus. 18.23
Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be not at one that tempts the
Lord: or that of the Son of David rather, Ecclus. 5.1.
Keep thy Foot when thou go to the House of God, and be more ready to hear,
then to give the Sacrifice of Fools. No doubt but that of Jacob was always in
his Mind, Genesis 28.17.
How dreadful is this Place! this is none other but the House of God, and this
is the Gate of Heaven.

But how is it here said, that he would worship toward the Temple, whereas he
had said in the Words before, that he would come into the House? The Answer is,
that the Temple here meant, being the Tabernacle, and the Tabernacle having a
Court; the Priests only when they used to pray, did enter into the Tabernacle,
the Rest stood without in the Court, and prayed toward the Tabernacle. Now the
Tabernacle, and the Court (like as afterward the Temple, and the Court) were
both called Gods House, and therefore is it here said, that David would both
come into it, and also pray toward it.

Where by the Way we may call to Mind how Bellarmine wrongs Calvin in a Matter
of this Argument. Calvin had said in his Calv. Instit. l. 3. c. 20.. 20.
Institutions, That Christ being entered into the Sanctuary of Heaven, unto the
end of the Ages of the World, he alone carries to God the Prayers of the
People abiding far off in the Porch. Bellarmine hereupon Bell. de Eccles
Triumph. l. 1. c. 1.
inferrech, that Calvin's Opinion was, that the Souls of the Saints do not see
God before the Day of Judgment. Why? because in Calvin's Judgment, they are
excluded from the Sanctuary of Heaven. Yea but then by like consequence, the
People came not into the Temple. But if Bellarmine confess that the Luc. 20.1.
People, I that Luc. 2.37.
Women, I that Luc. 18.10.
Publicans went up into the Temple, who were admitted only into the 2. Chron.
4.9 Joseph. cont. Ap. l. 2.
Court of the Temple, needs must he granut by like consequence, that the Saints
even in Calvin's Judgment, were not excluded from Heaven, for all our Saviors
Prerogative in being entered into the Sanctuary of Heaven, But to return unto
my purpose.

That which caused our Prophet here to promis^ to come to this House, was
d^u^tlesse the Service of God performed in this House, and that not only in his
Word, but in his Sacraments, and Sacrifices, and Prayer and P^ayses. Especially
PRAYER, which albeit the Prophet could have performed by himself alone, no Man
b^tter, yet did he desire to make his Prayers in those Assemblies no Man more.
The Benefit indeed of PVBLIKE PRAYER, St Gregory shows us in a most apt and
fit Similitude: While we pray together in the Church, Greg. Epist. l. 1. ep. 24
says he, we with you, you with us, we hold as it were hand in hand like
those that are walking in slippery places, and the more that one of us does
rely on another, the stronger is every man's Devotion in particular. Harken all
you that refuse to frequent the Church, Basil in Ps. 115.
says S. Basil, betaking your selves for sooth to your Home Devotions,
miserable Fragments as you are of that precious Body of Christ, and learn that
your Prayers and Devotions, ought to be performed in the midst of Jerusalem,
that is in the midst of the Church of God. I find it storyed of our Th.
Walsingh. Chron. p. 1.
Henry the Third, that he in his time was so devour, that every Day he would
hear no less then Three Masses, and always at the Elevation, he would
support the Hand of the Priest, and use to kiss it. Lewis of France, called
the Saint, happening on a ^^ime to confer with him thereabouts, told him it was
not so fit that he should be at so many Masses, but that he should hear
Sermons more usually then he did: to whom King Henry, they say, made Answer,
Malle Amicum suum saepius videre, quam de eo Loquentem, licet bona dicentem,
audire, that he for his part had rather see his Friend often, then hear an
other speaking of him, though he spoke much good. Ill applied as it was to the
Mass, but it was the Blindness of those Times. Queen Elizabeth applied it much
b^tter, when She applied it unto PRAYER, saying as it is Camde^ Elizabeth, p.
14.
storyed, That She had rather devoutly speak to Go^ in Her Prayers then hear
Others speaking of God, though never so eloquently. Taxing no doubt hereby, the
preposterous Zeal of too-too Many who l^y all upon the Ministers Non omnia in
Humeros nostros p^o^cite. Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Col. Hom. 9.
Shoulders, never wearying then own Hands, never hardening their own Knees in
the publ que Service of God. Wherein such People cry qui^tance with the Scribes
and the Pharisees of Old. They bi^d heavy Burdens, and grievous to be borne,
Mat. 23.4.
says our Savior, and ^ay them on Men's Shoulders, but they themselves will
not move them with one of their Fingers. So they can be content their
Minister should ^reach unto them Day by Day, or all Day long; but either to
practice what he preaches, or Themselves to endeavor by Themselves, by
Reading to get more Knowledge, or to pray as they ought to do: there they
leave him: God grant they be not liable to that which follows in that place.
Mat. 23.5.
But all their Works they do, (and all is but Hearing of Sermons) for to be
seen of Men. Indeed Chrysostom. vbi supra.
says S. Chrysostom, ye are Sheep, but yet are ye Sheep endued with Reason,
and therefore S. Paul commits many things to your Selves to do in these
Cases, without us. And again in other place, Chrysostom. in 2. ad These Hom 3.
Concerning the Earth, all the Workmarship is the Husband man's. For it is a
senceles Subject, only fit to be wrought vp^n, but concerning your spiritual
Husbandry, it is not so. N^n hic totum opus Doctorum, sed si non potior, certe
med^a Portio Discipulorum est. You are not to rely upon your Teachers, to have
all things performed by them, if so be not the better Part, doubtless the one
Half is to be performed by your Selves.

Verse 8. Lead me, O Lord* in thy Righteousness, because of mine Enemies: make
thy Way plain before my Face] Of Lord, I have Exposit on Ps. 3.1 p. 64.
spoken before, and it being here in our last Translation in Capital Letters,
I have showed the Reason thereof in that place; and therefore now to the Word,
Lead.]

Duci, Puerorum est, Coecorum, Claudorum, Infirmorum, Ignorantium, and Ovium:
to be Led Marlorat. in hunc Ps.
says Marlorat, belongs to Children, to Blind men, to the Lame, to the
Impotent, to the Ignorant, and unto Sheep: so that the Prophet in this one
Word, intimates himself to be all these. Nay he expresses himself in this
his Book of Psalms, to be every One of all these. First, that he was but a
CHILD, Lord Ps. 131.1.
says he, I am not high minded, I have no proud Looks, I do not exercise my
self in great Matters, which are too high for me. But I refrain my Soul, and
keep it low, like as a Child that is weaned from his Mother: yea my Soul is
even as a weaned Child. Secondly, that he was a BLIND-MAN, witness his own
Words, Open thou mine Eyes Ps. 119.18.
says he, that I may see the wondrous things of thy Law. For what was the
Request of Blind-men indeed, but that their Mat. 20.33.
Eyes might be opened, as we read in S. Mathews Gospel. Thirdly, that he was
a LAME-MAN, behold his own Words again, I am ready to halt Ps. 38.17.
says he, and my Sorrow is continually before me, as it is in our last
Translation. Fourthly, that he was IMPOTENT, he does manifest it in these
Words, Ps. 6.2.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak says he, and what is Weakness, but
Impotency? Fifthly, that he was IGNORANT, The very Beasts Ps. 35.15.
says he came against me unawares: it is in the Vulgar, Et ignoravi, and I was
ignorant thereof. Sixthly, and lastly, that he was as a SHEEP, it is his own
very Word, I have gone astray Ps. 119.176
says he, like a Sheep that is lost, oh seek thy Servant, for I do not
forget thy Commandments. This very Last of going astray, puts me in mind of a
good Noate, that I have read in a good Divine, who speaking of the diverse
Checks that Satan gives us in this World: This lower Hemisphere or visible
Part of the World Mr Thomas Iackson, of Justifying Faith. Sect. 1. c. 7. p 55.
says he, is as the Devils Chess-board, wherein hardly can our Souls move
back, or forth, but he sets out one Creature or other to attach him: nor have
we any other means to avoid his Subtilty but by looking to the Ps. 121.1.
Hills, whence comes our Help; or into that Part of this great Sphere, which
is altogether hid from the Worlds Eyes, 2. Kings. 6.15.
where we may behold more for us, then th^se that be against us. It puts me in
mind also of a saying of S. Austen. who having spoken of his own Wanderings,
and his Calamities thereupon, Quid autem mirum cum infoelix Pecus aberrans a
Grege tuo, and impatiens Custodiae ^uae, turpi Scabie faedarir. And what great
Marvel was it, Aug. Confess. l. 3. c. 2.
says S. Austen, if unhappy Sheep as I was, wandering from the Fould, and
careless of thy Custody, I bec^m^ so infected as I was, all over my Body. But
to return unto my purpose.

Lead me in thy Righteousness?] What may that be? or how in thy Righteousness?
The Prophet explaines himself elsewhere; for saying in an other Psalm, Ps.
35.24.
Judge me, O Lord my God, according to the Righteousness; In thy Righteousness
here in this place, is according thereunto. So that it is as if the Prophet had
said, Lord, because thou art Righteous protect me with thine Aid, that so I
may avoid all the wicked Plots of mine Enemies: the very meaning of these
Words: Lead me in thy Righteousness, because of mine Enemies.

But what is that which here follows, Make thy Way plain before my Face? Is
not the Lords Way plain? The Lord himself Ezech. 18.25
says in Ezechiel, Are not your Ways unequal? And he repeats the same
again. V. 29.
O House of Israel, are not my Ways equal? are not your Ways unequal? The
truth is, the Lords Ways are equal and plain enough, but it is to those
that tread them with Faith, and rely wholly upon the Lord. No doubt in regard
of the Wicked they are so full of Hills and Dales, so fraught with such variety
of D^^bts, and ^^ff^culties, that it is odds but they miscarry. As for example,
there is Romans 8.35.
Tribulation, Distres, Persecution, Famine, Nakedness, Peril, and Sword: First
for TRIBVLATION, it is a very deep Dale, and DISTRESS is an other. Ovid
T^i^t. (...). 2.
Quantae diduc^o subsidunt Aequore ^alles,
I am (...) tacturos Tartara nigra putes.
Nay by means of Tribulation, and Distress, David oftentimes thought himself
in very Hell. Ps. 18.4.
The Pa^^es of ^eli came about me, says he, the Suares of Death ouertooke me.
PERSECVTION, that is a Mountain, so S. Austen, Quid sunt Montes nisi Tumores
Terrarum? What are Mountains Aug. ^^ Psalm. 24.
says S. Austen, but the Swellings, and R^sings of the Earth? Nero, Domitian,
Traian, Antoninus, Severus, Maximinus, and the ^es^, what were they but so many
Mountains? The persecuting heathen Emperors, Mr G^^^^n his Trumpet of Wa^^e.
says a good ^ivine, were very great Mountains, that stood very high and very
stiff in the Churches Way, but the ^aith of the Church according to the
Promise of our Mat. 17.20.
Savior, has remo^ued them all. FAMINE, and NAK^D^^S, what are they but so
many Briars? and so many Thorns?

^^veral. Sa^. 3
Haud facile emergunt quorum Virtutibus ^^slat
Res angust a domi.
They that are cumbred with these Guests will find more a do to come to their
iournies end, the Tully had in finding out by reason of Briars and Thorns the
Toomb of Cic. Tusc. Quaest. l. 5.
Archimedes. Lastly PERIL and SWORD, what are they but Hedge and Ditch, Thick
and Thin, and not such an Hedge and such a Ditch as by the benefit of a good
Horse may be easily sprung over, but such a Ditch as in Queen Mary's time our
Oxford Ditch was, where that m^st Reverend Archbishop, and Councellor of
State, Cra^m^r, learned Kidly, and old Latimer, were all of them Bu^nt, that
like a Golgotha, nay worse then that, the very Place mig^t breed an horror in
the Minds of Men against them. Thus as with the Arrians of old, Non Canicies
apud Iudices iniquitatis Venerabilis erat, Neither Age, and an hoare white
Head, as Bas. Ep. 70.
speaks S. Basil neither Godliness, nor ^ Life most Virtuously led, had any
reverence at all with those bloody Burreaus. But to return where I left.

Not the least of all the Premises but withholds a Worldling from walking
this Way, whereas unto the Godly every of these is made so plain, that as the
Apostle S. Paul gives out, Romans 8 37.
We are more then Conquerers through ^^m that loved us. So that as the Earth
is said to be round, notwithstanding so great Height of Hills, and such
Plainness of Downs, because (as Pliny Plin. Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 6^.
tells us) that if the Compass thereof might be taken by lines, the Ends of
those L nes would meet just in Circuit, and prove the Figure of a just Circle:
so let the Lords Way be once Leueld by the Line of his Word, and nothing more
Eeuen, nothing more Plain unto us then the Way of the Lord.

Verse. 9. For there is no Faithfulness in his Mouth, their inward parts are very
Wickedness.] A lively description of the Wicked, I^tus and in Cuse, both
Within and Without. Their Mouths, their Hearts in this Verse (for their Hearts
are these inward Parts) their Throats, and Tongues in the next. No Apelles can
better paint them, then the Spirit of God here sets them forth. In confesso est
Orationem, si explicandi vim ac facultatem habeat, non minus quae velit ponere
ob oculos posse, quam Viros manuum artificio praestantes. It it apparent,
Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 3. c. 1.
says Aelian, that Speech, if it has the Force and Faculty of expressing that
which it takes in hand, delivers it no less unto the Eye then the Hand of a
skillful Workman.

First for their Mouths, there was no Faithfulness in them, Truth was utterly
banished thence. It should seem they were all of Lysanders constitution,
Plutarch. Apopth.
Pueros Talis, Viros Sacramentis decipi oportere, that Children were to be
deceived wi^h Chery-stones, and Men with Oaths But the Apost e S. Paul gives
us better Counsel. Putting away Lying, Ephesians. 4.25.
says S. Paul, speak every Man truth with his Neighbor, for we are Members
one of another. Where he not only gives us good Counsel, but a Reason of
the same. Namely, that as in our Natural Bodies the Mouth deceaues not the
Hand, nor the Hand the Mouth, nor the Head the Feet, nor the Feet the Hands,
for the whole Body it self should loose by the bargain, if there were any
such Deceit amongst them, as is to be seen by that elegant Fable of M^nenius
Agrippa in Live. Dee. 1. l. 2.
Livy, concerning the Members of the Body: so ^^e deceiues himself that
deceaues his Christian Brother, nor does he put up thereby so much in h s Purse
as he is damnified in his Conscience. Lucrum in Arca Dam ^um in Conscientia,
His Cofers perhaps are filled, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 215.
S. Austen but his Conscience Smarts for it. But of Lying and D^ceit I have
spoken Expos. on. Ps. 4.2. p. 93.
before.

Concerning their Hearts, intimate there by their Inward Parts, they are said
to be W^^kednesse in the Abstract nay in the Hebrew it is more, it is
Wickedness in the Plural, as if the Abstract and Plural both, were both
little enough to explicate the Wick dnesse of the Heart. But of the Heart I
have spoken Expos. on Ps. 4.4. p. 96.
before too. Only here it may be doubted how the Pro^^et should be so skiiful
as to know the Heart. Quid tam altum and tam profundum quam Men's Hominis quae
quasi involucro quod an Corporis tegitur and occultatur, vt eam haud facile
quisquam introspicere and speculari queat? What so High and so Deep, Ambros.
Instit. Virg, 3.
says S. Ambrose, as is the Mind of Man, which is hid, as it were, and
covered within the Bulck of his Body that no Man may easily prye into it. It is
true, no man can unless he be taught of God, as the Prophet David here was,
the holy Spirit directing his Pen to Paint them out to the full. But I come
to the Throat and Tongues.

Verse. 10. Their Throat is an open Sepulcher, they flatter with their
Tongues.] In that the Throat is here said to be a Sepulcher, and that an open
one too, we may call to mind what our Savior Mat. 23.27.
said concerning Sepulchers, namely how they are full of dead men's Bones, and
all Uncleanness. Such Bones, and such Uncleanness have the Wicked in their
Throats.

Pers. Sat. 3.
Gutture Sulphureas lent exhalante M^phites. Do but tell them of their Faults,
and they will cast you presently such Bones to Gnaw upon, as you will wonder at
their Impudency. They are set on Fire, as Ps. 57.5.
speaks the Prophet, (...) if so be they were made of Tuch-Wood: their Teeth
are Spears and Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword. But it was the
Proverb of the Ancients, and it may be a Modern Proverb now adays, 1. Sam.
24.13
Wickedness proceeds from the Wicked.

Concerning their Tongues, which the Prophet calls Swords, and Sharp Swords
to, that here it is said, They Flatter with them, they show the skill of
Lysander again, concerning the Lions Skin, and the Foxes Case, as you heard
Page 125.
before. These the Prophet elsewhere styleth by the name of Balmes, and what
more gentle and supple then Balm? And yet who would think it? Nothing more
forcible to give a Broken Pate. Let the Righteous, Ps. 141.6.
says the Prophet, Smite me friendly, and Reprove me, but let not their
Precious Balmes (meaning the Flatteries of the Wicked) break my Head. Why? Can
Balmes do such a Feat? Balm, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 12. c. 25.
says Pliny, is that Sweet and Odoriferous Liquor that goes beyond all
others. Howbeit as the same Pliny says in the same Chapter, that there is no
Merchandise and Commodity in the World, wherein there is practiced more Fraud
and Deceit, then in the traffic of Balm, so falls it out in this case, when
Flattery works such Wonders. It puts me in mind of a saying in Tacitus,
Pessimum Inimicorum genus, Laudantes: speaking of Agricola. Often was he in
those days, Tacit. Vit. Agricolae.
says Tacitus, accused to Domitian in absence, and in absence acquitted. The
Cause was neither matter of Crime, nor Complaint of Party aggrieued, but the
Renown of the Man, and the Princes disposition hating all Virtue, and the most
Capital kind of Enemies Commenders, procured the Peril. Whereupon that
Matchless Translator, and worthy of all Admiration Sr HENRY SAVILE, Annot upon
the Life of Agricola. nu. 16
To Hurt or Disgrace by way of Commendation, albeit it seems a strange
Position at the first fight, yet may be and daily is both easily and diversely
performed. He brings many Examples which I here omit, sufficient it is, that
I have pointed to the Fountain. I conclude with that of S. Austen, Aug. in Ps.
69.
Plus persequitur Lingua Adulatoris, quam Manus Interfectoris. The Tongue of a
Flatterer strikes more deadly, then does the Hand of a Murderer.

And thus have you seen the Description of the Wicked by their Mouths, Hearts,
Throats, and Tongues: Faithless Mouths, Wicked Hearts, Deadly Throats,
Flattering Tongues, what do they all say unto us but that is the Man. Like as
Plin. Not. Hist l. 35. c. 10.
Apelles on a time being at Ptolemies Table, and King Ptolomy demanding of him
what he made there, and who had invited him, Apelles not knowing the name of
the Party that had invited him, caught up a dead Coal of Fire from the Chimny
corner, and drew him so lively thereby, that every man knew who the Party was.
But our Prophet like another: Apelles draws them hereby, not so much to know
them, as to teach us to beware of them, least participating with them in their
Sins, we participate with them in Punishment too. Cic. Philip. 2.
Tully wondered at Antonius that he feared not to follow their Steps, whose
ends were so remarkable. And it is a thing indeed to be wondered at, that our
Mouths, Hearts, Throats, and Tongues so often employed in GODS SERVICE, I say
so often, should prove so Malepert, so Saucy, so Waspish, so Outrageous in the
turning of an Hand. But the Esaias. 57.20
Wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, whose Waters cast up
Mire and Dyrt.

Verse. 11. Destroy thou them O God, let them perish through their own
Imaginations, cast them out in the Multitude of their ungodliness, for they
have rebelled against thee.] It was the Promise of our Savior, as I told you
Expos. on. Ps. 5.8. p. 132.
before, that the Faith of the Church should be able to remove Mountains,
and as Arriu^, Donatus, and Maximinus were all of them Mountains by way of
HERESY, and the Church has removed them, so the persecuting Heathen
Emperors, they were also Great Mountains by way of TIRANNIA, and the Faith of
the Church has removed them too. Look upon Domitian, Mr Gosset his Trumpet
of War.
says a good Devine, Decius, Dioclesian, Julian the Apostata, Herod,
Antiochus, and a number such like Princes persequuting the Church, all of them
have miscarried by some one fearful death or other. Now as these did stand in
the Churches way, and the Church did pray against them, so David's Enemies stood
here in David's way, and David prays against them too. The effectual fervent
Prayer of a Righteous Man avails much, Iam. 5.16.
says S. James, and S. Chrysostom gives the reason, For as Trees, Chrysostom de
Incompreh. Dei Nature. Hom. 5.
says he, which have taken deep Root, are well able to withstand the Force,
and Violence of the Winds, by reason of that rooting: so the Prayers which the
Soul sends forth from the bottom of the Heart ascend aloft into the Skies,
nor is their Growth hindered with the Puffing and Blowing of any By-thoughts
whatsoever.

But what is it here the Prophet prays for? For the Destruction, the
Perishing, the Casting out of his Enemies, and that they themselves might be
the Cause of their own Destruction, Let them Perish through their own
Imaginations. As if the Prophet had said, let their Proiects be to no purpose,
let them never bring to proof what they have devised among themselves. An
excellent Pattern hereof we have in Achitophel, who for the Counsel he gave
miscarried, and was not accepted of, made no more ado but ^. Sam. 17.23.
Hung himself in a Halter.

Here a Question arises, Whether we also, as David, may Pray against our
Enemies, we that are Christians. And indeed our Savior upon occasion Mat.
12.3. Marc. 12.35.
alleging David's Sayings and Doings both, who would not Say as David, who
would not Do as David did? But the Answer is, that this kind of Prayer here
used, as also Ps. 59.13. Ps. 109 7.
others of like nature, as the Prayers of the Prophet Ier. 18.21.
Jeremy, and of 2. Tim. 4 14.
S. Paul, savor of a peculiar zeal which David and they had, but are not to
be imitated by every Christian. And therefore our Savior to them that in all
have would have Fire come down from Heaven to consume the Samaritans that
refused him, and pleaded 2 King. 1.10
Elias his Example to that purpose: Ye know not, Luc. 9.55.
says he, what manner Spirit ye are of. For the Son of Man is not come to
Destroy Men's Lives, but to Save them. And yet David, Jeremy, and S. Paul
pronounced not those Curses, Vindictae Liuore, sed Iudicio Iustitiae, not upon
a Spleen to be Revenged, as Greg. Moral. l. 4 c. 5.
speaks S. Gregory, but in Judgment and Justice, for that they knew by the
holy Spirit that they were Abominable and Disobedient, as Tit. 1.16.
speaks the Apostle S. Paul, and unto every good work Reprobate. Aug. in hunc
Ps.
S. Austen, he takes these words to be rather a Prophecy then a Prayer. And as
elsewhere he Aug. in Ps. 68.
speaks of David's Curses in particular, that they were not Stomachatio
Maledicentis, sed Praedictio Prophetantis: of the Prophets in General, Aug. de
Temp. Ser. 59. and Ser. 109 and De Ser. Dom. in Monte.
Per Imprecationem quid esset futurum cecinerunt, non Optantis Voto, sed
Spiritu Praevidentis. By the Imprecations they made, they showed what was to
come, not by way of Wishing, but by the Spirit of Prophesying. But to return
to the Words again.

The Prophet showing here the reason of this his Prayer in this place, says it
is Rebellion against the Lord: For they have rebelled against thee. Where the
Prophet says not as he might have said: For they have Rebelled against me: No;
but, Against thee: alluding in all likelihood, or to that of Moses in the Book
of Exodus, or to that of the Lord himself in the First of Samuel. Your
Murmurings, Exodus 16.8.
says Moses, are not against us, but against the Lord: and They have not
Rejected thee, 1. Sam. 8.7.
says the Lord to Samuel, but they have Rejected me, that I should not Reign
over them. Little thought those Israelites that their Murmurings and Rebellions
were against the LORD himself, they no doubt would have made many a Pamphlet
in defense of themselves as a Franco-Gallia, or a Franco-Iudaae, a Philo-Pater,
or a Philo-Mater; a De Iure Regni apud Scotos, or a De Iure Regni apud Iudaeos;
or the like: all which might have been answered, with this single sole
Sentence of holy Scripture, and the Words we have in hand IRRITAVERVNT TE
DOMINE: They have Rebelled against thee. Thus speaks our Savior of his
Ministers too, Luc. 10.16.
He that Despises You, Despises Me, and yet many of us as if we had never
Read, nor Heard it, or did certainly believe what our Savior says, are ready
to say with the Evil Spirit, Act. 19.15.
Jesus we know, and Paul we know, but who are ye? And as they said of our
Savior himself, Mat. 13 55.
Is not this the Carpenters Son? Is not his Mother called Mary? and his
Brethren, James, and John, and Simon, and Judas? and his Sisters, are they not
all with us? Right so do they say of many of us: They know our Fathers, they
know our Friends, they know our bringing up, and they are offended in us. But
it was an excellent Note of O^i^en. in Number. c. 12. Hom. 7.
Origin, Nunquam invenimus tantas Lauds Deum dixisse de Moyse Famulo suo
quantas nunc dici videmus quando ab Hominibus ei derogatum est. We never find
that God more praised Moses, then when he was most of all spoken against by
the Israelites.

Verse. 12. And let all them that put their trust in thee Rejoice: they shall
ever be giving of Thanks, because thou Defendest them, they that love thy Name
shall be Joyful in it.] He comes at length to pray for the CHVRCH, even for
All and Every of them that put their Trust in the Lord, and in none but him.
There are but Few that can thus do, for what with the Words of Man, what with
the Bewty of Man, what with the Strength of Man, what with the Wealth of Man,
what with the Wit of Man, what with Princes the Best of Men, as has been
observed Expos. on Ps. ^.5. p. 102.
heretofore, there goes our Trust and Confidence away.

But what is it here the Prophet prays for? For Joy, and Gladness of Heart.
Let them that put their trust in thee, Rejoice, and he meant, no doubt, such a
Rejoicing as should never be taken from them. No not in Infirmities, no not in
Reproaches, no not in Necessities, no not in Persequutions, no not in
Distresses for Christ his sake; the Apostle S. Paul may be an Example, For when
I am weak, 2. Cor. 12.10
says he, then am I Strong. But of this Joy, and this Rejoicing, has been
spoken Expos. on. Ps. 4.8. p. 106.
heretofore. Come we now to the Effect thereof, and that is Thanksgiving,
for so it is in the next Words, They shall ever be giving of Thanks.

Ever, that is, continually, that is, all the Days of their Life, to dwell in
the House of the Lord, as David Ps. 27.4.
promised to do, and Anna in S. Lukes Gospel, performed no less. There was,
Luc. 2.37.
says S. Luke, one Anna a Prophetess: the Daughter of Phanuel, of the Tribe
of Aser; she was of a great Age, and had lived with an Husband seven years
from her Virginity. And she was a Widow of about Fourscore and four years,
which departed not from the Temple, but served God with Fasting and Prayer,
Night, and Day. No doubt but amongst those Prayers, this Giving of Thanks is
included, Giving of Thanks being the most proper, and peculiar Serving of God.
For as that worthy D Howson his Sermon at Oxford. Nov. 17 Ao 1602.
Doctor, now our Right Reverend Diocesan has observed, God is not only, or
chiefly worshipped, Evangelici Sermonis Auditu, by hearing the Word preached,
sed Latriae Cultu* in Praising, and Mag^ifying, and Lauding God in the Memory
of hi^ manif^ld Bl ssings. ^^^ria or the Worship of God, is a Virtue Moral,
not Intellectu^ll ^h^rf^re to despise, says he, as many do, or neglect as
most do, Cultum Latriae, this Praising, and M^gnifying of God, and to gad up
and down to hear the Word preached, as they call it, is not only against the
Laws of this Land, the Statutes of our Colleges, but against the chief
Institution of the Lords Day.

This by all likelihood, seems harsh to Many, that consider not Things aright,
but as if the Gospel of Christ were Faction, and all to be as they would have
it, -- Horat. Sermon. Sat. 4.
Nam multo plures sumus, ac veluti te
Iudaei cogemus in hanc concedere Turbam:
it is strange how CHVRCH-SERVICE is generally now neglected of all Sorts, nay
and so much vilyfied of some, that would seem to be Protestants to, and of the
forwarder Sort, that the very Scriptures there read, are despised, and with
Choroebus in the Poet, as if they resolved with Papists, to fight with their
Weapons against the said Scriptures, Virg. Aeneid. l. 2.
Mutemus Clypeos, Danaumque insignia nobis Aptemus, they stick not to give out,
that they are read there to little purpose, because forsooth not interpreted.
And indeed I must needs say, they are so heard by Many, that they profit by
them never a whit; who did they hear also Lectures, and Sermons no better,
would profit as little by them. And by them how little they profit, CREDIT
OPERIBVS. They are our Saviors own Words, Ioh. 10.37.
If I do not the Works of my Father, believe me not: But if I do, though ye
believe not me, believe the Works. But concerning the Profit that may be taken
by Scriptures read in the Church, let us hear what Strangers say, seeing our
own Men at Hoame have thought so hardly of it. Concerning the Scriptures to be
read, Zanch. Tom. 8. De Rel. Christ. Observat. in c. 25. Aphoris. 10. and 11.
ex Bucer. in Ep. ad Ephesians. c. 4.
says Zanchius, and he confirms it by MARTIN BVC^R, whose Words they are;
Concerning the Scriptures to be read, says he, God be thanked it is well
ordered in the English Churches. Let it therefore be pondered diligently, whose
Mouth they represent themselves to be, which in the sacred Assemblies read the
Divine Books unto the People, that is to wit, they represent the Mouth of God
Almighty. Next of what Moment, of what Dignity the Matters are that are
recited, they are the Words and Precepts of Life Eternal. Lastly, to whom they
read, namely to the Sons of God. These things if a man with true Faith
consider with himself, what Gravity, Decency, Religion can be yielded in any
Action, which should be omitted by such a Reader. Thus far Zanchius, and with
him Martin Bucer hand in hand. Had our own Mothers Children at Hoame, had the
like Opinion of Reading Scriptures in the public Congregation, which Strangers
you see have had, our Church by this time had been too happy, nor had our
Adversaries the Papists gotten so much Ground of us, as they seem to have. But
it befalls GODS SERVICE, what oftentimes befalls his Prophets, Mat. 13.57.
It is not without Honor, save in our own Country. God grant it follows not
with us, what does in that place concerning our Savior, V. 58.
that it does not many mighty Works here, because of our Unbelief. But to
return to my purpose.

The Reason here given of Giving Thanks, is, because the Lord defends them, but
of Defending them, in the next Verse; in the mean time let us consider what it
is to Love his Name, and this is the Effect of all.

Thy Name Mollerus in hunc Ps.
says Mollerus, that is, thy Word, whereby we are made acquainted how, and in
what sort, the Lord will show himself unto those that are his. For that is
called a Name, says he, whereby any one is known, or the Remembrance of him
is kept in mind. Such are the HOLY SCRIPTVRES, by them the Lord is known, by
them his Remembrance is kept in mind. The Ignorance of the Scriptures Hieron.
Comment. in Esaias. Prooem. ad Eustoch. Virg.
says S. Ierom, is the Ignorance of Christ; and, Haec est Mors Animae, vt Deum
nesciat. Not to know God Aug. Annot. in Job. c. 9.
says S. Austen, is the Death of the Soul.

Verse. 13. For thou Lord wilt give thy Blessing unto the Righteous, and with
thy favorable Kindness will thou defend him as with a Shield.] Who they are,
that are the Righteous, and whence it is they are so termed, I have declared
Exposit. on Ps. 1.7. p. 29.
before. Here the Prophet shows unto us, that they which indeed are Righteous,
what Benefits they shall reap thereby. And first here is Blessing in the
Singular Number, which is not so to be taken, as if it were but only One: No;
it cannot be said to God, as was said to Isaac, by Esau his Son, Genesis 27.38.
Have thou but one Blessing my Father? For God has many. So that the Blessing
here, though it be but One, yet is it indeed a Swarm, a Cluster of Blessings.
One Swarm, many Bees; one Cluster, many Grapes. And as S. Austen in an other
case, Aug. in Ps. 141.
Quae Via, ipsae and Viae; quae Ecclesia, ipsae Ecclesia; and quod Coelum, ipsi
Coeli: Way, and Ways, Church, and Churches; Heaven, and Heavens are spoken
Singularly, and Plurally, and therefore by the Singular Number, the Plural is
meant: even so in this Case, by Blessing in the Singular, the Plural is
understood. And would you now see the Plurality of these Blessings? I specified
them Exposit. on Ps. 1.1. p. 4.
before, it is but to have recourse to the First Word of the First Psalm.

That the Prophet here adds, that the Righteous shall be defended with the
favorable Kindness of the Lord as with a Shield, we are first of all to
consider what this Favorable Kindness is, then the manner of the Defense
thereof, namely, as with a Shield.

It is in the Original, RATSON, Benevolentia, Beneplacitum, and rendered by the
Septuagint (...), that which we say in English Favor, or Goodness, the
Benignity of God, readily doing good to any of his Creatures. It is that which
the Apostle calls, Romans 2.4.
The Riches of his Goodness, whereby we may understand that saying of his in the
same Epistle, where it is said that he is Romans 10.12.
Rich unto all that call upon him. Indeed his gracious accepting of us, and
merciful Readiness to do us good, is the everlasting true RICHES. Of worldly
Riches it may be said, that which Solomon says of them, and many a man finds
too true, Prove. 23.5.
they certainly make themselves Wings, they fly away as an Eagle toward
Heaven: but Riches of this Nature, is that which remains for ever. The other
Riches, Aug. de Temp. Ser. 74.
says S. Austen, what are they but a Testimony of our Want, Mayor Indigentia,
quasi maiores comparat Facultates: and because our Wants be greater, we procure
our selves greater Wealth: but here in these, is All Sufficiency, and therefore
we heard in the Former Ps. 4.8.
Psalm, Thou have put Gladness in mine Heart: since the time that their Corn,
and Wine, and Oil increased.

That the manner of Defense is said to be as with a Shield, it was, it seems,
his usual Phrase, for so he uses the Word Shield in diverse of his Ps.
33.19.35.2.91.4.
Psalms. And King Solomon to this purpose: Prove. 30.5.
Every Word of God is pure, he is a Shield unto them that put their trust in
him. So Ajax of Ulysses, when Ulysses was in danger, and Ajax bestrid him with
his Shield, and saved his Life: Ovid Met. l. 13.
Opposui molem Clypei, texique iacentem,
Servauique Animam.
Clypeus, Serve. in Virg. Aeneid. 7. and apud Latin. Ling. Auctor. p. 607.
says Servius of the Greek Word (...), for that it hides, and covers the
Body, which would otherwise be exposed to the Blows of the Enemy. Isid l. 18.
c. 12.
Isidore of (...), which signifies the same. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 35. c. 3.
Pliny o^ (...), of the chasing, or engraving that was therein. Vid. Isid. Loc.
cit.
Others of an old Latin Word Cluere, which did signify to fight, or to be
well reputed of, of Cluco, Clues, not Cluo, Cluis, for the Words are diverse.
It was of a round Form, and therefore Virgil as he compares Polyphemus his
Eye to such a Shield, Virg. Aeneid. l. 3.
Argolici Clypei, aut Phoebeae Lampadis instar: so Ovid not only compares the
Sun in the Firmament thereunto, but calls it by the selfsame Name.

Ovid. Met. l. 15.
Ipse Dei Clypeus, Terra cum tollitur ima
Mane rubet.
Howbeit the Word in the Original is CATSINNAH, which though Tremellius
interpret Clypeus, yet Arias Montanus, and the Vulgar, have Scutum, which
comes of the Greek (...), a Steph. Thesaurus in Verbo Scutum.
Skin, or Hide, for that they were made of Hides. Both which words, Clypeus,
and Scutum, though they herein differ, that Clypeus belongs to Footmen, and
Scutum to Horsemen, as Isid. ^oc cit. Vid. Turneb. l. 11. c. 27.
Isidore observes: yet for matter of protecting, there is no difference at all.
Only this one thing let me remember before I pass from hence, that Demaratus
being demanded why they were accounted infamous at Laecedemon, who had lost
their Targets, not their Head-peeces, or their Corselets: for that these Things
Plut. Apopth. Lacon. Hence that of the Lacedemonian Mother to her Son: (...).
Cum hoc inquit, aut in hoc redi Auson. Epig. 24.
said he, they bear for their own Safety; but the Target for the Safety of all
the Army. And thus is the Lord a Defense unto the Righteous, not that he uses
any such Shields, it were Folly so to think, but for we are under him as safe,
nay more by much, then Shields can make us.

But why is it here said, that He shall defend them with his Favorable
Kindness, and not rather with his Power? The Holy Ghost, Marlorat. in hunc Ps.
says Marlorat, had rather ascribe the Benefit of his Protection to his
Favorable Kindness, then to his Power, thereby the better to confirm the
Minds of the Weak. For his Favorable Kindness includes his Power, and all
that belongs thereunto, but his Power does not include his Favorable
Kindness. Nor ought we to carry our selves Proudly, and Insolently hereupon,
that thus we are defended, but as the Apostle gives us counsel, to work out
our Salvation with (...). Phil 2.12
Fear and Trembling. The Certainty, and Assurance of our Salvation, being not
such as whereby a Man is merely- Secure, and made absolutely out of doubt, but
Dr Abbot his Defense of the Reform. Cath. Part. 2. c. 3. p. 256.
such as many times is assembled, and shaken with many Difficulties, and
Fears, and Doubts, which often do intricate, and perplexe the Soul of the
Righteous, and Faithful Man. And again: Dr Abbot. Ib. p. 289.
The Truth of God is always alike, not subject to Alteration, never increased,
or diminished; but our Faith is greater, or less; sometimes has a Full, and
sometimes a Waine, and to us the Truth of God is according to our Faith, and
according to our apprehension, and feeling of it. Wherein we are variable, and
diverse, even after the manner of Peter's Faith, of whom S. Austen Aug. de Verb.
Dom. Ser. 13.
says, Peter was the Pattern of us all, sometimes he believes, sometimes he
wauereth; one while he confesses Christ to be Immortal, an other while he is
afraid least Christ should die. In a word, All our Prose may be concluded in
that Distick of the Poet, applying to our Savior CHRIST, what he does to
Augustus Caesar, and putting in FAITH in steed of Hope.

Ovid. Trist. l. 1. Eleg. 1.
Spes mihi magna subit, cum TE mitissime CAESAR,
Spes mihi, respicio cum MEA FACTA, cad^t.
Fit mi^i magna FIDES cum TE mitissime IESV: At mihi respitio, cum MEA FACTA,
cadit.
Great is my FAITH, when I on thee
Sweet SAVIOVR cast an Eye:
But when I look on my MIS-DEEDS,
That Greatness seems to die.
Unless we would mend one thing more, namely that where the Poet begins with
CAESAR, and ends with his own MISDEEDS: we begin with our MISDEEDS, and end
with our SAVIOVR. As if so be we should use those Words of our Prophet in an
other Ps. 130.3. last Translat.
place: If thou Lord should mark Iniquity; O Lord, who shall stand? But
there is Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.

PSALM. VI. Domine ne in Furore.
1 O Lord, rebuke me not in thine Indignation: neither chasten me in thy
Displeasure.
2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me, for my Bones
are vexed.
3 My Soul is also sore troubled: but Lord, how long will thou punish me?
4 Turn thee, O Lord, and deliver my Soul: O save me for thy Mercies sake.
5 For in Death no man remembers thee: and who will give thee Thanks in the
Pit?
6 I am Weary of my Groaning, every Night wash I my Bed: and water my Couch with
my Tears.
7 My Beauty is gone for very trouble: and worn away because of all mine
Enemies.
8 Away from me all ye that work Vanity: for the Lord h^th heard the Voice of
my Weeping.
9 The Lord has heard my Petition: the Lord will receive my Prayer.
10 All mine Enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back, and put to shame suddenly.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis is the First of those Psalms, which are called the Seven POENITENTIALL
Psalms, which in our Account are these, The 6, the 32, the 38, the 51, the
102, the 130, and lastly the 142. I say in our Account, for they are otherwise
reckned in the Vulgar (all but the Sixth) though the Psalms be the same. As
for example, the 32, is the 31; the 38, the 37; the 51, the 50; and so forth.
The Reason is, for that the Ninth Psalm, which the Hebrews divide into Two,
namely into the Ninth and Tenth, the Vulgar Translation makes but One. But then
to make up an Hundred and Fifty, for so many there are, both with the Vulgar,
and the Hebrews, the 146, and the 147, which are but One Psalm with the
Hebrews, the Vulgar makes Twain. So that howsoever they did disagree toward
the Beginning, they accord again toward the End; Like as the Jews and
Gentiles parted themselves in the Beginning of the World, who shall both of
them join again toward the Romans 11.^6. Vid. Coel. Sec. Cur. de Amplit. Regni
caelest. and de Iud. Vocat. ante extrem. Iudicij diem. Printed. 1617.
End, and Consummation thereof.

They are called POENITENTIALL Psalms for that upon the knowledge of our
Sins, and acknowledging of the Wrath of God to follow thereupon, Frid.
Balduinus in 7. Ps. Poenitent. in Prolegom. Vid. ^olet in Ps. 31 and Innocent.
in 7. Ps. Poenitent. Prooem.
they show us how to fly to the Mercy of the most Highest with an earnest
Repentance and hearty Sorrow. Now howsoever there are many more of this
Argument amongst the Psalms, yet Venerable Antiquity made choice of these
Seven, partly in respect of the Number of Seven so religiously observed of
Wrighters both Sacred and Profane: partly in respect of the Seven Days of
the Week, that forasmuch as we had need of Repentance every Day, therefore
every Day should have a several Psalm, to be a Remembrancer unto us to that
purpose. Memorable is that which is Possidonius de vita Augustini. c. 31.
related of S. Austen, who lying on his Deathbed caused these Seven
Poenitentiall Psalms to be painted on the Wall over against him where he lay,
and so would he still behold them, and in Beholding, read them, and in Reading
them Weep amain.

Concerning the Analysis of this Psalm, framed it is, partly by way of
Petition: partly by way of Reprehension. In which Psalm the Prophet David
perfourmeth two things: First, he turns himself to the Lord in certain
Soliloquies unto him: Secondly, he turns himself to his Enemies, and
Expostulateth with them. First, concerning the Lord, he makes his Humble
Petition to him, to mitigate his Punishments toward him, and that in the
First, Second, Third, and Fourth Verses; Secondly, he gives the Reason: First,
for if he continue them, there remains nothing for him but Death, which as
the Case then stood was not so convenient for him, as it is in the Fifth Verse;
Secondly, for they had wrought in him Repentance to the full, as it is in the
Sixth and Seventh Verses. Concerning his Enemies, he bids them Avaunt, as it
is in the Eight Verse; partly for his Prayer was heard, as it is in part of
that Verse, and part of the Ninth; partly for it should be effected what he
desired of the Lord, as it is in part of the same Verse, but Principally in the
Tenth.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse. 1. O Lord Rebuke me not in thine Indignation: neither chasten me in thy
displeasure.] Concerning the Word LORD. I have spoken Expos. on Ps. 3.1. p. 64.
before, only this I may add in this place, that it is in this Psalm repeated
no less then Five times, as First in this First Verse; Twice in the Second;
the Fourth time in the Third; and the Fifth time in the Fourth. No doubt but a
most vehement Affection it was, that caused the Prophet to use it so
oftentimes. Ioash the King of Israel coming to visit Elisha the Prophet as he
was upon his Deathbed: the Prophet wild the King to take his Arrows and to
Smite them on the ground. The King took the Arrows, smote Thrice with them
and ceased. Whereupon the Prophet waxing Angry, Oh, 2. King. 13.19
says he, thou should have Smitten Five or Six times, then had thou
Smitten Syria til thou had consumed it: whereas now thou shall Smite Syria
but Thrice. Syria was one of those that with Ephraim, and the Son of
Remaliah, as it is in Esayes Esaias. 7.5.
Prophecy, took evil Counsel against Judah to vex it, and make a Breach
therein, and to set up a King in the Midst of it. This Syria, and Ephraim, and
the Son of Remaliah, we may Interpret by way of Allegory to be the Prophets
Enemies in this Psalm. Concerning whom as he Smyt^s the Ground of his Heart no
less then Five times here in this Psalm with this Arrowe of his, LORD, so he
Smote his Enemies till he had consumed them, as it is in the last Verse of
this Psalm. But to leave the Word Lord, and to come to the Words that follow.

Whereas the Prophet requesteth here not to be Rebuked in Indignation, nor
chastned in Displeasure, he requesteth not simply not to be rebuked or
chastned at all, for, what Son is he Heb. 12.7.
says the Apostle, whom the Father chastneth not? But if ye be without
Chastisement, whereof all are Partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons,
and what the Spuria Vu^lamina non dabunt radices altas, Sapient 4.3. Vulg.
(...).
Bo^ke of Wisdom says of Bastards, is well known. Again, it were against
the Justice of God that there should be no Punishment at all for Sin, though
it be in his own Children. For a; Abraham in another case Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right? So was it our Saviors
Conclusion, that they which did sin alike should have like Punishment.
Suppose ye, Luc. 13, 3.
says our Savior, that these Galileans were Sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay: but except ye repent ye
shall all likewise Perish. Or those Eighteen upon whom the Tower in Siloe
fell, and slew them, think ye that they were Sinners above all men that dwelt
in Jerusalem? I tell you nay; but except ye Repent ye shall always likewise
Perish. Indeed sometimes there is some difference, and therefore our Prophet in
another Psalm, The Righteous shall be punished, Ps. 37.29.
says he, as for the Seed of the Ungodly it shall be rooted out.

The Prophets Request then in this place, is to be delivered from Punishments,
not in Toto, as they say, but in Tanto: not wholly and altogether, but so far
forth as it might seem to proceed from an angry and wrathful Hand. With how
great circumspection, Wisd. 12.21.
says the Wisdom of Solomon, did thou Judge thine own Sons, unto whose
Fathers thou have sworn, and made Covenants of good Promises? Therefore
whereas thou do Chasten us, thou scourgest our Enemies a Thousand times more,
to the intent that when we Judge, we should carefully think of thy Goodness,
and when we our selves are Judged, we should look for Mercy.

But what? Is there Indignation then, and Displeasure in the Highest? Is he
subject to Passions as we our selves are? No; the Lord is not as sinful Man,
Fury is not in me, Esaias. 27.4.
says he. These Words then, Displeasure and Indignation, are spoken here of
God according to the Nature and Property of Men, who when they Punish severely,
use to be Furious in their Punishments, and so the Lord is said to be. This it
was that Job experimented, and which the Prophet now feared. Thou huntest me,
Job. 10.16.
says Job, as a fierce Lion: and again thou show thy self mavelous upon
me, Thou renuest thy Witnesses, that is, thy Plagues, against me, and
increasest thine Indignation upon me; Changes and War are against me.

Verse. 2. Have mercy upon me O Lord, for I am weak O Lord, Heal me, for my
Bones are vexed.] From the Lords Justice in the former Verse, he Appealeth in
this Verse unto his Mercy, and of Mercy has been spoken Expos. on Ps. 4.1. p.
88.
before. Nor is the Prophet at a wrong Door in craving these Alms, forasmuch
as the Lords Title is, 2. Cor. 1.3.
The Father of Mercies, and the God of all Comfort. The Mercy here meant is a
Commiseration over his Miseries, a Tender Compassion toward himself, that
suffered Affliction: which how well it agrees to God above, witness the Words
of the Apostle S Paul: Heb. 4.15.
For we have not an High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of
our Infirmities, but was in all Points Tempted like as we are, yet without
Sin. His Conclusion there is, Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throane
of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of Need.
And again in the same Heb. 2.18.
Epistle, In that he himself has Suffered being Tempted, he is able to
succor them that are Tempted.

Now that here was the Time of Need, wherein this Help of Grace was to be
found, witness the Words of the Prophet here, for that he was Weak, and his
Bones vexed, which Weakness of his what it was, though it be not here
expressed, yet may we gather by the Circumstances. Infirmum non se vocat quia
Aegrotat, sed quia Deiectus ac Fractus sit: He calls not himself Weak in this
place by reason of any Sickness, Calvin in hunc Ps.
says Calvin, but for he was Dejected and Cast down, by reason of his Broken
and Contrite Heart. A Case which oftentimes happens to the dearest Children of
God, though sometimes they have Boldness again, and Vndauntednesse of Courage
against all Opposition whatsoever.

By the Vexing of his Bones here the Prophet perhaps means not his Bones
indeed, but Firmamentum Animae vel Fortitudinem, as Aug. in hunc Ps.
S. Austen interprets it, the very Strength of his Soul, suppose his Faith, or
Hope, or so forth: Praecipuum Robur suum, as Calvin. in hunc Ps.
Calvin terms it, his Might, his Strength, Excellency of Dignity, or
Excellency of Power: or if so be he meant his Bones indeed, then as Iansen.
in hunc loc.
Iansenius observes, they are put for the Members of his Body by an usual
Synecdoche among the Hebrews.

Verse. 3. My Soul is also sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou punish
me.] The Spirit of a Man, Prou. 18.14.
says Solomon, will sustain his Infirmity, but a Wounded Spirit who can
bear? That is, says the Note in the Margent of our Former Translation: The
Mind can well bear the Infirmity of the Body, but when the Spirit is Wounded,
that is, the Mind it self, it is a thing Unsupportable. If we Reply as did the
Disciples of our Savior in another Case, when our Savior had told them that
it was easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, then for a Rich
man to enter into the Kingdom of God, Who then can be saved: so, who then can
be sustained? who can possibly be supported? The Answer must be as our
Saviors there was, Mat. 19.25.
With Men it is impossible, but not with God, for with God all things are
possible. The Lord, 1. Sam. 2.6.
says Hannah, kills and makes alive, he brings down to the Grave, and
brings up. Words which She had learnt, no doubt, of Moses the Prophet, in his
Book of Deuteronomie. Deuteronomy. 32.39


Howbeit the Prophet here in the mean time is driven to such Extremities, that
he is feign to come to VSQVE QVO, to How long he should be Punished? It seems
he was long in Punishing then, and it was not with him as at other times, Ps.
30 5.
Heavines may endure for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning: no, but
happily he endured many Nights, many Mornings in this plight. So the Prophet
here in this place, Vsque quo? How long? but especially in another Ps. 13.1.
Psalm, How long will thou forget me O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide
thy Face from me? How long shall I seek Counsel in my Soul, and be so vexed
in my Heart! how long shall mine Enemies triumph over me? How long? and How
long? and again How long? and How long again the fourth time? Indeed it is Long
to us, but it is our Infirmity which makes us think that Long, which we have
not in a Tryce. Just for all the world like those that are Sick, especially,
if in their Sickness they be Choleric to. How hasty, Aug. in Ps. 36
says S. Austen, are sick Men to have their Wills? Nothing seems so long
unto them as while the Cup they call for, is in fetching. They who do attend
them make all the speed they can, and all for he should be pleased, and yet the
Sick Man, When? why When I say? When will you bring it me? When shall I have
it? They make as much have as possible they may, and yet that which they with
so much have endeavor to perform, thy Sickness makes it seem long unto
thee. But it is a good Note and fit to this purpose, which S. Austen has upon
this Psalm. Aug. in hunc Ps.
That which is easily Cured, is not greatly cared for, the Difficulty of
Healing makes us take the greater heed when Health is once obtained. And again,
Aug. Ib.
The Prophet is in this long Perplexity, that hereby he might know how great
the Punishment is that is prepared for those that will in no wise be
Converted, when they that are Converted find so great difficulty in obtaining
of Pardon: as it is written, 1. Pet. 4.18.
says he, in another place, If the Righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the Ungodly, and the Sinner appear?

Verse. 4. Turn thee O Lord, and deliver my Soul: Oh save me for thy Mercies
sake.] Himself being now converted to the Lord; his Petition to the Lord now
is, that the Lord would be converted unto him, according unto that of the Lord
himself in the Prophet Zachary, Turn ye unto me, Zach. 1.3.
says the Lord of Hoasts, and I will turn unto you, says the Lord of Hoasts.
Now what he here meant by the Lords Turning unto him, he explicateth in the
Words that follow, namely in delivering his Soul, and saving him for his
Mercies sake.

First for his Soul likely enough that his Life is meant thereby, being now
(as it were) at the last cast, and upon the Co^fines of Death. For howsoever
the Soul is sometimes taken for that Spiritual, and best Part of Man, whereby
we understand, and discourse of things; sometimes for the Will, and Affections,
whereof the Soul is the Seat; yet here in this place considering the
Sequences, it may be taken for Life, by the Figure Metanomia, for that the
Soul is Cause of Life.

Secondly, where he petitioneth to be Saved, and that is the Sum of his
Request, he took no doubt the right course in making his Repair unto God. For
as this our Prophet acknowledges elsewhere, that he is the Ps. 17.7.
Savior of them that put their trust in him; so the Lord says of himself,
Esaias 43.11.
I, even I am the Lord, and besides me there is no Savior. And again, Esaias
45.21.
There is no God else beside me a just God and a Savior, there is none beside
me. The like has the Prophet Hos. 13.4.
Hosea. True it is, that the Word to SAVE is applied to Others to, either
Spiritually, or Corporally, as Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4.16.
Take heed unto thy self, and unto the Doctrine: continue in them: for in
doing this, thou shall both save thy self, and them that hear thee; and S.
James to this purpose, Iam. 5.19.
Brethren, if any of you do err from the Truth, let him know that he which
converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Way, shall save a Soul from Death.
So Ministers by Preaching; Magistrates by Protecting; Christians by Admonishing
do save. But thus to save, is to serve Gods Providence, only as a means in
the preservation of others, as Instruments under God, who for their Service
herein, honors them with the Title belonging to Himself.

Thirdly, where he pleads not Merit, but Mercy, which Merit no doubt he might
have pleaded as well as any our Merit-mongers whatsoever, it teaches us what
we in like case should bring as a Present to the true JOSEPH our Governor,
not a Genesis 43.11.
little Balm, and a little Honey, Spices, and Mirrhe, Nuts, and Almonds of our
own Works and Deeds, but only his own MERCY. Periculosa habitatio eorum qui
in Meritis suis sperant: periculosa, quia ruinosa. Dangerous is their Dwelling
Bern. in Psalm. Qui habitat. Ser. 1.
says S. Bernard, that trust in their own Merits, it is a Dangerous, for it
is a Ruinous Dwelling. When an House is ready to tumble down, Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 8. c. 28.
says Pliny, the Mice go out of it before; and first of all the Spiders with
their Webbes fall down; and surely we should be more brutish then either
Spiders or Mice, should we trust to such ruinous Dangers, as such Confidence
would bring upon us.

Verse. 5. For in Death no man remembers thee, and who will give thee thanks
in the Pit?] Two Sorts of Men have lived in the World (would God we might say
Have lived, as Tully Plut. in Cic.
said Vixerunt, of Some, whom he had caused to be executed as Traitors, for
so are these against God) but two Sorts of Men have lived in the World, that
deny the Zanch. de Oper. Dei. Part. 3. l. 2. c. 8.
Immortality of the Soul: the One of them absolutely: the Other by a
Consequence. Of those which do it absolutely, we have now no cause to speak,
cause we shall have sufficient, when we come to the Fourteenth Psalm. They
which do it by a Consequence, are such, as hold that the Souls dye when as
the Bodies do dye, and that they rise not till the Bodies rise again. They
dare not deny flatly, Zanch Ib.
says Zanchius, the Souls Immortality, for that it is so manifest throughout
the whole Scriptures, but what they dare, that they do; they deprive it of all
Sense, of all Knowledge, of all Affection, and Operation, stiffly maintaining,
that it sleeps forsooth till the Day of the Bodies Resurrection, and then
that it shall be wakened, and not till then. Among the several Parcels of
Scripture, which they have heaped up to this purpose, this of this Psalm is
one, and as many besides in the Psalms, as describe Man to be of such a
Condition, as that he cannot after Death praise the Name of the Lord any more.
As namely where David Ps. 88.10.
says, Do thou show Wonders among the Dead: or shall the Dead rise up
again and praise thee? Shall thy loving Kindness be showed in the Grave; or thy
Faithfulness in Destruction? Shall thy wondrous Works be known in the Dark,
and thy Righteousness in the Land where all things are forgotten? And again,
Ps. 115.17.
The Dead praise not thee, O Lord: neither all they that go down into the
Silence: but we, that is, we which live, will praise the Lord from this time
forth for evermore. And yet again, Ps. 30.9.
What profit is there in my Blood, when I go down to the Pit? Shall the Dust
give Thanks unto thee, or shall it declare thy Truth? But there is as Zanchius
Zanch. vbi supra.
observes, a twofold Praise: the One, when in this World we show forth unto
Others the Lords Goodness toward us, that Others also by our example, may be
stirred up to put their Confidence in God, and to worship God in like sort, and
of this kind of Praises are the foresaid Places to be understood: The Other,
when the Praises of God are reserved for the World to come, to be performed by
the blessed Saints that shall at that time praise the Lord. And that they
praise the Lord in the World to come, witness those several places in the
Revelation, that might be brought to this purpose. Rev. 5.13.
Every Creature which is in Heaven, and in the Earth, and under the Earth, and
such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them heard I, saying, BLESSING,
HONOR, GLORY, AND POWER BE UNTO HIM THAT SITS UPON THE THRONE, AND UNTO THE
LAMB FOR EVER AND EVER. Again, Reu. 14.2.
I heard a Voice from Heaven, at the Voice of many Waters, and as the Voice of
a great Thunder: And I heard the Voice of Harpers, harping with their Harpes.
And they sung, as it were, a new Song before the Throne, and before the Four
Beasts, and the Elders: and so forth. And again in a third place, Reu. 19.1.
And after these things I heard a great Voice of much People in Heaven, saying,
ALLELVIA: SALVATION, AND GLORY, AND HONOR, AND POWER UNTO THE LORD OUR GOD.

By this then that has been spoken, we may gather why the Prophet here in this
place, abhors Death so much. Not for it was a means to conveigh him to a
better Life, where was as S. Gregory Greg. in 7. Ps. Poenitent. and Aug. Medit.
c. 17.
speaks, Et certa securitas, and secura Aeternitas, and aeterna
Tranquillitas, and tranquila Foelicitas, and foelix Suavitas, and suavis
Iucunditas: both assured Security, and secure Aeternity, and eternal
Tranquillity, or Quietness, and quiet Foelicity, or Happiness, and happy
Pleasantnes, and pleasant Delightfulnes: but for it did deprive him here in
this World of that kind of Serving of the Lord, which by way of Example was so
necessary to Many that lived in those days. Who knows not the Apostle S.
Paul's distraction in like case, who howsoever he had a Phil. 1.23.
Desire to depart, and to be with Christ, yet seeing it was more needful for
the Philippians, that he should abide in the Flesh, he confesses himself in
a straight, and what to chose he wotteth not. Howbeit here let us consider what
the Prophet intimates in this place, namely that if so be he might live, he
would then remember his Maker, and Preserver, and Give him Thanks, that is, he
would praise him all the Days of his Life. A point that Many promise, when
they are in like extremities, but perform so seeldome, that it has been the
Cause of a common Proverb, and Lemnius de occult. Not. Mirac. l. 2. c. 29. See
my L. of Cant. upon Jonas. Lect. 17.. 5.
Lemnius discourses thereof at large, That no man in a manner is bettered in
Life and Conversation, either by reason of his long Disease, or by long
Travailing on the Seaes.

Verse. 6. I am weary of my groaning, every Night wash I my Bed: and water my
Couch with my Tears.] No doubt the Prophet had in this sort groaned, and
greeved exceeding long, otherwise he could hardly, nay he would not have been
so weary. He was not ignorant by all likelihood, how sweetly these Groans of
his, did sound in Gods Ears. Quoties te in conspectu Domini video suspirantem,
Spiritum sanctum non dubito aspirantem: cum intueor flentem, sentio
ignoscentem. As often as I see thee sighing in the sight of God, Cyp. de Coena
Dom.
says S. Cyprian. I doubt not but in those Sighs of thine, the holy Spirit
does breathe: when I see thee weeping, me thinks he is then forgiving. A
special good Noate for Many, who if according to their hasty Affections, they
have not present Help from the Lord, either their Prayers they say, are not
heard, or the Lord deals with them, as with no Body else, or they say with the
King of Israel, 2. Kings 6.23
Behold this Evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer?
Certainly there is no Wearines to this Weakness, and they that are thus
hasty, little remember how long the Lord stayed for them before their
Conversion. Sustinuit te, sustine illum: God Aug. Hom. 11.
says S. Austen, has staid thy leisure, stay thou his, an other while:
Sustinuit te, vt mutares Vitam tuam malam: sustine illum, vt coronet Vitam tuam
bonam: He has borne with thee, till thou should change thy bad Life, bear
with him now till he crown thy good Life. They are the Words of the Psalmist
himself, Ps. 27.16.
O tarry thou the Lords leisure: be strong, and he shall comfort thy Heart. Have
thou not known Esaias 40.28.
says Esaias, Have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the
Creator of the Ends of the Earth, faints not, neither is weary? He gives
power to the faint, and to them that have no Might, he increases Strength. The
Vision Hab. 2 3.
says Habakuk, is yet for an appointed time, but at the End it shall speak,
and not lie: though it tar^y, wait for it, because it will surely come, it
will not tarry.

But how is it that here he says, that Every Night he washes his Bed, and
waters his Couch with his Tears? What? Every Night? and that with Tears? Is
it probable? nay, is it possible? No doubt but the Speech is Hyperbolicall, and
yet like a true Quintil. Instit. Orat. l. 8. c. 6.
Hyperbole, though it be Vltra Fidem, beyond belief: yet is it not Vltra
modum, beyond all measure. No doubt but he meant hereby Plenty of Tears, like
as Scipio in Tully, Tull. Sem. Scip.
Equidem vim Lachrymarum profudi. We have diverse the like in holy Scripture, I
will make thy Seed Genesis 13.1^.
says GOD to Abraham, as the Dust of the Earth. Quis non videat quam sit
incomparabiliter amplior Arenae numerus, quam potest esse omnium Hominum ab
ipso Adam, vsque ad terminum Saeculi? Who sees not Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 16. c.
21.
says S. Austen, how incomparably the Dust of the Earth is greater then can be
the number of all Men from Adam himself to the End of the World, how much more
then the Seed of Abraham, which Seed in comparison of the Multitude of the
Wicked is only in a few: albeit even those Few do make an innumerable
Multitude signified by the Dust of the Earth, according to the Figure
Hyperbole. But now concerning Tears.

Tears Ambros. Tom. 3. Ser. 46.
says S. Ambrose, are as it were a speechless Praying, they crave not pardon,
and yet they obtain it, they open not their case, and yet they find Mercy.
Why? but for the Prayers of Tears are much more profitable, then the Prayers
of Words. Words in a Prayer may deceive, Tears cannot; Words many times do
their Errands by halues, Tears make demonstration of the whole Affection. And
S. Austen to this purpose, Sufficit Auribus Imber Oculorum, Fletus citius audit
quam Voces. To the Ears of God above, Aug de Temp. Ser. 226.
says S. Austen, a Shower of Tears is sufficient, he hears our Weeping much
sooner then our Words.

Concerning the two Synonimaes here, Washing, and Watering, washing his Bed,
and watering his C^uch, it is a pretty difference that S. Austen observes
between them, Potest aliquid in superficie lavari, Rigatio vero ad interiora
permanat quod significat Fletum vsque ad Cordis intima. A thing Aug. in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, may be washed superficially, and on the outside only, but
watering pierces even to the inward Parts, which signifies that Weeping must
in as far as the very Heart Root.

Verse. 7. My Beauty is gone for very trouble, and worn away because of all
mine Enemies.] The Beauty of David, what it was when he was a Child, the
Scripture declares to v^, namely how 1. Sam. 16.12.
He was ruddy, and withal of a beautiful Countenance, and goodly to look to
No doubt when he came to Years, he retained the same still; for though Beauty
be commonly variable, and al corporeal things Ambros. Hexam. l. 6. c. 6.
says S. Ambrose, do fade, and wither away, by reason of the access of Age
or excess of Sickness: yet with some it is not so, but the Elder they wax, the
more comely, and it is strange to see how some men have carried their Age. To
say nothing of them before the Flood, who lived so many Hundred years: Adam,
930, Seth, 912, Cain, 910, and who lived least, 700 years, being perfected in
many respects with a most excellent proportion of Humors, and as it likely Vid.
Coll. of Hist. by Thomas Fortescue. and Printed by my FATHER Ao 1576.
Fruits, and Herbs of far greater Efficacy, and Virtue in those Days, then
since the Earth was cursed: Moses Deuteronomy. 34.7.
says the Scripture, was an Hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
Eyes were not dim, nor his natural Force abated. And Caleb to Joshua, Josh.
14.11.
Forty years old was I, when Moses sent me to espy out the Land, I am this
Day Fourscore and five years old. As yet I am as strong this Day, as I was in
the Day that Moses sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength
now, for war, both to go out, and to come in. The Prophet David was likely
enough to have been such an one, who before this Accident befell, carried his
Years it should seem no man better. Howbeit now the Case was altered, and
Sin had made such a Breach, as that where so much Beauty was, there was
nothing now but Deformity. When thou Ps. 39.12.
says he in an other place, do chasten man for Sin, thou make his Beauty
to consume away like as it were a Moth fretting a Garment, every Man therefore
is but Vanity. Omnis Animi Dolor statim se prodit in Vultu. All Grief of Mind
Mollerus in hunc Ps.
says One, appears presently in the Countenance: and therefore King Solomon,
Prove. 17.22.
A merry Heart does good, like a Medicine, but a broken Spirit dries the
Bones. A good instruction by the way, for Women, who so much esteem of their
Beauty, and for fear of marring thereof, will not suffer the Sun to touch
it, but the greatest Enemy unto it, is rather Sin, then the Sun; the One
with his Beams burns them not so much, as they are scorched by the Other.
Though Sin be as cold as Ice to: and therefore Aug. in Ps. 125.
S. Austen, Illigati Frigore Peccatorum gelavimus, we are frozen with the Cold,
and benumming of our Sins.

But how is it that the Prophet adds, that his Beauty is worn away because
of his Enemies? went the consideration of Enemies so near him? took he them
so nigh to Heart? For doubtless it could not be but an extraordinary anguish of
Mind that made such a Metamorphosis of him. Anguish of Mind indeed, if it be
extreme, works strange Effects, and that in an instant. One only Night has
been sufficient to make a young Man that was fresh, and of a lively Hew,
gray headed by the Morning. Lemnius de Complex. l. 2. c. 2.
Lemnius tells of one, Scal. de Subtle. Exere 312.
Scaliger of an other, that have been Examples in this kind. But would our
Prophet, nay could our Prophet be so much moved by his Enemies? Yes: for his
Enemies by all likelihood, gave out hereupon, that what he suffered in this
kind, was most worthily deserved. Like as the Barbarians Act. 28.4.
said of Paul, when they saw the Viper on his Hand. No doubt this Man is a
Murderer, whom though he has escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to
live. Indeed there is nothing goes nearer the Heart of a good and godly Man,
then the hasty Judgments of Others upon him, by reason of those Crosses,
which it pleases the Lord to send him. Hoc vnum tantum dixerim, vltimam esse
adversae Fortunae Sarcinam* quod dum Miseris aliquod Crimen assigitur, quae
perferunt, meruisse creduntur. It is Boethius de Consol. l. 1. Pros. 4. See my
L. of Cant. on Jonas. Lect. 6.. 6.
says Boethius, the heauiest Burden that Fortune can lay upon our Shoulders,
that when any Calamity does betide us, Men will streightway give out, that we
have our Deserts. This it was that wrought Job so much Trouble with his
Friends, who could by no means persuade themselves, but that so great
Calamities as those, did argue his great Offenses both to God, and to the
World. Insomuch that he was fain to make for himself many Apologies; and as
Calvin has Calvin. in Job. Conc. 1.
observed, Job maintained a good Quarrel, though he handled it but ill: his
Friends maintained a Bad one, but yet handled it too-too well. The Cause that
Job had in hand, was this: God does not always punish Men according to the
Measure of their Sins, and therefore that himself is not rejected of God, as
they would have made him to believe. On the contrary, they maintained that God
does always punish Men according to the Measure of their Sins, wherein they
entreat of Gods Providence; they entreat of his Justice; they entreat of Men's
Sins; but herein they go awry, for that hereby they wholly labor to cast
Job into Despair, in applying all to him. And this as Beza observes, his Wife
had aimed at before, when as she bade him to Bless God, and die. Satan
endeavoring (as he Saluo aliorum Interpretum Iudicio, ausim affirmare hanc
Muliorem eandem prorsus causam egisse, atque postea Iobi Amicos, quorum
d^s^eptatio subsequitur: and quidem non alia voluntate, nec alijs rationibus
impulsam. Bez. in Job c. 2.
says) to work that by her means, which afterward he thought to bring
about by those his Friends. Do thou still retain thy Integrity? Bless God,
and die. As if so be she had said; See thou not how exceeding angry God is
with thee? How, thou art now at the Pits brink, ready to give up the Ghost?
Nay, but yet while thy little Life remains (for dye instantly (she thought)
he should) give Glory unto God, as to a Righteous Judge, and esteeming the
Multitude of thy Sins, according to the Multitude of thy Calamities, which he
now sends unto thee, prepare thy self unto thy End. An Interpretation I should
well like of, did not our last Translators turn it, Curse God, and die, The
Rhemists indeed, in their Doway Bible, have BLESS in the Text, which would
serve Bezaes Interpretation exceeding well, but then their Marginall Note out
of Greg l. 3. c. 24.
Gregory, that she persuaded her Husband to Desperation and Blasphemy, marres
all that Hope that Beza might have had of them by their Translating that Word
Howbeit were Beza alive, and should say unto them: I commend you for
Translating the Word so, for so Mercerus does in his Comment, whose Translation
I follow; but it is very unlikely, that a Matron, bred up in so godly an House,
should forget herself so far, as to use such Impudency of Speech: and Jobs
Reprehension would have been in more forcible Terms, then to have said, she
spoke like a Nec eos probo qui Stultam pro Insana, and Impia interpretantur,
quod fateor interdum Hebraea Voce NABAL intelligi, and sane huic Mulieri optime
conveniret, si tam praesertim impudenter Marit^m ad Deum ipsum execrandum esset
hortata. Stulta^ igitur opponit Sapienti and Circumspectae. Bez. Ib:
Foolish Woman: No, but like a Wicked Woman: No, but like a Devilish Woman; Nay
Julian himself, that most wicked Apostata, came not to this height of Impiety
of Cursing God, only he said, Vicisti Galilaee, though there Montaigns Essays.
l. 2. c. 19.
are that think, he said not that neither: should Beza, I say, thus say, what
would our Rhemists reply again? If so be they would reply, that they but
followed the Interpretation of S. Gregory, or of the Fathers, their own
Andradius will tell them, that Experience inforceth us to confess, Andrad.
Defens. Fid. Trid. l. 2. p. 446. Edit Colon. 1580.
Nisi praeclarissimis Ingenijs, Ingraeti esse volumus, unless we will be
unthankful to most excellent Wits, that many things in the Scripture, are in
this our Age, more exactly expounded, through the Diligence of Learned Men,
then ever they have been heretofore. And so himself expounds that of Esaias 53.8.
Esaias, Who shall declare his Age? that of the Ps. 40.8.
Psalmist, Sacrifice, and Meat Offering thou would not have, but mine Ears
have thou opened: that of Genesis 20.16.
Abimeleh unto Sarah, I have given thy Brother a Thousand pieces of Silver:
far otherwise then the Fathers did. But to return to my purpose.

That which made our Prophet here so Jealous concerning the Scorning of his
Enemies, was not so much his own Worth, whereupon he might seem to stand, as
the Glory of the Lord, which by reason of these Accidents he saw trampled upon
by the Wicked, every Day more and more, as much as in them lay. Concerning our
Prophet, I nothing doubt but he had the Resolution of S. Paul, who professes
of himself that Knowledge, which many times the greatest Masters of Israel come
short of, Phil. 4.12.
I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound: euerywhere, and in all
things I am instructed, both to be Full, and to be Hungry, both to abound, and
to suffer need.

Verse. 8. Away from me all ye that work Vanity, for the Lord has heard the
Voice of my Weeping.] Of Vanity we heard Exposit. in Ps. 2.1. p 34. and Ps.
4.2. p. 93.
before, Now begins the Prophet in this place to rouse up himself, and to take
upon him his princely Courage. Away from me all ye that work Vanity. It is as
if he had said: You have now watched a long time to see whether I should
miscarry, or no; Nay you were fully persuaded I should, and now that I was
down, you imagined I should rise no more, but away, be gone, you are deceived
of your Expectation, you are frustrate of your Hopes, God the Almighty has
revived me, and Ps. 118.17.
I will not die, but live, and declare the Works of the Lord. The Reason of
this his Confidence he gives, is this: For the Lord has heard the Voice of my
Weeping. Vocem Fletus meam, id est cum Fletu coniunctam: The Voice of my
Weeping, that is, Piscat. in hunc Ps.
says Piscator, My Voice, and Weeping. Or it is elegantly said, the Voice of
Weeping, as if Weeping consisted of Words, and Sentences. Nay, as we heard out
of S. Austen even Exposit. in v. 6. p. 160.
now, He sooner hears our Tears, then our Words. Humanum Cor Lachrymas
nesciens, non modo durum, sed and impurum esse necesse est. An Heart, Bern. de
Fallacia praesent. Vit.
says S. Bernard that cannot weep, is not only hard, but foul, and filthy.
And therefore S. Ambrose, Ambros. de Obitu Valentin.
Solvamus bon^ Principi Stipendiarias Lachrymas, quia ille nobis solvit etiam
Mortis suae Stipendium: Let us pay to our King, Tears of Tribute, forasmuch as
he has paid to us the Tribute of his Death. If thou say, thou can not weep,
see thy preposterous Folly. Did thou loose any Substance of Worldly Goods, as
if thy House should be robbed; thy Ship laden with Merchandise, perish in the
Sea; thy Wife whom thou tenderly love, should chance to depart; thy Son,
thy only Son, should happen to die; thou would then weep more then
enough, thou would be a Mat. 2.1^.
Rachel, weeping for her Children, and not to be comforted, because they are
not, and when thou art like to loose thy Soul by Sin, that MARCHANT-ROYALL
of thy Body, that lovely Spouse, that only Son of thine, and chiefest Pillar
of thy Family, can thou not weep? Dulciores sunt Lachrymae Orantium, quam
Gaudia Theatrorum. The Tears of those that pray, Aug. in Ps. 127.
says S. Austen, are far more pleasing then all the Joys of the World, and
can thou not weep? Nay, some are so Womanish, that they will weep for their
little Gutuaraes Gold. Epist. p. 294.
Dogs, their Monkies, and Parakytoes, if they chance to miscarry, things but of
base Importance, and can thou not weep for thy Transgressions? Thus S.
Austen, he could weep for Didoes Death, that slew her self for Love, and yet
had not a Tear to shed in his own behalf, who was continually a-dying. O
Deus meus, Vita mea, quid miserius Misero non miserante seipsum, and flente
Didonis Mortem, quae fiebat amando Aeneam, non flente autem Mortem suam, quae
fiebat non amando Te. Oh my God, my Life, Aug. Confess. l. 1. c. 13.
says S, Austen, what more miserable, then a miserable Man, not pitying
himself; and mourning the death of Dido, miscarrying for her love to Aeneas,
and not mourning his own death whereby he was to miscarry, and all for he
loved not thee. But I say of Tears, as Tertullian Tertull. de Patient.
said of Patience, Absit a Seruo Christi tale inquinamentum vt Patientia
maioribus Tentationibus praeparata, in frivolis excidat: Far be from the
Servant of Christ such Pollution, as that Patience prepared for the bearing of
the greatest Tentations, should be lost in Trifles: so far be it from us that
Tears which should be spent for our Sins, should be spent so vainly. But to
return where I left.

That the Prophet here says, The Lord has heard the Voice of his Weeping, it
is not so to be understood, as if he were presently to be delivered, and there
an End. No; but for his Faith did assure him that though he were not as yet
Delivered, yet that the Lord heard him notwithstanding. For what is Faith, Heb.
11.1.
says the Apostle to the Hebrews, but the Substance of Things hoped for, and
the Evidence of Things not seen. And yet it may be that this Psalm, and Many
other in this kind, were penned after his Deliverance, as Calvin Calv. in Ps.
5.2
speaks in General, and Jans. in hunc Ps.
Iansenius in Particular of this Psalm, and so the Event did then declare what
here is delivered in these Words.

Verse. 9. The Lord has heard my Petition, the Lord will receive my Prayer.]
The often Repetition of one and the self same Sentence, Aug. in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, declares not so much the Necessity it has to be spoken,
as the Joy and Affection of him that speaks it. For they that are in Joy so
use to speak, as if it were not enough to speak what they speak, once only
over, but over and over again. Howbeit where the Prophet here says that the
Lord has not only heard his Prayer, but will receive it, the difference is to
be observed betwixt Hearing and Receiving. King Solomon did hear his Mothers
Request which she made for 1. Kings. 2.23
Adoniah, but he was so far from receiving it, that it cost Adoniah his life.
Indeed special care is still to be taken, what we presume to ask at Gods
hands. S. James has an Elegant Gradation to that purpose. Ye lust, Iam. 4.2.
says he, and have not, ye desire to have and cannot obtain, ye have not,
because ye ask not, ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss.
Socrates, the Terrestrial Oracle of Humane Wisdom, as Valerius Maximus Val.
Max. l. 7. c. 2.
calls him, was of opinion that Nothing should be asked of the Immortal Gods,
but only in general Terms, that they would bestow Good Things forasmuch as
they knew what to every one in particular would prove most profitable. For we
many times, says Socrates, desire that which it were better for us to be
without. His Instances are in Riches, Honor, Kingdoms, and Marriage. Change
but the Number there, GOD for Gods, and somewhat it is that Socrates says, but
the Oracle of Heaven goes farther by far, and therefore Reverend Hooker, The
Faithful, Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.. 48.
says he, have this comfort, that whatsoever they rightly ask, the same no
doubt but they shall receive so far as may stand with the Glory of God, and
their own everlasting Good, unto either of which two, it is no virtuous Man's
purpose to seek or desire to obtain any thing prejudicial.

Verse. 10. All mine Enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be
turned back, and put to shame suddenly.] S. Austen discoursing on these
Words, Aug. in hunc Ps.
professed that he saw not how it should possibly come to pass, what here is
spoken so Generally, but only in that Day when the Rewards of the Just shall
be manifest, and the Punishments of the Wicked For now says he, in the mean
time, they are so far from being confounded, that is, ashamed of what they
do, that they still insult upon the Godly, and so far prevail with the
Weak, that they rather confound them, that is, make them ashamed of Professing
the Name of Christ. But it is likely enough the Prophet here meant, that even
in this World to, that which he speaks should come to pass, and he saw no
doubt with his own Eyes, to what a shameful Death many of his Adversaries did
come, 1. Sam. 31.4.
Saul upon his own Sword, 2. Sam. 17.23
Achitophel with his own Halter, 2. Sam 18.9. Vid. Exposit. on Ps. 3.1. p. 63.
Absolon with his own Hair. Not a Day almost past over his Head, but he had
some visible Monument, or other, of Gods great good Love toward him in the
Confusion of his Enemies, ^. Sam. 3.1.
David waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of Saul waxed weaker and
weaker.

But it is most remarkable, that here it is said, it should be Suddenly, to
the greater Terror of the Ungodly. No doubt, least they should repent, and so
be saved. Like as our Savior himself Mat. 13.15.
speaks, This Peoples Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull of
hearing, and their Eyes they have closed, least at any time they should see
with their Eyes, and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. Suet. in Iul. c. ^7.
Caesar, when he read in Xenophon the Death of Cyrus, how being at the point to
die, he gave order for his Funeral, not only slighted so lingering, and slow a
kind of Death, but wished for his part, that he when he were to die, might die
in a trice. I and the very Day before he was slain, in a Discourse that was
moved at Supper, about the best ending of a Man's Life, held that to be the
best which was sudden, and unlooked for. Talis ei Mors paene ex sententia
obtigit. He had, says Suetonius, in a manner such a Death as himself had
wished. And indeed, Mr Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. 46.
says Reverend Hooker, to such as judge things according to the sense of
natural men, and ascend no higher, suddainnes, because it shortneth their
Grief, should in reason be most acceptable. Howbeit let us, says he, which
know what it is to die as Absolon, or Ananias, and Saphyra died, let us beg of
God, that when the Hour of our Rest is come, the Patterns of our Dissolution
may be Jacob, Moses, Joshua, David, who leasurably ending their Times in Peace,
prayed for the Mercies of God, to come upon their Posterity, replenished the
Hearts of the nearest unto them, with Words of memorable Consolation,
strengthened Men in the Fear of God, gave them wholesome Instructions of Life,
and confirmed them in true Religion. In sum taught the World no less
Virtuously how to die, then they had done before, how to live.

Now as the Prophet here in this place of his Enemies, so the Scriptures of the
Wicked in general, Job 34.20.
In a moment shall they die, and the People shall be troubled at Midnight, and
pass away: and the Mighty shall be taken away without hand. Thus Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram in the Book of Number. 16.32.
Nombers; Absolon, and Achitophel in the 2. Sam. 18.9. 2. Sam. 17.23
Book of Samuel; Ananias, and Saphyra in the Act. 5.9.
Acts of the Apostles; they all perished in a Moment, and came to sudden
destruction. And it will be but a poor Comfort to us, that our Griefs are
hereby shortened, for taken on the sudden, and consequently not repenting, how
do we leap (as is said) out of the Drying Pan into the Fire, and change our
Temporal Pains in this World, for Pains Eternal. Witness our Savior, who
so oftentimes in one Chapter uses these Words; Marc. 9.44.46.48.
Where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched; that is, where
their WORM, the Worm of Conscience, shall be ever gnawing upon them, and the
FIRE, that is, Hellfire, shall never but burn them Body, and Soul, and yet
not consume them, the true SALAMANDERS in this one respect, of the World to
come.

PSALM. VII. Domine Deus meus.
1 O Lord my God, in thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that
persecute me, and deliver me.
2 Least he devour my Soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces: while there
is none to help.
3 O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing: or if there be any Wickedness
in mine Hands:
4 If I have rewarded evil unto them that dealt friendly with me: yea I have
delivered him that without any cause is mine Enemy
5 Then let mine Enemy persequute my Soul, and take me: yea let him tread my
Life down upon the Earth and lay mine Honor in the Dust.
6 Stand up O Lord in thy Wrath, and lift up thy self: because of the
Indignation of mine Enemies, arise up for me in the Judgment that thou have
commanded.
7 And so shall the Congregation of the People come about thee: for their sakes
therefore lift up thy self again.
8 The Lord shall judge the People, give sentence with me, O Lord: according to
my Righteousness, and according to the Innocence that is in me.
9 O let the Wickedness of the Ungodly come to an end: but guide thou the Just.
10 For the Righteous God tries the very Hearts, and Reins.
11 My help comes of God, which preserves them that are true of Heart.
12 God is a Righteous Judge, strong, and patient: and God is provoked every
Day.
13 If a Man will not turn, he will whet his SWord: he has bent his Bow, and
made it ready.
14 He has prepared for him the Instruments of Death: he ordains his Arrows
against the Persecutors.
15 Behold he trauaileth with Mischief: he has conceived Sorrow, and brought
forth Ungodliness.
16 He has graven, and dug up a Pit: and is fallen himself into the
Destruction that he made for Other.
17 For his travail shall come upon his own Head: and his Wickedness shall
fall upon his own Pate.
18 I will give Thanks unto the Lord, according to his Righteousness: and will
praise the Name of the Lord the most High.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis Seventh Psalm, whether it has his reference to Saul, or Semei, or to
any other of Saul's Kindred (in the Greek Title there is mentioned Cush the
Beniamite, as also in the Hebrew) as it is partly framed by way of Petition
unto God: so partly by way of Doctrine, and Instruction unto Men. David's
Prayer, and Petition to God is, First to have his Assistance, as it is in the
First Verse; least by reason of his Enemies he should utterly miscarry, as it
is in the Second; who falsely accused him, as it is in the Third, and Fourth
Verses; which Accusations could they have proved, he refused no Punishment, as
it is in the Fifth Verse. Secondly, David's Prayer, and Petition to God is, that
God himself would take the matter into his own Hands, and show in his
behalf, his Severity, and Majesty, as it is in the Sixth Verse; and that for
their sakes who were the Godly, as it is in the Seventh Verse. Thirdly, David's
Prayer, and Petition to God is, to justify him, that is, to make his Innocence
appear unto the World as it is in the Eight Verse, that so the Ungodly may be
repressed, as it is in the Ninth: and the reason of this Petition is, for the
Lord knew David, inside, and outside, even his inmost Thoughts, as it is in the
Tenth, and Eleauenth Verses. David's Doctrine, and Instruction to Men, is
concerning Gods Judgments as it is in the Twelfe Verse; wherewith he punishes
the Wicked, as it is in the Thirteenth, the Fourteenth, the Fifteenth, the
Sixteenth, and Seventeenth Verses; and therefore is to be praised, as it is in
the Eighteenth Verse.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse. 1. O Lord my God in thee have I put my trust, save me from all them
that persecute me, and deliver me.] Of LORD has been spoken Exposam Ps. 3.1.
p. 64 and Ps. 6.1. p. 149.
before, as also of Expos. on Ps. 3.7. p. 75.
GOD, and of the Pronoune My, that is so usually annexed thereunto. Besides
what it is to Expos. on Ps. 4.5. p. 102.
Trust in God, and how he is said to Expos. on Ps. 6.4 p. 155.
Save. So that nothing remains in this Verse to be showed, but only how the
Prophet here does use the Words Save, and Deliver, in respect of God only, and
yet how God does honor his Instruments, be they Ministers, or Magistrates, or
Christians in general, with the self same Titles. Like as our Savior Christ,
he is the Ioh. 8.12.
Light of the World, and yet he calls his Mat 5.14.
Apostles so; he is the Esaias. 53.7.
Lamb, and yet he calls them Luc. 10 3.
so; he is the 1. Cor. 10.4.
Rock, and yet he calls Peter Mat. 16.18.
so; he is the Mat. 14 33.
Son of God, we are the Romans 8.17.
Children of God, and if Children, says the Apostle, then Heirs, Heirs of
God, and joint Heirs with Christ.

Verse. 2. Least he devour my Soul like a Lion, and tear it in pieces while
there is none to help.] That Soul is oftentimes taken for Life, and so in
this place, has been observed Expos. on Ps. 6 4. p. 154.
before, otherwise, though Saul were a King, yet being but of that Mettle that
other Kings are made of, the Prophet David was not ignorant that he was not to
Mat. 10.28.
fear them that killed the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul. But from
Words, to come to Matter.

Our Prophet spoke in the Verse before, of his Persecutors as of Many, he
aymeth in this Second Verse at only one. One indeed might be the Fountain of
all, whether Saul, or Semei, or Cush: but if Saul, then his Subjects; if Semei
or Cush, then their Accomplices, were most likely to be against him. The Wicked
most commonly flock together in Nos Numerus sumus. Horat. Epist. l. 1. ad
Lollium.
Troops, the Godly are commonly alone like 1. King. 19.14
Elias, or 2. King. 6.17.
Elisaeus, though indeed never less alone, then when alone in such sort.

The Similitude of a Lion here annexed, is to show the manner of his Devouring
to be most Dreadful. Who will not fear, Amos 3.8.
says Amos, when the Lion has Roared. And yet the Faith of Christians that
always opened their own Mouths, has stopped the Mouths of Heb. 11.33 Dan.
6.22. Vid. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 8. c. 7.
Lions. Or if God sometimes suffered them to be devoured of Lions, it was to
make them like Ignatius, who going to his Martyrdom. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3.
c. 32. Act. and Mon. Edit. 4. p. 40. Col. 2. out of Eusebius. and S. Ierom.
Now do I begin to be a Disciple, I weigh neither Visible, nor Invisible
things, so that I gain CHRIST: let FIR^, GALLOWS, Violence of BEASTS,
Bruising of the BONES, Racking of the MEMBERS, Trampling on the BODY, and all
the PLAGVES invented by the mischief of Satan, light upon me, so that I may
win CHRIST JESUS. And again, I am the Wheat of God, I am to be grinded with
the Teeth of Beasts, that I may be found Pure Bread, or Fine Manchet.

Verse. 3. O Lord my God, if I have done any such thing, or if there be any
Wickedness in my Hands.] What this thing was, was notorious no doubt in those
Days, though now not known, so Calvin. in hunc Ps.
Calvin, Pronomen [Istud] de re Vulgo nota eum loqui significat. We may guess
it to be some one Sclander or other, that was raised upon the Prophet, where of
himself was most innocent. Who here satisfies himself in approouing his
Innocence to the Lord, and teaches us in like case what we also ought to do.
Behold, Job. 16.19.
says Job, my Witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on High. Whereas the
Sclanderers Witnesses are in Hell, and their Record from below. But what? Was
not our Prophet again to requite them with like Language? was he not to yield
them Quid pro Quo, to give them again as good as they brought? Oh no: that had
been the next way for him to suffer with them Shipwreck too, as speaks S.
Chrysostom. If one, Chrysostom. Hom. in Ps. 7.
says S. Chrysostom, about to split his Ship, and consequently to be drowned,
should speak spightfully unto thee setting on the Shore, thou would not so
much grieve thereat, as that thou would forsake thy place of safety, and hie
thee unto him to be partaker with him of his wrecke. Then thus think with thy
self, that he that wrongs thee in this sort, and speaks so spightfully of
thee, is driven by Storm and Tempest upon the Shipwreck of Anger and Wrath:
but thou if thou bearst it patiently stand safely on the Shore. But once
come to the pass that he is in, and thou drownest not him, thou d^ownest thy
self. Thus Hannah, who when Eli mistook her, but was jealous over her with
godly Jealousy, as 2. Cor. 11.2.
speaks the Apostle S. Paul How long will thou be drunken? Put away thy Wine
from thee: What Language should he have had again of many of our Gossips, and
who will seem Religious too. What? you a Minister of God, and wrong me thus
palpably? You a Minister? You a Devil. And then at every Gossipping: Out upon
him, I have done with him for ever, I would we were well rid of him, a worse, I
am sure, we cannot have. Said Hannah thus? No; but as a Monument of Patience,
and worthy to be Registered, as we see, she is, in the Book of God, No my
Lord, 1. Sam. 1.15.
says she, I am a Woman of a sorrowful Spirit: I have druncke neither Wine,
nor strong Drink, but have powered out my Soul before the Lord. Count not thy
Handmaid for a Daughter of Belial: for out of the abundance of my Complaint,
and Grief, have I spoken hitherto. Heavenly Hannah, Happy Hannah, most worthy
to have been the Mother of such a Son, as afterward became such a PROPHET.
Where shall we find thy like? How many Others now adays instantly Whetting
their Tongues upon their Teeth, would have shaped him such an Answer
(especially had they been Innocent) that they would have been Nocent enough ere
they had gone out of the place, and the Town and Country both, should have
known of the Prophets Mistake. But I go forward.

Where our Prophet here so absolutely speaks of any Wickedness in his Hands, it
is to be referred to that Particular whereof he now speaks, to wit, any such
Wickedness as he was accused of, like as at another time to King Saul, My
Father, 1. Sam. 24.11
says he, see yea see the skirt of thy Robe in my Hand: for in that I Cut of
the skirt of thy Robe, and Killed thee not, know thou and see, that there is
neither Evil nor Transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against
thee; yet thou Huntest my Soul to take it. Where it is worth the observing,
how well in this case he justifies himself unto Saul, There is neither Evil,
nor Transgression in mine hand, and I have not sinned against thee. Who yet in
regard of God, was no wise able thus to Justify himself, and therefore the
Scripture declared V. 5.
before, that It came to pass afterward, that David's Heart smote him, because
he had cut of Saul's skirt. Good Reason. Abstain, 1. These. 5.22.
says the Apostle S. Paul, from all appearance of Evil. Here was more then
Appearance, here was Evil it self. The Jews have a conceit that by reason
hereof David in his old Age by way of Retaliation could get no Heat by his
own 1. Kings. 1.1.
Clothes, for that he had thus trespassed against Saul. Sed illi magis Frigent
quam ipse David: But their Conceit Vid. P. Mart. in 1. Sam. 14.5.
says P. Martyr, is much more cold, then David was. And so it is for the
Concert, but the Ground of that Conceit is warm enough, namely, that it was
Sin in their opinion to do but thus much against the Anointed of the Lord.
And therefore they that dare do more, and think they Sin not, what are they,
but worse then Jews.

Verse. 4. If I have rewarded Evil unto him that dealt friendly with me: yea I
have delivered him, that without any cause is mine Enemy.] To reward Evil unto
him that deals friendly with us, is a point of Ingratitude, and to style such
an one Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris. Vox Pop.
Ungrateful, is to say all the ill by him that may be said. Our Prophet not
only not did this, but he had befrended them that were Enemies to him without
a cause, and this may we see in the first of Samuel where we shall find him
so doing. Did he not there deliver King Saul when he had that opportunity of
quitting himself of him for ever? Behold, 2. Sam. 24.4.
say his Men, the Day of which the Lord said unto thee, Behold I will deliver
thine Enemy into thy Hand, that thou may do to him as it shall seem good
unto thee. Oh how sweet would Revenge have been to Thousands upon like
Advantage! How readily would they have said with him in the Tragedy, Senec.
Thyest. Act. 2. Sc. Ignaue.
Been est, abunde est, hic pl^cet Poenae modus. and to him that should have said
the Punishment was greater then the Offense that was made, they would have
replied again as readily, Senec. Ib. Act. 1. Sc. Festum Diem.
Sceleri modus debetur, vbi facias Scelus
Non vbi reponas.
but David would none of this. So likewise at an other time, when Abishai would
have been the Man to have performed that Service, Destroy him not 1. Sam. 26.9.
says David, for who can stretch forth his hand against the Lords Anointed,
and be guiltles. I, that base Shemei, that Railing Wretch, whom with a Wry or
Frowning look as His MAY. Defense of the Right of Kings in his Works. p.
464.
speaks his Excellent Majesty, he was able to crush, as an Earthworme in
pieces, how did he shelter him from Death when the same Abishai would have
stricken that Head off, that carried so devilish a Tongue: yet David at that
time to, Let him Curse, 2. Sam. 16.10
says he, Extr. De Transt. Episcopi Quanto. in Glossa.
because the Lord has said unto him, Curse David. Who shall then say,
wherefore have thou done so? From whence, I trow, came that of the Popes
Lawyers concerning the Pope: Papa dicitur habere coeleste arbitrium. The Pope
is said to have a heavenly Judgment, therefore in such things as he wills,
his Will stands instead of Reason, neither may any man say unto him, Domine,
cur ita facis? And again? Petrus de Palud. de Potest. Papae.
Totus Mundus non potest accusare Papam: Nemo potest dicere Papae, Domine, cur
ita facis? The whole World may not accuse the Pope. No man may say to the Pope,
Sir, why do you so? So that there is but a Domine, between Shemei and the
Pope. But to return unto my purpose.

David no doubt was a good Scholar, and brought up by that Master that has
taught us also to do the like, if we could possibly light on it. Love your
Enemies, Luc. 6.27.
says our Savior, do good to them which hate you, Bless them that Curse
you, and Pray for them which Dispightfully use you. And again, V. 32.
If ye Love them which Love you, what thanks have you: for Sinners also love
those that love them. And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what
thanks have you? for Sinners also do even the same. But let us beware to be
such Sinners, we heard of such in the First Ps. 1.6.
Psalm, namely, that the Ungodly shall not be able to stand in the Judgment,
neither the Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous.

Verse. 5. Then let mine Enemy persecute my Soul and take me, yea let him
tread my Life down upon the Earth, and lay mine Honor in the Dust.] David,
Aug de Temp. Ser. 168.
says S. Austen though adorned with many Virtues, yet none of them all more
familiarly coupled him unto God then the Love of his Enemies. And speaking a
little after of this Parcel of Scripture, Behold, says he, with what a Curse
he condemns himself if contemning the Precepts of God concerning loving our
Enemies he feared not to keep hatred still in his Heart. Whereupon it is to
be considered with what Face, or Conscience he can possible pronounce this
Verse with his Mouth, who renders to his Enemies Evil for Evil. Now how
loath King David was to come within the Clutches of his Enemies, his Answer
well witnesses to Gad the Seer, who when he propounded to him that threefold
Choice, either of Famine, or Fall before his Enemies, or Pestilence, Let us
Fall, 2. Sam. 24.14
says he, into the hands of the Lord (for his Mercies are great) and let me
not fall into the hand of Man. He refuses not now to fall into Man's hand if so
be the Premises had been true, and not so only, but he could have been
contented (it seems) that his Name and Fame should have been odious to all
Posterity. An evident Sign and Token of his Innocence, and could every of us
show the like, the Hand of God would be more ready to help us then oftentimes
it is. But for many times it comes to pass, Calvin. in hunc Ps.
says Calvin, that they which annoy and hurt us, either are formerly provoked
by us, or being annoyed we breath out presently nothing else but Revenge, we
make our selves unworthy of the Help of the Lord in such Cases, nay our
Distemper and Fury is such as that it shuts Heaven Gates against our Prayers.

Verse. 6. Stand up, O Lord, in thy Wrath, and lift up thy self: because of
the Indignation of mine Enemies, arise up for me in the Judgment that thou
have commanded.] The Prophet here speaks, as if he spoke, what he speaks,
not of God, but of Man. Man indeed when he is moved to anger stands up, and
lifts up himself, as it was noted long ago in that old Honorable Captain the
Earl of Shrewsbury, whose patience when a French Ambassador had moved at a
Dinner, where before his Head by great Age, was almost groueling on the Table:
he roused himself in such wise, that he appeared, A Defense of Priests
Marriages thought to be Dr Parkers (so Dr Cosens Apol. Part. 2. c. 12. and
Others) but I take it rather to be D. Poynets. My Reason is, for that no less
then 21. Pages ( videl. from p. 36. to p. 57.) are Verbatim taken out of a Book
of Dr Poynets mentioned in that Defense p. 36. a Point which Dr Parker would
never have performed. D. Poynet might be bold with his own.
says my Author, in length of Body, as much as he was thought ever in all his
Life before, and knitting his Brows gave the French man such a look, that the
Monsieur spoiled no more Vittaile at that Dinner, but drancke wondrous often. But
to come to the Matter in hand.

Such Terms as these, To stand up, and To lift up himself, are usual
throughout the Scripture, especially in the Psalms, and applied unto God:
howbeit properly they belong to Man, not to a Spirit, but God is a Ioh. 4.24.
Spirit. So the Psalmist in other Places: Ps. 78.66.
The Lord awaked as one out of Sleep, and like a Giant refreshed with Wine.
And again in another Psalm, Ps. 12.6.
I will Up, says the Lord, and will help every Man from him that swells
against him, and will set them at rest. And where the Prophet here says, Stand
up in thy Wrath: In Ira tua, id est, Paenis, In thy Wrath, Mollerus in hunc Ps.
says Mollerus, that is, with thy Punishments, for then the Lord is said to be
Angry when he destroys his Enemies.

But what is that which here follows: Arise Up for me in the Judgment that
thou have commanded? The Judgment, Chrysostom. in hunc Ps.
says S. Chrysostom, that God has Commanded, is to help those that are in
need, and not in any wise to neglect such against whom there are Dangers
toward, and therefore, thou O Lord, who by thine own Law have taken order
that so we should do, do it also by thine own Deeds. No doubt but God is
the Fountain of Pity, and if we that are but Conduits, and come from him,
ought to be Pitiful, how much more should he himself be, who is the Fountain
it self. Some corrospondence this Passage has with that in the Lords Prayer,
Mat. 6.12.
Forgive us our Debts, as we also forgive our Debtors. Meaning that seeing we
who have but a Drop of Mercy in respect of thee forgive others, thou who art
the Fountain of Mercy, do thou forgive us.

Verse. 7. And so shall the Congregation of the People come about thee: for
their sakes therefore, lift up thy self again.] It is storyed in Exodus 18.13.
Exodus that when Moses sat to judge the People, The People stood by Moses. Or
as it was in our Former Translation, The People stood about Moses from Morning
unto Eauen. It was the Custom belike in those Ages to stand about their
Magistrates as it were in a Ring, that so the Words of the Judge that spoke,
might have the better access to every of them. The Crown is set upon the
Kings Head, and compasses it, His MAJESTY'S Meditat. on Mat. 27. v. 27.28.29.
Or Pattern for a Kings Inaugur. p. 48.
says his Excellent MAJESTY upon whose Head may it long set, and compass it
for ever, to show that as the Crown compasses the Kings Head so is he to sit
in the Midst of the People, his wakerife Care is ever to be employed for their
Good, their Love is his greatest Safety, and their Prosperity is his greatest
Honor and Felicity. For many times among the Romans, the Word CORONA signifies
the People. Steph. Thesaurus in Verb. Corona.
Perottus takes it to come of Chorus, and thereupon in old time it was written
with an H, though Quintil Instit. Orat. l. 1. c. 5. Vid. Polit. Mis^ell. c. 19.
Quintilian mislikes that writing. But to return where I left.

As Moses then did sit in the midst of the People, and the Judges with him, so
to such a Custom it is, that the Prophet alludeth in this place. Intimating
that if the Lord would be thus beneficial to him, it would be a Cause the
whole People would the rather rely upon him, in regard they saw the Fruit
thereof in the Prophet himself. But what? was it the Prophets meaning, that
the People should compass the Lord in Heaven? No, but the meaning is Chrysostom. in
hunc Ps.
says S. Chrysostom, that they should Sing unto him, that they should Praise
him, that they should Honor and Extol him in their several Congregations,
which forasmuch as in the Temple was performed by such Assemblies as stood in
Circuit round about (for so were their Synagogues built, as we see to this Day)
hence it is that the Prophet thus speaks. Like as our Savior in like sort,
Mat. 18.20.
Where Two or Three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the midst
of them. Thus was he in the Luc. 2.46.
Midst of the Doctors, hearing them, and asking them Questions. And after his
Resurrection, when the Disciples were assembled together for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus, and stood in the Midst, Ioh. 20 19.
says S. John: and again Eight Days after, the Doors being shut, came
Jesus, and stood in the V. 26.
Midst again. Indeed JESUS is the true CENTER, to whom Every of the Faithful,
by equal Lines, has his true Reference. Whereas it is added here in this
place, For their sakes therefore lift up thy self again: That is, Piscat. in
hunc Ps.
says Piscator, Once more get thee up into thy Seat of Judgment. For such
Thrones, and Seats were set very high.

Verse. 8. The Lord shall judge the People, give sentence with me. O Lord:
according to my Righteousness, and according to the Innocence that is in me.]
First, whereas it is here said, The Lord shall judge the People, what Lord Aug.
in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, but JESUS CHRIST, for the Ioh. 5.22.
Father judges no Man, but has committed all Judgment to his Son. Though in
this place it may signify to Rule and Govern, like as the Heb. 10.30.
Apostle to the Hebrews applies it out of Deuteronomy. 32.36.
Deuteronomy. So the Prophet David in an other Ps. 9.8.
Psalm: He shall judge the World in Righteousness, and minister true
Judgment unto the People. And again, Ps. 67.4.
O let the Nations rejoice, and be glad, for thou shall judge the Folk
righteously, and govern the Nations upon the Earth. And Abraham to this
purpose, Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do Right?

Secondly, in that the Prophet cries here, Ad Sententiandum: to have Sentence
given him, we are to observe his Assurance in the Equity of his Cause. And what
a Comfort it is to sue in that Court, where the Equity of the Cause may
prevail, I leave it to poor Suitors to consider of, in their Extremities, and
what a World it was even among Heathens, when of a Judgment given at one time,
it was said by a good Remembrancer, Valor. Max. Memorabil. l. 7. c. 7.
Si ipsa Aequitaes hac de re cognescere potuisset, iustiusve, aut gratius
pronunciaret? Had AEQVITY it self sat in Judgment, could she have given a
more Righteous, and Gracious Sentence? But I fear me they find those other of
the same Author more oftentimes true, which he spoke of a Sentence ill given,
Valor. Max. Memorab. l. 6. c. 6.
Crediderim tunc ipsam Fidem humana Negotia speculantem, moestum gessisse
Vultum, perseverantissimum sui Cultum iniquae Fortunae Iudicio tam acerbo exitu
damnautem cernentem. The best English to this, is PATIENCE: and in no wise to
be forgotten, that Nebrissens. Dec. 2. l. 3. c. 1. My LORD of CANT. on Jonas.
Lect. 3.. 17.
Jews the Eleventh, King of France, did on his Deathbed restore two Counties
to the Heirs of John the King of Arragon, to which in all his Lifetime
before, he would never condescend, CONSCIENCE at last wrought with him.

But how comes it that the Prophet here calls for Sentence according to his
Righteousness, and according to his Innocence? This had not wont to be the
Prophets Plea. His Plea had wont to be, for so it was in the Former Ps. 6.4.
Psalm, O save me for thy Mercies sake. And again in an other Ps. 143.1.
Psalm, Hearken unto me for thy Truth and Righteousness sake, and enter not
into Judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be
justified. The Calvin. in hunc Ps.
Answer is, that the Prophet here in this place delivers not unto us what
Answer himself would make, if so be the Lord would take account of him,
concerning his whole Life past: but comparing himself with his Enemies, he
shows himself Righteous in respect of them, and especially in this one Point
which they laid to his Charge, he declares in these Words how Innocent he
was. In respect of God, Titleman. in hunc Ps.
says an Other, let us in no wise say, if I have offended in thy sight, and if
there be any Iniquity in my Hands. Nay rather let us say, 1. Sam. 7.6.
We have sinned against the Lord: and that which the Prodigal said, who
devoured his Fathers Living with Harlots, Luc. 15.21.
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy Sight: and let us add
thereunto, Ps. 51.1.
Have Mercy upon me; O God, after thy great Goodness; and Ps. 25.6.
According to thy Mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, for thy Goodness. And
again, Ps. 51.4.
Against thee only have I sinned.

Where by the way, it is worth the observing, how the Prophet comes to say,
Against thee ONLY have I sinned? Sinned not David against Bethsabee? Sinned
not David against Vriah? Sinned not David against Others? I doubt not Mr Doctor
GOODWIN, Deane of Christ-Church in Oxford, Sermon. before the KING at Woodstock.
Aug. 28. Ao 1614. p. ^1.
says a Reverend DOCTOR, and as Reverend a DEANE of the Church, but David
sinned against Bethsabe, and that a grievous and an unclean Sin; against
Vriah, and that a Bloody, and a Crying Sin; against the Child of Adultery, and
that a Deadly, and a Killing Sin; against his Kingdom, and that a Ruinating,
and Demolishing Sin; against his own Soul, and that a Dreadful, and
Pernicious Sin. In istos peccavit, soli Deo peccavit. Against all these he
sinned, but he sinned to God only. They might Complain, and Accuse, and
Testify against him; but GOD alone was to Judge, to Condemn, to Punish him.
But to return to my purpose.

Was it so, that notwithstanding David's Innocence, David was thus driven to the
Walls? Does the Habak. 1.^.
Wicked still compass about the Righteous, and does wrong Judgment still
proceed? The Wicked does he still devour the Man that is more V. 13^
Righteous then he? Sed non debemus super hac Rerum inaequalitate turbari. But
we ought not Hieron. in Habak. c. 1.
says S. Ierom, to be troubled with the Iniquity of Things, in regard that we
see from the Beginning of the World, Righteous Genesis 4.8.
Abel slain by Wicked Cain; and afterward Esau domineering in his Fathers
House, when Genesis 28.5.
Jacob was in Banishment; and the Exodus 5.12.
Egyptians afflicting the Children of Israel, with Brick and Y^le; the LORD
against whom Complaint was made, crucified by the Jews, and Mat. 27.26.
Barabbas the Thief let go. Time, says he, will not suffice me if I should
endeavor to write, and reckon up in particular, how the Godly in this World
go to wrack, the Wicked flourishing, and prevailing. See more hereof in his
Hieron. Epist. ep. ad Castrus.
Epistle to Castrutius, whom he comfort in that Epistle for the loss of his
Eyes.

Verse. 9. O let the Wickedness of the Ungodly come to an end, but guide thou
the Just.] He that thus prays that the Wickedness of the Ungodly should come
at length unto an end, implies that their Wickedness was by all likelihood,
of long Continuance. Long Continuance in respect of Men, though in respect of
God not long. For what can be long with God, with whom a Thousand Years are
but as one 2. Pet. 3.8.
Day. But yet seeing to Man the Time seems so long, and Wickedness oft-times
is a great while a lengthning indeed: no marvel though the Prophet here
direct his Prayer for an End, for fear if it should continue, there would be
no Righteous at all. Which yet we must not so take, as if we would prescribe
to God how far he should lay upon us such Affliction, it is enough for our
comfort, that what is done, is done by him, and that the Wicked shall do no
more, then in his Providence has determined shall be done. So S. Peter of our
Savior himself, Him, Acts. 2.23.
says he, being delivered by the determinate Counsel, and foreknowledge of
God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified, and slain. And what if
we have not those Sins, that our Enemies vpbraid us with, yet may we have
Others of an other sort, and those, as S. Austen Aug. in Ps. 68.
speaks, may worthily be punished in us. Thus one Addaeus in the
Ecclesiastical Evagrius Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 5. Vid. My L. of CANT. on Jonas.
Lect. 7.. 21.
History, a special Friend of the Emperor Justinian, when he had escaped the
Law for one Murder, was afterward put to Death for a Fact, wherewith he was
charged, but in truth had never done it. He escaped for that which he did, and
died for that which he did not.

Oh, but the Time is long, it is a very long Time, that thus I am afflicted!
Days, and Months, and Years! why, but be Patient yet, and for these Days,
and Months, and Years of Sorrows, thou shall have Euerlastingnes, thou shall
have Eternity of Joy, thou shall have as 2. Cor. 4.17.
speaks the Apostle, an eternal Weight of Glory. What! would thou have in
this Life Foelicity, and hereafter to! Nay then thou art too-too Covetous. It
is as if King 1. King. 3.11
Solomon would have chosen Long Life, and Riches, and the Life of his Enemies,
and Wisdom to.

But David here, as he prays against the Wicked, so his Prayer is here made
also in behalf of the Just, to wit, that God would guide them. But concerning
Leading, and Guiding, I have spoken Exposit. on Ps. 5.8. p. 130.
before.

Verse. 10. For the Righteous God tries the very Hearts, and Reins.] The
Spirit that said by the Mouth of Solomon, Prou. 25.3.
The Heart of Kings is unsearchable, said as much of the Heart in general, by
the Mouth of the Prophet Ier. 17.9. Ier. 11.20.
Jeremy. By Hearts here in this place may be signified, our Wills, and
Affections, which are seated in our Hearts: and by Reins, Men's private, and
secret Thoughts. Now, none can do this, but God; and as here he is said to try
them, so elsewhere he is said to 1. Sam. 16.7.
look on the Heart, to Ier. 20.12.
see the Reins, and the Heart, to 1. Chro. 28.9. Ier. 17.10. Reu. 2.23.
search all Hearts. Vox mea in Ore nondum erat, sed Auris Dei iam in Cord
erat. My Words were not come so forward as my Mouth, Aug. in Ps. 31.
says S. Austen, and the Ear of God was already in my Heart. And again, Aug.
in Ps. 141
Nisi voce Pulmonum, and Laterum, and Linguae claemes, Homo te non audit;
Cogitatio tua, clamor est ad Dominum. Unless thou use the help of the Lungs,
and Sides, and Tongue, Man hears thee not, but thy Thought in regard of God is
Clamor enough. And yet again in a Third place, Aug. in Ps. 148. and Hom. 16.
Quomodo Aures nostrae, ad Voces nostras, sic Aures Dei ad Cogitationes
nostras. As our own Ears are to our Words, so are Gods Ears to our Thoughts.
Only one thing let me note for the Comfort of them that are sometimes too-too
much troubled with their Thoughts, that B. Bilsons Survey of Christ's
Sufferings. p. 200.
A Man may think, and speak of all the Errors, and Heresies in the World, and
yet not sin. It is the liking, and embracing of them that makes the Offense,
and not Thinking, or Reasoning of them. The Will causes Thoughts to be good,
or evil, the Understanding does not.

Verse. 11. My help comes of God, which preserves them that are true of
Heart.] The Art of Physic has two several Offices, the One of Healing, the
Other of Preserving in Health. According to the Former, Aug. in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, it was said in the Former Ps. 6.2.
Psalm, Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; according to the Latter it
is said in this Psalm, If there be any Wickedness in my Hands, If I have
rewarded evil unto him that dealt friendly with me: yea I have delivered him
that without any cause is mine Enemy. In that Psalm his Prayer was, that being
weak, he might be healed; in this Psalm his Prayer is, that being sound, he
may not be diseased. According to the Former, it is there said, Ps. 6.4.
O save me for thy Mercies sake; according to the Latter it is here said, Give
sentence with me, O Lord, according to my Righteousness, and according to the
Innocence that is in me. There he desired a Remedy, to be rid of his Disease;
here he requests a Preservatiue least he should relapse again. According unto
that it is there said O save me for thy Mercies sake; according unto this it is
here said, My help comes of God, which preserves them that are true of
Heart.

Yea, but who will you say, are such? Who, but such as was Nathaniel, of whom
our Savior, Ioh. 1.47.
Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no Guile. Such as was Jacob, of whom
the Scripture, Genesis 25.27.
Esau was a cunning Hunter, a Man of the Field: and Jacob was a plain Man,
dwelling in Tents. It is in the Vulgar, Jacob, Vir simplex, a simple Man. The
like in the Vulgar is said of Job to, Job. 1.1.
Simplex and Rectus, Simple and Upright, and so indeed they are, and are to be,
who will have their Names in Gods Book. The Wisdom of the Serpent, and
Simplicity of the Dove, is the true mixture that God requires in those that
are his. Where as his Excellent His MAJESTY'S Meditation upon 1. Chron. 15. v.
25, 26, 27, 28 Part. 5. in his Works. p. 88
MAJESTY has observed, Christ recommends unto us the Wisdom of Serpents, not
thereby to deceive, and betray others, but to arm us against the Deceit and
Treason of Hypocrites, that go about to trap us. What an Helper God is, has
been spoken Expos. on Ps. 37. p 78.
before,

Verse. 12. God is a righteous Judge, strong, and patient, and God is provoked
every day.] The Almighty God our Heavenly Father, as he is both Good, and
Merciful, Patient, and of long Sufferance, so he uses two manner of ways to
allure, and call us to him, when we of our own Heads, follow our own Devices,
and lewdly run whethersoeuer our Lusts do lead us Sometimes in his great
Mercy he uses Promises: sometimes in his Justice he uses Threatenings. And
therefore David in this place, God says he, is a righteous Judge. The very
Name of a Judge, may put us in mind of Gods Severity. A Judge is a Person
appointed over Criminal Causes, and Civil Controversies, to end, and
determine them by his Sentence. To the Guilty (such as all of us in an other
case are by Nature) Experience teaches, how dreadful a Sight the Face of a
Judge is. Rulers Romans 13.4.
says the Apostle, are not a terror to good Works, but to the evil. Will thou
then not be afraid of the Power? Do that which is good, and thou shall have
praise of the same. For he is the Minister of God to thee for good: but if thou
do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain: for
he is the Minister of God, a Revenger, to execute Wrath upon him that does
evil. But God is a Righteous Judge, that is, he will by no means clear the
Exodus 34.7.
Guilty, and it is a righteous thing with God, 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.
says S. Paul, to recompense Tribulation to them that trouble you. And Genesis
18.25.
Abraham, as you heard before, Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right?
And as he is Righteous, so is he Strong, that is, of Power to be revenged of
all the Wicked. Seek not, Ecclus. 7.6.
says the Son of Syrach, to be Judge, being not able to take away Iniquity,
least at any time thou fear the Person of the Mighty, and lay a stumbling
block in the Way of thy Vprightnes. And in some it is so indeed, they want
ability to curb the Impiety of Many in the Land. With the Lord it is not so,
he is so Powerful in such Cases, that the Ps. 104.3^.
Earth shall tremble at the Look of him: if he do but touch the Hills, they
shall smoke. If I speak of Strength Job. 9.19.
says Job, Lo he is strong: and again, Job. 36.19.
Will he esteem thy Riches? no not Gold, nor all the Forces of Strength.

But as God is Righteous, and Strong, so is he Patient to, and God is provoked
every Day. And now are we in a Sea of Matter, where we may have plenty at will.
I will content my self with that of Cyprian, who speaking of this Argument,
The Patience of God: What manner of Patience is in God Cyp. de Bono Patient.
says he, and how great for quantity, who patiently suffers profane Temples
of the Heathen, worldly Inventions, and execrable Sacrilege to be committed by
Men in contempt of his Majesty, and Honor, and yet notwithstanding causes the
Day to show, and the Sun to shine, as well upon the Mat. 5.45.
Evil, as the Good. He waters the Ground with Showers, and excludes no man
from his Benefits, but bestows his Rain in due season, to the commodity
as well of the Unjust, as Just. Again we see with what an inseperable Equality
of Gods Patience, the Times obey, the Elements serve, the Corn abundantly
does grow, the Fruits of the Vine do ripe in season, the Trees abound with
Apples, the Woods spring, and the Meadows flourish as well to the use of the
Sinful, as of the Virtuous, as well to the Wicked, as to them that fear God,
and as well to the Unthankful, as to the Giver of Thanks. And whereas God is
provoked with our Many, or rather with our Continual Offenses, (as here it is
said in this place, God is provoked every Day) yet does he temper his
Indignation, and tarrieth patiently for the Day that is appointed for every
Man's Reward. And whereas Vengeance is in his own Power, yet does he not use
it, but rather keeps long Patience, mercifully forbearing, and deferring, to
the intent that Man, wallowing in the Contagion and Error of Sin, may if any
Remedy will serve, through delay of his Displeasure, change at some time or
other, and at length be converted unto God. Thus far S. Cyprian, and a great
deal farther to this purpose, but we will content our selves with this.

Verse. 13. If a man will not turn, he will whet his Sword, he has bent his
Bow, and made it ready.] When Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. l. 2. c. 5.
Philo Iudaeus in defense of the Jews, had presented himself before Caius the
Emperor, against Appion his Accusations, and was excluded by Caius, and
commanded to depart, he came unto his Company, and with Words full of comfort,
We ought to be of good cheer, says he, for by Right GOD now should take our
Part, seeing CAIUS is angry with us. The word in the (...).
Original signifies, The Leader of an Army, and by way of Opposition, to take
our Part in that kind. Lo here the Weapons, the Sword, and the Bow, and the
Arrow, that in the Battles of Old time, did the Vid. Bish. PILKINGT. on
Nehem. c. 4. p. 61. and Dr HAYWARD his Lives of the three Norman Kings of
England, in King William the First. p. 77. and Mr ASCHAMS School of Shooting.
greatest hurt unto the Enemy. The Sword when he was at hand, the Bow, and
Arrows when he was far off. The truth is, the Lord of Heaven has neither
Sword, nor Bow, nor Arrow, but every Punishment he sends upon the Wicked in
this World, may be termed his Sword, his Bow, and Arrows. The Water that
drowned the World; the Fire that consumed Sodom; the Earth that swallowed up
Kore, Dathan, and Abiram; they were as so many Swords, or so many Bows, and
Arrows in his Hand. Nay, every Creature on the Earth, be it never so vile,
never so mean, and contemptible, yet if he will punish us therewith, it is his
Sword, and it is his Bow, and Arrows.

But what is this Turning here, If a Man will not turn? The Prophet Ezechiel
tells us. Repent, Ezech. 18.30.
says the Prophet, and turn your selves from all your Transgressions: so
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Cast away from you all your Transgressions,
whereby ye have Transgressed, and make you a new Heart and a new Spirit, for
why will ye dye O house of Israel. For I have no pleasure in the death of him
that dies, says the Lord God, wherefore turn your selves and live ye.

But is it said of Men only, If a Man will not turn? Nay but of Women too.
Quicquid Viris iubetur, hoc consequenter redundat in Foeminas. Whatsoever,
Hieron. ad Ocean. Epitaph. Fabiolae.
says S. Ierom, is commanded Men, is commanded Women to, and consequently
whatsoever is threatened to Men, is threatened to Women to. What? and is it in
our own power then, Men or Women, to turn when we will? Is it in our own
power to make us new Hearts and new Spirits, as Ezec. 18.31.
speaks the Prophet Ezechiel? Oh no, but we must crave it of him who will put
a new Spirit within us, and take the stony Heart out of our Flesh, and will
give us an Heart of Flesh, as speaks the self same Ezec. 11.19.
Prophet in another place. The like we have in the Zach. 1.3.
Prophet Zachary, Turn ye unto me, says the Lord of Hoasts, and I will
turn unto you, says the Lord of Hoasts. And when were these Words spoken? In
the eight Month, in the second year of Darius. I, but long before this,
namely, in the Here is to be noted that in the Vulgaar the 14. Verse wherein
these Words are comprised are severed from the First Chapter through the
ignorance of him that divided the Chapters at the first. The Author of the
Remains of a greater Work. p. 15. tells us that Stephen Langton Archb. of
Canterbury first divided the Holy Scriptures into Chapters, as Robert Stephan
did lately into Verse.
Four and Twentieth day of the sixth Month in the second year of Darius the
King, The Lord stirred up the Spirit of Zerubbabel the Governor, and the
Spirit of Joshua the High Priest, and the Spirit of all the Remnant of the
People, and they came and did the work in the House of the Lord, as we read in
the Prophet Aggey. 1.14.
Aggey.

Verse. 14. He has prepared for him the Instruments of Death: he ordains his
Arrows against the Persequutors.] We are now come unto the Arrows, and such
they are as was the Bow, both the Instruments of Death. But never Sword did so
much harm, never Arrow in the Field, nor Bow that discharges many Arrows, as
do his Judgments when they come. Famous has been the English Bow, and a
terror to the Vid. Mr Alch. School of Shooting. B. P^lkingt. and Dr Hayward
vbi supra.
French in many our Battles with them, but English Arrows could hit but
within a certain kenne. Cedrenus apud Zonaram Annal. Tom. 3. p. 89
Gratian was so cunning in throwing the Dart that they would not stick to say
that his Darts were endued with an Understanding Power, they would hit so
right. Gods Arrows fly mainely throughout the whole world. Extra ^ctum, or
Extra teli iactum has here no place. It was our Prophets own Question, Ps.
139.6.
Whether shall I go from thy Spirit, or whether shall I go from thy Presence?
And his Answer unto it was, that neither Heaven, nor Hell, nor the Uttermost
Parts of the Sea could hide him from the Lord.

But who are these Persecutors against whom these Arrows are ordained? First,
they are such as Persecute the Righteous Vi and Armis, by Force of Arms, and
of such Rev. 16.6.
S. John in the Book of Revelation. Secondly, they are such as Mock and
Scorn the Godly, though it be but by Word of Mouth as Ismael did Isaac, and of
such the Apostle speaks in his Epistle to the Gal. 4.29.
Galathians. Thirdly, they are such as have their Lives contrary to Good Men's
Lives and Conversations, and of such S. Austen Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 24.
and Hom. 10.
Mali Persequuntur Bonos, si non ferro and lapidibus, certe Vita atque Moribus.
The Bad do persequute the Good, though not by dint of Sword, yet by their
Lives and Behavior, and he uses the self same Words, once, and again.

Verse. 15. Behold he travaileth with Mischief, he has conceived Sorrow, and
brought forth Ungodliness.] Conception, Travail, and Birth, the three proper
Passions of the Mother of a Child. So the Vid. Expos. in Ps. 1.1. p. 7.
Wicked in bringing forth their wicked Works those Bratts of theirs. First,
they Conceive a Mischief, then are they in Travail with it, and at the last
they are Delivered. Thus Titleman in hunc, Ps.
Cain who seeing no respect had to his own Offering, but only to his Brothers,
was very Wroth, as speaks the Scripture, and his Countenance fell: there was
Conception, and that was ENVY; Then did he Walk and Talk with his Brother,
and egged him on to the Genesis 4.5.
Field there was Travail; At last he rose up, and Slew him: there was Birth,
and the Brat was PARRICIDE. Amnon he 2. Sam. 13.4.
loved Tamar his Brother Absolons Sister, there was Conception, and that was
LUST; Amnon made himself sick for Love, and all for his Sister should make
him Cakes, there was Travail; At length he forced her and lay with her, and
afterward Despised her, there was Birth, and the Brats were Twins, INCEST and
VILLAINY. So Absolon when his Brother Amnon had deflowred his Sister, Absolon
spoke unto his Brother, 2. Sam. 13.22
says the Scripture, nether Good nor Bad: there was Conception, and that was
MALICE. After two years expyred he invited Amnon to a Feast, there was a long
Travail. But when Amnons Heart was merry with Wine he caused Amnon to be
Slain: there was MVRTHER in the Highest Degree, for he endeauored as much as
in him lay, to kill him both Body and Soul. I might instance in King Vid.
Titleman in hunc Ps.
Saul, I might instance in the Devil himself, he indeed was the RING LEADER,
and these Plotters, these Devisers, they follow their Fathers steps.

Verse. 16. He has graven and dug up a Pit, and is fallen himself into the
destruction that he made for other.] Who so diggeth a Pit, Prove. 26.27.
says Solomon, shall fall therein, and he that rolleth a Stone it will return
upon him; Ovid. de Art. l. 1.
-- Neque enim Lex iustior vlla est,
Quam Necis Artifices art perire suae.
Our Prophet has the like in another Ps. 9.15.
Psalm, The Heathen are suncke down in the Pit that they made, in the same
Net which they hid privily, is their foot taken. The Lord is known to execute
Judgment, the Ungodly is trapped in the works of his own hands. Examples are
Vid. Lauat. in Proverb. 26 27.
Many in this kind, both in Sacred Writers, and Profane, as of Pharao, Saul,
Achitophel, Absolon, Perillus, Maxentius, and the like. Especially Maxentius to
whom Eusebius l. 1. c 9 and de Vita Constant. l. 1. c. 32.
Eusebius applies most appositely this of our Prophet in this place. I come to
Examples of our own Nation, and nearer home. And here to let pass how Dr
Poynet in his A Tretise Printed 1556. with these Letters in the Forefront,
D.I.P.B.R.W. that is, Dr Ioha Poynet Bishop of Roch. and Winchester.
short Treatise of Politic Power, and of the true Obedience which Subjects owe
to Kings and other Civil Governors, applies it to the times wherein himself
lived, and to certain of the Nobility in Q. Maryes days, how was it Verified
in our Delving POWDER-TRAYTORS, that took such pains to Dig as they did? How
fell they into that Destruction which they made for us? How sancke they down
into the same Pit? How was their Foot taken in the self same Not? How were
they Trapped in the Works of their own Hands? But of this has been spoken
sufficiently by many, specially by him, who was then a most Worthy My LORD of
LAND. His Sermon at Whitehall, November. 5. 1608.
DEANE, now as Worthy a BISHOP in the Church of England. I will end this point
with that of S. Chrysostom It is, Chrysostom. in hunc Ps.
says he, a great Blessing and Clemency of God to bestow such a Nature upon
such Wyles and Traps that the takers may be taken by them, for by that means
shall they leave to be obnoxious to their Neighbors.

Verse. 17. For his travail shall come upon his own Head: and his Wickedness
shall fall upon his own pate.] That which the Prophet by way of Metaphor
delivered in the former Verse under the Similitude of a Pit: he delivers now
in plain terms without any Circum-quaques at al. Terent. And. Act. 1. Sc. 2.
Aperte ipsam rem modo locutus, nihil circuitione vsus est. Only we may observe
how contemptuously our Prophet here speaks of these Plotters and Politicians.
They doubtless for their parts would not (as we say) have given their Heads
for the Washing. They walked up and down like Pageants in the chiefest Cities
of the Land, they were the only Brave Men then being. They wondered that those
they liud withal took no more notice of their Worth, and yet for all this the
Prophet styles them here but In verticem ipsius. The Crown of the Head. Graece
(...). vnde Coriphaeus Hebraice CHADCHOD.
PATES, like as elsewhere speaking of the like, he calls them HAIRY SCALPS, God
shall wound, Ps. 68.21.
says the Prophet, the Head of his Enemies: and the Hairie Scalpe of such an
one as goes on still in his Wickedness.

Verse. 18. I will give thanks unto the Lord according to his Righteousness:
and will praise the name of the Lord the most High.] Of Thanksgiving, and
Praise, I have spoken heretofore, only this may now be noted, Vid. Expos. in
Ps. 5.12. p. 140,
that the Thanks here mentioned were meant by all likelihood to be Private and
Public too; Private at home in his own privacy, and Public in the
Congregation. And this I gather the rather for that he says not here, I do
give, but I will, in the Future, intimating that after he is made partaker of
these Blessings, he will then institute Public Thanksgiving in the Church.
Not that the Lord has need of any such Thanks at all, but for it is
profitable for our selves so to do, like as the Apostle in another case,
Philip. 4.17.
Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit that may abound to your
account.

But what is this that is here said According to his Righteousness? I will
give thanks unto the Lord according to his Righteousness. That is, Chrysostom. in
hunc Ps.
says S. Chrysostom, For his Righteousness, namely in destroying his
Enemies. For it is a Righteous thing with God, ^. Thessalonians. 1.6.
says the Apostle, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you. Not
that he rejoiced in the Slaughter and Destruction of them, but for he embraced
Gods Love and Mercy toward himself.

PSALM. VIII. Domine Dominus.
1 O Lord our Governor, how excellent is thy Name in all the World: thou that
have set thy Glory above the Heavens.
2 Out of the mouth of very Babes, and Sucklings have thou ordained strength,
because of thine Enemies: that thou mighst still the Enemy, and the Avenger.
3 For I will consider the Heavens, even the Works of thy Fingers: the Moon
and the Stars which thou have ordained.
4 What is Man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of Man that thou
visitest him?
5 Thou made him lower then the Angels: to crown him with Glory and Worship.
6 Thou made him to have dominion of the work of thy Hands: and thou have put
all things in subjection under his feet.
7 All Sheep and Oxen: yea and the Beasts of the Field.
8 The Fowls of the Air, and the Fishes of the Sea: and whatsoever walks
through the Paths of the Seas.
9 O Lord our Governor how excellent is thy Name in all the World.
THE ANALYSIS.
THis Eight Psalm, beside the ordinary saying of it the First Day of the
Month, is the First of those Three that are appointed for Morning Prayer upon
the ASCENSION DAY. Why it was selected to that purpose will appear in the
handling thereof. In the mean time let us consider that it wholly consists
of Praising God, whose MAJESTY the Prophet here extolleth, partly in respect
of the whole World in general, as it is in the First Verse; partly in respect
of the Creatures therein contained. This his Majesty very Babes and Sucklings
do seem to acknowledge to, as it is in the Second Verse. The Creatures
contained in the World are first of all those Celestial Orbs, the Heavens, and
Moon, and Stars as it is in the Third Verse; Secondly Man, whose Dignity the
Prophet shows, partly for that the Lord had such a peculiar love unto him, as
it is in the Fourth and Fifth Verses; partly for he gave him Dominion over all
things living in the World, as it is in the Sixth Verse; whether they were
Terrestrial, as it is in the Seventh Verse; or Fowls and such as lived in
the Water, as it is in the Eight Verse. The consideration whereof made the
Prophet end with the self same Words he did begin withal, as it is in the
Ninth Verse.

And thus much of the Analysis.
VErse. 1 O Lord our Governor how excellent is thy Name in all the World: thou
that have set thy Glory above the Heavens.] The Prophet is here as good as his
word. He had said in the Psalm before, Chrysostom. in hunc Ps.
says S. Chrysostom, Confitebor Domino secundum Iustitiam eius, and psall^m
Nomini Domini altissimi: I will give Thanks unto the Lord according to his
Righteousness, and will praise the Name of the Lord the most high, here he
performs his Promise, offering unto him an Himne. And those things that are
there said, says S. Chrysostom, they are spoken in the Person of one only,
for there he says, O Lord my God in thee have I put my trust, save me, and so
forth, here he speaks in the Person of Many, O Lord our Governor how
excellent is thy Name. It may seem somewhat strange Calvin. in hunc Ps.
says Calvin, that the Prophet should begin with an Exclamation, when as the
thing to be admired is commonly declared first what it is, and then it is
admired, but it will appear, says he, not so strange, ^f so be we consider
with our selves that the Works of God cannot possibly be expressed by any
Words. But come we now to the Words expressed.

First for the Word Governor, it is in the Septuagint, (...), in the Hebrew,
JEHOVAH Adonenu, but for Governor, Adonai is the Word and it comes of the
Hebrew Word EDEN, the Foot or base of a Barth. Schaerae^ Itinerar. p. 11.
Pillar, wherewith any thing is sustained. Adonai is one of the Lords ten
Names; and the Mascrites, the Hebrew Critici Ebraeo^um Ma^s^rite. Drus
Tet^agram. (...). Dedic. and ^ap. 14.
Critics hold, that the Word Adonai is found in Scripture, an Hundred and
Four and Thirty times. It is worth the noting, that in our last Translation,
though it be translated Lord, yet is it not Printed in Capital Letters as Vid.
Expos. in Ps. 3.1. p. 64.
LORD commonly there is, and in the very selfsame Verse, but thus we there
read, O LORD our Lord, how excellent is thy Name! where LORD in Capital
Letters, shows that the Hebrew is that Name of four Letters, and Lord in the
second place in less Characters, shows that the Hebrew Word is Adonai.

Secondly, for the Word affixed here, and the Pronoune [Our] O LORD our
Governor, it may put us in mind of our Community that we ought to have with
one another. I mean not an Anabaptisticall Community, to have all things
Common; nor yet such a Timon-like Propriety, as to esteem of nothing but
what is our own God Epistolae aliquot Eruditorum. p. N. 2.
says Sr Thomas Moore, well provided, when he instituted at the first all
things Common, our Savior Christ provided well to, when he endeavored to
withdraw mortal Men from the Private, to the Public He well knew the corrupt
Nature of Mortality, that it could not be enamoured of that which was Private,
but to the Damage, and Loss of that which was Public It is true I have
observed Expos. on Ps. 3.7. p. 76.
before, that in some Cases, as the Prophet, so we also by his example, may
every of us say, MY GOD in Particular, but now that the Subject of Speech is
upon Matter of Government, it becomes each in Particular, to speak thus in
Common.

Thirdly, concerning the Name of GOD, it is taken here in this place, or ^or
the Honor, Renown, and Glory, or for the Virtue, and Power of GOD, for by
these is GOD known, as Men are by their Names. In Iewry is GOD known Ps. 76.^,
says David, his Name is great in Israel; but what is Iewry, or what is Israel
to all the World besides? And therefore the Apostle S. Paul, speaking of the
Gentiles, The Wrath of God Romans 1.18.
says he, is revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness, and
Unrighteousness of Men; who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness. Because that
which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
them. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his Eternal
Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse: because that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain
in their Imaginations, and their foolish Heart was darkened.

Fourthly, concerning the Excellency here of his Honor, Renown, Glory,
Virtue, and Power, it were an endless piece of Work to describe each
particular, for seeing they are all of them infinite, where should we begin to
speak? where should we end? The best discourse can be made hereof, is to
admire here with our Prophet, and to say as here is said, O Lord our Governor,
how excellent is thy Name! Admiracio est interdum ignota causa, interdum,
cognita. We sometimes admire the things whose Causes are unknown, Scalig de
Subtle. Exerc. 312.
says Scaliger, sometimes the things whose Causes are known well enough. And
surely all things being, come within this compass, that either known they
are, or not known. And howsoever the Poet say, Horat. Epist. l. 4. ep. 6. ad.
Numicium.
Nil admirari, prope res est vna Numici
Solaque quae possunt facere, and seruare beatum:
and Tull. Tusc. quaest. l. 5.
Tully accordingly, Sapientis est proprium, nihil cum acciderit admirari, vt in
opinatum ac nouum accidisse videatur: It is the Property of a wise Man, to
admire at nothing that happens, as strange, and unexpected: yet in these
Cases it is not so, our Savior himself did wonder, as Mat. 8.10.
S. Matthew, and Luc. 7.9.
S. Luke do both relate of him. For hearing the Centurian, He maruailed, says
S. Matthew, and said to them that followed, Verily I say unto you, I have not
found so great Faith, no not in Israel. Whereupon Aug. de Gen cont. Manich. l.
1. c. 8.
S. Austen. Whereas our Lord did marvel, he signified to us, that we might
marvel to, who have occasion so to be moved. And therefore all such Motions
of his, they are not the Signs of a troubled Mind, but of a Master that
thereby instructs us.

Fifthly, and lastly, where our Prophet here says, That he has set his Glory
above the Heavens; the meaning is, that he is Infinite both in Majesty, and
Glory. Behold 1. King. 8.27.
says Solomon, the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee: how
much less this House that I have builded.

Verse. 2. Out of the Mouths of very Babes, and Sucklings have thou ordained
Strength, because of thine Enemies, that thou might still the Enemy, and the
Auenger.] As if the Prophet had here said, that God should commend his
Providence to us, he needs not the Calv. in hunc Ps.
Eloquence of Rhetoritians to that purpose, no he needs not so much as words
Articulate, and Significant, he has Sufficient Testimony from the very Tongues
of Babes, and Sucklings, that can do nothing but Pule, and Cry. For whence is
it that no sooner they issue out from their Mothers Womb, and have Food ready
at hand, but that by a kind of Miracle, God eftsoons turns Blood into
Milk? Whence comes their present Inclination of sucking the same, and ability
to draw it forth, but that God by a secret Instinct, prepares their Tongues to
that purpose? Whence comes it, that in so few Days they wax so Great, that
then they grow more, then after that in some Years? No doubt but in these
Particulars, God has a special Finger, and therefore no marvel though
Infants may well be said to sound forth Gods Praises. And not only so, but Vt
destruas Inimicum, and Vltorem, to still the Enemy, and the Avenger to, even to
put him to perpetual Silence, in so much, that he should not have a word to
say. And of this one Parcel of Scripture has much Use been made by way of
Application in the Church of God.

First by our Savior. Our Savior when he rode to Jerusalem, and the chief
Priests, and Scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the Children
crying in the Temple Hosanna to the Son of David, and sore displeased
thereat, said unto him, Hear thou what these say? Yes Mat. 21.16.
says our Savior, have ye never read, Out of the Mouth of Babes, and
Sucklings thou have perfected Praise? Arguing as Calvin. in hunc Ps.
Calvin observes, a Maiori, ad Minus, from the Greater, to the Less. Namely,
that it was no Inc ongruity, if God who made very Babes, and Sucklings, by the
Testimony of one of their own Prophets, the Publishers of his Praises, caused
those that were Elder, perhaps seven years old, or thereabouts, yet but
Children in respect, to sound forth like Praises.

Secondly, by the People of the City of Sulpitius in vita Martini. c. 7.
Towers in France. The Story is this. About the Year of our Sa- Christ 370.
The People of the City of Towers, upon the Vacation of the Bishopric, were
desirous to have S. Martin to be their Bishop, Vna omnium Voluntas, eadem Vota,
etc. Yet some Few, and some of the Bishops to, which were called thither. to
constitute some One, or Other, were earnestly against it, saying that he was
but a Man contemptible, unworthy of a Bishopric, a homely Man to see to, both
in his Apparel, and in trimming himself. The more they spoke against him, the
People liked him the more, but who so much against him, as one Defensor by
Name, but he was paid for it with a witness. And thus it fell out. Instead of
the Words aboue-mentioned, Vt destruas Inimicum, and Vltorem, it was in their
Translation that they used in those Days, Vt Destruas Immicum, and Defensorem.
Now it so fell out, that whereas by chance the Reader, whose Office was to
read that Day, was shut out by means of the Throng; and the Ministers were
troubled, looking about for him that was not there, One of the Company took
the Psalter, and read that Verse that came next to hand. The Verse of the
Psalm was this, Ex Ore Infantium, and Lactentium perfec^sts Laudem, propter
Inimicos tuos, vt destruas Inimicum and Defensorem. Now as soon as that Verse
was read, the People made a Shout, as if S. Martin had been meant in the Former
Part, and the Prophet David in the Latter, had directly aimed at his Enemy
Defensor, whereupon the contrary Part was clean confounded.

Thirdly, there is in Ruffin. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 3. Book of Hom. Part. 1.
for Whit-Sunday.
Ruffinus a memorable Story, how the Words of this Verse were fulfilled after
a sort, though they are not applied there. The Story was this. When
Constantine the Emperor had caused the Clergy to come together about Arrius
his Opinion, there came unto the Assembly, Philosophers, and Logitians, that
were exquisite in their Faculty, and had great Conceits of themselves. Among
the rest, One there was that was famous in Logic, and every Day he disputed
with our Bishops that were well seen in Logic to. Many very Learned, came to
here and see these Conflicts. Nor could the Philosopher be put to Silence; nay
he had such Skill, that when he was thought most of all to be caught and
taken, like a slippery Snake he would slide away from them. But that God might
show that his Kingdom is not in 1. Cor. 4.20.
Word, but in Power, there was among the Bishops One of the Confessors by, a
Man most simple, and knowing nothing else but 2. Cor. 2.2.
JESUS CHRIST, and him crucified. Who when he saw the Philosopher insulting
upon our Men, and boasting himself upon the Skill he had in Reasoning,
desires of all that were by, to yield him room, that he a little might talk
with that Philosopher. Our Men that knew the Simplicity of the Man, and his
unskillfulness in that kind, began to Fear, and withal Blush, least that holy
Simplicity of his, should happily be exposed to the Scorns of those crafty
Companions. The old Man persisted in his Purpose, and thus began, O Philosopher
says he, in the Name of JESUS CHRIST hear thou those things which are true.
God that made the Heaven and Earth, and gave Man a Spirit, whom he framed of
the Dust of the Earth is one: he has by the Virtue of his Word, created all
things, both Visible, and Invisible, and strengthened them by the
Sanctification of his Spirit. This Word and Wisdom, whom we call the Son,
taking pity upon humane Errors, is borne of a Virgin, and by the Passion of his
Death, has delivered us from everlasting Death, and by his Resurrection, has
given us everlasting Life. Whom we look for, to come to be the Judge of all we
do. O Philosopher, beleeuest thou this? Whereupon he, as if he had never
learnt the Art of Contradiction, was so amassed by Virtue of the Words that were
spoken, that being mute to all that was alleged, only this he was able to
answer, that it seemed so to himself indeed, and that there was no other Truth
then what was delivered by that Party. Whereupon the old Man, Why then, if thou
beleeuest says he, these things to be true, arise, and follow me to the
Church, and take thou Baptism, the Seal of this Faith. Hereupon the
Philosopher turning to his Disciples, or to those that there were present, and
came to hear, O you Learned Men, says he, hearken unto me. While this Matter
in hand was performed by Words. I also opposed Words unto Words, and those
things which were spoken, able I was to confute them by the Art of Speaking,
but now that instead of Words, Power is proceeded from the Mouth of him that
speaks, neither can Words resist that Power, neither can Man withstand GOD.
And therefore if any of you here present, can believe these things that have
been spoken, as I my self do believe them, let him believe in CHRIST, and
follow this old Man, in whom GOD has thus spoken. And so at length the
Philosopher being made a Christian, was glad that he was so vanquished.

I shall not need here to relate those Legendary Tales of S. Nicholas, when he
was an Infant, how as soon as he was borne, he began to serve God: for he
would not take the Breast to suck, The Lives of Saints in Spanish by Alfonso
Villegas, and translated by W. and E. K. B. Part. 2. December. 6. Printed at
D^w^y, 1615.
they say, but one time only in a Day; especially twice a-Weeke, to wit, on
the Wednesday, and the Friday: and how he observed this Fast all the Days of
his Life. Of S. Romuald, who as soon as he was borne Nova Legend. An^l. in
Vita Run^w^ldi. See My LORD of CAN 1. Answer to Hill. (...) 6.^.
spoke Divinity, and forthwith being baptized, did preach high Points of
Doctrine, and lived in all but three Days. Or of the Child of nine Dr Poynets
Defense of Priests Marriages. p. 200.
Days old, Christened by B. Aldelme, and answering to certain Questions, and
clearing Pope Sergius of a shrewd Crime that was laid to his Charge. All that I
will say to these, and to such like Stories as these, is that of Job, Job. 13.7.
Will you speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him? Truth indeed
may spare such Proctours.

Verse 3. For I will consider the Heavens, even the Works of thy Fingers, the
Moon, and the Stars which thou have ordained.] There are specified in holy
Zanch. de Oper. l. 1. c 4.
Scripture, three kinds of Heavens. The First is that whole Space that
reaches from the Earth, to the Moon, where the Meteors are engendered, or to
speak more plainly, the Air next unto us, where the Birds use to fly, and
from whence the Rain does shower down upon us. Thus the Windows of Heaven
were opened, as we read in the Book of Genesis 7.11.
Genesis: of Heaven, that is, of the Air, for so Heaven is taken in diverse
Places of the Mat. 8.20.13.32. Marc. 4.4. Luc. 8.5.
New Testament. The Second kind of Heaven is all those Heavenly, and mooueable
Orbs, that is, all that Space that those visible Heavens, and Orbs do
contain, and herein the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, are all of them
comprehended, whereof we may read in Deuteronomy. 17.3.
Deuteronomy, and in many other Places of Scripture besides, and with these
Zanchius comprehends the Ninth Sphere also, howsoever it be invisible to the
Eye. The Third Heaven, which is of a far other kind, then are the other Two,
is that peculiar Place where GOD himself is said to inhabit, and into which
as we read, our Savior CHRIST did ascend, and wherein our Ioh. 17.24.
selves also, as many as shall be found Faithful, shall be hereafter with our
Savior. And to these Three the Apostle S. Paul did seem to allude, when
speaking of himself, he said, that he was caught up into the 2 Cor. 12.2.
Third Heaven. No doubt but the Prophet here means them all Three, especially
the Second, for that the same of all the Rest, was only visible to the Eye.
That he calls them here, the Works of the Fingers of God; and in an other
place, the Ps. 102.25.
Work of his Hands; and the Prophet Esaias to the selfsame purpose, Esaias 48.13.
Mine Hand has laid the Foundation of the Earth, and my Right Hand has
spanned the Heavens; it is, for that they are of such Excellency, as if they
had been his handy-worke indeed, which yet were made by his Word only, as Genesis
1.6.
Moses, and Ioh. 1.3.
S. John do declare. St Francis Eacon of the Advancement of Learning. l. 1. p.
27. b.
Excellent is that Passage which that great Advancer of Learning has, and
suitable hereunto: It is to be observed, that for any thing which appears in
the History of the Creation, the confused Mass, and Matter of Heaven and
Earth, was made in a Moment, and the Order, and Disposition of that Chaos or
Mass, was the Work of six Days, such a Note of difference it pleased GOD to
put upon the Works of Power, and the Works of Wisdom: wherewith concurreth,
that in the Former, it is not set down that GOD said Let there be Heaven and
Earth, as it is set down of the Works following, but actually that GOD made
Heaven and Earth: the One carrying the Style of a MANVFACTION, and the Other of
a LAW, DECREE, or COUNCIL.

From the Heavens in general, our Prophet comes in Particular to the Moon,
and Stars, which why they were ordained at the first, Moses declares in many
Words, Let there be Light Genesis 1.14.
says Moses, in the Firmament of the Heaven, to divide the Day from the Night:
and let them be for Signs, and for Seasons, and for Days, and Years, And
let them be for Lights in the Firmament of the Heaven, to give Light upon the
Earth. And God made two great Lights, the greater Light to rule the Day, and
the lesser Light to rule the Night: he made the Stars also. And God set them
in the Firmament of the Heaven to give Light upon the Earth, and to rule over
the Day, and over the Night, and to divide the Light from the Darkness.
Otherwise as Plin Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 107.
Pliny notes, it exceeds all Miracles, that any one Day should pass, and
all the World not to be set on a light consuming Fire.

But how comes it that in this place there is no mention of the Sun, who is
the Chief of all the rest? For as Light is the Queen of Heaven, as Aug.
Confess. l. 10. c. 34.
speaks S. Austen, so who is the King to that Queen, but that glorious Planet
in Heaven, that heavenly Ps. 19.5.
Bridegroom, who so much rejoices every Day to run his Course? Chrysostom. in
hunc Ps.
S. Chrysostom is of Opinion, that in specifying the Moon, and Stars, he
intimates the Sun to. And because that Some says he, exempt the Night from
being the Workmanship of God, the Prophet here shows them their own Error,
in making mention of the Moon, declaring in these Words, that God was the
Workman thereof. Whereunto is correspondent that of the Prophet Esaias 45.7.
Esaias, I form the Light, and create Darkness. I make Peace, and create Evil: I
the Lord do all these things. But as the Moon is here mentioned, and the
Sun not spoken of, so elsewhere the Sun is mentioned, and the Moon not
spoken of at all, as in the Ps. 19.5.
Psalm before alleged: In them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which
comes forth as a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, and rejoices as a Giant to
run his Course. Greg. in Ezech. Hom. 13.
S. Gregory thinks that the Prophets omitting the Sun in this Psalm, cannot
be excused but by an Allegory. I should think that this Psalm was made in the
Night time, when the Sun being gone from that Horizon, the Moon was in her
Brightness all the Night long, as sometimes She appears to us when She is in
the Full.

Verse. 4. What is Man that thou art Mindful of him? and the son of Man that
thou visitest him?] Man, Calvin. Instit. l. 1. c. 1.. 3.
says Calvin, is never sufficiently touched, and inwardly moved with
Knowledge of his own Baseness, until he have compared himself to the Majesty
of God. And how in that case they are at their Wits end, we have often
Examples, says he, both in the Book of Judge. 13.22. Esaias 6.5. Ezec. 2.1
Judges, and in the Prophets, so that this was a common Saying among the People
of God, We shall surely die, because we have seen God. With like Astonishment
is the Prophet David here stricken, and as here, so elsewhere, Lord Ps. 144.3.
says he, what is Man that thou so respectest him, or the Son of Man that
thou so regardest him? And Job to like purpose, What is Man Job. 7.17.
says he, that thou should magnify him, and that thou should set thine
Heart upon him? and that thou should visit him every Morning, and try him
every Moment. So that holy Men here speak as Mephibosheth 2. Sam. 9.8.
spoke to David, What is thy Servant, that thou should look upon such a dead
Dog as I am. Indeed, consider we Man as he comes into the World, and the great
ado there is about him, in the bringing of him up; and when once he is brought
up, the many By-ways that he takes: and well may we say as here it is, What is
Man? and the Son of Man? Pliny saw somewhat in Man's Miseryes, when he Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 7. Prooem.
spoke as he did, namely of all other living Creatures, how Nature has brought
him forth altogether Naked; and afterward when he is clothed, how she has
clothed him yet with the Bounty, and Riches of Others; how when he is Borne, he
is immediately fast bound having no part or Member at liberty, a point not
practiced on the young Whelps of the wildest Beast that is; how among all
other Creatures, there is not one, but by a secret instinct of Nature, knows
his own Good, and whereto he is made able: some make use of the Swiftnes of
their Feet, Some of their Wings, some of their Finnes, and so forth; Man only
knows nothing, unless he be taught, he can neither Speak, nor Go, nor Eat
otherwise then he is trained to it; in a Word, how naturally he is apt and good
at nothing, but to pule, and cry: but how much deeper should we look, then
Pliny did into the Depth of his Misery, should we consider, which Pliny did
not, neither indeed could he, the great and abundant MERCY of God, in
bestowing upon him such Dignities, as here are specified by the Prophet, amidst
those and greater Miseries, as First that the Lord is Mindful of him:
Secondly, that he Visits him, Memores quasi absentis, visitas praesentem.
Thou art Mindful Aug. in Ps. 35.
says S. Austen, as of one that is Absent, thou visitest him as Present:
Thirdly, that he Crowns him with Glory, and Worship: Fourthly, that he gives
him Dominion over the Works of his Hands, and puts all things in subjection
under his Feet, as is specified in these Particulars, Sheep, Oxen, Beasts,
Fowls, and Fishes. Nor all this in regard of Princes only, and the high
Potentates of the World, but as Lem. Exhort. ad Vit. Opt. Instit. c. 3.
Lemnius well notes, Vniversitatis Prafecturam ac Principatum attribuit, etiam
infimo cuique Cerdoni ac Plebeio, qui non minus fruitur Creatoris Munificentia,
totiusque Mundi Amoenitate spectabili cum primis ac visenda, quam Regum quivis
Copijs, Opibusque affluens: He bestows the Government, and Principality of
all these worldly Things, even upon every mean COBBLER, and basest Artisan, who
no less inioyes this Munificence of the Creator, and Pleasure of the World,
then the most wealthiest King, and Potentate.

But what has Man only? have not Women also these Prerogatives? Yes
doubtless, Women also, and they as well as Men. And therefore consider they with
themselves what cause they have to be ashamed of their Sex, as many of them of
late show themselves to be. Insomuch that it seems, displeased with their
Maker, for not making them Men, maugre God, and Nature, they endeavor to
transform themselves into the Habits of Men. Videlicet into their Belt,
Scarf, Hat, Points, Ferrum est quod amant. luvenal. Sat. 6.
Steele-lettoes, Cut-Haire, Doublet, Horsemans-Coat, and as it is said, Boots
to. Resolved they are, it seems, to bestow themselves on Satan, and to yield
him somewhat to boot. The Prophet Esaias 3.18.
Esaias has said enough: so has the Apostle 1. Pet. 3.3.
S. Peter: if neither prevail with them, Law, nor Gospel, let them beware God
himself takes not the Matter into his own Hands; Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God. But to
return unto my purpose.

First as touching Mindfulnes, to speak properly in very deed no Mindfulnes,
nor Forgetfulness can be said to be with God, forasmuch as with him all things
are present, both which have been from all Eternity, which now are at this
instant, and which shall be ever hereafter unto the Ends of the World. So that
as his Substance is Immutable, right so is his Knowledge to, seeing with him,
as Iam. 1.17.
speaks S. James, is no Variablenes, neither Shadow of Turning. Whenever
then in Holy Scripture God is said to Forget, as also to be Mindful, it is
spoken Figuratively, according to the manner of Men, who Forget, or Remember
thereafter as they help, or deny their help unto the Needy. Thus Pharaoes
Butler Genesis 40.23.
forgot his old Friend Joseph: and Many no sooner up the Ladder of Preferment,
but they begin to want in this kind that which Pharaoes Butler had not, I mean
a good Memory. Thus is it said to be with the Lord. Aug. in Evang. Joan. Tract.
7. Almae Nutricis blanda atque infracta Loquela. Lucr. l. 5. v. 222
For thus the Scriptures like Nurses, speak unto us in our own Language. When
the Lord helps us not, he is said to Forget us, when he helps us, he is said
to Remember, like as he remembered Genesis 8.1.
Noah in the Arc, Why, but will some say, if this be all, God remembers even
Beasts to, as he did every Beast, and all the Cattle that was with Noah. And
again, Ps. 145.15. Ps. 147.9.
The Eyes of all wait upon him, he gives them their Meat in due Season, he
opens his Hand, and fills all things living with Plenteousnes. True, he is
Mindful of Beasts indeed, but it is for our sakes that he is so Mindful of
them. For in respect of themselves, Does God take care for Oxen? 1. Cor. 9.9.
says the Apostle, Or says he it altogether for our sakes? and the Answer
there is, that for our sakes he says it indeed.

Secondly, concerning Visiting, To Visit in holy Scripture is taken two manner
of ways, either in Judgment, or in Mercy. In Judgment as elsewhere, Ps. 89.32.
If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments. If they break
my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments, I will visit their Offenses with
the Rod, and their Sin with Scourges. And again, Ps. 59.5.
Stand up, O Lord God of Hoasts, thou God of Israel, to visit all the Heathen,
and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious Wickedness: but in this
place, as also in some others it is taken in the way of Mercy, according to
that of Zacharias the Father of S. John Baptist, Luc. 1.68.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
People. So the Lord is said to visit Sarah, in the Genesis 21.1.
Book of Genesis, in that he did to Sarah, as he had spoken, concerning Isaac
her Son, borne and bred in her old Age.

Verse. 5. Thou made him lower then the Angels, to crown him with Glory, and
Worship.] Two Dignities of Man we have heard already, this is the Third,
namely, that he is crowned with Glory, and Worship; which two words Glory, and
Worship, though briefly thus spoken, yet contain no doubt, much matter, and
substance in them. I doubt not, Calv. in hunc Ps.
says Calvin, but in these words he commends those excellent Graces, which
show that Men are made to the Image of God, and created to the hope of the
blessed and everlasting Life to come. For in that they are endued with Reason,
whereby they may discern between Good and Evil; in that the Seed of Religion
is sowed in them; in that there is mutual Society between them, tied together
with certain Sacred Bonds; in that the Respect of Honesty, and Shamefastnes,
and Government of Laws is of esteem amongst them; all these are of a very
excellent and heavenly Wisdom. And therefore David in this place, worthily
cries out, that Mankind is crowned with Glory, and Worship. But what is that
he here says, Ita est: Charissimos nos habuerunt Dij Immortales, habentque. Et
qui maximus tribui honos potuit, ab ipsis proximos collocaverunt. Senec. de
Benef. l. 2. c. 29.
Thou made him lower then the Angels?

Man in the former Respects, coming so near to the Deity it self, Conimb. in
2. de Coel. c. 1. qu. 2 art. 2. p. 184.
they endeavored to signify his Excellency, who called him the Tie of all
things Visible, and Invisible, or the Horizon of things Material, and
Immateriall, forasmuch as he obtained a middle kind of Nature, that is, a
Nature above all things that were Material, though inferior to such as were
Immateriall. Now of this sort are the Angels. Angels, Hooker Eccles. Pol. l.
1.. 4
says Reverend Hooker, are Spirits Immateriall, and Intellectual, the
glorious Inhabitants of those sacred places, where nothing but Light, and
blessed Immortality, no shadow of matter for Tears, Discontentments, Griefs,
and uncomfortable Passions to work upon, but all Joy, Tranquillity, and Peace,
even for ever and ever does dwell. Such Obseruants of that Law, which the
HIGHEST, whom they adore, love, and imitate, has imposed upon them, that our
Savior himself being to set down the perfect Idea of that which we are to
pray, and wish for on Earth, did not teach to pray or wish for more then Mat.
6.10.
only that here it might be with us, as with them it is in Heaven. And again a
little after: Of Angels we are not to consider only what they are, and do, in
regard of their own being, but that also which concerns them, as they are
linked into a kind of Corporation amongst themselves, and of Society and
Fellowship with Men. Consider Angels each of them severally in himself, and
their Law is that which the Prophet David mentions, Ps. 148.2.
All ye his Angels praise him. Consider the Angels of God associated, and their
Law is that which disposes them as an Luc. 2.13. Mat. 26 53. Ps. 148.2.
Army, one in order and degree above an other. Consider finally the Angels, as
having with us that Communion, which the Apostle to the Heb. 12.22. Rev. 22.9.
Hebrews notes, and in regard whereof, Angels have not disdained to profess
themselves our Fellow Servants; from hence there springs up a third Law,
which binds them to Works of Ministerial employment. Every of which their
several Functions, are by them performed with Joy. And these are the ANGELS,
to whom but a little, God has made us here inferior, who hereafter shall be
as they are, according to the saying of our Savior, Mat 12 30.
In the Resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in Marriage, but are as
the Angels of God in Heaven. Hooker vbi sup^a. Ps. 91.11. Luc. 15.7. Heb. 1.14.
Act. 10.3. Dan 9 23. Mat. 18.10. Dan. 4.10.
Desire to resemble God in Goodness makes them unweariable, and even insatiable
in their longing, to do by all means al manner Good unto all the Creatures of
God, but especially unto the Children of Men, in the Countenance of whose
Nature, looking downward, they behold themselves beneath themselves, even as
upward in God, beneath whom themselves are, they see that Character which is no
where but in themselves and us resembled. Howbeit here we must have an Eye to
an other understanding to, which the Apostle to the Hebrews commends to us,
in that he interprets this Passage, of our Savior JESUS CHRIST. But of that
more anon. Concerning the fault that Faber found with this Translation, that
he should be lower then the Angels, and how he insulteth upon the Vulgar, and
upon Erasmus thereupon, I refer him to Erasm. Annot. in Novum Test. in Epist.
ad Heb. c. 2.
Erasmus, who has the leisure to see that whole Process.

Verse. 6. Thou made him to have dominion of the work of thy hands: and thou
have put all things in subjection under his Feet.] The fourth Dignity I spoke
of, that belongs to Man, Dominion over all things that are in the World. No
doubt but the Prophet in this place, has Relation to those words that were
Genesis 1.28.
spoken by the Lord to Adam in the Beginning of the World, and Genesis 9.2.
renewed unto Noah, after the Drowning of the same, and recovery thereof. I,
but wherein, will some say, does this Dominion consist? It consists even in
this, that Man has the use of all Creatures, or for his Profit, or for his
Pleasure. He may first kill and eat them, accordingly as was Act. 10.13.
said to Peter, Rise Peter, kill, and eat; Secondly, he may be Job. 31.19.
clothed with them; Thirdly, he may use them for his Pleasure, as Apes, and
Peacocks; for such also had King 1. King. 10 22 2. Chro. 9.21
Solomon, as we read in the First of Kings, and in the Second Book of
Chronicles.

If so be a Question be here moved, concerning venomous and Savage Zanch. de
Oper. Part. 3. l. 1. c. 1.
Beasts, what use there is of them, seeing they are so far from acknowledging
this Power in Man, that they are ready rather to fly in his Face, and to rend
and tear him, nay sometimes to devour him: the Answer is, that at the first,
when this Authority was given to Man, they neither did, nor durst do so, nay
they were all of them brought to Man, and in acknowledgment of their Obedience
to him, they were to have their Names from him, insomuch, that whatsoever Genesis
2.19.
Adam called every living Creature, that was the Name thereof. Howbeit
afterward when Man did fall from God, then fell these Beasts also from the
Sovereignty of Man, to revenge, as it were, Gods Quarrel, that seeing he
rebelled against God, they would also rebel against him. Mirari noli, si ca
quae deseruit superiorem, poenas patitur per inferiorem. Marvel not, Aug. de
Verb. Apost. Ser. 12. Vid. Theodoret. Graecor. affect. curat. Ser. 4.
says S. Austen, if so be that Creature [Man] who forsook his Superior, is
punished by his Inferior. Thus neither Horse, nor Dog, nor Ox, nor Sheep,
nor any other living thing, B. PILKING. on Aggey. p. M. 8. a.
says a Reverend Prelate, is tame at the first to obey us, but it must have
many stripes, or ever it will be brought to any good order to serve us. And
many Beasts, as Lions, Bears, Wolves, be so wild, that they will not serve Man
at all, but still remain his continual Enemies, ready to devour him. So that
the use of these is now in respect of God, chiefly forasmuch as God by them
does chastise the Disobedient, when by reason of our Sins, he armeth these
Servants of ours against us. Thus were Ezech 5.17. 1. King. 17.25
Lions sent among the Samaritans, because they feared not the Lord, and ^.
King. 2.24.
Bears among Two and Forty Children, for that they reverenced not his Prophet.
But to return unto my purpose.

Though the Prophet (as I said) have here Relation to the Words that were
spoken to Adam, as also to Noah, yet in these his general Words, I make no
doubt but he aymeth at the Heaven above, as also at the Stars. For as his
Incomprehensible MAJESTY fills all things, so has he given the use both of
Heaven, and Earth, and of the Air, and of the Water, and of all the Creatures
in them unto Man. And surely for these Heavenly Lights, that is a pregnant
Place in Deuteronomy. 4.19.
Deuteronomy, where it is said, the Lord has divided, that is, imparted them
unto all Nations under Heaven.

Verse. 7. All Sheep and Oxen: yea and the Beasts of the Field.] Having spoken
so generally in the Verse before, of all things in subjection under the Feet of
Man, he makes instance in three Particulars, the Beasts of the Field; the
Fowls of the Air; and the Fishes of the Sea. Of the Fowls of the Air, and
the Fishes of the Sea, in the next Verse; Of the Beasts of the Field in this.
And here speaking of the Beasts of the Field, he instanceth in Sheep and Oxen,
the mildest of all the rest, and most profitable unto Man. Where by the way let
me remember a good Meditation of S. Chrysostoms, who speaking of Savadge
Beasts. It is a great gain unto us, Chrysostom. in hunc Ps.
says he, that they are not subdued to us as other Beasts are. For how little
would it avail us if so be we had brought LIONS under our power? What great
Profit should we reap if so be we could tame LIBBARDS? Surely it were to no
purpose, but to make us more Proud and Arrogant. And therefore the Divine
Providence has suffered these to be exempted from our power: but those which
are profitable for us, those he has made tame, as the OX to plow, the SHEEP
to cloth the Nakedness of our Bodies, other laboring BEASTS to carry those
things that are to be carried in or out, FOUL, and FISH, whereby our Table may
be the better furnished. Iam. 3.7.
And yet as S. James notes, Every kind of Beasts, and of Byrds, and of
Serpents, and things in the Sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of Mankind,
but the TONGVE can no Man tame, it is an unruly Evil, full of deadly poison.
But to return where I left.

First, concerning SHEEP, they are, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 8. c. 47.
says Pliny in great request, both in regard that they serve as Sacrifices to
pacify the Gods, and also by reason their Fleece yields so profitable an
use. For even as Men, says he, are beholden to the Boeufe for their Principal
Food and Nourishment, which they labor for, so they must acknowledge that they
have their clothing and coverture of their Bodies from the poor Sheep As
touching Sacrifices, though the Gentiles had great use of them, as also the
Jews, yet we Christians have none at all, and yet I know not how, the use of
them is such with some Christians that as Sr Th. Moore Vtop. l. 1.
Sr Th. Moore observes very wittily, They that were wont to be so Meek and
Tame, and so small Eaters, now be become so great Devourers and so Wild, that
they eat up and swallow down the very MEN themselves. They Consume, Destroy,
and Devour whole FIELDS, HOUSES, and CITIES Meaning as he there speaks in
the person of another, that Noblemen and Gentlemen, yea and certain Abbots not
contenting themselves with the yearly Revenues and Profits that were wont to
grow to their Forefathers and Predecessors of their Lands, nor being content
that they live in rest and pleasure nothing profiting, yea much noying the
Weale-publique: left no ground for Tillage; they Enclosed all in Pastures; they
threw down Houses; they plucked down Towns, and left nothing standing, but
only the CHVRCH to be made a SHEEPE-HOVSE.

Secondly, concerning OXEN they are so profitable to Man, that a certain
Roman, as Plin Not. Hist. l. 8. c 45.
Pliny reports, was iudicially Endited, Accused, and Condemned by the People of
Rome, for that (to satisfy the mind of a Wanton Minion and Catamite of his,
who said he had not eaten any Tripes all the while he was in the Country) he
killed an Ox, although he was his own: yea and for this fact was Banished as
if he had slain his Grangier and Bailife of his Husbandry. These also served
the Heathen and the Jews for Sacrifices, and though to us Christians they are
needles in that respect, yet are they so necessary otherwise, as that in many
respects, we cannot be without them.

Verse. 8. The Fowls of the Air, and the Fishes of the Sea, and whatsoever
walks through the Paths of the Seas.] When these living Creatures here
mentioned, and in the next Verse before were first created, this was the order
of them. First, the First; Secondly, the Foul; Thirdly, the Beasts of the
Earth, for so we read in the Genesis 1.21.
Book of Genesis. Here, and in the Verse before, the order is inverted, the
last, first; and the first, last. Beasts in the first place with their kinds,
Sheep and Oxen; Fowls in the second; and Fishes in the third. But howsoever
the order is inverted, the meaning is all one, both in this place and in that,
namely that all Creatures of what kind soever (which are all comprehended
under these) are put in subjection unto Man. Pecora voluptatis, Volucres
Superbiae, Pisces Curiositatis. By Beasts, Aug. in hunc Ps.
says S. Austen, may Pleasure; by Birds, Pride; by Fishes, Curiosity, be
meant, alluding to that of S. John, The Lust of the Flesh, 1. Ioh. 2.16.
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life. Howbeit I had rather go more
literally with Chrysostom. in hunc Ps.
S. Chrysostom to work, and to understand as he does, that we have Dominion of
all these, and they are put in subjection under our Feet, in that God has
given us Art and Cunning to take them. Whether they be the Fowls on high, or
Fishes beneath in the Deep, or Beasts, as it was in the former Verse. The
Fowls and Fishes are thus joined here together, for that both of them had
their first Vid. Zanch de Oper. Part, 2. l. 7 c. 3.
Creation out of the Waters, though concerning Fowls, Aristotle is of another
mind, Here a Note would be remembered, and that a worthy one which Antoninus
has, both of the Verse going before, as also of this, marry I dare not commend
it for Current, but only to our Romish Catholics, and I wonder our Rhemists
made here no use of it, The Note is this. The Antonin. in summa Part. 3. Tit.
22. c. 5.
Man here meant is the POPE; The Beasts of the Field, Men living on Earth; The
Fishes of the Sea, the Souls in Purgatory; The Fowls of the Air, the Souls
in Heaven. He that would see more hereof, I refer him to B. Iuel Defense of
the Apol. Part. 1. c. 10 Divis. 1.
B. Jewel, as also to my Sermon. on the Queens day p. 695.
Lord of London, and thirdly to Pseudo-Mart. c. 3. p. 91
D. Dunne.

Verse. 9. O Lord our Governor how excellent is thy Name in all the World.]
This Psalm is like a Bracelet it begins and ends with one and the same
Linck. It is like unto the Year which begins where it ends, and ends
where it does begin.

Virg. Georg. l. 2.
Atque in se sua per vestigia volvitur Annus. In a word, it is a true
Rhetorical Epanalepsis. The Prophet no doubt had great Cause to begin with
Admiration, but having now considered these particulars in this sort, he had
greater Cause as here he does, to end with Admiration. For if so be we look
upon Man in himself, we shall see him so poor a Creature, as it may well
seem strange unto us, admirably strange, that God should have any respect, or
cast so much as an Eye upon him. And therefore as Elisabeth Luc. 1.43.
said, Whence is this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? So
whence is it, may we say in our Soliloquies unto God, that he should visit
us in this sort, and have this respect unto us.

But is it of Man only that this Psalm does thus speak? Nay, doubtless but of
God and Man, of the promised MESSIAH, and in that respect this Psalm was a
Christ's Sermon. going to Emaus. p. 104. and p. 105. Vid. Iansen. Epist. Dedicat.
p. ^. 5. b.
Prophecy, and many Mysteries of our Faith contained therein, to wit, our
Saviors Passion, his Resurrection, and Dominion, which he has over all
Creatures, both in Heaven and Earth. Witness the Apostle S. Paul, which does
open this Psalm unto us after the self same sort, as in his Epistle to the
Heb. 2.8.
Hebrews, his Epistle to the 1. Cor. 15.27
Corinthians, and his Epistle to the Ephesians. 1.22.
Ephesians. In his Epistle to the Heb. 2.5.
Hebrews thus: Unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the world to
come, whereof we speak, but one in a certain place testified saying, what is
Man that thou art so mindful of him: or the Son of Man that thou visitest
him? Thou made him a little lower then the Angels, thou Crownedst him with
Glory and Honor, and did set him over the Works of thy Hands. Thou have put
all things in subjection under his Feet. For in that he put all things in
subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him. But now we see
not yet all things put under him. But we see JESUS who was made a little lower
then the Angels, for the Domine quid est Homo, etc. Aduertant Paulum Apostolum
hunc locum ad Mortis humane intelligentiam referentem, ita vt istam
Minorationem non solum naturae Humanitatis assignet quinetiam divinitatem
Christi a Consortio Passionis and Mortis acceptet. Fulgent. de Pass. Dom. ad
Trasimund. l. 3.
suffering of Death, Crowned with Glory and Honor, that he by the Grace of God
should taste Death for every Man. For it became him for whom are all things, and
by whom are all things, in bringing many Sons unto Glory, to make the
Captain of their Salvation perfect through sufferings. In his Epistle to the
Corinthians thus: 1. Cor. 15 27
For he has put all things under his Feet; But when he says all things are
put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things
under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
also himself be Christus in quantum DEVS est, cum illo nos subiectos habet: in
quantum SACERDOS, nobiscum illi subiectus est. Aug. de Trin. l. 1. c. 8.
subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be Id est, Vt
Deus in omnibus Electis omniaca efficiat quae ad solidam eorum Beatitudinem
pertinent. Piscat. in 1. Cor. 15.28.
all in all. In his Epistle to the Ephesians thus: According to the working of
his mighty Power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead,
and set him at his own Right Hand in the Heavenly Places, far above all
Principality, and Might, and Dominion, and every Name that is named, not only
in this World, Ephesians 1.16.
but also in that which is to to come: and has put all Things under his Feet,
and gave him to be the Head over all Things to the Church, which is his Body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all.

By this then may appear what special Cause the CHVRCH had to appoint this
Psalm for One of those that are to be read upon the ASCENSION DAY. The
ASCENSION DAY puts us in mind, how when our Savior for our behoof, had
performed al those Offices that God required to be done; after he had been
borne of a Pure Virgin; lived and taught in the World some three and thirty
Years; died that Ignominious Death upon the Cross; rose again the third Day;
and showed himself to his Disciples the space of Forty Days after that: he
came with them to the Mount Act. 1.12.
Oliuet (the self same Mount Mat. 26.30.
from whence not long before, he descended to his Passion) and there in the
Sight of them al ascended up to Heaven, where according to S. Mark he Marc.
16.19.
sat on the Right Hand of God, and in that Sense is there to set to the End of
the World according to that of Peter, Act. 3.23.
Whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of Restitution of all Things
which God has spoken by the Mouth of all his Holy Prophets since the World
began. And all this as it is the Meaning of the Solemnising of that Feast, so is
it in effect, the Argument of this Psalm concerning our Savior CHRIST, Whose
Humiliation, as it was showed in those Words, Thou made him lower then the
Angels: so his Exaltation is annexed immediately, in that he was Crowned with
Glory and Worship, and has the Dominion of the Works of Gods Hands; and has
all Things in subjection under his Feet. Thus the Apostles took this Psalm,
and our Mother the CHVRCH teaching us, thus to take it too, she gives us those
Eyes to see the Mystery in this Psalm, that in greatest probability, we might
otherwise have wanted.

Bless, O Lord, this CRVRCH of thine, and defend Her now in time of
Prosperity, as thou have done heretofore in time of her Adversity. If when She
was, as was Ezech. 16.6.
Jerusalem, polluted in her own Blood, thou said unto Her, as thou did to
Jerusalem, when She was in her Blood, Live: yea thou said unto Her when She
was in her Blood, Live: now thou have caused Her to multiply as the V. 7.
Bud of the Field, and She has increased and waxen Great, and is come to
excellent Ornaments, and has prospered into a V. 13.
KINGDOM: Oh deliver Her not now, unto the V. 27.
will of them that hate Her. Remember thy Covenant with Her in the Days of her
V. 60.
Youth, and establish unto Her an everlasting Covenant. Joel. 2.17.
Spare thy People O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to reproach. Why should
Papists and Athists say, Ps. 79.1^.
Where is now their God?

To the same GOD Uncreate, Incomprehensible, Eternal, and Almighty, Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, be all HONOR, PRAISE, POWER, and DOMINION now
and evermore.

AMEN.

