A DISCOVERY OF THE HELLISH PLOT AGAINST DIVERSE particular of the Nobility of
the Kingdom of England.

ALSO THE PAPISTS GVNPOWDER-PLOT, brought to light.

With the Copy of a Letter sent from a Nobleman in Ireland, to Colonel
Lunsford. Jan. 11. 1642.

SHOWING, In a most true and real Relation, the manner how this Hellish Plot
was laid, and how these Noble Pillars of Protestant-Religion, the Earl of Cork,
the Earl of Kildare, and the valourous Lord Jones, should have been blown up.

AS ALSO, How they intended to burn down the City of Dublin with Wildfire,
and how they were beaten back by the Lord chief-Iustices in the Castles.

London, Printed for(...) (...)smith. 164(...).

A GUNPOWDER PLOT IN IRELAND, DISCOVERED.
THe rebels having intelligence that the noble Earl of Ormond, the Earl of
Kildare, and the Lord Jones were fully resolved about the 7. of Ian. to relieve
the City of Dublin, by reason that the Rebels have besieged it a long time,
whereby they wanted provision and Ammunition very much, they resolved
altogether to hinder their intents: therefore General Neale, and many other of
the Rebels invented a Plot for the utter confusion of them all, and it was to
be performed at that very instant when the aforenamed Lords were marching with
their forces toward the City of Dublin.

THE Manner how the PLOT was laid.
THe Rebels for bringing their bloody and hellish designs to perfection, had
provided shovels, spades, pick-hacks, and many other instruments for the said
bloody design, and about the number of 400. soldiers, and there with all speed
they set them to work which was to undermine the ground for the space of two
miles, and laid there great store of Gunpowder: and so by that means to blow
up the aforenamed Lords in their marching over: thy(...) being done, the Rebels
intended to march against the City of Dublin, and to destroy it by wildfire:
but they were prevented, and their hellish designs discovered by a miraculous
means.

THE Manner how this PLOT was discovered.
Colonel Morton marching before the protestant Army, and the two other Lords
bringing on their forces with puissant courage, they being come within the
space of six miles of Dublin, Colonel Morton feeling the ground quiver under
his feet, it seeming like dry ground, caused the Army to stand, and said, that
he feared that there was treachery intended against them, he therefore
immediately took one of their strongest pikes, and thrust it into the ground, to
see whether it were hollow or not, the pike running in with such great force,
and he laying no strength to it, immediately caused some of his soldiers to
dig, to see what plot there was intended against them, and digging a yard deep
they espied a vault, and great store of gunpowder, whereupon the aforesaid
Colonel caused them to retreat back, fearing that they had come too far, but
not knowing how to discover the same: unless that some man would venture his
life to go in: where presently a young man stepped forth, and spoke to them as
follows. Noble Captain, to do you and my Country good, I will venture my life
to find out this hellish plot, then they let him down, who presently espied 6
men, they immediately questioning of him, he answered that he came from General
Neale, chief General for the Rebels, to help them in their good enterprise,
who being there about the space of two days, they resolved that only one of
them should tarry to bring this to pass, which was to give fire to the
Gunpowder, for to blow up the protestant Army, the rest should go forth, and
retire back to the Rebels: therefore they concluded together to draw cuts which
of them should tarry, which as the Lord would have it, it fell to his lot: and
they being gone, he seeing the place which they came out at, came presently to
the said place, and opened the door, which was of wood, and covered with
turfe, in such a manner, that no man could perceive whether there were any
door or not: and coming forth, he re^ated to Captain Morton how it was. Who
presently set a strong guard about the said vault, and then 200, of the
protestants went in, and fetched all the powder out, and great store of
Ammunition they have also taken.

THE COPY OF A LETTER SENT from a Nobleman in Ireland, to Colonel Lunsford.
Sir,
WE desire you to make ready your forces, as soo^e as possible you can, and to
fall on with speed, you know our meaning, and we will send you aid suddenly;
for we have gathered our forces together, since they were defeated bp the
Scottish Regiments, for in that fight we lost 2000. men, and what you begin,
we will end, use your hands, and put in practice your wits; for you know we
have many friends in City and Country, and what moneys you disburst, we
will be answerable to you,

Your loving friend, E. F.

FINIS.

