THE DOCTRINE OF FAITH, JUSTIFICATION, AND ASSURANCE, Humbly Endeavored to be
farther cleared toward the satisfaction and comfort of all free Vnbiassed
Spirits.

With an APPENDIX for PEACE.

BY ROBERT DIXON, Prebendary of ROCHESTER.

1 Cor. 12.31. Covet after the best gifts, and yet I show you a more excellent
way.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid. M.DC.LXVIII.

To the Honorable Sr EDWARD HALES, Baronet.
SIR,
GOD is the great Maker and bestower of all Rights: The persons capable to
receive them, and to whom he does convey them, are Angels and Men. To mankind
he gives the best of Rights, and invests them with the best Inheritance, by the
best Mediator Jesus Christ, the Principal Heir of all Things, through the means
of Faith, which justifies the Sons of Men by Nature, to be the best Title, and
the strongest Assurance that can be had to Eternal Life.

I have therefore purposely fixed upon these noble Principles of Faith,
Justification, and Assurance, That I might be a true Mercury to point out the
stately way that leads to Celestial Glory. Directing wise Souls to come off
from the wandering Pursuits of earthly Pomps, empty Speculations, and uncertain
Riches, which discompose and tire the best Wits in the Labyrinth of this World:
That they may find true content in the Choice of that one Thing which is truly
necessary, That better part which shall never be taken from them; That solid
comfort which will stand by them, and bring them Peace to the end, and in the
end, and unto all Eternity.

This pain Treatise of these most high and most Christian Truths, I held my
self obliged to dedicate unto you, as being the first Fruits of my Labors in
this kind, and therefore most due to you of all men, who was my first
Benefactor and most liberal Patron of my Studies, together with your most
excellent Lady, now with God.

Her transcendent Estate I cannot reach, but Yours, and both your Sons I may,
and do Address my self unto. And for the joynt-favours which I have received
from you and your Lady during your conjugal Union, and for your continued and
for her sake increased kindness since the sad separation, I humbly offer this
token of my Gratitude to remain by you, from me, to look into upon occasions
for your Satisfaction and comfort, in the midst of the Dis-satisfactions and
Discomforts of this Miserable World.

The same also I desire you would commend to your Sons, the Stems of that Noble
Lady, whose memory I shall ever honor, and you and them for her sake.

In this I aim merely to strike the sprightly vein of Pure Love to You and to
your hopeful Family, and a deer Remembrance and kindness to you all, as to the
best of my Friends.

Upon which generous Terms if you please to accept of this small Present it may
promote the acceptance thereof to others, and encourage him farther, who ever
desires to show himself,

SIR, Your most faithful, and most affectionate Servant ROBERT DIXON.
Rochester. March. 26. 1668.
To the honest READER.
FAITH is all in all to a Christian; For all that have Faith, are thereby
Justified, and have full Right to all the Promises of God, To be his Sons by
Adoption and Grace, to have their Sins pardoned, to be Sanctified by the Holy
Spirit, and thereby to have all necessary Assistance and comfortable Assurance
of a Resurrection to the Inheritance of Eternal Life. I therefore purposely
wave all perplexed Disputes, and subtle Notions and Distinctions, which serve
for nothing but to puzzle all men, especial them that are weak in the Faith.
It shall suffice all Christians, if they are willing to embrace Gods Promises,
and perform his Precepts with an honest heart. Let them not trouble themselves
at all with the variety of Sects and Factions. For all such true hearted and
humble Souls, do belong to Christ his Church, what ever Differences there be in
Opinions caused by vain men who do not understand one another, being sore
blinded with Pride and idle Speculations which engender nothing but Strife and
Divisions. Keep thou therefore, Good Reader, Faith and a good Conscience, and
pass not for the rash Censures of any. Be thou confident of Gods unchangeable
favor, if thou be no Hypocrite. In Order therefore to the satisfaction and
comfort of tender Spirits, I have written this short Treatise, and do encourage
them to do their true endeavor to please God, and to perserverance, and trust
in him for the certainty of their future estate of Happiness and Salvation,
which he has undoubtedly provided for them. Accept therefore, kind Reader,
what I have here offered; and then if God permit, I will add more to the same
purpose: Avoiding all Nicety and Superfluity of Words, and condescending in the
great Points of Grace, Faith, Justification, and Assurance, to the meanest
capacity; aiming at no Side, or Party, but equally respecting the plain Truth,
with an unbiassed mind for Peace. This even Temper of Spirit, is the only means
among all good Christians, especially Divines, for the stinting of
Controversies in all foolish and unlearned Questions, and the Propagation of
Piety, Peace and Love, in Church and State. This Rare Character of a True Child
of God, to be pure and peaceable by obedience to good Laws and fulfilling all
Righteousness, is the safe way to Heaven. Thus we work out our Salvation with
fear and trembling, and make our Calling and Election sure; Which shall be the
daily prayer of him, who is

Thine in the Lord Jesus Robert Dixon.

The Doctrine of FAITH, JUSTIFICATION and ASSURANCE.
HEBR: 11.1. Now Faith is the Substance of things hoped for, the Evidence of
things not seen.
COHERENCE.
THE Author having in the end of the former Chapter spoken of Faith, makes a
digression upon that occasion to explain the Nature of Faith more largly, and
produces many examples of faithful men to provoke the Hebrews to imitate their
Fathers and others in the Holy Faith, and thereby to endure afflictions, and to
overcome them by Faith, as they had done.

EXPLICATION.
These words are no Definition of Faith, Chap. 1. Of Faith.
no more than those, Chap. 12.29. where God is called A consuming Fire, are the
Definition of God.

FAITH is a Thing Indefinite, and is not defineable, because it is so general a
Thing, that no Genius will comprehend it; yet it may be designed, a high Esteem
of Gods Existence, Power, and Goodness. Besides, definitions are dangerous; if
in the Civil, much more in the Divine Law.

Two Notions are here laid down, as Principles and Elements, to conclude, that
Faith was in those persons hereafter mentioned.

1. The Substance of Things hoped for, is Faith. 1. Where Things hoped for do
subsist, there is Faith; or where Things to come are present, there is Faith.

2. The Evidence of Things not seen, is Faith; or where there is a sight of
Things not seen, there is Faith.

These Principles are taken from the Object of Faith, Good Things to come, and
therefore absent and unseen: But when the Soul apprehends them as present and
visible, then she believes and hopes -- For hope that is seen is not hope: Romans
8.24, 25.
for what a man sees, why does he yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see
not, then do we with patience wait for it. A great Argument to Patience, by
having an Eye to the Recompense of the Reward, and to the Price of the high
Calling, which is laid up for us in Christ, which causes us to endure the
Cross, and despise the Shame.

A great Argument to live by Faith, as if the Things were sensibly present, and
seen; yea, by Faith they are made present, and seen; for Faith is the substance
of things hoped for, and the evidence of Things not seen.

Where therefore these Two Principles and Arguments are, they do necessarily
infer true Faith; and they do show the excellency thereof, by the great
effects of Patience and Courage, which were wrought in the hearts of those
famous Worthies, whereby they obtained so good a Report from God, who highly
favored them, and rewarded them for all their sufferings.

The several Instances are very remarkable. Chap. 2. of Examples of Faith.


Ver. 3.
The World framed by Gods Word, Things seen, made of Things that do not appear,
but are understood by Faith.

By the Things now seen, we have a sight of things unseen, done long before our
times. The Scripture makes Faith of it -- Let there be light: Genesis 1.3. Ps.
33.6.
and there was light, etc. -- By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made,
etc. He spoke the word, and it was done.

We now see Trees of Trees, Living Creatures from Living Creatures, Men from
Men; but these first Trees, Creatures and Men, had not their beginning from
these we now see, Wisd. 11.17.
but from the Chaos or Deep without Form.

Ver. 4.
Abel offered a more excellent Sacrifice than Cain by Faith, (he leaves out
Adam for his Sin) Abels Sacrifice was not more valuable than Cains, but more
acceptable for his Faith. The other was, the Sacrifice of a Fool, i.e. a
sinner, this of a wise man, i. e. just.

Verse. 5.
Enoch was translated by Faith, Genesis 5.21.
for he walked with God, and so pleased God; how, but by Faith? for without
Faith it is impossible to please God.

Verse. 7.
Noah prepared an Arc by Faith, i. e. in hope of Gods promises. He had a sight
of Things unseen, i.e. of the Flood yet to come, a Subsistence of Things hoped
for, i. e. safely from the Universal Deluge.

Verse. 8.
Abraham sojourned and looked for a City to come by Faith, Verse. 27.
and offered up Isaac the Child of Faith in the Promise, not Nature.

Verse. 11.
Sarah by Faith conceived in her old Age, above the strength of Nature.

Verse. 20.
Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau concerning things to come in the Promised Land.

Verse. 21.
Jacob dying in Faith and worshipping, blessed his Sons to the Promised Land.

Verse. 22.
Joseph by Faith gave Commandment concerning his bones to be buried in Canaan.

Verse. 23.
Moses by Faith was saved from drowning, and refused to be called the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the People of God,
than to enjoy the Pleasure of sin for a season.

Verse. 30.
The Walls of Jericho fell down by Faith.

Verse. 31.
Rahab by Faith perished not with the Unbelievers.

So Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jephthah, and David, Samuel, and the Prophets; who
by Faith subdued Kingdoms, and wrought Righteousness, obtained the Promises,
endured tortures, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire,
waxed valiant in fight, 2 Mace:
women received their dead raised to life again, etc. Heb. 11.35.

All this Faith arose not from any clear Promise of a Resurrection, Chap. 3.
Acts of Faith.
but hoping in Gods Power and Goodness, beyond this Life they endured all
things here patiently: Much more may we that have a full and open Promise, and
Example of the Resurrection, by him that first brought Life and Immortality to
light through the Gospel, and is the first born from the Dead, and the first
fruits of them that slept.

Thus the Things that are absent from us, and do subsist in themselves, are
made to subsist to us by our Faith. As Christ's Birth, Life, Miracles,
Suffering, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Glory, all real in themselves,
subsisting, though before our times, yet are made present by Faith: So our
Resurrection, Ascension, and Glory Eternal, not yet come nor seen, but are made
present, and visible by Faith, anticipating their being to us, before they be:
For we live by Faith here, and not by Sense. And blessed are those that have
seen Christ in the Flesh, and the works that he did, and heard his words; yea,
but much rather blessed are they, that have never seen, nor heard him, or his
Works or Doctrine, and yet have believed.

And this is truly to know Christ, and by this knowledge of Faith, Christ is in
us, and we in Christ. For we know not Christ now after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, i.e. as he is spiritually present with us by Faith, and will be
eternally present with us by sight. For although we had lived in his time, and
known him after the flesh, or been his Natural Mother, Sisters, or Brethren;
yet from henceforth by our Faith, we should have known him no more in that
state of weakness and Mortality of Flesh, but in a far better state of
Eternal Glory and Power in the Spirit. And in the Union and Communion with him
by Faith. And so we do know him, and by the hearing and believing of his Word,
we are made one with him and he with us; are flesh of his flesh, and bone of
his bone; are his spiritual Mother, Sisters, and Brethren. Having fellowship
already with the Father, and with the Son, by the Spirit of the Father and the
Son, and are already in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; For Faith is the
Substance of things hoped for, and the Evidence of things not seen.

Doctrine.

1. The Subject of this Text, is Faith.

2. The Circumstances are two: 1. The Substance of things hoped for. 2. Chap.
4. Of the fruits of Faith.
The Evidence of things not seen.


3. The Reason is, Because Faith obtains a present Right to a future Blessing,
and an earnest and assutance thereof, and an Expectation of the full Possession.

4. The Reason of this Reason, is from the Nature of Faith, which is not only
an Assent to the Truth of Gods Promises, with a Reliance and Dependency upon
God for the performance of them, but an acceptance and embracing them upon the
condition of Holiness, that they are offered unto us; which Faith is therefore
accounted unto us for Righteousness. That is, whereby we have a true Right,
Interest, Title and Claim to the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven, which is
the Thing promised unto us.

This Description of Faith is thus illustrated unto us. Chap. 5. Of the
Desc^iption of Faith.


1. God makes a Promise of Eternal Life, and in order thereunto of the grace of
Adoption, and forgiveness of Sins, and the gift of the Holy Ghost. Thus God
gives his Faith unto man, is Gracious to promise, being moved thereunto only by
his free love in Christ, without our supplication, or the mediation of any
Creature.

2. God stands to his Promise thus made, and keeps his Faith; for he is
faithful that has promised, and keeps Covenant for ever.

3. Man accepts and entertains this Promise made by God, which is a taking of
the Faith given, trusting firmly to the giver for the full performance of it in
due time.

4. Man makes a Promise to God, that is, he gives his Faith to God, to work
that righteousness which God has required at his hands, by the help of his
grace.

5. Man stands to his promise and Faith, which he has given to God, by the
performance of that duty of Love, which God has required of him, with all his
heart, soul, and strength, by the same Grace.

6. God accepts this Promise or Faith which man has given to him, that is, God
takes his Faith given, and trusts to the Giver, expecting the performance of
it.

This is a mutual Contract betwixt God and Man, as that in Marriage, a mutual
Assent and Consent, giving and taking of each other.

This is the Covenant of Grace made between God and man, Chap. 6. Of the
Covenant of Grace.
whereby both parties are made sure together: This is our Faith.

God reveals his Promise, Law, Will, Word, Testament, Covenant, Ordinance,
Grace; God calls, moves, persuades, draws, invites, allures, by all gracious
and proper means, fit for a rational spirit to receive.

When the heart hears, understands, is invited, moved, persuaded and drawn,
that is, accepts and embraces the offer of Grace, then man believes.

When the Heart stops the Ear at the voice of this Charmer, though he charm
never so often, never so wisely; when he refuses, rejects, or embraces not,
then man disbelieves, then he is condemned of himself, because he makes God a
Liar, who is Truth its self, and cannot lie. As when a Rebel has pardon
offered by his Prince, and will not accept it upon the condition of future
Loyalty, he deserves to dye, if he had ten thousand lives.

So when the heart has once accepted the free grace and love of God, and
afterward falls off, and embraces this present World, being weary of
obedience, and unwilling to exercise mortification and self-denial; then man is
said to deny the Faith, and to make Shipwreck of Faith, and of a good
Conscience.

So then the Acceptance of Gods good Word and Promise is True Faith, and by it
the Believer obtains Righteousness, even the Righteousness of God which is by
Faith.

And this is our Justification, Chap. 7. Of Justification.
that is not only to the forgiveness of our sins, but to a present Right of
being the Child of God, and Heir of God, and Coheir with Jesus Christ, and has
thereby the Spirit of God given unto him, which is the earnest Evidence and
Assurance of his Salvation, and accordingly has Hope of the future Possession
of the Inheritance which is by Promise. And thus the just man lives by his
Faith, and waits patiently upon God for the fulfilling of his word. And this
his Faith stays his Soul from fainting, and is unto him the Substance of
things which are yet to come, and otherwise as to him do not subsist, and is
unto him the Evidence of things not seen, and otherwise as to any mortal Eye,
cannot be seen.

Thus Abraham believed in God, and it was accounted unto him for Righteousness,
that is, Abraham believed in God and thereby was justified; for St. Paul
alleges these words to prove the Doctrine of Justification by Faith: and to
account any Right to any person, is to justify that Person, or to have
Righteousness imputed to him, Romans 4.6. Gal. 2.16. So had Abraham a true Right
by his Faith to have a Son and a numerous Progeny, and to possess the Land of
Canaan.

And this is our Evidence also, That 1. We have a Right to Heaven by Faith. 2.
We hold it by Works. 3. We expect it by Hope.


So Faith is a Passive Act of the Will, receiving, holding and embracing Gods
offer; as the Fathers that were persuaded of the Promises of God, and saw them
a far off and embraced them; as they that heard the word, Heb. 11.13.
and received it with joy: And to as many as received Christ which was the
Promised Seed, Luc. 8.13.
to them gave he Power, that they should be called the Sons of God. Joh. 1.12.
So it is a Passive Act of the same Will, to refuse or reject what is offered,
as the Text speaks -- See that ye refuse not him that speaks from heaven. --
He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him,
Heb. 12.25. Joh. 12.48.
etc. Thus the Lawyers rejected the Counsel of God against themselves, and
therefore accounted themselves unworthy of Eternal Life.

Gods Promise imputes a Present Right to a future Blessing, Chap. 8. Gods
Promise.
which are two Acts of Gods will. Hence God requires an Acceptance of that
present Right, and an Expectation of the future Blessing, which are two Acts of
man's Will, correspondent to the two Acts of Gods Will, of imputing a Present
Right, and a future Possession of a Biessing.

This is Gods Promissory Will, which is not at all compulsatory, but
invitatory, altogether leaving us freely to our own choice. And this Acceptance
is Faith, and this expectance is Hope agreeable to the will of Gods Promise.

Thus Gods Precept, which is the condition of his Promise, imposes a present
Band to a future observation of some Duty, as the works of love, Chap. 9. God's
^recept.
which are two Acts of Gods Preceptory Will. Hence God requires submission to
this present Band, and performance of the future Duty, which are two Acts of
man's will, agreeable to the two Acts of Gods Will.

This is Gods Preceptory will, and this is compulsatory, not Invitatory to
leave us free to our own choice to obey, or to transgress, but legally binds us
to obedience. And this obedience if freely performed, not for fear of
Punishment, is Love, which is the fulfilling of the Law in an Evangelical way.

Gods Precepts are his Revealed Will or Word, proceeding from his Holiness; and
Gods Judgments are his revealed Will or Word, proceeding from his Anger: But
Gods Promises are his revealed Will or Word, proceeding from his Love. This is
Gods good Word, or his good Promise.

Therefore an Assent to Gods Precepts and to his Judgments, is Faith to convict
a Sinner of his Transgressions, and the guilt of Punishment due to him for the
same: But an Assent to Gods Promises, and an Acceptance of them, is faith to
justify to a present Right to a future Blessing.

Thus Abraham, and Sarah, accepted the present Right, and expected the future
blessing by faith and Hope.

And so the faithful accept the present Right, and expect the future Blessing
by Jesus Christ, and have it by Faith and Hope.

And though we dye before we possess it: yet we dye in faith, and lie down in
hope to rise again to the possession of Eternal Glory. For so the faithful are
said to be persuaded of Gods promises, having seen them a far off, and embraced
them -- All these dyed in faith, Heb. 11.13.
having not yet received the full fruition of the Promises, and their flesh
rested in hope to put on a glorious and blessed Immortality. Therefore my
Deerly beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know, that your labor is not in vain in
the Lord. For Faith is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen.



Thus in making faith, the Action is on Gods part; and in taking faith, the
Action is on Man's part. And this is noble and free in God to promise and
persuade, and in Man to be persuaded and to receive what God gives. What can be
more easy and reasonable, then to say Amen to Gods Promises, only this Fiat
quod dicitur, Lord here I am to do whatsoever thou will have me to do. Thus the
Blessed Virgin answered; Be it unto me even as thou have said. Give Lord for
thy servant is ready to receive, And that with a glad heart too, to obtain such
rich Grace from the God of all Grace.

This is Gods drawing of us with the Cords of a Man, which makes his Yoke easy,
and his Burden light, and all that refuse to be persuaded are left without all
excuse. For how often has God stood at their door and knocked, how often would
he have gathered them together into his congregation to be partakers of his
Benefits with his faithful People, but they would not; therefore these things
are justly hid from their Eyes.

Chap. 10. Of both Covenants.
This is to be in Covenant with God, When Gods Sponsions are Double Acts of his
Will, devising a present Right to a future Blessing, and Man's Responsions are
Double Acts of man's Will, accepting this present Right to a future Glory. And
so our will becomes agreeable to Gods will, touching one thing to be had of
God, which makes a perfect Covenant of Grace justly so called, because God was
moved to make that Covenant merely by his Grace, and because the Matter of it
is very gracious. So Gods Commands are Double Acts of his Will for a present
obligation to a future duty, and man's yeeldings are double Acts of his Will, to
a present Band to a future duty. So our Will becomes agreeable to Gods Will,
touching one Thing to be done of man, which makes a perfect Covenant of Works
justly so called, because man's duty is a work, and the matter of it is Labor.
For God Covenanted with Abraham, that he should walk before God, and be
upright, and that every male of his should be Circumcised. And God covenants
with us, That we should be poor in Spirit, mourn, Matthew. 5.
hunger and thirst after Righteousness, be pure in heart, merciful, meek, etc.
which is laborious.



Therefore a full Right, Interest, Claim or Title of an Inheritance to come,
together with an earnest penny given and received, is the substance and
evidence of that inheritance to the Heir thereof, and he is as sure if he hold
his Right given, as if he actually enjoyed it.

Therefore the Scripture says, Ephesians. 1.3.
We are already in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. And God has raised us up
together, and made us to set in heavenly places in Christ -- He that Believes
has everlasting life, Ephesians. 2.6.
and I will raise him up at the last day. -- Christ is the first fruits of them
that sleep.

Now if the first fruits be holy, then the whole Lump is holy. If Christ be the
first fruits of the Resurrection to Glory, then all that are Christ's, even the
whole Harvest of the Faithful, shall rise to the same Glory. And therefore
Christ is called the First Born from the Dead, our Elder Brother, the first
Born among many Brethren; and if the first Born be risen, then shall the second
and third Born, and all the Brethren that are born of the same God, rise from
the Dead, and be partakers of the same Inheritance of Glory with Christ their
Elder Brother, in whom, and by whom they have right to be the sons of God by
the Grace of Adoption and Regeneration, as he had by Nature and Generation.

If Christ be the Head, then the Faithful are the Body. And if the Head be
risen, the Body shall follow after. For our Flesh is in Heaven already. And as
sure as Christ is in Heaven, so sure shall we be also. For where he is, there
we shall also be, and Christ is gone before to prepare a place for us, that
where he is, there we might also be. And in his Fathers house there are many
Mansions and Portions for all his Children. And where the Carcass is, thither
will the Eagles be gathered together.

Application.

Chap. 12. Of Comfort.
For Comfort and satisfaction to all. Godliness has the Promise of this life,
and of that which is to come.

Things to come are made Present, and things unseen are made to be seen by
Faith. God will have us to walk here by Faith, and hereafter by sight.

Here we believe and see a far off, hereafter we shall enjoy and see clearly.

Here we know and see darkly as in a Glass, there we shall see Face to Face,
and know even as we our selves are known.

We are sure we are now the Sons of God, we know not yet what we shall be, but
this we know, that when Christ shall appear, we shall appear also with him in
Glory.

Chap. 12. Of Privileges by Faith.
For look what Right Christ has by Nature to the Love of his Father, who has
made him Heir of all things, The same in kind, though not in degree, have we by
Grace in and through Jesus Christ, to be the Heirs of God, and Coheirs with
Christ Jesus; and consequently, as younger brothers, to Taste of the same
Inheritance.

By Faith we see and feel these absent and invisible things of God, and know
the height, and length, and depth, and breadth of the Love of God in Christ
Jesus, which otherwise passes all knowledge; For neither Eye has seen, nor
Ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what
things God has laid up for those that fear Him.

Chap. 13. Of Assurance.
Evidence and Assurance. Faith, and the Spirit of God, are both these to our
Spirits.

In the exercise of my Priestly office, I have often heard the sad complaints of
poor devout Souls for want of Assurance; and that they had not interest in
Christ, no faith, no comfort, they could not pray, nor do any good, and God had
forsaken them. And alas, what should they do?

Chap. 14. Miserable Comforters.
To this, unskilful men, Physicians of no value, miserable comforters, such as
preach Christ out of no good will, but envy eternal happiness to others, and
would engross it wholly to themselves, make many sad answers. Their Eye is
evil, because Gods is good; niggardly Stewards to a Bountiful Master. Whereas
they ought freely to give, as they have freely received, and dispense the
mysteries of Salvation with a most bountiful hand. Hard Fathers, that had
rather give a Stone, then an Egg, and a Scorpion rather then a Fish, of Sour,
Sullen, Ghostly, Saturnine Aspect to some, driving them into despair, calling
them Reprobates, such as have no share in Gods Promises. These men are far
from our Saviors Temper, who came to seek and to save that which was lost, to
call sinners to Repentance, to Preach the Gospel to the poor, Deliverance to
the Captives, Recovery of sight to the blind, and to proclaim the acceptable
year of the Lord. The smoking Flax he did not quench, and the bruised Reed he
did not break; and of those that came unto him he rejected none, but invited
all that were heavy laden with the burden of their sins, that they might find
rest to their Souls. They have forgotten the Precept of the Apostle, Let the
same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus.

On the contrary, they are fair, frolike, boon, buxome and debonair to
themselves, and to such as are of their own Pharisaical Sect. They can sow
pillowes under every such Elbow, and dawb with untempered mortar, and Preach
pleasing things to such as fill their Purses.

These can make a great gain of Godliness, can make it the fashion to move
scruples, and create doubts and fears in the tender consciences of poor
Creatures, teach them to whine and cry as a Woman in her pangs, and call this
the spiritual Throws of the New Birth: but they must come to them to be their
Midwives, and to resolve all their doubts, and be delivered from all their
fears; and thereout suck they no small advantage.

They have set up an Assurance-office, and to them these Adventurers must come
to secure them for their prosperous voyage to Heaven.

They can make a Fair and Market for Pardons, as well as the Papists by their
Indulgences. It Is the same trick under a diverse and more cleanly conveyance.

The same thing is done by their assurances, as is done by the Popish pardons.

They cause poor Souls to pin their salvation upon their sleeves, to hang their
hopes upon their Teachers Girdles, and make the Disciples live or dye by the
Breath of their mouths, stand or fall, thrive or be undone by their smile or
frown: In a word have absolute dependence from them.

This is to Lord indeed over men's souls, and yet these men shall be admired,
and humbly sought unto by Rich Presents, and glad they can get a glance or nod
from the man of God. Thus they lead along multitudes, carrying them like
Pitchers by the Ears, in as much ignorance and security, as the subtilest
Jesuits or any other Orders can do.

Those of their select flock shall be the elect, and never fail. Slips and
frailties may be in the Babes of Grace, but come to them, and all shall be made
up again. God sees no sin in them, and they are in Heaven already.

As for others they shall be Reprobates and Castawayes, such as have the Mark
of the Beast, no signs of Grace nor Evidences for heaven at all.

Let the World take heed of these men, both amongst us, and the Church of Rome.

Chap. 15. Of reso ving of Doubts.
But they that are the True Interpreters of Gods Word, few among thousands, that
are able to speak a word of comfort in due season to weary souls; These can
show unto man his Righteousness by Faith, and save a soul alive, plucking them
out of the Jaws of despair, and to find a Ransom for them.

What heart so merciless, that will not, having power, draw a poor Captive out
of the Dungeon?

To such souls as these that are thus fearful I would say as Christ did, fear
not, be of good cheer, thy Faith has saved thee, Why do ye doubt, O ye of
little faith?

To these I say, they have Faith, and have an Interest in Christ; because they
desire it, and do their utmost endeavor to please God.

And what if they feel no comfort, nor can find these marks men talk of, and
can not pray eloquently, nor preach, is this for want of Grace? You know what
the Scripture says, -- Lord, have we not taught in the streets, and in thy
name cast out Devils, and done many mighty works; yet for all this, Depart from
me, for I know you not, ye workers of Iniquity.

Nay, their spirits do pray, though their tongues want utterance, and the
Spirit helps their infirmities with sighs and groans which they cannot utter.

And surely if they be asked, if they would part with the hopes that they have
in Christ, they would not do it for ten thousand Worlds.

This is their Case and Condition; They have lowly dispositions of mind, the
best of all; and they have melancholy tempers of Body, the worst of all. This
is the true cause of their speaking after this manner from their sense and
reason, not from their Faith.

And as for Assurance, what Assurance would these men have? Would they look
into Gods Book, and see their names written in the kingdom of Heaven; or is
there any such Book; or if there were, Do they look for a special Revelation?
This is an unreasonable request, wherefore serves Faith? but to be the
substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen.

If they yet urge and say, they feel no comfort, I answer. Let them be content
to want the sense of Comfort, Faith is all in all to supply all our Wants, and
there is joy and comfort enough in Believing; For I believe what I feel not,
what I understand not. I live by Faith, and not by sense. I believe against
hope, and above hope, and contrary to hope. I cannot define what Faith is: but
this I can tell, that I do believe, and I know in whom I trust; and though I
know not how the grace of God comes into my heart, nor when, yet I believe that
I have it; and though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him.

Chap. 16. Faith about sense.
Remember Abraham. The Promise was made to him, that he should have a Son though
he was old, and Sarah was past Childbearing, insomuch that she laughed, and
said, Shall Sarah which is old bear, my Lord being old also? Yet Abraham
believed, that God was faithful that had promised, and able to raise up Seed
unto him, (though he knew not how) though it were out of the very stones. And
Sarah believed also, else she could not have conceived; but by her Faith she
did conceive, and the Child was the Child of Promise, by the mighty Power of
God, above the strength of Nature.

And again, when that Son was born and grown toward maturity, God commanded
him to be slain, what hopes had Abraham then? Yet he staggered not, but
believed still, and God counted it unto him for Righteousness.

Thus Job was tempted by his Wife to trust no more in God: Do thou not see,
how thy goods are consumed with fire from heaven, Thy children all destroyed by
the fall of a house upon their heads, And thou thy self art forsaken of thy
friends, and smitten in thy Body, art a very Dunghill upon a Dunghill, And do
thou retain thine integrity still? Will thou serve such a God, that rewards his
servants no better? Curse God to his face and so dye, for it is to no purpose to
serve him any longer. But what said Job, Thou speak like one of the foolish
women. Do thou think that we shall receive good at the hands of God, and not
receive evil also? Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him. In all this Job
sinned not, nor spoke unadvisedly with his Lips, nor charged God foolishly.

Thus David, according to sense, was almost gone, his feet had well nigh slipped,
when he considered his own sufferings and the prosperity of the ungodly, Till
he went unto the Sanctuary of God, and considered better, and then he condemned
himself for being so foolish and ignorant, and even as a Beast before God.

What think ye of Christ himself? Was he not a man of Sorrows, and acquainted
with Griefs; and there was no beauty in him, and men hid their faces from him,
and he was despised and rejected of men, and endured the contradiction of
Sinners, and there was no sorrow like unto his sorrow, Did he not cry out in
his Agony upon the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Was he
therefore quite forsaken, because he suffered such things? Was he not the Son
of God, and the Beloved of God still, Though he felt no comfort for a time,
while he grapled in the fearful Dark, and no Beam of comfort did shine upon him?

And if these things were done to the green-Tree, well may they be done to the
dry.

If the Lord himself was thus served, do we think to fare better then he? It is
well for us, if we be as our Master.

When Jonah was in the Whales Belly, and was gone down to the bottom of the
Mountains, and the Earth with her bars was about him as he thought in the
judgment of his flesh and blood, for ever; and the weeds of Despair were
wrapped about his head, that he had little hope in reason ever to see the light
of the Sun more; yet by his Faith did he raise up his mind to look up once more
toward the holy Temple of God, and cry for Deliverance, and it was granted
unto him.

St. Paul was in long and great distress, when he had a Thorn in the Flesh,
and the messenger of Satan was sent to buffet him, who in his fierce wrath did
lay sore stripes upon him, which made him pray once and again, and yet he was
not delivered; nevertheless this Answer was given him from God, That his grace
should be sufficient for him: and this stayed his spirit, and kept him from
Despair.

And what though my condition be sad, and so, that I have little or no joy in
this World? And what if I should go mourning from my Cradle to my Grave? If it
be the will of God, I will bear it. I will say to my soul, Why art thou so
vexed, and why is my spirit so disquieted within me, Put thy trust still in
God, and he will cause every thing to work together in the end for his own
glory and for the good of all such as fear him. I reckon, that all the
Afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be revealed.

I cannot tell the Reasons of Gods workings, but this I am sure, that though
the ways of God are often secret, yet they are always just, and the Judge of
the World must needs do right; and therefore he can and will do me no wrong.
Here therefore I am under his hand, as the Clay is under the hands of the
Potter, Let him do with me what seems good in his own eyes.

I am content, and count it an honor to be conformable to Christ in his
sufferings; and this I gather by my Faith, That if I suffer with him, I shall
also be glorified with him. And therefore in my Patience I possess my soul
still, and count it good to wait upon God; though I see and feel no comfort,
yet I will stay till it comes, and it will come and will not tarry; and though
it never come, yet will I serve my God, and I know in whom I have trusted: My
heart is fixed upon the sure mercies of David, and there I cast Anchor: I build
my House upon this Rock of Christ; and though the Winds do bluster, and the
Waves rage and rore horribly, yet I am sure I shall not sink under them, nor
split upon the Rocks of Despair.

Though I do stick deep in the Mire and Clay, and the Waves go over my head;
nay, though I be trod upon as the dirt in the streets: yet I have a God still
that owns me, and knows my soul in all its Adversity, and will never leave me
nor forsake me. Though my father and my mother forsake me, and all the comforts
of this life take wings and fly away from me, yet I will go unto my God, and to
the Throne of his Grace, for Grace sufficient to help me in the time of all my
need. Out of the Deep therefore will I cry unto God, and he will hear my voice,
and in his due time and in his own way he will deliver me from all my fears.

When the Israelites had the Red Sea before them, and their Enemies behind
them, that there seemed to be no hope, but that they must be swallowed up one
way or other; yet then they were bidden to stand still, and see the salvation
of God, who made bare his Arm, and stretched forth his right Arm to save them.

Be not therefore affrighted, O ye faithful souls, Chap. 16. Counsel.
at the multitude and strength of Temptations and miseries here in this World:
know this, that there are more with you, then are, or possibly can be against
you. It is Christ that is your Captain, March under his Banner against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and at last you shall be more then Conquerors,
and shall tread Satan under every one of your feet.

Be not troubled for want of Assurance. This is your Assurance, That you
believe in the Son of God. I demonstrate comfort Thus,

1. God is Faithful that has Promised, he can never fail.

2. Christ is faithful, in whom, and to whom the Promises are made, and he can
never fail; for the Promise is sure to all the Seed.

3. The Holy Ghost is faithful that Seals the Promises of God to our Souls, and
he can never fail, The Spirit of promise to all the Seed.

4. Therefore the faithful that receive and rely upon these Promises, shall
never fail; for they are in Christ the Promised Seed. As for flesh and blood,
though that be weak, and afflictions very grievous to it; yet let the spirit be
but honest and willing, and then fear nothing. For to him that has, though
never so little, true faith shall be given; full measure, pressed down and
running over, shall God give into his bosom. To him that is never wanting to
himself, God will never be wanting. Do but desire, and God will help, do but
seek, and thou shall find, ask and have, knock and it shall be opened unto
thee. If we that are evil, know how to give good things to our Children, how
much more shall our heavenly father give good things to them that ask him. And
has he not promised, that whatsoever we shall ask of him in the Name of his
Son, he will give it us; and having given us Christ, how shall he not with him
also give us all things that he in his wisdom and goodness knows to be
necessary for us? And having our Portion, let us therewith be content.

Look therefore Sin, Misery and Death in the face, and Trust in God still.

Look only upon Sin, and Misery, and Death, and Hell with the Eye of Sense, and
dye for fear and despair: but look with the Eye of Faith beyond all these at
the glory that shall be revealed, and live for evermore.

Consult not with flesh and blood; for if you do, you will droop and fall: but
consult with the Spirit by Faith in Gods Promises, and he shall strengthen
thine heart.

I have nothing to comfort and satisfy me and assure me in life or Death, but
my honest and faithful desires. If I be a Hypocrite, I can have no comfort; but
if I be true and upright to God, to the World, and to my own soul, and do all I
can to please God, and to keep my Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men, though I am clothed with innumerable frailties, and imperfections,
yet I am sure God will pardon all for Christ his sake; only let me be valiant
and of a good courage.

And though I see no comfort coming to me in this life, or very little, let me
not be disheartened for this, nor judge of Gods favor by what I see or feel,
but by what I believe and hope for; for the things which are seen or felt are
but Temporal: but the things which are not seen nor felt here, are Eternal. And
what I see not and enjoy not now by sense, I do see and enjoy by Faith, and
shall see and enjoy by sight. And till then I content my self with the sight
and fruition which I have, which is to me an Evidence and full Assurance of
what I shall have.

Therefore, Deerly beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as ye know that your labor
shall never be in vain in the Lord; for faith is the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen. Amen.

GAL. 3.6. Abraham believed in God, and it was accounted to him for
Righteousness.
EXPLICATION.
THis Apostle says -- Righteousness comes not of the Law, Gal. 2.21. Gal.
3.18.
-- And the Inheritance is not of the Law, but by Promise, and faith in that
Promise. Both these sayings carry the same sense: that is, The right of an
Inheritance (which is the best Right,) comes not of the Law, but of Faith. And
both these sayings carry the same Reason, because they argue the same
Conclusion, viz. That a man is not Justified by the Law, but by Faith; For if a
man be Justified by the Law, or if his Right of Inheritance be by the Law, Ro^.
4.14.
then Faith is made void, and the Promise void: But being justified by his
Grace, Tit. 3.7.
we are made heirs to the hope of Eternal Life.

So that to be justified by Faith, and to be made an heir of God, are all one
in effect, or the latter is but the property or consequent of the former. In
like manner to be counted Righteous, or as in the Text, for Faith to be counted
for Righteousness, is all one as to be justified; For St. Paul alleges these
words to prove the Doctrine of Justification by Faith: and to have Right
accounted to any person, is to justify that Person, Romans 4.6. Gal. 2.16.
Therefore this great saying, That Abraham believed in God, and it was accounted
to him for Righteousness, is to this effect. That Abraham was justified by his
Faith.

The Subject is Justification.

The Points, 1. God, 2. Account, 3. Thing, 4. End.

God the Cause of Justification: Chap. 1. God justifi s. Romans 8.33. Genesis 15.6.
-- It is God that justifies, so the Hebrew Text; Abraham believed in God, and
he imputed it to him for Righteousness. God was the Agent that imputed Faith to
Abraham for Righteousness. St. Paul follows the Septuagint, but the sense is
all one. For if actually God imputed Abraham's Faith unto him for Righteousness,
then it must needs follow passively, that Abraham's Faith was imputed to him for
Righteousness.

2. The Account. Cap. 2. Accounting.
The Word (...) is rendered, reasoning, concluding, numbering, reckoning,
imputing.

The great Arts of counting are Logic and Logistick.

1. Logic is the counting of Sayings, according to their rations or reasons,
as they are composed into their Conclusions, and resolved into their Principles.

2. Logistick is the counting of Numbers, according to their rations or rates,
as they are composed into their Powers, and resolved into their Roots.

And as in Logic the Conclusion is the effect of two Sayings rightly figured,
when one of those Sayings is the cause of that effect, and the other Saying is
the reason or mean between the Cause and the Effect: So in Logistick, The Power
is the Product of two Numbers rightly multiplied, when one of those two Numbers
is the Root of that Power, and the other is the Rate between the Root and the
Power. Both these Countings or Reckonings, or Reasonings, do manifest the
ration or Rate of a Saying to a Saying, and of a Number to a Number.

So that to Account, is to conclude by Reasoning or Numbering; by arguing to
find the Conclusion; by addition to find the Total, by Multiplication the
Product, by Division the Quotient.

The Word is used thus in several places. Romans 6.11.
-- Reckon your selves to be dead unto sin, etc. Ro^. 3 28. Romans 8.18.
-- Therefore we conclude that a man is justified by Faith, -- I reckon that
the sufferings of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be
revealed, Heb. 11.19. Romans 4.19.
-- Accounting that God was able to raise him up even from the dead. -- We say,
that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness. -- The children of the
Promise are counted for the seed. Romans 9.8. Romans 4.4.8.
-- Now to him that works the reward is not counted of Grace but of Debt: --
Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Romans 2.26.
-- If the Circumcision keep the Righteousness ((...) the Rights of the Law)
shall not his uncircumcision be counted for Circumcision? -- But to him that
works not, Romans 4.6.
but believes on him, that justifyeth the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
Righteousness. Romans 4.6.
-- Blessed the man to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without works.

3. The thing accounted is Faith; Chap. 3. Faith.
that is, Faith was the Reason, whereby God concluded Abraham Righteous: Faith
was the Medium that inferred that Conclusion. Gods Promise was the Cause,
Abraham's Righteousness was the Effect; Abraham's Faith was the means that
produced this Effect from that Cause. Romans 4.13.
-- The Promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham and
his seed through the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith. So by Faith
the Promise became effectual.

1. This Faith was real in Abraham, and really imputed to him for
Righteousness; Romans 4.20.
-- he was strong in Faith, giving glory to God.

2. This Faith was his own proper Faith; else how could he be accounted the
Father of the faithful, if the Faith accounted to him were not his own. So the
Un-circumcision which is counted for Circumcision, is not another man's; but his
own Circumcision to whom it is accounted. And that Sin, that is imputed, or not
imputed, is not another man's sin, but his own sin. And that Righteousness,
which is accounted to any man, is not the Righteousness of another; but his own
Righteousness to whom it is accounted.



4. The End, for which Faith was accounted, Chap. 4.
is Righteousness.

Righteousness.
(...) is of various signification, as is the word (...), and the Verb (...).

1. Legally it is taken for doing Right to all, or giving every one his due by
Law. Ex. 23.7.
-- The Innocent and Righteous slay thou not. 2 Samuel 23.3.
-- He that rules over men must be Righteous: -- Herod feared John Baptist,
Matthew. 6.20.
knowing that he was a just man. Luc. 1.6.
-- Zachariah and Elizabeth were both righteous before God, walking in all the
Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord blameles;s. -- Jacob s;aith, Genesis 30.33.
So shall my Righteousness answer for me. -- Not for thy Righteousness, etc.
Deuteronomy. 9.5. Ps. 45.7. Thou love Righteousness, etc. Prove. 16.8. Better is a
little with Righteousness, then great Revenues without Right: -- He looked for
Righteousness, Is. 5.7.
and behold a Cry: -- He has appointed a day, Act. 17.31.
in the which he will judge the World in Righteousness. -- He that does
Righteousness is Righteous.

2. Morally for kindness and Courtesy, Liberality and Bounty, giving more then
is due by Law, through Love. Ps. 37.2.
-- The Righteous shows mercy and gives. -- The Righteous gives and
spares. Prove. 21.26.
-- Stand still that I may reason with you, 1 Samuel 12.7.
of all the Righteousness of the Lord, which he did to you, and to your
Fathers. He that has clean hands, and a pure heart, Ps. 24.4.
shall receive the blessing from the Lord, and Righteousness from the God of
his Salvation. -- He has dispersed abroad; Ps. 112.9.
he has given to the poor; his Righteousness remains for ever. -- Seek ye
first the kingdom of God, Matthew. 6 3 3.
and his Righteousness. Romans 1.17.
-- For therein the Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith;
signifying the kindness of God; because opposed in the next verse, to the wrath
of God. Ro^. 3.21.
-- But now the Righteousness of God, without the Law, is manifested. 1. The
kindness, as it is taken verse. 21, 25, 26. compare Ephesians. 2.7. where the Apostle,
to express the same thing, uses the word (...) -- That he might show the
riches of his Grace, in his kindness toward us: So Tit. 3.4. After that the
kindness and love of God appeared: kindness here, is the very same with
Righteousness before. 2 Cor. 9.10.
-- Now he that ministers seed to the Sower, etc. Increase the fruits of your
Righteousness, i. e. kindness in contributing to the poor Saints. -- Take heed
that you do not your Alms before men: The Right Original there, is (...)
properly in the New Testament is to do a kindness. And this signification was
familiar to the Eastern Greeks in Asia, after whose Idiom the New Testament was
written: Is. 60.21.
But to the Western Greeks in Europe it was more strange.

3. Jurally for Propriety, Ps. 69.28.
or Right. -- Thy People shall be all Righteous, they shall inherit the Land
for ever. -- Let them be blotted out of the book of the Living, Ps. 118 20.
and not be written among the Righteous, i.e. The Israelites the Righteous
heirs of the Land, upon Record. -- This Gate of the Lord into which the
Righteous shall enter, Genesis 30.33.
i. e. Israelites; for strangers might not enter into the Temple: but remained
in the outward Court. Ps. 35.27.
-- So shall my Righteousness answer for me in time to come, i. e. all the
young spotted cattle, I have right to for my wages. Prove. 16.8.
-- Let them be glad that favor my Righteousness, Is. 5.23.
i. e. my Righteous Cause. -- Better is a little with Righteousness, then great
revenues without Right. -- Which justify the wicked for reward; Heb. 11.7.
and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him. Romans 4.5.
-- Noah became Heir of the Righteousness which is by Faith. Romans 4.11.
-- His faith is counted for Righteousness. -- Abraham received the sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the faith which he had, being
uncircumcised, Romans 4.13.
that he might be the father of all them that believe; which was no Moral
Righteousness, but a Jural Right of Dignity. -- For the Promise that he should
be the Heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed through the Law,
but through the righteousness of Faith. Now promise, and Heir, are matter of
Right: So the word Righteousness signifies in diverse places of this Epistle.

Compare Gal. 3.18. -- For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of
promise. What is meant in one place by (...), a general word for Right, the
same is expressed in the other, by the special word (...), the best kind of
Rights. Also to have Right by the Law, Romans 4.14.
or to have the Inheritance by the Law, is the same in sense. And then the
Promise is frustrate -- For if they which be of the Law, be heirs, Faith is
made void, and the Promise made of no Effect. Chap. 5. Right.


The word Righteousness is taken in this last sense jurally for (...), Jus or
Right; supposed in all Acts of Justice, Equity, and Righteousness; opposed to
Injustice, Iniquity, and Unrighteousness.

For whenever any of these Acts are done to any person, that person is
supposed to have some Jus or Right; otherwise we can do him no Injustice,
Injury, or Wrong. For as where there is no Law, there is no Sin; so to him that
has no Right, there can be done no wrong, as to Slaves.

Abraham had a Right, Title, and Interest to all these; else the promise had
been unjust, and of no effect.

But to him that works not, Romans 45.6.
but believ^th in him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
Righteousness: Even as David also describes the Blessedness of the man, unto
whom God imputes Righteousness without Works; So also in the 10, 11, 12, 13,
22, 23, 24 verses of this Chapter.

Ps. 106.30, 31.
Then stood up Phinehas, and executed Judgment, and so the Plague ceased. And
this was counted to him for Righteousness to all generations for evermore. This
gave him a Right to the Fee-simple of the Priesthood, to him and to his Heirs
for ever; for so the Charter runs: Number. 25.10, 11, 12.
-- And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the son
of Aaron the Priest, has turned my wrath away from the children of Israel
(while he was zealous among them) that I consumed not the Children of Israel in
my jealousy. Wherefore, behold I give unto him my Covenant of Peace, and he
shall have it, and his seed after him, even the Covenant of an everlasting
Priesthood; because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for the
Children of Israel. He had a Right to the Priesthood before by

Because all Rights consist in accounting, which is their Essence; As that the
use, fruit, or propriety of such a thing, is accounted or reckoned to such a
person, as belonging to him, and not to another.

Thus God by his promise accounted to Abraham a Seed to be multiplied into the
higher Powers of Numbers, As into Squares, Cubes, Squares of Squares, Squares
of Cubes, and Cubes of Squares, i.e. into Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, and
hundred Thousands, and thousand Thousands; till they were numberless as the
Stars of Heaven. And the Root unto all these Powers, was but the Binary of
Abraham and Sarah; old, dry, and dead in Body: but young and lively in Faith.



The Son that works not, has right to his maintenance by his Birth. The
first born Son has right to his Inheritance by his Majority or Primogeniture.

The Believer has no Right by Birth, nor by Works, but by Faith only; of
Grace, not of Debt. This Faith is but a personal Act, Romans 4 4.
but the right thereby is a real, permanent, and hereditary Benefit.

Thus Right to Blessedness, was the effect; whereof Gods Promise was the Cause,
and Abraham's Faith the means, whereby that Cause wrought this effect.

The sum is; God by his Promise counted to Abraham a Right, and accounted his
Faith for a means to obtain that Right: So his Faith was accounted for his
Right, and his Right was accounted to him for his Faith.

Abraham's Rights were, Issue, Inheritance, and chiefly Alliance with God; Chap.
6. Blessedness.
therefore God is called the God of Abraham, which is blessedness in the
Abstract, i. e. Heavenly blessedness, not expressly so mentioned, but contained
in the Promise, which wise Abraham in his reasoning well understood, though a
far off; Heb. 11.19.
and made a right reckoning of it, accounting that God was able to raise from
the Dead. And that God was bountiful so to do, to be his exceeding great
reward; every way for Issue, for Inheritance: but especially for Eternal Life.
Heb. 11.10.
-- For he looked for a City, which has foundations, whose builder and maker
is God. Heb. 11.16.
-- And he desired a better Country, then the Land of Canaan was; even a
heavenly, and a better life then this: For God is not a Benefactor to the Dead,
while they are dead. He is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. And
therefore that he may again become to them a God, he raises them from the Dead
unto Eternal Life; Because that is the great Blessing which they want, and he
only can gives, and it is fitting only for his children to receive; and
therefore he has prepared for them a City, even Jerusalem which is above,
which is the Mother of us all: Luc. 20.35, 36.
Christ reasons just so. -- They which shall be counted worthy to obtain that
World, and the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry, nor are given in
marriage; Neither can they die any more: but are equal unto the Angels, and are
the children of God, being the children of the Resurrection. Now that the Dead
are raised, even Moses showed in the Bush, when he calls the Lord, The God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; For he is not a God of the
Dead, but of the Living; for all live unto him.

Now the Title that Abraham had to all these Rights, was not his generous
Birth, nor his Righteous works; but his acceptance of Faith, Jus Fidei,(...)
Romans 3.14. (...) Romans 4.11, 13. (...) Romans 9.30. Faith-right opposed to
Birthright and Work-right.

Genus to both Justifying and Condemning, for Accounting is a Word larger then
Justifying or Condemning; and therefore is the common Genus to them both, being
acts of accounting.

To Justify is to acquit as just to some reward. To condemn is to adjudg as
sinful to some Punishment. -- For I will not justify the Wicked. E^. 23.7.
-- The Lord will not leave him in his hand, Ps. 37.33.
nor condemn him when he is judged. Romans 4.8.
-- Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.

Abraham's Tenure to hold this Right, was the obedience of the Faith by which he
had that Right.

Therefore he was accounted Righteous, only by his Faith; but he kept his
Righteousness by his Love and Duty that proceeded from his Faith, as of the
offering up of his Son.

And so he had a full assurance to himself of his own Faith, by which he
obtained so much Right, and by his works his Faith was made perfect. Jac. 2.21.
So the word Justify, signifies to hold as well as to have a Right.

Abraham righteous, God confirms his Right by an Oath. -- By my self have I
sworn, Genesis 22, 16.
says the Lord, for because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld
thy Son, thine only Son; That in Blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying
I will multiply thee, etc.

The effect of this was; Chap. 7. Oaths.
That Abraham might claim that Right which he had to the Promises which God had
made, and now obliged himself to the Performance. For Juramentum comes from
Juro, and Juro from Jus Juris, because the right and best use of an Oath is to
confirm and decide rights; for when a Right is voideable, an oath makes it
immutable; and when a Right is Litigious, an Oath decides, and puts it out of
question, Heb. 6.16.

This was Juramentum Fidelitatis, to perform the Faith God had given by
Promise: God swears Fealty to his Homager, to Dust and Ashes, to be a Protector
and Benefactor unto him. Yea, when Abraham was dead, Heb. 11.16.
he was not ashamed to be called his God, and the God of Isaac and Jacob when
dead, because he had prepared for them a City. Now the Oath of fealty is
usually taken by the vassal to his Lord. A wise man may find cause to doubt,
whither this be only reasonable, or no.

Note by the way; That Gods Oath was voluntary, as all Oaths should be; else
all soul-Liberty is destroyed. Genesis 24.2.
-- Put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh, and I will make thee swear, etc.
Abraham prayed his servant to swear; He was his slave born in his house, yet he
forced him not in this. So Jacob to his Son Joseph. If I have found grace in
sight, Genesis 47.29.
put I pray thee thy hand under my Thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me;
bury me not I pray thee in Egypt.

Abraham was legally and morally Righteous before he believed the Promise,
Chap. 8. True Right. Genesis 13.14.
and yet h was not justified by that Righteousness, nor by the Estimatory Faith
which he had in God, as a great Benefactor, who was feared and worshipped by
him: Genesis 13.4.
but when he received the Promises. That Promisory faith justified him, Genesis
14.15.16.
i. e. gave him a Title to those Promises, of Issue, Inheritance, and Alliance,
even before the Ceremonial work of Circumcision fourteen years.

So that he was merely justified by his Faith in the Promises Genesis 15.9. 'Till
when, Abraham never made the least mention of an Issue or Inheritance.

So then, Gal. 3.7, 8.
they that are of Faith, are the children of faithful Abraham. And the
Scripture foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen through Faith, Preached
before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all the Nations of the
Earth be blessed. So then, They that are of Faith, are blessed with faithful
Abraham.

Abraham to such an Issue, and such an Inheritance, and Alliance, more then
other men, whose Bodies were younger and stronger, but only this; That such an
Issue, Inheritance and Alliance was counted, and unto him for His; and his
Faith was counted unto him for the Reason of it, i. e. for his Title to it.

So what right has the Servant, who works to his wages, but only that his
wages are accounted to him for His, and his work is accounted to him for the
reason of it.

And what Right has the Son that works not to maintenance, more then the
Servant, who works, but only this; That maintenance is accounted to him for
His; and his Birth is accounted to him for the reason of it.

And what Right has the first born Son to his Fathers Inheritance, more then
his younger Sons, who are born to his Father as well as he, but only this; That
the Inheritance is counted to him for His; and his Primogeniture or Majority is
accounted to him for the reason of it, i.e. for his Title to it, which
therefore is called his Birthright: though that word be too wide; for it is
his Primogeniture, or first Birthright in order before the rest, which gives
unto him his Right.

And so the Believer in God, who as to God, has neither Works nor Birth, What
right has he to Blessedness more then an unbeliever, but only this; That
Blessedness is accounted His; and his Belief is accounted to him for the Reason
of it, i.e. for his Title to Blessedness.

Hence the Apostle mentioning matter of right in Abraham's case, constantly
uses the Verb (...) which signifies to count, And reckoning, Ratiocination,
and Counting, are all one in effect in Logic and Logistick.

APPLICATION.
1. For Assurance, Evidence, and Satisfaction to all Believers, of their Right.

1. To Adoption by Grace. 2. To Remission of sins. 3. To Sanctification by the
Spirit. 4. To Audience at the Throne of Grace. 5. To every ordinance of God,
Baptism, etc. 6. To Resurrection. 7. To Eternal Life.
1. Assurance is Gods giving his Faith to us, Chap. 9. Assurance.
and we giving our Faith to him, which is our being in Covenant with God. And a
mutual giving and taking of the Faith of each other, is to be made sure
together.

2. Assurance is an Acceptance of the Act of Gods grace and pardon upon the
condition of our obedience.

3. Assurance is the Acceptance of the Legacy and Gift of Eternal Life,
devised to all the Faithful in Gods last Will and Testament, whereof Jesus
Christ is the Mediator.

This Promise, Devise or Gift of Gods Testament concerning the Inheritance of
Eternal Life, is made primarily to Christ, who is the promised Seed, in whom
all the Promises of God are Yea and Amen, who is the Principal Heir of all
things, and the faithful do taste of the same Inheritance by Faith, that the
Promise might be sure to all the Seed, who for Christ his sake are made Heirs
of God and Coheirs with Christ, partakers of the same most precious promises
by Grace and Adoption.

Which Promises are as sure to the Adopted Sons of God by Grace, as they are to
Christ the Essential Son of God by Nature.

This Act of Grace is freely made of God in and for Christ, in whom God is well
pleased; in whom God has reconciled all things to himself.

And this is the full and last unchangeable Will of God, confirmed by the Blood
of Christ; so that heaven and earth may fail: but not the least Title of Gods
Will and Testament shall ever fail. For the Foundation of God stands sure,
and God knows who are his; and all the faithful are Instituted written Heirs
of God ex Ass, and there is no Disinheredation or Preterition of any faithful
Soul.

4. Assurance is Gods accounting us for righteous for our Faith, or by the
means of our Faith. And if God so accounts us to have Right to the Kingdom of
Heaven, what greater Assurance can there be?





1. Because God accuses not; and if God accuses not, who can? If God
justifies, who dare condemn?

2. Because the soul that believes, knows that she believes, therefore knows
that she is thereby justified, and therefore cannot accuse.

The Soul that lives in trespasses and sins, that Soul does not believe; well
therefore may that soul accuse, and God accuses much more.

But the soul that lives not in trespasses and sins; that Soul believes; and
therefore that soul cannot accuse, but excuse, because God excuses much more.

Say not therefore, O faithful soul? that thy conscience accuses thee, and
that thou art in the state of Damnation. Nay, It is not thy Soul that can say
thus, but it is thy Fancy, thy Passion, thy Humor, thy Distemper, thy Disease,
thy Temptation. Why then should thou doubt, or speak unadvisedly with thy
lips, or charge God so foolishly, O thou of little Faith!

To reckon Right with God. Chap. 10. Reckoning.
God accounts thee to be Righteous for thy Faith, or by the means of thy Faith,
and they that God account Righteous, are Righteous indeed, for God judges
righteous Judgment, and makes a true account; therefore we may most safely
reckon with God, as God reckons by the means of our Faith: Yea, we wrong God
and our selves, if we do not.

Our reckoning then is upon Gods Promises, those sure mercies to Abraham and
his seed; Therefore Christ came to perform the mercy promised to our
Forefathers, and to remember his holy Covenant. For the hope of which
promises, the twelve Tribes of Israel, even the children of the Promise, do
instantly serve God day and night: and to this Promise they hope assuredly to
come, upon the strongest grounds of Reasoning and accounting, that can possibly
be made, even to a demonstration that cannot be denied.

For all Rights that do arise from any Promise, Chap. 11. Promises.
are conveyed to the party, to whom the Promise is made by no other means, but
by Faith, i. e. by Acceptance of the promise, and the right specified therein.

For all Promises are made effectual by Faith, by his Faith to whom the promise
is made; For if he be unbelieving and refuse it, then the Promise is dead, and
of one effect: but if he give Faith to it and accept it, then it binds him that
made it, to perform it, and creates a Right to him that accepts it, to enjoy
the benefit of it.

And the Reason is, because Acceptance forms a Promise into a Covenant,
whereby there is a convening or meeting of mind unto mind, and will unto
will, viz: the mind and will of the Receiver, to the mind and will of the
Promiser. Thus the Promise, Romans 4.13.
that Abraham should be the Heir of the World, came not to him through the
Righteousness of the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith, i.e. not by
any Act of the Law, but by the Act of his Acceptance. For as the Promise was an
Act of mere Grace on Gods part that made it: So the Acceptance was a mere Act
of Faith on Abraham's part that received it.

And as between God and Abraham, so is the Nature of all Promises, and the
Assurances of the benefits by them.

To prove our Reckoning right.

In Ratiocination and Reckoning, 3. Chap. 12. Proof.
there is a way to prove the Argumentation or Account to be free from fallacy
or error, as wise Logicians and Arithmeticians use to do.

So every wise Christian will prove his own Faith, by which he reckons upon
his own Salvation, whither it be true or no.

And that must be by his Works. Cap. 13. Works.
For Works do declare this Right to Salvation to be truly concluded and
reckoned, and do justify that faith, by which we reckon our selves to be
justified.

Note here, that Works do not make and create a Right, where there was none
before: but do manifest the right which was before made, but concealed: My
Faith does create and make me to have a Right in Christ; but my Faith is a
thing invisible, spiritual, and concealed within my heart, I cannot see it, nor
the World cannot see it, unless I show it by the fruits thereof outwardly to
God and Man. Jac. 2.18, etc.
-- A man may say (says St. James) Thou have Faith, and I have Works, Show me
thy faith without thy Works, and I will show thee my Faith by my Works. -- Know
O vain man, that faith without works is dead.

Abraham was justified by Faith, when he embraced the Promises; but Abraham was
justified by Works, when he offered up Isaac his Son upon the Altar. See thou
how Faith wrought with his works, and by works was faith made perfect: And so
the Scripture was fulfilled, which says, Abraham believed God, and it was
imputed unto him for Righteousness.

Works therefore do perfect thy Faith, and declare thy Faith to be perfect.
Faith justifies before God, without the concurrence of works as to the mere act
of Faith; but works justify Faith before men by their concomitancy with Faith.
And though Faith gave thee a Right; yet works do demonstrate to thy self and to
the World, that Faith has been lively and operative, to give thee this Right
and Interest in Christ.

Works therefore do perfect that Faith by which thou art justified, and Works
do declare thee to be justified, because they declare that Faith by the which
thou art justified. Thy Faith alone does procure that Right to be justified,
but thy Faith alone does not declare that Right to me, which it creates and
makes to thee: But thy Faith needs works to declare and prove both to thee and
me that Right, which it has created and made to thee, for thy great comfort
and satisfaction, and the Glory of God and praise of good men.

I conclude therefore that Faith, makes a Right Reckoning with God; but Works
prove this Right Reckoning to be right made.

But this is not all. For as Faith is the means whereby we have a Right and
Title present to the future Possession of the heavenly Promises: So works are
the means whereby we hold the Right and Title present to the future Possession
of the heavenly promises, that we may maintain and keep our Right, and make a
Right reckoning thereof unto the end; that our Faith fail us not, and that we
may not come short of the heavenly Glory. Heb. 4.1.
-- Let us therefore sear least a promise being l^ft us of entering into his
rest, any of you should seem to ^ome short of it. For some did not keep the
Faith, but made shipwreck of it by their evil deeds; and therefore could not
enter into the Temporal Rest provided for them, because of their unbelief. Heb.
3. ult.
-- Let us therefore draw near with a true heart in full assurance of Faith;
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water. Heb. 10.22, 23, 24.
Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering (for he is
faithful that has promised.) And let us consider one another, and provoke one
another unto Love and good works, etc.

4. For comfort. Why should Believers quarrel? Chap. 14. Peace.


1. We have all the same Cause of Right, which is Gods Promise. 2. We have all
the same Right, the effect of Gods Promise, Justification. 3. We have all the
same means, reason, or Title, whereby the same cause becomes effectual for the
obtaining of that Right, which is Faith. Therefore we all agree in the main,
and may and ought to be comforted thereby.
How vain then and sinful are those questions and doubts, about the manner of
Gods Promise, and our Right thereby, and the means of Faith, for the conveyance
of that Right unto us.

Brethren and fellow-heirs of the same Promise, have no Reason to fall out
about the way and manner how they come by them; it is sufficient that they are
sure of them: and God be thanked for that. Let them love one another. Unjustly
therefore do we hate and separate one from another, seeing we all trust in one
God for the same common Salvation.

And why should we be disheartened, Chap. 15. Courage.
or doubt any more of the Truth which is so evident: God is Faithful which has
promised; our Right is sure which is promised; the Means to join both these
together, and give us this right is sure, even our Faith. Therefore do but
believe, do not dispute; All things are possible to him that believes. Do but
accept, and ye shall have; Take what is offered unto you. An easy Yoke, A light
Burden, A noble way: A rational way to be drawn by the cords of a Man; by Love,
for Love. To suffer our selves to be wrought upon, and persuaded by Love. To
believe that God is; That he is a Rewarder of all such as fear him; That all
that will accept of this Reward, shall have it upon this reasonable and easy
condition of Faith and Repentance. That a new Life and Holiness is a most
pleasant thing of its self, if there were no other Reward. That if there be
another Reward, it ought in reason, being so great as Eternal Life, to be
enjoyed by them only that believe it, and that labor for it. That if there be
no Reward; yet it is more just and comfortable to hope well, and live well,
then to despair and do all wickedness, to the present hurt of our own Peace,
and the Disturbance and Ruin of others, for which they will Curse us even in
this World. And if there be a Reward, as most certainly there is, then these
men shall be sure to miss it, but the Faithful cannot fail to have it; Because
that reward is promised upon the Condition of Faith, and none other. As sure as
there is a God in Heaven: so sure shall there be a Reward in Heaven. And as
sure as there is a Christ: so sure shall all they be rewarded that are in
Christ.

As sure as Christ is born the Son of God by nature and the spirit: so sure are
the faithful born the Sons of God by Grace and the Spirit. As sure as Christ
was the promised Seed: so sure are the Faithful the Promised Seed in him, and
by him. As sure as Christ is the Heir of all things in himself, by the means of
his Birthright: so sure are the Faithful, the heirs of God by the means of
their Birthright. As sure as God has promised and sworn to Christ: so sure
has God promised and sworn to the Faithful.

This is Gospel. God is a Spiritual Father; The Faithful are a Spiritual Seed,
Spiritual Heirs of a Spiritual Inheritance.

5. For Distinction of Reckoners true and false, and of such as do not Reckon
at all.

1. Some make no account, Chap. 15. Kinds of reckoning.
being without God in the World, and having no Hope, strangers to the Covenant
of Promise, dead while they live.

2. Some make a false account, reckoning without Faith, Boasting of a Right to
an estate when they have no grounds for it: Living highly, and making a great
show to the World, of a portion in Heaven; when as they have nothing to trust
unto; being Hypocrites, whose hope shall perish, and be cut off before God,
Luc. 13.25, etc.
Angels, and men. -- They shall knock at the door, saying, Lord Lord open unto
us; then shall the Master of the house answer and say unto them, I know you not
whence you are. Then shall they begin to say We have eaten and drank in thy
presence, and thou have also taught in our streets; but he shall say, I tell
you, I know you not whence you are, Depart from me ye workers of Iniquity.
Matthew. 7.21, etc.
-- Not every one that says unto me Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of Heaven; but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. Many
shall say unto me in that day; Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied in thy Name?
and in thy Name cast out Devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works? And
then will I profess unto them, I never knew you, Depart from me ye workers of
Iniquity.

3. Some have a true account made by God for them, but cannot make a true
account for themselves; but are hindered and puzzled, being weak, and put out of
their reckoning.

1. By school distinctions without difference, and coined niceties, oppositions
of Sciences falsely so called.

2. By Pulpit marks and signs; the fancies of idle Brains, and multiplication
of Words without knowledge.

3. By private scorns and Reproaches of Reprobation and Damnation, without Wit
or Charity.

But let all such poor true hearted wretches be of good cheer. They that cannot
reckon for themselves, God shall reckon for them, and help them to make it out.
The Spirit within them shall cry Abba Father for them, and help them in all
their infirmities with sighs and groans which they cannot utter. Christ does
plead for their Right in Heaven, which he has obtained for them; and knows how
to have compassion upon the ignorant, and them that are out of the way, for
that he himself also was one compassed with infirmities.

As a faithful and kind Steward will reckon to a poor servant his dues to a
farthing, Heb. 5.2.
when he cannot reckon for himself: So will Christ do for these poor Creatures,
and all that are Christ's faithful Messengers and dispensers of the mysteries of
Salvation.

The fault is in the false Teachers, that fright poor Souls with Hell and
Damnation, Physicians of no value, miserable Comforters, such as cannot, or
will not show unto man his Righteousness, nor save a Soul from the Pit. They
are of such evil Natures, and so full of spiritual Pride and Malice, that they
will neither enter into Heaven themselves, nor suffer others that would, by
their good will. Such whose Eye is evil, because Gods is good, and would fain
have others to be in no better condition then themselves.

4. Some make a true account, and are able to prove it, being strong in the
Faith, Chap. 17. Demonstration.
nothing doubting.

They Demonstrate their Assurance thus.

1. The Cause of Salvation is Gods Promise. 2. The Effect is Salvation its
self. 3. The means that makes the Cause to produce this effect, is their own
Faith.
So in Logic.

The Conclusion is the effect of two Propositions rightly figured; whereof one
is the Cause, and the other is the Medium or Mean between the Cause and the
effect. The major Term in the major Proposition is the Cause. The minor Term in
the minor Proposition is the Effect: And the Medium or middle Term, in both
major and minor Proposition, is the Means that produces the Effect in the
Conclusion: As thus.

A living Creature is Sensible.

A man is a living Creature, Therefore A man is Sensible.

This last Proposition is the Effect of the two former; in which Sensibility,
which is the Major Term, is the Cause, and a man is the Effect. And a Living
Creature is the Means, whereby this Cause produces this Effect. For, Because
man is a Living Creature, Therefore he is Sensible.

So in Logistick.

The Power or Product is the Effect of two Numbers rightly multiplied, when one
of those two is the root of that Power, and the other is the Rate between the
Root and the Power.

As 6 is the Cause of 12, 12 is the Effect; and the Multiplication of the Root
2 is the Means between the Cause and the Effect. So Promises are the Cause of
Blessedness is the Effect; and Faith is the Means, between the Cause and the
Effect.

The ground of both these Reasonings and Reckonings is this.

1. Those things that agree in one Third, do agree among themselves; as in
Logic, As the Major and Minor agree in the Medium, therefore they agree among
themselves.

So in Logistick. The Multiplicand and the Product agree in the Root by the
means of the Multiplication by that Root, As 6 and 12 agree together in the
Root 2. by the means of the Rate or Multiplication: by the Root 2. And into
which they are resolved. So Gods Promises, and our Salvation do agree in Faith.

2. Whatsoever is affirmed of the Genus, is affirmed also of the Species, and
all that are under it. As whatsoever is affirmed of Abraham, the Father of the
Faithful, is affirmed of all the Faithful, the children of Abraham. Blessedness
is affirmed of Abraham, Gal. 3.9.
Therefore Blessedness is affirmed of all the Children of faithful Abraham. --
So then, All that believe, are Blessed with faithful Abraham.

This is all the assurance that can be had, and this is enough by all Reason,
to a reasonable Creature from a Reasonable God, that reasons with us according
to our capacities as reasonable Creatures.

As for Revelations and Inspirations, we may not expect them. For God will have
us to live here by Faith, and not by Sight or Sense, that must be hereafter.

Therefore, though I see, or feel no comfort; Chap. 18. Faith above Hope.
yet I have Faith, and live thereby. Though I be in the Dark, and lie low in
the Dungeon, and stick fast in the Mire and Clay, and the Waters flow over me,
and the weeds of Despair are wrapped about my head, being gone down to the
bottoms of the Mountains, and the Earth with her Bars are round about me for
ever; so that I say in the Judgment of my weak flesh, I am lost, I have no
hopes: Yea, though besides all this, to keep me down the more, that I may be
sure never to rise into any hopeful or comfortable condition, I see nothing but
misery about me, and feel it in my own person; and hear nothing but Scorns,
Reproaches, and Condemnations; yet I believe still. I hold my own. My house is
built upon a Rock. I keep me close unto my God. I strengthen my self in him. I
see all, and hear all, and bear all, and say nothing.

I am prompted often to renounce all hope, and to curse God and die in
detestation of the failings of his Promises, because he has mocked me. And
that I might not be altogether miserable here, I am bidden to Eat and Drink,
for to morrow I shall Die. To enjoy the good things that are present, and
speedily use the Creatures as in Youth. To fill my self with costly Wine and
Ointments, Wisd. 2.6.
and let no Flowr of the Spring pass by me. To crown my self with Rose-buds,
before they be withered; not to go without my part of voluptuousness, but to
leave tokens of joyfulness in every place, for this is my Portion and Lot. For
our Time is a very shadow that passes away, and after our end there in no
returning; for it is fast sealed, that no man comes again. We are all but of
yesterday, and to morrow we shall not be.

All this I hear, but give no consent; I am content to lie still in silence,
though it be without comfort, and wait upon my God; and resolve, that though he
kill me, yet I will put my trust in him.

And this is Faith to believe above Hope, and contrary to Hope.

I speak nothing all this while to Hypocrites, for their hope shall perish.
Hypocrisy cannot consist with faithfulness, it makes shipwreck of Faith, and of
a good Conscience. The Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone, is the
portion of Hypocrites, even the same that was provided for the Devil and his
Angels, and for all them that make and love lies.

I speak nothing to profane Persons and Atheists, for these have condemned
themselves.

But I speak to the plain True-hearted Believers, That between God and their
own Consciences, they should fear nothing if their cause be good.

This takes off all Disputes, about the Church, Chap. 19. Disputes.
about Baptism, the Lords Supper, Faith, Justification, Merits, Infallibility,
etc. We may all comply very well, if we hold the same Faith in the prime
necessary Principles which are but few. There needs no hatred or strangeness to
condemn or divide about Circumstances and Superstructures, so long as we do all
agree in Fundamentals.

And as for Ceremonies and Forms of outward worship, the Law is a Rule to every
man's Conscience, and this is the safest way to fulfill all Righteousness: But it
is not safe to Divide, or Rebel, either in the Church or State; for that
overthrows the unity of the Faith, and the bond of Peace.

This takes off all blame in God, Chap. 20. Excuses.
and all excuses from our selves, and puts every man into a hopeful capacity of
Salvation.

For if we be not justified to Salvation, it is not Gods fault, but our own;
because we do not believe.

God has graciously promised, but man has ungraciously refused and rejected
Gods kindness, and man has nothing to say for himself. Let God be true, but
let every man be a Lie. Our destruction is from our selves, but in God is our
help. 2 Cor. 4.4.
-- But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, In whom the God
of this World has blinded the minds of men which believe not, least the light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ who is the Image of God, should shine unto
them.

FINIS.
2 COR. 5.7. For we walk by Faith, not by sight.
INTRODUCTION.
FAith, that is the evidence of things not seen, abstracts the Soul from sense.

Therefore as that Faith that is so abstracted from sense, is counted to us for
Righteousness, or does justify us to Eternal life: So the same Faith kept by
works, upholds us in our Justification, and makes us to walk before God, in the
Practice of a spiritual life, abstracted from all carnal and sensual ways,
which is our Sanctification.

For as the end is Spiritual that we aim at, and not Carnal: So the means
whereby we attain to this End, are Spiritual, and not Carnal, that is Faith,
and the life of Faith, not of Sight.

For the Just man lives by his Faith, and not by his sight or sense; and does
not make have, but waits patiently for the Hope of Glory that shall be
revealed: Still looking beyond this life, and forgetting these things which are
here behind, reaches out, and presses hard to the mark of the High Calling,
which is laid up for him in Christ Jesus. Romans 1.17. Romans 8.24, 25.
For we are saved by Hope, but hope that is seen is not Hope; for what a man
sees, why does he yet hope for? but if we hope for that we see not, then do we
with patience wait for it. Heb. 11.1.
-- Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not
seen. When I was a Child, I spoke as a Child, I understood as a Child, I
thought as a Child; but when I became a man, I put away childish things. 1 Co^.
13.10, 11.
For we now see through a glass darkly, but then face to face. Now I know in
part, but then shall know, even as also I am known.

The Subject is Walking or Living.

The Parts are Faith, Sight, or a Spiritual and a Carnal Life.

The Doctrine. Chap. 1. Life.
A Christians Life is Spiritual.

Life is,

1. Of Nature, Pure, Harmless, as of other living Creatures.

2. Of sense, irregular, sinful, brutish, irrational, Earthly.

3. Moral by practice of Virtue.

4. Civil, in Society, Justice, under Laws.

5. Spiritual, Self-denying, above Laws. (...). Christians by their Spiritual
lives, Gal. 2.19.
come up higher then the Laws. -- Wherefore then serves the Law? it was added
because of Transgressions, 'till the seed should come, to whom the Promise was
made. 1 Cor. 2.15.
-- The spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is judged of no man.
-- The Law is good if a man use it lawfully. 1 Timothy 8, 9, 10, 11.
Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a Righteous man, but for the
Lawless and Disobedient, for the ungodly and sinners, for wholly and profane,
for murderers of fathers, and murderes of mothers, for man-slayers, for
whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for menstealers,
for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing that is
contrary to sound Doctrine according to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God
committed to my trust.

This life Sanctifies and spiritualizeth Nature, Sense, Manners, and Laws. For
though we walk after the flesh. 1 Cor. 10.3, etc.
we do not war after the flesh. For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal,
but mighty through God, for the pulling down of strong holds, casting down
imaginations, and every high thing that exalts its self against the knowledge
of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.
-- We are delivered from the Law, Romans 7.6.
that being dead wherein we were held, that we should serve in newness of
spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter. -- Let not sin reign therefore in
your mortal bodies, Romans 6.12.13.
that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof. Neither yield ye your members as
instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but yield your selves to God as those
that are alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness
unto God; for sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace. -- Knowing this, Romans 6.6.
that our old man is Crucified with him, that the body of sin might be
destroyed, that from henceforth we should not serve sin. -- I am Crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
which I now live in the flesh, Gal. 2.10.
I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

So that this life is High.

1. Above all natural sensual pleasures, profits, Honors, Arts, Powers,
Glories, Liberties, Beauties, Friends, Health, Strength, Peace, Orders, etc.

2. Above all natural sensual Pains, Wants, Shames, Ignorances, Weaknesses,
Disgraces, Deformities, Enemies, Diseases, Wars, Slaveries, Confusions, etc.

So that I value the Pleasures of God, and the profit of Eternal Life, and the
honor of being the child of God, and the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and the
Power of God, and the Glory of Heaven, and the Liberty of the Gospel, and the
Beauty of Grace, and the Friendship of God, and of Saints and Angels, and the
Health, and Peace of my Soul, infinitely above all the Pleasures, Profits,
Honors, Arts, Powers, Glories, and all the Pains, and Wants, the Shames,
Ignorances, and weaknesses, and all the miseries of this life. -- I glory in
tribulations, and choose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God,
then to enjoy the Pleasures of sin which are but for a season. -- For whosoever
is born of God overcomes the World, 1 John 5.4, 5.
and this is the victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith; who is he
that overcomes the World, but he has believes that Jesus Christ is the Son
of God? 1 John 3.9.
-- Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his seed remains in
him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God.

3. This life regulates all Passions, Love, Hatred, Joy, Grief, Hope, Despair,
Boldness, Fear, Anger, Revenge, etc. and raises them to Celestial Objects.

4. This Life sublimates all Faculties, Understanding, Will, Memory, Conscience.

5. This Life attains to true Wisdom and Tranquillity of Spirit.

By Exemption from vulgar Errors, Chap. 2. Vulgar Errors.
Vices and Passions. Lata est ad mortem via, Alienis perimus exemplis. Odi
profanum vulgus and arceo. Broad is the way that leads to Death. We perish if
we follow evil examples. I hate the profane Rout, and all their customs of
Swearing, Lying, Stealing, etc. and tend toward a harmony of rational Judgment
and will, with sensual Apprehension, and Desire.

2. By universal liberty of spirit in Judgment and Will. Chap. 3. Liberty.
The judgment of a Wiseman tries all things, yet is not tied to any thing; is
open and free, yet captivates its understanding to the obedience of Faith. --
The spiritual man judges all things, 1 ^or. 2.15.
but he himself is judged of no man.

Many are deceived by approving and following customs, because they are in
credit and use, without examination.

We may and must live in obedience to laws, Chap. 4. Obedience.
and Customs; speak and do as the Vulgar, but not Judge as they do, but rather
judge them. Powers and Laws, and Customs, may govern my hand, and my tongue,
least I disturb the peace of the World, but not my Spirit: my outward, but not
my inward man.

Behold I show you a more excellent way, Chap. 5. Dogmatists.
not to be Dogmatical or Magisterial in Proud Determinations, or Definitions.
Scimus nihil: opinamur verisimilia: fingunt docti magis quam norint. We know
little: we guess at the most likely things: learned Men, fancy more then they
know. There is a vain Philosophy and oppositions of Sciences, falsely so called
by men that are vainly pufft up with their fleshly minds, and such as dote
about Questions, not knowing whereof they spoke, nor whereof they do affirm.

Plato never intended to tie us to his Idaea's, nor Pythagoras to his Numbers,
nor Epicurus to his Atoms; they only abounded in their own sense to themselves,
and the solacing of their own spirits with their own Notions. Dogmatists are
most Pedantick. Socrates was far from them, and was therefore counted the
Wisest man. Cogitationes mortalium timidae, incertae sunt inventiones nostrae.
The thoughts of Mortals are fearful, and our Inventions uncertain. God knows
the thoughts of Man, that they are but vain. 1 Cor. 8.2.
-- If any man thinks that he knows any thing, he knows nothing as he
ought to know.

Who can obtrude Principles upon the World, but God himself, who only is to be
believed? Let the obtruders of Principles agree in them if they can, and then I
shall submit.

-- Purge out therefore the old Leaven, that ye may become a new Lump. -- Put
off the old man, and put on the new man. Be as white Paper, fit to receive fair
Impression. Be biassed no way, but respect the Truth equally; As new born Babes
receive the sincere Milk of the Word, which is able to save your Souls.

Be Academicks, and Pyrrhonians; for men of that Temper are never Heretics,
Fanatics, Opiniators, Troublers of the World, as Dogmatists Pedantick,
Magisterial and Definitive Gnostics. O homines ad servitutem nati! A
generation of Men born to continual Thraldom, and will not be released.

Like them Men in Plato's Cave, that never had knowledge but of Shadows; and if
they be told of the Beauty of the Substances, they will not believe it: And if
any offer to drag them out of the Dungeon to behold the fair Glory of the Sun,
and the Truth of all things discovered by the light thereof, they will shut
their eyes, and strive to run back to their old darkness again. In Love with
bondage. Violent, not harkening to any thing wiser then themselves: Male cuncta
ministrat impetus. Festina lent. All haste makes waste. It is good to try all
things, 1 These. 5.21.
and hold fast that which is good. -- Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if
there be any praise, think on these things.

3. By true essential simple Honesty, Chap. 6. Honesty.
and plainness of Spirit. A true, manly, generous, free, cheerful, equal,
pliable Genius. A spirit freely good, not for fear of Punishment, or hope of
Reward.

Not only natural Innocence and goodness, not acquired virtue and honesty: but
High and stately Resolutions of Grace and Perfection, more then Nature, Art, or
Law require. -- Covet after the best things, and yet I show you a more
excellent way. And this Temper of down right simplicity, and well meaning, is
the Mercury that points justly to the Highway of Grace and Glory.

The Stoics aimed at this Disposition, and Spicures more (witness Seneca,
though blasted by others of unequal Credit) to be above Want, Pain, Grief, Joy,
Shame, etc. And surely they were not all sullen, and morose; but very firm,
grave, severe, as Cato was, and pleasant too.

4. By Practicing true Piety. Chap. 7. Piety and Superstition.


An opinion contrary to this, prevails in the Carnal World. As

That God is appeased with satisfactions of Penance, moved with Gifts and
offerings, Delighted with the Torments and Ruins of his poor Creatures, with
the Sacrifices of innocent Beasts, and sometimes men, as presents to appease
his Wrath; affected with Austerities, Sackcloth, and Hair-shirts, Ashes, and
hard cold Stones, Macerated bodies, Wan-looks, Whining or Yelling noises,
Cuttings, Launcings, Pilgrimages, Incense, Candles, Holy-waters, etc. as are
practiced in Hermitages, and Cells.

A madness to flatter the Divinity with Inhumanity. To think to satisfy Gods
Justice with Cruelty.

Of what nature do they judge God to be? Surely they think him such a one as
themselves. And who has required these things at their hands?

Is God delighted, or ever was, or ever will be, with burnt Sacrifices, with
Calves of a year old, with Rivers of Oil, or the Cattle upon a thousand Hills?
or with the fruit of the Body for the sin of the Soul? God is a Spirit, and
they that worship him truly, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth.

The most noble service of God, is without too much External, and Carnal
service. It draws the Soul into its self, and raises it by pure contemplation
to a Heavenly worship.

-- Si Deus est Animus, nobis ut carmina dicunt,
Hic tibi praecipue sit pura mente colendus.
It was the humor of the Jews, Chap. 8. Judaisme and Heathenisme.
that knew no better, to dote upon a Material Temple, and cry out The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, to be ravished with numerous, laborious, and
costly Ceremonies, and the Purer sort to superadd of their own Inventions,
innumerable Traditions, imposed equally to be observed with those that God had
commanded; yea more. Thus their Religion exuberated into these excrescencies
and formalities, which destroyed the Power of Godliness.

God gave them a Carnal Commandment, because it fitted their low Estate, and he
kept them busied with many chargeable services to please them as children, with
outward performances, semblable to the Heathen worship, and to keep them busy
from doing the same Devotions to the Idol Gods, to which he knew they had a
great wambling: But with these services God was never fully pleased. He
intended far higher Duties, unto which he led them by the hand, if they had
had the wit to observe it, according as the Prophets did often hint unto them.
But they rested in the Letter, and in the worke-daies, and would not understand
what God farther intended; no not when they were sorely slasht in the
Babilonish Captivity; nor in the time of the Maccabees; nor under the sore Yoke
of Antiochus, nor yet of the Romans, when the Gospel began to dawn; nor yet in
the days of Christ himself, and his Apostles, when the clear dayspring from
an high did visit them, and that God did fully reveal what worship he meant
should continue for ever; and that all their rude and beggarly elements should
be laid aside, as being added only because of Transgressions, till the Promised
Seed should come. -- It was therefore necessary, that the Patterns of things in
the Heavens should be purified with these, Heb. 9.23.
but the heavenly things themselves with better Sacrifices then these.

But still they stumbled at the Old stumblingstone of a Temporal Covenant,
established upon Temporal Promises, and commanding Temporal Services.

And from hence many Christians first taken from the Nation of the Jews, and
afterward from all the Heathen Countries, have erred exceedingly; Partly by
mixing Judaisme; and partly by mixing Paganism, with Christianity, which both
of them are not out of us unto this very day, although the Apostles made it
their business, as they had then too much occasion, to overthrow these two
maine errors, from whence all other Heresies have been derived, and that Christ
himself did so much speak against the continuance of the Jewish way, and the
Introduction of Heathenish customs, by Preaching a more Spiritual Law, and
declaring Eternal Promises.

All though God has winked at the Nonage of the Jews, and the Ignorance of the
Gentiles; Chap. 9. Ch^i^^^anisme.
yet now God will have all men every where to aspire to perfection, and learn
better things, commanded in a better Covenant, that is established upon better
Promises; especially in the days of Adversity, when we are pinched with long
and sore Wars, with plagues of Fire and Water, and sundry kinds of Death.

It is high time now for the World to grow wiser, to come off from the Vanities
and Pomps of this Life, and walk highly with God in the Spiritual Exercise of
Faith and Repentance.

Away then with this Loose and Carnal way of Living: This will not do. The
Gospel calls for higher things.

1. This Loose and Carnal Life, will never satisfy the Conscience, nor please
God.

2. This formal and outward Worship will not serve the Turn.

You must come up to the pure Gospel-way, to the life of Faith, and to the
worship of the spirit, or you can never please God.

Be honest and just in your words and Actions.

Be dutiful and obedient to the Laws.

Be decent and orderly in Gods Worship.

But still I show you a more excellent way. This is to be done, and you are not
to leave the other undone. For thus it becomes us after Christ's own Example,
To fulfill all Rigteousness; To offend none, but to give unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's, and unto God the things which are Gods.

APPLICATION.
I have set before you two ways, Faith and Sight; Spirit and Flesh: choose
therefore the better part, that shall never be taken away from you.

1. Cherish the life of Nature, by Temperance, Sobriety, and Chastity.

2. Regulate the life of sense, by Reason, Prudence, and Moderation.

3. Order the Moral life, by Virtue, Justice, Obedience, and Honesty.

4. Maintain the Civil Life, by dutiful submission to Rulers, and their Laws
for the public Good.

5. Keep the Spiritual Life above all by Faith:

1. Which may Sanctify Nature, Sense, Morality, and Laws.

2. Which may transcend all carnal Profits, Pleasures, Honors, Arts, Powers,
Glories, Liberties, Beauties, Friends, Health, Peace, Orders, etc.

3. Which may overcome all Carnal Pains, Wants, Shames, Ignorances, Weaknesses,
Disgraces, Deformities, Enemies, Diseases, Wars, Bondage, Confusions, etc.

4. Which may regulate all Passions, of Love, Hatred, Hope, Despair, Joy,
Grief, etc.

5. Which may sublimate all Faculties, Understanding, Will, Memory, Conscience.

6. Which may arrive at the height of true Wisdom, Peace and Tranquillity of
Mind.

1. By exemption from vulgar Errors, Vices, and Passions.

2. By aiming at Universal Liberty in Judgment and Will, still submitting to
Faith.

3. By learning true essential simple honesty, and plainness of Spirit.

4. By Practicing true Piety.

1. Free from Jewish worship.

2. Free from Heathenish Idolatry.

This is the high and noble way of the New Testament of Jesus Christ, which is
of the spirit that gives life: not of the Letter that kills.

Thus we overcome sin from ruling in our mortal Bodies, that we should be
obedient unto the lusts thereof.

Thus we overcome the Temptations, and miseries of the World.

Thus we overcome the Devil, and bruise Satan under every one of our Feet, and
through Jesus Christ are more then Conquerors. And thanks be to God which
gives us this victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Look therefore on things Spiritual and not on things Carnal: Chap. ^0. Faith.
on things Eternal, and not on things Temporal. -- For the things that are
seen, are temporal and carnal; but the things which are not seen but believed
are Spiritual and Eternal.

Believe your sins are blotted out of Gods Book (for so they are when forsaken)
Though you cannot see your Pardon sealed by Gods spirit, by your sense; yet by
your Faith you may see it.

Believe the Peace of God and of your own Consciences; though the sense discern
it not: yet your faith may.

Believe the Judgments of God are escaped, and shall not hurt you; though you
feel present pain in the Flesh, as is needful for you.

Believe the Devil is overcome; though he sift you as the wheat is sifted: yet
Christ has prayed for you, that your Faith shall not fail you, and his Grace
shall be sufficient for you.

Believe you shall live, though you die and see corruption; for you shall die
in Faith.

This is Faith, to believe above sense, above hope, and contrary to hope, and
the judgment of flesh and blood.

This is Faith, To be present with God in the Spirit, though you be absent from
him in the Flesh.

This is Faith, to rejoice in Misery, to glory in Tribulations, to be ravished
with Spiritual comforts, during the enjoyment of Temporal, To find Rest in God
in the midst of Trouble, to rest upon Gods Promises of Pardon and Blessedness
in the midst of Sins and Miseries.

I will believe, though I see not, nor feel not any comfor: This shall be my
joy and comfort in believing.

I will believe, though I can give no Definition nor Reason for my Faith.

I will live in the Spirit, though I live in the Flesh; for I do not live after
the Flesh.

I will worship God in the Spirit, though I use a Form and outward Ceremony.

I will Eat and Drink, and be merry in the Lord.

I will suffer patiently in the Lord.

I will Live and Die in the Lord.

Tell me not of Temptations, I know who is on my side, and will deliver me.

Tell me not of Tribulations, I know who will Save me.

Tell me not of Death and Hell, I know who will Redeem me.

Yea; He has Delivered, He has saved, He has Redeemed me already.

The Forgiveness of my Sins past, present, and to come, is already present with
me.

The Deliverance from all my Sufferings is already present with me.

Eternal Life and Salvation is already present with me.

I know in whom I have Trusted. Here will I fix, say the World, the Flesh or
the Devil, what they will or can.

But with a Carnal Life, Chap. 11. Carnal m^n*
this Faith and Hope cannot consist.

Of all Tempers, these are most opposite to Faith.

1. Outward uncleanness, Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness,
Strife and Envy, Cursing, Damning, Oppression and Cruelty, and such like.

2. Inward Hypocrisy, Lying and Cheating, etc.

3. Open Rebellion, Sacrilege, Sedition and murmuring, and such like.

-- The Carnal mind understands not the things of God; neither indeed can it,
because they are spiritually discerned.

Thus it becomes us to Preach, and you to practice, Grace, Faith, Repentance,
Patience, etc.

It is too Legal, to preach Laws, Duties, Curses, Threatenings, Damnation.

The Gospel is, Faith, Love, Hope, Joy in the Holy Ghost; Grace, mercy, pace
from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

Till we persuade you to Faith, we shall never do our work, nor your work for
you.

Believe only and you shall be saved, This will bring works, and duties, and
mortifications, and all shall be pleasing to God, and without this, nothing
shall be pleasing unto him, for without Faith it is impossible to please God.

Say not; You cannot understand this Spiritual Doctrine of the Gospel; and this
Rule is too high for you to walk by; it is too hard a Task to lead this life
of Faith.

Chap. 12. Gospel Easy.
It is easy to understand this Doctrine; and he that is willing, shall be made
to know the mind of God, and to do the same.

It is as easy to understand this Gospel-Precept, Thou shall not Lust, or Hate,
as to understand this Legal Command, Thou shall not commit Adultery; or Thou
shall not Kill.

It is as easy to understand, That the thoughts of the Heart, and the desires
of the Will, are to be regulated, as the words of the Tongue, or the works of
the Hand.

It is as easy to understand Faith as Works, to Believe as to Live, To accept
of the Covenant of Grace as of works.

As for the Mysteries of Faith in the Trinity, Incarnation, Descension,
Intercession of Christ, and such like. They are more easily and safely to be
believed, then disputed. And the spirit is given to all that Believe, that they
might understand, and do the Will of God. That they might know the height, and
length, and breadth, and depth of the Love of God which passes all knowledge.

It is as easy and far more, to hear of Grace, Mercy, and Peace; as to hear
of Law, Curses, and Damnation.

It is as easy to hope as fear, to rejoice as to mourn, to be free as to be
slaves, to walk in light as in darkness, To understand the good of the Soul as
of the Body, the life to come as this life present.

Wise are we to know this World, Gain, Honor, pleasure, etc. and wiser we might
be to know the World to come.

Ob. A hard saying, who can hear it.

Sol. An easy and true saying, and very pleasant, and may be heard. Yea, and he
that has Ears to hear, let him hear; for he may hear if he will: none so deaf
as they that will not hear. The Charmer charms often and wisely, unless we
stop our Ears with the deaf Adder, and refuse to hear the voice of this
Charmer, though he charms unto us, never so often, never so wisely. There is a
voice behind us, yea within us, which says unto us, This is the way, walk in
it: Turn from the ways of wickedness, pass by them, and come not near unto
them, for fear iniquity be your Ruin; for why will ye Dye? O when will it once
be!

The Sun of the Gospel shines very clearly; but the World shuts her eyes upon
it. The light is come into the world, but men loved darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil.

The opposers of this heavenly way of walking with God in Faith and spiritual
Duties, are

1. Outward Formalists and Will-worshippers, Chap. 13. ^ormali^ts.
which rest in the Letter, and in the outward work done; as in Fasts, Feasts,
Forms, Austerities, Alms, Justice, Temperance, etc. yet there is a more
excellent way to go on to perfection; -- not to draw near to God with our Lips,
but our hearts: As the proud Pharisee that fasted twice in the Week, that made
long Prayers, that paid Tithe of all that he possessed, that thanked God that
he was not like other men; nor as that Publican: But the poor Publican went
home to his house Justified rather then the other. And the very Publicans and
Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven by their Faith, when these
Hypocrites shall be shut out.

2. Law-Preachers, Chap. 14. Law-Preachers.
and hearers of Curses and Damnation. Are we Saved by the Works of the Law, or
by the Faith of the Gospel? By the works of the Law, no flesh living shall be
justified. What Law had the Heathens Preached unto them? They were never under
the Law, they needed it not after they did believe, nor We. God did write in
the Law in their hearts by his Spirit in the days of the Gospel, and the
Kingdom of Heaven is within us. The royal Law of Love, The perfect Law of
Liberty, is written upon the Tables of our hearts; and this is a sufficient
Rule to bring us to Heaven.

Mockers of Faith, Chap. 15 Mockers.
Self-denial, Mortification, Purity of heart, Poorness of Spirit, Mourning,
Meekness, hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, Mercifulness,
Peacemaking, Suffering Persecution, Rejoicing in Persecution, which are the
spiritual commands of Christ, to which Blessedness is promised. Such Prophets
as speak of these things are counted Fools, and such spiritual men esteemed
mad, by the voluptuous and Luxurious men of the World, and by the Zenonian
Fatalists, that depend upon absolute Decrees, and put all to a venture.

What then remains, but that all Reasonable men should be satisfied with this
reasonable service of Faith, which is above their Carnal Reason, but agreeable
with all spiritual and Right Reason; and none but unreasonable and absurd men
will deny it.

I will resolve therefore with my self, Chap. 16. Soul-Resolution.
to go out of my self, and trust no longer in my Flesh, nor in any Creature.

I will resolve with my self, to understand better things, and to know my self
more perfectly.

1. How all Sin is in my Flesh.

2. How all misery is in my Flesh.

And that this is but my outward Man, the old Man, That decays and dies, which
I am daily putting off.

3. How all Grace is in my Spirit.

4. How all Glory is in my Spirit.

And that this is the Inward Man, The new Man, That quickens and lives, which I
am daily putting on.

And that therefore by my Faith I live above sin, and above Misery, and beyond
them both, while in my flesh I am perplexed with them both.

What then is all this Mourning by reason of Sin, and for Afflictions here
below?

Is not this the way to Heaven, though it be thus Rugged and Thorny? Is not
this the Sea, and are not these the Waves, and Storms, and Rocks, and
Quicksands that are therein?

But is not Christ my Pilot, and am I not safe under him? Have I not a sure
Guide, that will bring me into a safe Harbor? Can I not then have a little
Patience? It Is but to have a little Patience. --

Dabit Deus his quoque finem. It Is but standing still a while, and I shall see
the Salvation of God.

Wherefore then all this a do? Wherefore do ye trouble my Spirit? I am ready
not only to suffer but to dye. There is no strange thing happened unto me, but
such as is common to all the faithful, and such as happened to Christ himself.

What though I am Tempted, Afflicted, Oppressed, I live still. The just shall
live by his Faith. My Vessel is covered with Waves; yet she bears up against
them. My House is beaten and shaken with winds and waves, yet it stands still;
because it is founded upon a Rock.

I am fearful naturally, I do confess; yet by the Grace of God, I can look Sin,
Misery, and Death in the face, and trust in God still.

If I look only upon Sin, and Misery, and Death, and Hell, alas I dye for fear:
But if I look upon God and Christ, I live for evermore.

If I consult with flesh and blood, I mourn and die: but if I consult with the
Spirit, I rejoice and live. -- They that live after the Flesh, shall die: but
they that by the spirit do mortify the deeds of the flesh shall live.

Qu. Do we then live by Faith, or by Sense? Spiritually, or Carnally?

Ans. If we say we live by Faith, and by the Spirit, I say then, what means
this lowing and bleating of the Beasts that I hear?

Vnde Luctus and Planctus. Where is all this howling, and Lamentation? Why all
this Despairing and Doubting? O we of little Faith! A voice in Ramah is heard,
bitter Lamentation, Rachel mourning for her children, and refuses to be
comforted, because they are not.

But is Christ's Church a Widow, has she not a Husband? is she an Orphan, and
has she not a Father? Is she a stranger, and has she not a Protector? Surely
she is the Spouse and Daughter of Christ and no stranger; therefore God will
take care and charge of her, and do for her abundantly above all that she is
able to ask or think. Does God take care for Oxen, and for the Birds of the
Air, and for the Lillies of the Field? and shall he not much more take care for
us, O we of little Faith?

Let me alone therefore, and trouble me no more from henceforth, with idle
Questions or direful Curses. I have a God to trust to. I have nothing to do
with you, O ye subtle, O ye uncharitable ones! O my Soul strengthen thou thy
self in thy God alone, it is good for me to wait upon my God, and to keep my
self close to the Rock of my Salvation.

Why, Have I not found his Goodness all along, and should I doubt now? Have I
served so good a Master, and now should I leave him?

Why, how, and by whom have I lived all this while under all sorrows?

And how do I live still?

And how do I hope to live hereafter?

And how do I hope to live for evermore? but by my Faith in Gods Promises.

I am not exactly Righteous, therefore I cannot live by my works, but I am
willing to work Righteousness, and by the Grace of God I shall be accepted and
live by Faith.

CONCLUSION.
The Doctrine of Faith is sufficiently known, that thereby we are Justified,
Regenerated, Adopted, Incorporated into Christ's Church, Elected, Sanctified,
Assured, and shall be raised up from the dead, and live in glory everlastingly.

But who are the true Believers, is not so sufficiently known; and it is hard
to know.

All will profess their Faith, but how do they prove it? All will reckon upon
Salvation, but how do they prove their Reckoning?

Here lies the main Point, that men should not deceive themselves.

Professors enough, Teachers many; but how true God knows, 2 Cor. 13.5.
and they themselves do not know for want of Trial of themselves.

Well therefore, said the Apostle, Examine your selves, whither ye be in the
Faith; prove your own selves, know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

I take great care upon This.

I find high Pretenders to Faith, and to the Spirit, Chap.17. Pretenders.
and mighty zealots in all duties of Devotion; but I find also, that they are
not honest, but Liars, Cheaters, Malicious, Proud, Boasters, Rebellious,
Sacrilegious, Extortioners, Lovers of themselves, Luxurious, Covetous, and the
greatest Troublers of the World. I do not say Swearers, nor open Drunkards, etc.

I wish these men to examine themselves better, and know themselves to be
Hypocrites.

For God and the World know them so to be; for they daily rob God in Tithes,
and offerings, and his Priests of honor and respect. They rob the King of
Tributes and Customs, and of Honor and Obedience.

They do cheat and forswear to the ruin of their neighbors, none more.

Now shall such a Faith save them? It must be no other then a dead Faith;
Because they are Hypocrites, and do no good works, therefore they have made
shipwreck of a true Faith, and of a good Conscience.

2. I find ordinary Professors of Faith, formal enough, Customary hearers and
Worshippers and just men: But they are not zealous, but they are not sober and
temperate, but they are cursers and swearers, I do not say they are Liars.

I wish heartily these men would examine themselves better; They are in a good
way, and are almost, but not all together good Christians.

They are too lukewarm and formal. They must stir up themselves more, or else
they will come short of true Faith.

3. I find some that are close and private, and make little open show of any
Religion to the World. Being no comers to Church, no Readers, nor Prayers at
home, regard no Laws nor Magistrates nor Ministers: But keep to their shops and
employments, greedily grovelling upon the World and minding no divine Deity.

I wish these men would examine themselves better, and awaken out of their
sottish condition. For they can have no grounds to build any solid comforts to
themselves: but are as it were, without God in the World.

4. I find some that are open and profane Ranters, Cursers, Swearers,
Drunkards, Fighters, Revellers, and slighters of all Religion, Laws, and
Authorities, unprofitable burdens of the Earth, consumers of the precious
things put forth by the Sun, and of the precious things put forth by the Moon;
the enemies and shame of Mankind, and to their own Bodies and Souls.

I wish these men would better consider, bethink themselves, and examine in
what a fearful and hopeless condition they are in with God and Man.

For their Actions stink in the nostrils of God, and he will blast them with
the breath of his displeasure; For there is no comfort nor safety in their
Actions being inhumane and barbarous. A modest man that comes into their
company, and hears their roarings, yellings, blasphemies, and lewd speeches,
and sees their antike Garbs and monstrous behavior, thinks himself in the
Suburbs of Hell, or rather in the Court of Beelzebub.

Therefore these men of all men, have the least hopes of any reward in this
World, or in the World to come. For if there be any Dignities, Offices, or
Trades to manage, they are most unfit for them. Nor can the Gates of honor
without great injury, lie open to these men, who defile their families, and
shame and undo the Nation. And if there be any Reward in Heaven, they are sure
never to come there; and if there be none, they are unworthy to be rewarded
here.

So that they are the very scum and dross of the World; and it had been better
for them if they had never been born, or been like the untimely fruit of a
Woman, that had never seen the Sun.





It is hard for the World to know a true Believer from a false; because of
Hypocrisy. A vizard and Disguise of Religion, may cover black Deeds; fair
Speeches, looks and actions, may almost deceive the very Elect.

But it is easy for a man to know himself, whither he be a Hypocrite or no, if
he will but try. St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 4.4.
I know nothing by my self. If there had been any thing he might have known it.
-- Thine own heart knows, Eccles. 7.22.
that thou thy self have cursed others. So thine own heart knows whither thou
believe or dissemblest. 1 Cor. 2.11.
-- Who knows the things of a Man, save the spirit of man which is in him. 1
King. 2.44.
-- The King said to Shimei; Thou know all the wickedness, which thine heart
is privy to.

The heart of man is deceitful and Desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9.
and who can know it?



You need not therefore, be ignorant of your selves, nor cheat your selves
unless you will.

You are willing to be deceived; therefore you are deceived; it is your own
fault.

Never tell me you cannot tell your own heart, you may tell it well enough, if
you would examine it. The Soul has a faculty, not only to know, but to know
what she knows, and to reflect upon her own Actions.

I can tell I hope very well, whither I be honest or no; I, and no body else
can tell but I, if I be cunning to hide dishonesty from them. But yet they may
at last find me out, it is a thousand to one else, if they live long enough by
me, and try me much, and mark me well. There is nothing so secret, but at last
it shall be revealed; and that which is done in Closets, shall be shown upon
the house tops.

What do men think that are Hypocrites?

Alas, it is a poor silly business.

If there be a God, as there is, he must know all; and if there should chance
to be a Heaven as there will be, they shall be sure to be shut out. They had as
good put off their vizard, and lay aside their painted veil, and speak and do
plainly, and be at open defiance with God, and never make mention of his name
within their mouths; for their labor is in vain to Preach of him, and Pray to
him, in whom they believe nothing at all.

The humor of these men is very strange to take such pains to no purpose at
all.

Yea, but they have worldly ends thereby, to be counted Religious, that they
get Riches and Honor.

Very well, then they have their Reward: but it is a poor one; yet it is such as
they like, much good it cannot do them, nay, much harm will accrue thereby.

1. For God will condemn them much more.

2. Men will not love them, though they may fear them. Men count them as they
are, false; and scorn them in their hearts for their baseness.

3. They must shortly Dye, and then to what purpose is all this closeness,
plotting and contriving to get a little Pelf together, and to be revenged, and
have their Wills; for shortly their Enemies, and those they have oppressed,
will dance upon their graves, their Names shall stink and rot; and their own
seed, if not strangers, throw away what they have unjustly gotten.

Is it not far better and safer to be plain and down right honest? And then

Amongst good men a man shall be sure to be beloved* and God will certainly
reward him.

Beloved, bethink your selves, and be as you profess and seem to be.

Here are Sermons, Prayers, Communions, Bibles, and other good Books. What
then? Will this do the work to use all these?

One thing is wanting, and then all is done. Hear Pray, Receive, Read, give
Alms, etc. in sincerity, and humility.

What is it to be a great Talker of God; and with God, in Preaching, Praying,
etc. when the heart is not right with God all this while?

What is it to be a great Disputer, and Contender for Religion, and the
Ceremonies thereof, only to get applause and profit thereby?

What will all this avail at the hour of Death, or at the Day of Judgment?

At the hour of Death, they say, they care not; they must, and they can but dye.

At the day of Judgment, they pass not for that; for they believe no such
thing. Let them but alone till that Day, and they shall do well enough, they
will venture that.

Well then, if it be so; let them go as they are, and Gods Vengeance will go
along with them; and for ever, despair of Gods Mercies: Let them enjoy this
World, no wise man will envy them.

They are left to themselves. They that are wilful, let them be wilful still.



their Time, and never regard to know any thing that is good.

Who can pretend ignorance, that there is a God? and that he should do as he
would be done by? Not one: For these are Common Principles.

And as for Consequences, men might easily make them, if they would take the
pains, upon several occasions in life. As to say, when they dissemble, How do I
look when I Lie? Do I not hide falsehood under my Tongue, and is there not a
Lie in my right hand? Do I spend vast Sums upon vanity of Apparel and Riotous
living, and should I grutch to pay the Minister his small dues, or to give a
little to the Poor. No man but might say and do these things, and such as
these, whenever occasion is offered in his business amongst men: But men
sleep or Pot away their days, and forget all goodness, and in a moment they go
down to the Grave, and Rottenness takes fast hold upon them.

In a Word, for there is no end of writing Books upon such Subjects, to inform
and rebuke all men at all times, as they have need, for all their wild
Extravagancies: Let us hear all in a little. Fear God and keep his
Commandments: keep Faith, and a good Conscience: yet more briefly. Love is the
fulfilling of all Gods Commandments.

FINIS.
An APPENDIX for PEACE.


1. It remains that I should farther put on to satisfy, concerning Children
that dye, before they attain to Faith or the use of Reason, in what condition
their souls are in.

2. As also concerning Innocents and Fools, that all their life long are
suspended from the use of Reason.

3. As also concerning Madmen, who, after the Exercise of Reason, have been
deprived thereof for ever; or have lost it for a time, and then recovered it,
and lost it again.

4. As also of them that perish by Fire or Water or dye suddenly by any other
accident.

5. As also concerning them, that in their health of Body, enjoy health of
mind: but when Sicknesses have violently seized upon their Bodies, their Souls
have lost all sober use of understanding, will, or memory to the outward
appearance; only the Fancy abounds with absurd Idaeas, and representations of
things never acted by them, or sometimes by any other. And thence proceed
expressions of Blasphemy, Uncleanness, Nonsense, to the great trouble and
amazement of their weak friends, especially if they chance never to recover
their wits again.

6. And lastly concerning those honest Heathens that have excelled in virtue,
and the fear of God; either upon the stock of natural knowledge and their own
practice: or some farther secret Revelation that God has made unto them, In
what state or condition their Souls may be thought to be in.

And these are all the cases of doubt that I can think on upon this present
Subject.

To these I shall strive to give a modest answer with submission to better
Judgments, being far from a Magisterial Spirit of absolute Determination in
any thing, save what God has most clearly revealed to all.

1. I say then as to the first Case of Infants that dye in that estate. Chap. 1.
I think their souls are in a very safe condition.

Adam by Nature, that brought in death by his Sin, which is the wages thereof:
But they shall not dye everlastingly, because they are the children of the
Second Adam, by Grace that brought in life everlasting; by his Righteousness
which is the Reward thereof.

As for their actual non-stipulation, such as is required in ordinary
Covenants, and in the Covenant of Grace, I suppose their incapacity which God
puts them, in of such Stipulation for want of Power to use Reason, shall not
render them incapable of the Grace of God to excuse them by extraordinary
favor, for what they could not help.

For notwithstanding the impossibility of actual acceptance of their Will; yet
probably God may convey that Grace unto them, which he has promised to the
faithful, and their Seed: though at present they do not know it, yet hereafter
they shall know it, to their great admiration of that Grace, that brought them
unto Glory.

And what should hinder them from being susceptible of the benefit of Gods
Promises, although they understand not Faith. For are they not innocent? and
will God condemn the innocent, as he does the wicked? shall not the Judge of
all the World do right? This be far from God to judge unrighteous Judgment,
and this be far from us to think of God after such a fashion.

Are not Infants free from all love of the World, or malicious wilfulness to
put by Grace, or to grieve the Spirit of God, whereby they are sealed unto the
day of their Redemption?

And is it not an exuberancy of Love, and such as becomes the God of Love, to
help those poor creatures that cannot help themselves? And can he in Justice
create such innumerable and helpless Souls, and give them but a short life,
without all knowledge or sense of pleasure, on purpose to damn them to
everlasting pain, and make them fuel for Hellfire; only to show what he can
do! Certainly Gods thoughts are not like man's thoughts, so cruel; neither are
his ways like man's ways, so unjust: But they are of a better fashion; neither
may we think God to be such a one as our selves.

Secondly concerning Innocents and Fools, Chap. 2.
that have lived long, and yet never attained to the use of a Rational Soul, I
think these are more miserable wretches then children that dyed in their
Infancy; but not more sinful: but both are alike innocent and harmless before
God. That stained condition, that they, as Sons of Traitors are in by Law, that
have forfeited their Estates, is a sufficient punishment for this World, by
Grace they are most certainly free from the punishment of the next World. For
these poor Lambs what have they done? that never were in a capacity so much as
to will good or bad. And it is a true saying; Nihil ardet in inferno, nisi
propria voluntas. Nothing suffers in Hell, but the sinful Will.

What does Baptism consign, Chap. 3.
but an Ablution from Original Sin, and a Death to all Sin, and a life to
Righteousness, and thereby exemption from the state of Damnation to the state
of Salvation; and that to Infants as well as others, that are Baptized with
water: and if not Baptized it was none of their fault. And whither outwardly
Baptized or no, what can hinder the Inward Baptism of the Spirit, to them if
they Dye presently before or after Baptism; or to others, if they live long to
believe and keep that Faith in which they were Baptized: except they make
Shipwreck both of Faith and a good Conscience, by breaking the Vow and Promise
made by them.

None can deny but the Spirit of God is free as the Wind, to blow where, and
when, and how it lists; and who so fit objects to receive the gifts of his
Grace for life Eternal, as these poor Creatures that are so miserable, as not
so much as to enjoy the comforts of this life Temporal? Do not Rights belong to
Children and Fools by Law, but Grace gives Rights above and contrary to Law:
Especially the Grace of God, which is so Gracious, that our shallow
understandings and stammering Tongues, are not able to apprehend and express it.

I will therefore stand still, admire and hold my peace, when I cannot fathom
his Infinite Mercy.

3. Thirdly, Concerning Madmen, who have had Reason and Faith, Chap. 4.
Untimely Ends.
and afterward without their own fault, have lost the use of both; at least
Quoad nos, to outward appearance, either wholly, or for a certain time, or
times coming and going, I am as favorable to judge of them, as I did for
Infants and Fools.

I know well, God is favorable, and his Royal Laws most favorable, and to be
most favorably interpreted (as good men will allow their own Laws to be) And
therefore it becomes me and all men, to come as near unto God for kindness as
we may, and it is most safe so to do.

I say then, as favorably as I can, thus: As they have had Reason and Faith
before their distraction; so they have them still under their Distraction. The
Habits they retain, the Acts they cannot show. It is all alike to God, though
not to us. He knows what the Inward Man is; though we do not, but by the
expressions of the Outward Man to guess only.

4. Fourthly, Chap. 5. Untimely ends.
Concerning such as have been understanding and faithful both, and fruitful in
Wisdom and Goodness; and yet have suddenly pershed by Fire, or Water, or the
Sword, or any other fatal Contingency, I answer, I do not judge amiss of their
Souls at all for the grievous misery that has happened unto them: No, not if
they have in their Passion, or Provocation of uncharitable Censures, thrust out
their own Souls out of their Bodies, supposing they were such as constantly
feared God before.

They have not lost the life of their Souls, though they have lost the life of
their Bodies; they have not lost an Eternal, though they have lost a Temporal
life.

All these Changes and Chances of a long Life or a short, of a natural or
violent Death, of a Single or a Married life, of Poverty or Riches, of Beauty
or Deformity, of Ignorance or Learning, etc. are nothing to the farthering or
hindering of the state of a Blessed Eternity.

5. Fifthly, Chap. 6. Sickmen distracted.
Concerning them, that in their health of Body have enjoyed health of mind,
with Faith and a good Conscience; but afterward have been distracted, by
violent Diseases and never recovered: But (as other Madmen, that walk abroad,
or are shut up, as otherwise healthy and strong) they do talk not only idly and
fantastically, but wickedly and profanely, and act altogether ragingly.

I am not afraid to answer, that notwithstanding all these things have happened
unto them through Gods Providence, against their own Wills; yet their Souls are
in as good and as safe a condition, as ever they were before.

Chap. 7. Malefact^rs.
that for and by the guilt of some grievous Sins, as Murder, Rebellion, etc. or
for some grievous Misery, as Love, Want, loss of Children, etc. have fallen
Sick, and lost their Wits withal, 'till they have dyed either by mere sickness,
or by laying violent hands upon themselves?

I answer, And what will you say, that make this objection, or what can any man
say of these men whither they repented or no, between the Bridge and the Water?
or of God, whither his ways be not often secret, but always just?

And whither, think you, is safest, for me to say they are damned, or to hope
the best; that by the favor of God, punishing them here, they may be spared
hereafter?

If you can give a better Judgment then I in this Case, then do. I leave them
to that God that made them, who is infinitely just and good, and knows how to
relieve the weak. And hope the best.

It Is dangerous to walk upon the Ridges of headlong and slippery Places, as the
Tops of Towers and steep Rocks, or Brinks of deep Waters.

6. Sixthly and lastly, Chap. 9. Heathens.
There is one Case more, and it is as much as I can think of, concerning those
honest Heathens, that have excelled in virtue, and the fear of God; though
never Circumcised to the Jewish Law, nor Baptized to the Christian Gospel: but
only for ought we know, have grown good upon the Stock of Natural Light, or
some secret supernatural Illumination, in what state or Condition their Souls
may be thought to be in.

I answer as well as I can. That their Creed is to believe, that God is; and
that he is a rewarder of all such as diligently seek him. And so they came to
God, and whither he rejected them after they came to him as well as they could,
let the wise judge.

If then they do believe that God was a Rewarder, Chap. 9. Jews.
then there is no Reward but in Christ: And what did the Jews know clearly of
Christ, or of the Resurrection; were they therefore damned? They had a dark
Dispensation of Resemblances of Heavenly things by the Patterns of Earthly
Ceremonies and Promises, and these a darker, by natural light and impulse. If
Spiritual and Eternal things were generally hinted unto them, and they walked
according to what they knew, as the best Jews did; God will ^equire no more at
the hands of the Jew or Gentile then what he has given them. The one shall be
judged by that Law they had in Tables, and the other by that Law they had in
their hearts, and the Christians by that Spiritual Law of the Gospel, the
Perfection of both the former.

And God will have all men every where to repent, and in every Nation, and at
all times, they that fear God and worship him, and do justly as well as they
can, shall be accepted of him.

And whatever their condition be, which yet we have no cause to judge damnable,
they shall most certainly rise up in Judgment against them, that know more and
do less.

Let me add now certain Reasons applyable to the several Cases of the Persons
before specified.

A former life well led in the use of Reason and Faith, Chap. 10. A good Life
denominates Ju^.
is sufficient to denominate that Person Righteous, that afterward did fall
into Frenzy, or into a Lethargy or Apoplexy, or any other stupifying, or
distracting Disease to his dying hour, as also into a Pit, or into Fire or
Water, or any other danger never to be escaped. Nor can the Principles and
Seeds of Moral or Divine Virtues, be rooted out of the Soul by the violence or
permanence of any bodily Distemper, or by any sudden deadly chance whatsoever.

The Reason of this Reason may be, because the Body is but the Organ of the
Soul, and that very weak and dull, whereby it may operate in this World; and
therefore the indisposition that is, is of the Instrument only, and not of the
rational and sanctified Spirit, which is untouched all this while, and when the
Body fails can work better without it, 'till it be Spiritualized, and fitted
for the mind to act by for ever in the World to come.

2. Besides, All Spirits of good men made perfect, or not made perfect, out of
the Body, or in the Body; in this World, or in the World to come, have
communion with God still, and with the whole Church which is the Body of Christ
the Head; and therefore safe with the Father of the Spirits of all flesh
before, in, and after all bodily discomposures.

3. Consider farther, That a Disease may, and can kill the Body; so can Poison,
a Sword, a Fly, and other accidents of all sorts: But nothing can hurt or kill
the Soul but Sin. Fear not therefore that that can kill the Body, and go no
farther; but fear that that can destroy both Body and Soul in Hellfire, which
is living and dying in Sin, I say, Fear that.

As for idle or profane Words or Actions, Chap. 11. Idle Words or Actions.
spoken or done by children, fools, or madmen in Sickness, or out of Sickness,
They ought not in the least to be censured for them, as guilty of such words or
actions.

4. Because when a Man falls into an estate or condition which he could not
help, and in which he cannot deliberate, nor choose at all, Those Words or
Deeds that are spoken or done by him during that state or condition, they are
none of his.

Therefore these miserable Persons are never censured by any Laws for ought
they say or do, Chap. 12. Censur. s.
though never so irregular; Because it is not in their Power to help this
infirmity at all: and in the judgment of the Law, they have no will, because
they cannot use any. And they are already too miserable from the hand of God,
and that is Punishment enough to free them from the hands of Men.

He that knows not what he says or does, is next to him that is Innocent. They
that cannot deliberate or choose, are neither good nor bad.

Ignorance involuntary and invincible, must needs excuse; because the Law
says, Errantis nulla voluntas, nullus Consensus, Ignorants have no Will,
consent not, discern not; therefore they are not Criminal, for none can sin
without, or against his Will, as none can do good without or against his Will.

Thus Children born blind, dumb, deaf, lame, etc. must not be upbraided for
their misery; for that is a reproach to their maker, cannot be upbraided for
their sin. Their tender Age preserves their Innocence, they are yet white
Paper, and cannot be sullied with the World, the Flesh, or the Devil.

In like manner any sickness, or any other disaster that takes away the Wits,
or the Life; and comes not by our fault (these things being out of our Power,)
they keep the Innocent party from being polluted.

When therefore such poor Innocent Souls, are surprised by the hand of God,
lying so sore upon them as to bereave them of their Sense or Life: alas! They
are to be pityed, not condemned; for why, much evil have they suffered, but
what evil have they done?

What if they talk idly or filthily, Chap. 13. Sleep and Waking.
or rave and take on furiously? We well know, that in sleep, when men are in
their health and wits, the fancy is awake and very idle, which occasions
talking and doing agreeable to that idle fancy in them that dream, and talk,
and walk in their sleep.

So likewise in Sickness and Distraction withal, the fancy is heigthened to
stir more, then in Health and Sobriety, which occasions words and deeds, both
agreeable to such a disturbed fancy.

Now if the Body be awake and not overcharged with wild vapors flying up into
the Head, then the Soul can hinder the Tongue and Hand from expressing or
acting, as the toyish fancy did dictate in sleep otherwise.

And though a thousand ridiculous and impertinent conceits flutter about in my
brain, yet my sober understanding and will, disapproves and rejects them all,
not owning them in the least, if I be my own man; and so never suffering them
to be uttered or performed.

But when I am asleep, or dream, or am stark mad; I know neither what I say,
nor what I do; and therefore all that I say or do then, is nothing to me,
because none of mine.

Chap. 14. Innocence preserved.
Solus cum te praestare potest
Furor insontem, Proxima puris
Sors est Manibus, Nescire nefas.
Since thy fury only makes the guilt less, thy condition is next to the pure
Wights that know no evil.

Innocens si furere coeperit, aut innocens resipiscet, aut innocent morietur.
If an innocent person grow mad; either when he returns to his Wits again, he
shall be innocent as he was before: or if he dye distracted, he shall dye
innocent as he lived innocently.

Nulla Aetas, nulla Sanctitas, nulla Custodia sic, innocentem conservat, ut
Furor. Qualem invenit, talem reddit. No Age, no-Mortification, no close Custody
can so preserve a man's innocence from being tainted, as does distraction of the
mind; for just as it found a man when it first took him, so shall it leave him.

Infancy and Madness is without all Crime, which is the root of punishment.

Chap. 15. Drunkenness and Passion.
As for Drunkards with Wine or Rage that speak and act monstrously and most
illegally and irreligiously, The Case is otherwise with them. They might have
helped it. They have brought this condition upon themselves. They should not
have looked upon the Wine when it was red and moved its self aright by
sparkling in the Glass for the riches of the spirits thereof. It was in their
power to have withstood strife and hatred at the first, before it came to the
height of fury and revenge.

They should have considered Wine, and Love, and Malice, if not restrained by
Prudence in time, inflame the heart with unruly Passions, and urge the Patient
to Jealousies, Railings, Fightings, which end in Wounds or Death.

And therefore Pittacus ordained a double punishment to such as were drunk, and
committed outrages during their drunkenness; one for their drunkenness, and
another for the mischiefs done by them. Drunkenness therefore is styled (...).
A Devil that we invite to come unto us, A Madness that we bring upon our selves.

Callicles in the Comedy did well convince Dinarchus when he prayed for Pardon,
saying,

-- Quod animi impos vini vitio, fecerim.
Excuse me, It was my Wine, not I, did this: Non placet in mutum quicquid
conferri, quod loqui non potest.
Nam vinum si fabulari possit, se defenderet.
Non vinum moderari, sed vino solent,
Qui quidem probi sunt: verum
Qui improbus est, sive bibit, sive idem caret Temeto;
Tamen ab ingenio est improbus. That is, I like not your answer, That you
should lay the fault upon the wine, A dumb thing that cannot speak for its
self; for if it could, it would defend its self well enough. Blame not the Wine
then, for Wine does not govern a good man, but a good man governs the Wine: But
he that is wicked is wicked from within, whither he drinks or no.

If you ask me concerning the Reasons, Chap. 16. Extraordinary Visitations.
why the above mentioned Persons are so extraordinarily visited. I answer, I
cannot tell; for Reasons are best known to God himself, and those most just,
though hid from us. Certainly they are plagued, not for their extraordinary
Sins, nor yet of their Parents: but that God might show his Glory, and make his
mighty Works to be seen, and to humble us for our Preservation from such
grievous miseries, for our Deserts that we have. To render us thankful for his
free Grace and Love, and to make us careful and fearful to offend, least such
or worse things come unto us.

And that we should not insult over their woe, nor tread upon them that are
down, and add sorrow to their sorrow: but rather fear and tremble at the mighty
works of God, and repent for fear, we should all likewise perish.

Learn therefore to pitythose harmless and distressed Creatures. Chap. 17. Pity
and Charity.
O pity them all you that are their friends! All you that are Christians! yea,
All that are men!

Shake not your heads, and mock not, as the Jews mocked Christ upon the Cross.

Say not in the Pride and Error of your minds, doubtless these Persons were
sinners more then ordinary, or else God would never have so extraordinarily
afflicted them. Judge not that ye be not judged. Be not like unto Jobs friends,
that because God had deprived him of all worldly comforts, therefore they
charged him to be an Hypocrite. These were miserable Comforters, Physicians of
no value.

Remember your Saviors words. -- Think not that those, whose blood Pilate had
mingled with their Sacrifices, or those on whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were
sinners above all others that dwelt in Jerusalem, because they suffered such
things: I tell you, nay; but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. --
Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy! for though I do fall, yet I shall rise
again. -- They that go forth weeping, bearing good seed, shall doubtless come
again rejoyeing, bringing their sheaves with them. And greater shall their
Reward be in heaven. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God holy and beloved)
bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind; and above all things, put on
Charity which is the band of all perfection.

Pity the condition of those, whose Infancy, Youth, and Beauty are assaulted,
with Consumptions, Poxes, Lameness, Madness, and Death, which is the last
Punishment; whose Prime and Golden years are cut off, and all their Wits and
Parts turned into folly. Alas! the budding Tree, and the Tree laden with mature
fruits, suddehty wither and dye. The fairest flowers are cropped in their full
glories. The Sun sets at Noon day. And yet they are either altogether innocent
as Infants; or setting humane infirmities aside, more righteous then other men,
and yet they are plagued more then other men. But do not you therefore condemn
the generation of the Just; because the hand of God is upon them. I say
therefore, that except you have sucked the breasts of Tigers, and partake of the
nature of the savage Beasts in the wilderness, you cannot but stop your
uncharitable censures and leave them to that God that made them, and will save
them, and look you to your selves.

And now before I take off Pen from Paper, I think fit to add one word more for
the use of this Doctrine delivered, which is; To take off all Disputes, if it
were possible, and that the minds of proud, contentious, and interessed men
would bear it, concerning the great noise that is made of Infallibility,
Supremacy; the Light that is in us maintained, either by the Pope, Presbyter,
Independent or Quaker; as also those endless wranglings of Schoolmen or
Casuists, which make up such heaps of confused Volums to the distraction of
Churches and States for Jews, Turks, and Heathens to laugh at.

For if Faith be the ground of all Justification and Assurance, Chap. 18.
F^^^dation.
What need all those heart burnings and separations about the Notion of the
True Church; Seeing all that hold the faith of Jesus Christ, are the members of
Christ all the World over, though they differ about Consequences and
Superstructures, and forms of Discipline or external Worship. If any man shall
build upon that precious Foundation, Gold or Silver, or precious Stons, Wood,
Hay, Stubble; every man's work shall be made manifest. 1 Cor. 3.1.12, etc.
For the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire, and the
fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. If any man's work abide which
he has built thereupon, he shall receive a reward. If any man's work shall be
burnt, he shall suffer loss; but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.
And other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which if Jesus Christ.

We all agree in the main Foundation, and therefore we might all hold the unity
of the Spirit in the Band of Peace. Therefore all other unnecessary Questions
that engender nothing but strife do vanish of themselves, and it will be found
sufficient to hold to those few things that are necessary for saving Faith and
Life, and to trouble the people of God with no more Controversies.

Let all subtle, Factious and Seditious spirits, pack up their bundles of Trash
and be gone. We give them to understand, that we have no such custom, nor the
Churches of God. We have enough to secure us for Heaven hereafter, and for
Peace while we live here.

Here is a safe and a short way propounded for happiness, if they will take it.
From henceforth let these Dividers look to themselves, and Teach nothing but
the Scriptures for Doctrine, and the Laws of their several Countries for
Discipline, and be quiet.

I wish Councils would make no more Creeds nor Definitions and Canons, forced
with deadly Curses and Anathema's against all Dissenters.

I wish no one Church would dare to Excommunicate another, nor the same Church
cut off her own Members so desperately, for some fond opinions, or scruples:
for they do but show their malice and pride, in calling Fire from Heaven in all
haste. Their blows cannot hurt a Soul that is ingrafted into Christ, nor cut
off any from Communion with him or his People in the Spirit. They do but beat
the air. They know not what spirit they are of.

Away with Transubstantiation, Consubstantiation, Merits, and Works of
Supererogation, Prayers to Saints or Angels, Indulgences, Purgatories,
Supremacies, Infallibilities, Pilgrimages, Whippings, Penances, or Pecuniary
satisfactions, and such like stuff.

These things are not worth the striving for (they are all Hay, Straw, and
Stubble) to the effusion of Christian blood, and wasting of Treasures, How long
will the World be deluded with vain Words! It is enough to contend for the
Faith that was once delivered to the Saints; and neither to add to it, nor take
from it, as it is contained in that Rule of Faith, the Creed Apostolical, out
of Gods Word. And all Divines and others should do well to bend their forces
this way, against the common enemy.

And pray what good have the Disputes about such things ever done? Chap. 19.
Disputes.
and what one Controversy have they laid asleep, or ever will, when both
parties join wit to wit, fallacy to fallacy, equally triumphing, in their own
strength or success; and neither party acknowledging themselves foiled, but
rather Conquerors.

And in the mean time, while men contend for the Form of Godliness, the power
thereof is lost. They raise such a thick dust by striving, that the Truth
cannot be seen; and while the state of the question is debating, The plain
verity sneaks away. The worst is, they tie more knots, then they are ever able
to unloose: and raise more Devils, then they are ever able to lay. This is the
Scab of the Church, When Aristotle, and Plato, or an idle Legend, are greater
Oracles, then the Scriptures themselves.

I would fain the Church of Rome would better consider of these things, why
they should urge so many new Articles of Faith, and such infinite Heathenish
Ceremonies upon Christians, and so hate, condemn, and persecute to death the
Reformed Party as they do.

We are not so imperious and uncharitable to them, but hope favorably of the
honest poor people under them, that are kept in ignorance, and must know no
better. But woe be to the blind Guids!

I would fain the Reformers of our Reformation would better consider, what
reason they have to stand off, and be so shy of the Episcopal and Royal Party;
because they do but their Duty to stand to the Discipline and Worship which by
Law is established.

Lord what mischief have these men done! Too like the old Zealots among the
Jews, and the Seditious Orators among the Gentiles. So they cause the People to
hate the Prince, and the Priest, and ravish their sacred Rights, while they are
pampered with the spoils of both, and of the people to boot.

And the poor people on both, sides will be deceived, because naturally they do
not love Dignities. And this their Deceivers work upon.

If they that have eyes would see, and they that have Ears would hear, and they
that have hearts would understand, they would yield to the plain reason of
Faith in the Laws of God, and to the plain reason of Law in the Statutes of
men. But first, these sweet tongued Orators must be removed. These Mountebanks
must be cashiered. The Sea would be calm if the Winds were laid. If Princes
would silence these Mimical stage Players, Nimble Sophisters, and Fucous
Declaimers, their Subjects would be wiser and better then they are.

If Kings take care in the first Place that God be served after a pure and
decent Form, prescribed by their Law, they themselves will be better served.

If Kings keep the Reins in their own hands, and never prostitute their Sacred
Rights to the ambitious Clergy and wild Rabble, they will do their business;
and keep the Church, Themselves, and their Dominions in Peace.

O blessed way if it could be taken! The only expedient to beget and maintain
Truth and Peace. Who but such as are faithful to God and the King, can have any
assurance of their Salvation?

One thing more sticks in the way: A Doctrine undiscerned; hurtful to Religion
and Laws: I mean, An absolute Personal Election and Reprobation. Chap. 20.
Decrees Absolute.


1. A Dishonor and Blasphemy against the Good God, in making of him the Author
of Sin and Misery to most of his poor Creatures; so that they cannot love him
as they would, that is so unjust and cruel to condemn them from all Eternity,
for just nothing; and in time to make his Decree good, by forcing them to Sin,
under a color that they may be justly damned! I tremble to think, that
Sejanus's innocent Daughters must first be deflowred by the Hangman, that they
might be capable to be put to death according to Law!

2. A Bar for ever, to any Satisfaction, Assurance or Comfort to any Soul
that is in Distress! A spade will be a Spade: The Black-moor cannot be made
White; nor the Leopard loose his Spots withal the washing in the world. They
weary themselves in the very Fire. It is a Lottery, if a man have the luck of
it.

3. A gap it will be, do what they can, to all Licentiousness and Presumption.
If Elected, they must be called, and persevere, let them take no care. If
Reprobated, they are sure to be damned, let them take never so much care.

4. A Prostration and Enervation of all Laws and endeavors; There is neither
Virtue nor Vice, to reward or punish, if the will be forced against its will to
Good or Evil, as by a Fate it must be.

5. By it all Preaching and Exhortation to duty is a mere mocking. For God
means not as he speaks, Salvation to all; but he has a secret reserved Will of
Damnation to most.

These and many more absurd and profane consequences, they can never avoid
while the World stands, let them say or do what they please. But the thing that
I wonder at is, That the people should rather delight to hear these
Boanerges's, the Sons of Thunder, then the Barnabas's the Sons of Consolation.
But any thing will go down kindly from those that speak against the present
Powers. For Power is a thing naturally hated, though it be Gods.

But though they have the knack to cheat the Ignorant and weak by the dril of
their Clappers, antic faces, and demure deportment; Yet they cannot put out
the Eyes of the Wise, that can discern sense from flams, nor stop the Ears of
the prudent, that can distinguish betwixt the harmonious Touch of a skilful
Musician, and the harsh scrape of a Country Fiddler.

They know it can be no sense nor honesty, to bid men see that are born blind,
to bid men run that are lame; or fast chained, to bid men hear that have their
Ears dammed up, To bid men eat and drink that are sick, and can neither Taste,
nor take any thing; or if able to do both, show them meat and drink, and snatch
it from them.

Though they may thus mock men, yet let them not think to mock God also: or
that God is such a one as themselves: verily they have their Reward.

See how great a part is deluded, if not stark mad.

1. The Papists that Damn all out of their Church, as being without the pale,
cast overboord and sunk.

2. The frantic Quaker says, of all other Sects, They are Damned. And both
these look when God shall put the Sword into their hands, to destroy the
Wicked, as the vermin of the World.

3. The Zenonian Pharisaical Tribe, are of the same spirit, but hide it more
craftily. They are not for fire and faggot as the Papists, nor for a general
Massacre, as the fifth Monarchy men, etc. But they are merciful to suffer the
Gibeonites to live; only they must be hewers of Wood, and drawers of Water to
serve the Elect, which have the Right to all things. Good men and True, they
can hunt down the game from his legs; and when the Dogs of the same pack
started before them, and tore the game in pieces, they barked and howled sadly,
because they lost the benefit of the Prey.

The Rabbis and Philosophers began early to mingle their Extravagancies among
Christians: Next the Pride of Infallibility and Supremacy began to peep from
the chief Seats of Empire, with Apish Imitation of Idolatrous Ceremonies. They
had not learned yet thoroughly the Art of Defense, but being challenged by Arius
and Pelagius those Mighty Champions among the rest, they came to close Fights,
and in heat of blood let fly at random. Thus the Gap once opened, In rusht a
Crowd of Gowned Warriers, cutting down all opinions but their own, with the
sharp weapons of their Tongues and Pens, singing Jo Paean to this day, flatly
determining by their Legislative Power against pure and modest Antiquity. And
took occasion still by the very Reformation, striving to be most contrary to
them, from whom they did justly depart, taking all upon the credit of some few,
who were most famous for striking the first stroke.

There was all along a moderate Party, especial at this last overture: but they
could not be heard for Peace, because the Cry of the Zealots was against them,
and so it is still. But the heat of the business is in good part over: At
leisure the Diligent have better considered, and long for the Peace of
Christendom.

Young Dupradii Novices may be indulged to believe their Masters, when they
know no better; but when they come, for their time to be Lytae and Regents
themselves, they may judge of what they have learned, and teach better. And so
might thousands do, if they knew their strength and were not Lazy, and content
with that little they have; and if they were not tied up under present pains,
or future Damnation, to believe all that is obtruded upon them: But the World
we hope, will grow older and wiser. Amen.

FINIS.

