THE DISCOVERY OF A GREAT PLOT INTENDED Against the City of LONDON, to have
robbed, and murdered the Citizens and Inhabitants: And the Names of the Actors.

ALSO, The victory at Arundell Castle, obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLER;

And the taking of: 2. Ladies. 4. Colonels. 3. Sergeant Majors. 12. Lieut.
Colonels and Captains 90. New Captains for the Commission of Array. 100.
Gentlemen. 50. Gentlewomen. 4000. pound in money. 25. Barrels of Gunpowder.
1000. Common soldiers, with other rich commodities.


TOGETHER WITH A Full Satisfaction, concerning the three Queries about the
great Controversy and different Opinions of the Observing of Holy days.

Published according to Order.

Ian: 8. London, Printed for AND: COE. 1644.

Full Satisfaction concerning the three Quaeries about the great Controversy
and different opinions of the observing of Holy days.
1. Quer. Whether the Institution of other Holy days besides the Sabbath, be
of Divine Right?

Ergo, not of Divine Right.

2. Quer. Whether there by any Precept or example Apostolical, to warrant or
condemn the celebrating of any such days, or neither.

Answ. This Quere is needless: but to give further satisfaction. In Scripture
there is no such precept, but the superstitious observation thereof is so far
forbidden, that Paul would have us so to carry our selves herein, that no man
may condemn us for the superstitious respect of an Holy day. Coloss. 2.16. But
the third is the main Querie intended.

3. Quer. Whether the Church and Civil Magistrate, have Authority to
iustitute any such yearly Festivals?

Answ. We are here to understand who is meant by the Church and Civil
Magistrates; and that first negatively, not such as the Apostles in the
primitive Church, for they were spoken of in the former queries: but
affirmatively the Church now remaining, and the Governors and Officers
thereof: To which we answer. That in respect of civil obedience they may
impose lawful commands on certain days, but have no power to consecrate a
day, or make it holy. The Sillogisme is this.

If we find that the Church and Civil Magistrate, or either have authority in
godly policy and civil respects to appoint the solemnity of yearly Festival
days, the Holy days by them appointed may be observed: but they have
authority (if they see it expedient) Ergo, they may be observed.

But this argument of theirs proves nothing, to impose a necessity, or that the
conscience is bound to observe such days, as more holy then others: no more
then if one should say, We are bound in conscience to spend all we have in
housekeeping this Christmas: For if the Ministers and Churchwardens have
authority to beg our charity for the poor, we may give them all we have. But
they have such authority, therefore in conscience we must give away all: this
proves nothing, but to search the particulars more exactly.

1. The Major they prove thus. That the Church or Civil Magistrate have
Authority to appoint and institute yearly Festivals in policy and civil
respects, is warrantable by the example of Purim. Esther. the 9. Mordecheus and
Esther, appointed a new Festival day, not instituted of God and bind every
one to the observing thereof, that none should fail to observe it. Verse 27.
From this Bellarmine concludes, That men are bound in conscience to observe
Festival days. Bellar. cap. 10. So also our Doway Men. page 1050.

Answ. 1. Though we do not utterly reject Festival days yet we acknowledge
none necessary (says Doctor Willet) more then are of the Holy Ghosts
appointing in the Scripture. 2. We deny that the constitutions of the Church do
bind christians, in respect of the days themselves, in conscience to keep
them, otherwise then they may give offense by their contempt and disobedience
to the wholesome decrees of the Church: for it self in its own nature is
indifferent: nothing binds absolutely in conscience but that which is
warranted by did Word. Wherefore keeping of Holy days being not enjoined, but
left indifferent in the Word, binds no otherwise, then as we have said. 3.
The example of Esther, did bind the observer in conscience, not in regard of
the day, but of the promise, which was made for themselves and their seed, to
keep it: but first their consent was required: and therefore there was no feast
instituted for that so miraculous a passage over Jordan: none for the walls of
the fall of Jerico: nor for the slaughter of the Midianites in the time of
Gideon: nor for that other no less admirable of the Ammonites and other people
confederate in the days of Jehoshophat, neither for that of the Assyrians when
the Angel of God destroyed the whole host. And who can reckon up those so
many the like miraculous deliverances, for remembrance whereof notwithstanding
there were no solemn days dedicated. Ser. 25. on Esther. 9.4. Mordecheus
besides his ordinary authority as a chief Governor, had also some
Prophetical directions to institute this day of rejoicing (being held to have
written also that Book of Esther) which cannot now be drawn to an ordinary
president. 5. Lastly, it seems rather to have been appointed as a Festival
day of rejoicing, and thankesgiving, for the joyful remembrance of that
deliverance, then as a new Holy day to be kept with that stricktnes, as the
Holy days appointed by the Law: for they kept it with joy and feasting, and
sending presents one to another. v. 19 Like as now in the Church of England,
the 5. of November. is appointed by Act of Parliament to be celebrated, not as a
new holy day, with Injunctions of abstinence from work the whole day, but only
to assemble together in the Congregation, to give God thanks for so great a
deliverance. 2. They bring in the example of the dedication of the Temple, to
which I answer.

Answ. 1. There was no yearly memory thereof kept nor instituted; neither for
the restitution of the Temple by EZekiah, after the profanation thereof by
Ahaz and Urias, nor by Josias after the same had been most horribly polluted by
Manasses and Amon. Nor by Zerobbabel, Esdras, or Nehemiah, after it was
reedified: when it had been utterly destroyed by the Chaldees. 2. These were
shadows of the things to come, but the body is in Christ. The first Argument
you see is nothing worth: The minor they prove thus:

If the Church or Magistrate may celebrate Festivalls for temporal mercies,
they may do it for spiritual mercies, and appoint days for the one, as well
as for the other.

Answer. The difference is not in the cause, but in the thing: not about the
matter for which the days are celebrated, but how far the celebration it
self is superstitious, and what is binding, and therefore we shall proceed to
the ensuing considerations

1. Whether an holiness may be ascribed to these days, or whether they be
only indifferent, and merely civil and politic^ll. But assuredly no holiness
is to be ascribed, and therefore not necessary, though some times expedient.

That they are indifferent is proved already, and holiness not to be ascribed
to the day. And therefore it is recorded in the confession of Augsburg. Art. 4.
That concerning Festival da^es etc. they are things indifferent, which where
is no danger of giving offense, may be well omitted. And let them therefore be
pleaded never so expedient binding to the conscience, they cannot be.

So then it will necessarily follow (as themselves cannot deny) that these
days being no more holy then others to be observed (except for some civil
obedience temporalls to the Magistrate) or in some cases for some thankful
remembrance, to praise God for some deliverance or mercy received, Christians
are not bound in conscience to observe them, nor in the observing thereof to
attribute holiness to these days above others.

So that in some respects we agree in the general rule, that in all different
things, of civil use, (in temporal respects) the Magistrate may command and
we are bound to obey, either for the observing a day, or the not observing a
day, (where the Scripture is silent and conscience free) But in things of
Religious use in the worship of God: we are to obey nothing by the pretended
Authority of the the Church. But what Gods word expressly commands, or for
which we have express precept, in things of Religion, and worship, the
Scripture must command the Church and Magistrate.

But whereas they say in civil indifferent things the Church and Magistrate,
may command us.

Answers. This must exactly be observed; that without authority from the word
of God, they cannot bind the conscience. And therefore according to their own
rule, we are to enquire, wherein, or in what cases, the observing of such days
may be expedient, and in what cases not expedient. It is expedient, as before
upon the receiving of some blessing from God. The remembrance of which should
be kept not by attributing holiness to the day, as has been formerly the
custom: Whereby 1. Arose an opinion of a necessity even with fear of sin for
the breaking of them, which is contrary unto the Christian liberty. 2. The
holiness of one day was accounted greater then of another, as though Gods
grace was most easily found, and more largely granted on the festival days,
then on others, and in this feast, rather then in that. 3. There was also
joined an opinion of merit even by the work it self wrought, as though by the
ceasing on such days from work they, had done an holy Act. 4. There followed
a neglect to hear Gods word on other days. 5. And lastly, There issued a
careful and scrupulous ceasing from all handiwork, after the manner of the
Jews, and the observation of the time of the Feast, from one twilight, unto
the other. And therefore by the common Laws: Ad animae periculum pertinent
superstitiosa temporum observationes: supe^stitious observation of days
brings danger to the soul.

Neither indeed was it Mordicheu's purpose, to institute any new worship of
God: and to ascribe unto the days of Purim, (which example is so much
alleged) any greater holiness, then unto other days, neither to bind any
man's conscience to the observation of this Ordinance, as they are to those
things which God himself has commanded; But whereas God has granted unto man
six days of labor, and has left it to his will, either to labor, or to
employ it in holy things, as says Merlyn. Mordicheus only respected this, that
these days should rather be bestowed in the remembrance of the benefits of
God: and in giving thanks for such a deliverance, then to bind the conscience
so from handy work, the rest of the day as if God himself had commanded it out
of absolute necessity. And thus the nativity of Christ: the Epiphany etc. are
to be observed. We have now many holy days in our Kallender, but of old; for
the space of four hundred years after Christ, these were the only solemn
Feasts in the Church. Easter, Whitsontide, the nativity of Jesus Christ the
Ascension and the Epiphany.

2. And therefore to conclude with the last consideration, consider that when
by observing any such day: God is either by superstition or profaneness
dishonored: (although the remembrance of the mercy of God be required) yet the
day is not to be kept; except such abuses be taken away, but necessary to be
suppressed, and forbidden. Therefore the Church, and Magistrate, have power to
suppress and forbid them, when they are either instituted to a superstitious
use, or used profanely, and so, though the nativity of Christ, and other
Festivalls may be celebrated, yet as they were instituted to a superstitious
use, and are frequently abused to a carnal liberty, and profaneness, it is
necessary, they should be reformed: in name, end, and use. For, 1. No day
dedicated to an Idol is lawful to be observed, but Christ-mas day is
dedicated to the Idol of the Mass, and others, dedicated to Saints, and
therefore ought be reformed. 5. The end is to give power to the Prelates, to
trample upon our consciences. 3. And lastly, the use is very profane, to
dedicate days to Saints, is to ascribe that to the creature, which is only
proper to the Creator: which is Idolatry. And every Protestant is bound, so
far as the celebration of Christ's nativity or other Festival days are
Idolatrous, or Heathenish to the endeavor to have them purged.


