The diseased maiden Lover: Being a pleasant new Song,
to an Excellent New Tune, Or, may be sung to the Tune of, Bonny Nell.


AS I went forth one Summers day,
To view the Meddows fresh and gay,
A pleasant Bower I espied,
Standing hard by a Rivers side.
And in it I heard a Maiden cry,
Alas there is none e're loved like I.
I couched close to hear her moan,
With many a sad and grievous groan,
And wished that I had been the wight
That might have bred her hearts delight:
But these were all the words that she
did still repeat, none loves like me.
Then round the Meddowes did she walk,
Catching the Flower by the stalk,
Such as within the Meddows grew,
As Dead-mans thumb and Hare-bell blew.
and as she plucked them still cried she,
alas there is none e're loved like me.
A bed therein she made to lie,
Of fine green things that grew fast by,
Of Poplers and Willow leaves,
Of Sicamore and Flaggy sheaves:
and as she plucked them, etc.
The little La^k-foot she would not pass,
Nor yet the Flowers of three-leav'd grass
With Milk-Maids Hony-suckles phrayse
The Crows-foot, nor the yellow Craise:
and as she plucked them, etc.
The pretty Dafie which does show
Her love to Phoebus, bred her woe,
Who joys to see his cheerful fare,
And mourns when he is not in place:
alack, alack* alack, quoth she,
there is none that ever Loved like me.
The Flowers of the swe^test scent,
She bound them round with k1otted Bent,
And as she laid them still in bands,
She wept, she wail'd and wrung her hands
alas, alas, alas, etc.
False man, quoth she, forgive thee heaven,
As I do wish my sins forgiven,
In blessed Elezium I shall sleep,
When thou with perjured souls shall weep.
Who when they lived, did like to thee,
That loved their loves as thou do me.
When she had filled her Apron full,
Of such sweet Flowers as she could cull,
The green leaves served for a bed,
The Flowers pillows for her head:
Then down she lay* never more did speak,
Alas, with Love her heart did break.
FINIS.
The Faithless Lover.
To the same Tune.


WHen I had seen this Virgins end,
I sorrowed as became a friend,
And wept to see that such a Maid
Should be by faithless love betrayed:
But woe I fear will come to thee,
That was not true in Love as she.
The birds did cease their harmony,
The harmless Lambs did seem to cry,
The Flowers they did hang their head,
The flower of Maidens being dead;
Whose Life by death is now set free,
and none did love more dear then she.
The bubbling brooks did seem to moan,
And echoes from the Valleys did groan,
Diana's Nymphs did ring her knell,
And to their Queen the same did tell:
Who vowed by her chastity,
That none should take revenge but she.
When as I saw her corpse were cold,
I to her Lover went and told,
What chance unto this Maid befell,
Who said I am glad she sped so well:
Do you think that I so fond would be,
To love no Maid but only she.
I was not made for one alone,
I take delight to hear them moan;
When one is gone, I will have more,
That man is rich that has most store.
I bondage hate, I must live free,
And no^ be tied to such as she.
O Sir remember then (quoth I)
The power of Heavens All-seeing eye;
Who does remember vows forgot,
Though you deny you know it not:
Call to your mind this maiden free,
The which was wronged by none but thee.
Quoth he, I have a love more fair,
Besides, she is her fathers heir,
A bonny Lass does please my mind,
That unto me is wondrous kind:
Her will I love, and none but she,
Who still shall welcome be to me.
False-minded man that so would prove,
Disloyal to thy dearest love,
Who at her death for thee did pray,
And wished thee many a happy day:
I would my Love would but love me,
Even half so well as she loved thee.
Fair Maidens will example take,
Young men will curse thee for her sake,
They Will stop their ears unto our plaints,
And call us Devils seeming Saints:
They Will say to day that we are kind,
To morrow of another mind.
FINIS.
Printed for F. Coals, T. Vere, and J. Wright.


