A DISPVTE BETWIXT Two Clergymen upon the Road.

In which is discovered how unhumanly the one set upon the other in his
Journey, and at last Rejected his company, refusing to dispute with him.

Published by a friend of the Respondents.

Try the Spirits whether they be of God,

1 John 4.1. Printed for A. H. 1651.

A Dispute between two Clergymen.
Question.

Well met Countryman, whither are you traveling I pray you?

Ans. Toward I. in H. Sir.

Q. Have you been at London Sir?

A. Yes.

Q. By your habit you should be a Minister?

A. I am an unworthy Minister of Gods word at S. in E.

Q. I shall be glad of your company, I pray what College were you of, for I
suppose you have been either a Cambridge or an Oxford Scholar?

A. Sir, I have not been a Graduate.

Q. Then I fear the strange fire of preposterous zeal causes you as it does
many more in these times to run before you be sent: What do you think it is
lawful for one who has not been a Graduate to enter into the Ministry?
Spondeo te nunquam studioso Scholastico damnum illaturum nisi eum libris
privaveris?

A. Sir, I am at the present somewhat unfit for disputation, yet if you can
convince me by clear testimony out of Gods word, that he that has not been a
graduate may not be a Minister of Gods word in case of necessity, as well as a
Graduate, if thereunto lawfully called, I shall be sorry for my rashnesss, and
apply my self to something else for the futute.

Q. I pray where is there a necessity of such Preachers as have not been
Graduates?

A. Where there is a want of Godly and learned men to teach the People, and
whether there be not a want of such to supply many a hundred congregations in
England judge you I pray.

Q. And because you say if he be thereunto lawfully called, I pray who is
lawfully called to be a Minister?

A. He that is inwardly called of God, and outwardly called by those the
Scripture Authorize to call him, is lawfully called to be a Minister.

Q. Inwardly called? why ought none to preach, except they be inwardly called
of God, is not the outward calling sufficient?

A. No, for how shall they preach except they be sent, Romans 10.15. I hope you
will conclude the Apostle meant an inward call as well as an outward; no man,
no though he have been a Graduate, may take this honor to himself, but he
who is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. though a man be never such an
Eminent Scholar, he ought not to enter into the Ministry, unless he be
inwardly called of God: it is not every Scholar may turn Preacher: we read in
Dan. 1.17. of four excellent Scholars, but God powered the Spirit of Prophecy
upon but one of them, viz. Daniel: Paul was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel,
Acts 22.3. a place I fear too much abused by some Scholars: for if we compare
that text with Acts 18.3. it is said that Paul's craft was to make tents: but
suppose it be a truth that Gamaliel was a Tutor, and Paul a Student under him,
and that then and there he became skillful in all kind of Languages, Arts and
Sciences, which to prove will make a Scholar to sweat; yet Paul had no warrant
to turn Apostle until he had commission from Jesus Christ: so though it be
necessary that a Minister be a Scholar, yet no man's Scholarship makes him a
Minister though you join to that the lord Popes call or the lord Bishops
either, for unless he be inwardly called of God he is not able to prove
himself a true Minister; and truly it were good that those Scholars that turn
Ministers would make known their Commission they have received from God, if
they have received any, as well as that they have received from a Lordbishop or
some Patron, that when ever they reprove others for preaching without a call,
their own consciences might not reply, Medice cura teipsum.

Q. Ah sirrah, I begin to smell a rat, for any thing I can perceive you could
beteem to conclude that Paul was no Scholar?

A. Sir, I pray judge charitably, I believe Paul was a better Scholar than your
self, he spoke more languages than they all says the Text in 1 Cor. 14.18.
yet still it lies upon you to prove that Paul attained his skill in languages
by industry at Gamaliels College, or whether he had the extraordinary gift of
tongues as those had in Acts the second.

Q. You must know that the call of Ministers is either ordinary or
extraordinary, Prophets and Apostles were extraordinarily called, and therefore
though then God employed heardmen and fishermen, yet now miracles are ceased,
and we are not to look at any man as sent of God to preach the Gospel unless
he have been a Graduate.

A. We are not to expect that God should now send either heardmen or fishermen
with any other Gospel than we have already received; or that God should make
them Prophets or Apostles; yet it does not follow but that God may call one to
the work of the ministry who for some short time has wrought upon a trade or
followed husbandry, and give him such ordinary gifts as may be profitable for
those congregations which want godly and learned Divines, or else our English
Presbyters sin against light, for they give their letters testimonial in the
behalf of such, and also ordain them.

Q. I know no command in the word, or example, either that any tradesman should
enter into the Ministry without an Immediate call from Jesus Christ by name,
and that such a one as makes others take notice of it as well as himself.

A. If thereon you conclude, that it is unlawful for a man that for some time
has wrought on a trade, afterward to apply himself to the study of Divinity
and enter into the Ministry if he be by godly and learned Divines found able to
dispense the word of life for the good of the Church: by the same rule what
command or example have you in the word for Baptizing Infants, payment of
Tithes, Ordination of Ministers by a Lord Bishop, or for any Graduate to enter
into the Ministry unless he have such an immediate call, for the miracle will
hold for the one as well as the other, and I desire you to prove that either
they Acts 8.4. or Appollos Acts 18. were Graduates, or had this immediate call
you speak of, yet I hope you will conclude they were men in office, and did
not run before they were sent.

Q. I will not trouble my self about Appollo at this time, but I answer your
demand with another Quere, ought not a man to abide in the same vocation
wherein he is called, for I am sure its the counsel of the Apostle. 1 Cor.
7.20. Let every man abide in the same vocation whereunto he is called.

A. Man and Wife ought not by unlawful means to part, nor Servants by
unlawful means to reject the yoke, which is the sense if you observe the
scope of the Apostle in the Chapter: but I deny that that text binds a man
upon pain of damnation to a particular trade, or that it ties God only to
Graduates for the work of the Ministry.

Q. But I pray how shall a man understand the Scripture without knowledge of
the Original tongues?

A. There are Ministers that have not been Graduates that understand the
tongues, and I deny not but some have been ordained that have not been very
expert in the Latin tongue, yet thanks be to God we have the Scriptures
translated, and neither you or any learned man else is able to show such a
considerable difference betwixt the Original and our English translation as
shall forbid such either reading or the understanding of the Scriptures if they
be industrious; and if the case stand so as the Church of God have need of
such for the Ministry, the Churches good ought to be preferred before any man's
private interest; yet I would advise such to get as much knowledge of the
tongues as possible they can, and not to rest on what they have already
attained, that they may be able to convince gainesayers, for it is necessary
that a Minister be able to defend the truth as well as preach it.

Q. I think thou art a Roundheaded Rascal that never got yet above thy greek
Lexicon; the Churches good? what does it make for the Churches good to suffer
such Preachers? are they not heretics and very profane in their lives.

A. I could wish that it could not be said of those Ministers that have been
Graduates in the Universities, that the most part of them are either unsound in
judgment, or lead wicked lives, which will make their account the more
dreadful another day: and for my part such as those are whether they have been
graduates or not graduates, unless they repent they had better be removed and
faithful pastors put in their room, than continued in their places to make
the sacrifice of the Lord to be abhord, or to lead people out of the ancient
paths of life.

Q. Well, I see you will encourage tradesmen to enter into the Ministry?

A. Sir, I would be loath to encourage any Scholar or tradesman either, to
enter into the Ministry unless he be able to prove he is inwardly called of
God to the Ministry as well as externally by man, lest God make him an example
as he did Vzziah, Korah, Dathan and A^iram: or blast his ministry: or give him
over to a spirit of error, or lest the same judgments befall him that may
befall any that run before they be sent. -- but I pray sir let us dispute the
matter in hand syllogistically, whether or no he that is inwardly called of
God, and outwardly called by those the Scripture Authorize to call him be not a
lawful Minister of Jesus Christ though he have not been a Graduate in a
University. -- And secondly, whether he that is not inwardly called of God, nor
outwardly by those the Scripture authorize to ordain Ministers, or though he
be outwardly called and yet want the inward call, whether he may dare to preach
though he have been a graduate, and for my part I shall be willing to yield to
any thing that appears truth.

Q. If thou had not been a Roundheaded Rascal thou should have been my
companion, but I question whether thou can frame a Syllogism worth a flea,
and therefore I will neither talk, journey, eat or drink, or any thing else
with thee any longer, but I leave thee to the fiend, and so vale, the devil
take thee.

A. Vulgo dicitur, doctrinae solertes ut plurimum politicarum vel agendarum
rerum? non sunt maxim experti.

FINIS.

