The Cry of Sodom INQUIRED INTO; Upon Occasion of The Arraignment and
Condemnation OF BENJAMIN GOAD, For his Prodigious Villainy.

Together with A Solemn Exhortation to Tremble at Gods Judgments, and to
Abandon Youthful Lusts.

By S. D.

Isa. 26. 9. -- When thy Judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the
world will learn righteousness. Psalm. 119. 118. Thou have trodden down all them
that err from thy statutes: for their deceit is falsehood. ver. 119. Thou
put away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore I love thy
Testimonies. ver. 120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of
thy Judgments. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul. Cambridge:
Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1674.

Christian Reader,
IT is a solemn Expression of the Kingly Prophet, the sweet Singer of Israel,
Psalm. 36. 6. Thy Judgments (O Lord) are a great deep! too great a deep to be
fathomed, without the help of Scripture-direction. Had not the Most High
condescended to give us (poor silly worms) the Comment of his Word, upon the
more abstruse and less discernable passages of his Works, how hard had it been
for us to have found out, and understood the true sense and meaning of many his
darker dispensations. Amongst many other, this might have been looked at as
astonishingly strange, that the worst of sins should be perpetrated, in some,
the best of Places and Societies; that Enormities not so much as 1 Co^ 5. 1.
named amongst Gentiles, should be found among Christians: had not the Oracles
of God unfolded, and laid open the Mystery of such (otherwise inscrutable)
S^crets of his profound Providence. It was in the Sanctuary, that the
distr^ssed Psalmist saw a plain and easy way out of the perplexing
Intricacies, of those sad Tentations, in which he had been so far bewildered,
and well-nigh lost, Psalm. 73. 16, 17. By Scripture Light, in the forementioned
case, we may easily discern, not only that it is, but how it comes to pass;
and be informed, That the holy and blessed God is never more gloriously Just,
then when most dreadfully Severe against such as despise, and will not obey his
Gospel. No Judgments are more direful, and to be dreaded, then Spiritual; nor
are any nearer such, then they who have, and improve not, but set light by, and
abuse the Gospel and Grace of our Lord Jesus. The ground often rained upon,
which yet brings forth nothing but thorns and briers, is rejected, and nigh to
cursing, and its end is to be burned, Heb. 6. 7. 8. It was thus of old, Psalm.
81. 10 -- 12. Open thy mouth w^^e, and I will fill it. But my people would not
hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me: So I gave them up to their
own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. How unquestionably
righteous the holy God is, in such Severity against his own people, will be
abundantly evident, to all who shall consider, how trimendous his dealings have
been with poor ignorant Heathen. If such, who have had and abused but that
glimmering Starlight, which (to weak eyes) so dimly shines from the Works of
Creation and Providence, have been so terribly treated; that, as the Apostle
expresses, Romans 1. 18, to the end of the Chapter, The wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who imprison
the truth in unrighteousness: So that because when they knew God, they did not
glorify him as God, He gave them up to uncleanness, to filthy practices, to
vile affections, and at last to a reprobate mind: Of how much sorer punishment
shall they be thought worthy, who have trodden under foot the Son of God,
continuing to sin under and against a far more glorious Light, then ever the
Heathen had? An awful (and not to be forgotten) Instance of this, so
formidably solemn a Truth, was the sad Occasion unto our Reverend Brother, the
Pious and Judicious Author of the ensuing Discourse, to lift up his voice like
a Trumpet. His eminent faithfulness in so doing, we cannot but approve. It Is
surely no season for Watchmen to be silent, when Heaven-daring sins are calling
aloud for Vengeance. We willingly Commend it to the Press, and serious perusal
of all, into whose hands it may come; heartily praying, it may (by a blessing
from above) become successful unto all that good intended, and hoped for in
making it thus public.

John Sherman.
Urian Oaks.
Thomas Shepard.

The CRY of SODOM Enquired into.
GENESIS XVIII. 20, 21. And the Lord said, Because the cry of Sodom and G^morrah
is great, and because their sin is very grievous; I will go down now; and see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which is come
unto me: and if not, I will know.
BEhold the solemn Inquisition which the Lord made concerning the abominable
filthiness of the Sodomites, which cried unto Heaven for vengeance. In the
description whereof observe,

1. The fearful Aggravation of their wickedness. The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah
is great, and their sin is very grievous. Sodom and Gomorrah were ancient
Cities in the Land of Canaan, situate in the Vale of Siddim, bordering upon the
Tribe of Judah. There were two other Cities, which perished with them, viz.
Admah and Zeboim, Deuteronomy: 29. 23. but Sodom and Gomorrah are only named in my
Text, because as they were the most notable and famous for estate and
greatness, so they were the most notorious and infamous for sin and lewdness.
Ezekiel. 16. 46. Sodom and her daughters. The sins of Sodom were many and great,
but that which was the most grievous of all, was their abominable filthiness in
all manner of Vncle^nness. Ezekiel. 16. 49, 50. Behold, this was the iniquity of
thy sister Sodom, Pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of Idleness was in her
and in her daughters, neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and
needy, and they were haughty, and committed abomination before me. This their
wickedness cried unto Heaven for vengeance. A figurative expression, holding
forth the heinousness and notoriousness of their sin and wickedness. It made a
clamorous noise in the ears of the Lord, so that he could not rest nor be quiet
in Heaven by reason of the horrid cry of their horrible lewdness, which sounded
continually in his ears.

2. The Assertion and Vindication of Divine Justice and Equity in the Judicial
process against them. I will go down now, and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, which is come unto me: and if not, I
will know. These words are spoken after the manner of men, but are to be
understood after the manner of God. Local descension is not compatible to the
Omnipresent, nor external information to the Omniscient. The Lord is
everywhere present, and is not capable of any local motion; nevertheless he is
said to go down, in respect of the visible form and manner, wherein he revealed
himself at this time, appearing in the shape and likeness of a man. The Lord
sees the most secret wickedness, and knows our thoughts afar off, and
needs not to make any search or enquiry: nevertheless, that he might clear up
the Equity of his tremendous dispensation toward Sodom, and set an Example unto
Civil Judges, to take exact cognizance of the Cause, and after accurate
Examination to proceed to Sentence and Judgment; He condeseendeth after the
manner of men, to make Proof and Trial of the truth and weight of that horrid
Cry, which came up to Heaven against the filthy Sodomites. I will see whether
they have done altogether, (...) an fecerint consummationem, whether they have
made a full end, whether they have finished their sin, and filled up the
measure of their iniquity; and if they have, I will proceed to execute
V^ngeance upon them. Thus Abraham understood the Lords expression, as appears
by his Intercession, Will thou also destroy, etc. ver. 23.

Doct. Abominable Filthiness and Uncleanness is a Crying Sin, and grievous
Wickedness in the account of God; for which he makes diligent Inquisition, and
executes dreadful Vengeance.

The Sodomites were extremely wicked, prodigiously unclean, monstrously profuse
in all manner of lechery, obscenity and lasciviousness. Genesis 13. 13. The men of
Sodom were wicked, and sinners before the Lord exceedingly: Wherefore the Lord
visited them with the Sword, and brought them into servitude and bondage to
their Enemies, to whom they continued in subjection twelve years, Genesis 14. 1 --
4. During this time, righteous Lot coming and dwelling amongst them, bare
witness against their unclean and impious conversation, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8* but
these shameless Miscreants, in stead of being bettered either by Afflict^on or
Admonition, grew far worse, and added Perfidiousness and Rebellion to the rest
of their wickedness; wherefore the Lord whetted the Sword against them the
second time, overthrew their Armies, sent the people into Captivity, and their
goods became a prey to their Enemies, Genesis 14. 10, 11. Nevertheless, through
the wonderful patience of God, they were rescued by the hand of Abraham for
Lots sake, and the Lord spared them yet fifteen years longer. But in stead of
being gained or reclaimed thereby, they increased and multiplied their
wickedness, and filled up the measure of their sin, growing so impudent and
outrageous in their Villainy and Lewdness, that the Cry thereof went up to
Heaven, and the Lord himself came down in the likeness and similitude of a man,
accompanied with two of his holy Angels, to make search and diligent
Inquisition concerning their clamorous and crying Wickedness; and upon Trial,
found it to be most prodigious. Witness their Beastly incivility and rage
against those Heavenly Guests, the two holy Angels, which lodged in the house
of righteous Lot, Genesis 19. 4, 5. wherefore the Lord destroyed them with Fire
and Brimstone from Heaven, ver. 24, 25. and turned the whole Country into a
standing, stinking Lake.

Now that no man may plead ignorance, nor be able to say another day, that the
Ministry did not acquaint them with the nature and heinousness of this
Transgression, let us with holy modesty, in the fear of God, enquire,

Quest. 1. What is that Abominable Uncleanness, which cries in the ears of the
Lord of Hosts, and hastneth divine Vengeance?

Answ. It is expressed by and comprehended under those two terms, Fornication,
and going after strange flesh, Jude ver. 7. Fornication being taken in a large
sense, comprehends not only Whoredom and Selfpollution, but also Adultery,
Matt, 5. 32. and Incest, 1 Cor. 5. 1, Going after strange flesh, comprehends
Sodomy and Bestiality. These are the several sorts of Abominable Uncleanness,
which cry for Vengeance.

1. Self-pollution, when a man practices uncleanness, and commits filthiness
with his own body alone. This was the sin of Onan the second Son of Judah, who
out of envy and malignity against his Brother deceased, lest he should raise up
seed to him, abhorred the lawful use of the Marriage Bed, and most impurely
defiled himself. Which fact of his, was so detestable in the sight of God, that
he slew him by his immediate hand, and suffered not such a Villain to live upon
the face of the earth, Genesis 38. 9, 10. Seducers are called f^lthy dreamers that
defile the flesh, Jude ver. 8. Some learned Interpreters understand it properly
of their defiling their bodies by nocturnal Pollutions. This is a hateful and
an odious sin, and usually the fruit and punishment of impure thoughts and
f^^cies in the daytime. It seems that these Impostors were so addicted to
lasciviousness, (as our English Annotators observe) that they did not only
practice it being awake, but also dreamed of it, and defiled themselves in
their sleep. Yea, the truth is, their Spiritual dreams (which I think are
proper^y intended) viz. their Erroneous and Heretical Opinions, were unclean
speculations, turnings the grace of God into lasciviousness, ver. 4 (...), into
profu^^ness in Lux^ry and Uncleanness, and issued in all manner of carnal
pollution^.

2. Whoredom, the vi^iating of a single woman. Deuteronomy. 23. 17. There shall be no
Whore of the daughters of Israel. Lev. 19. 29. Do not prost^r (...) thy
daughter, to cause her to be a Whore, le^t the land fall to whoredom, and the
land become full of wickedness. Ephesians. 5. 5. This ye know, no Whoremonger, nor
unclean person -- has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ. and of God.

3. Adultery, the violating of the Marriage Bed. This is a h^ino^^ (...); yea,
it is an iniquity to be punished by the Judges. It is a fire that consumes to
destruction, Job 91. 11, 12. The Adulterer and (...) Adulteress shall surely be
put to death, Lev. 20. 10. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13.
4.

4. Incest, Uncle^nn^ss committed by parties that are near of Kin, between whom
there is Consanguinity or Affi^ity, within the degrees prohibited by the Law of
God. Lev. 18. 6. None of ^ou shall approach to any that is near of Kin to him,
to uncover their (...) Lord. This was the sin of Re^ben, for which he was
degraded from his Dignity, and deprived of his Birthright, Genesis 49. 4. 1 Chronicles. 5. 1. Amnon, and Absalom, and Herod the Te^rarch, made themselves
infamous by this kind of wickedness. The Co^inthians were required by the
Apostle to deliver the incestuous person to Satan, Cor. 5 4, 5.

5. Sodomy, filthiness committed between p^^ties of (...) same Sex: when Males
with Males, and Females with Females work wickedness. If a man lies with
mankind, as he lies with a woman, both of them have committed an abomination:
they shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be upon them, Lev. 20. 13.
This sin raged amongst the Sodomites, and to their perpetual Infamy* it is
called Sodomy. Against this wickedness, no indignation is sufficient. The
Athenians pu^ such to death Theodosius and Arc^dius adjudged such to be Burnt.
Amongst the Romans, it was lawful for a man to kill him that made such an
assault upon him.

6. Bestiality, or Buggery, when any prostitute themselves to a Beast. This is
an accursed thing, Deuteronomy. 27. 21. Cursed be he that lies with any manner of
Beast: and all the people shall say, Amen. This is monstrous and horrible
Confusion: it turns a man into a bruit Beast. He that joyneth himself to a
Beast, is one flesh with a Beast. Livi^ 18. 23. Neither shall thou lie with any
Beast, to defile thy self therewith neither shall any woman stand before a
Beast to lie down thereto: it is confusion. This horrid wickedness pollutes the
very Beast, and makes it more unclean and beastly then it was, and unworthy to
live amongst Beasts, and therefore the Lord to show his detestation of such
Villainy, has appointed the Beast it self to be slain. Lev. 20. 15, 16. If a
man li^ with a Beast, he shall surely be put to death, and ye shall slay the
Beast. And if a woman approach to any Beast, and lie down thereto, thou shall
kill the woman and the Beast: they shall surely be put to death, their blood
shall be upon them.

All these Abominations reigned amongst the ancient Inhabitants of Canaan, and
caused their Land to vomit them out, Lev. 18. 24, 25. but the men of Sodom and
Gomorrah were the most notorious therein: for they were all of them, both young
and old addicted to such lewdness, and went through all sorts of uncleanness,
giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, and
attained to a prodigious height, and hellish perfection therein; and therefore
are set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of eternal fire, Jude
ver, 7.

Quest. 2. Why is Carnal Uncleanness said to be a Crying sin, and gri^vous
wickedness, for which God makes diligent Inquisition, and executes dreadful
Vengeance.

Reas. 1. Because the sin of Uncleanness is a bold and presumptuous Violation
of the holy Law and blessed Commandment of God. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, 5. This is
the will of God, even your sanctification, that ye should abstain from
fornication: that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in
sanctification and honor; not in the lust of Concupiscence, even as the
Gentiles which know not God. Lev. 18. 24, 26, 30. D^file not you your selves in
any of these things. Ye shall keep my statutes and my judgments, and shall not
commit any of these Abominations, etc. Lewd and filthy persons thwart and cross
the Sacred and Sovereign Will of God, preferring their base lusts, and the
satisfaction thereof, before Gods Royal Commandment, and obedience thereunto.

Reas. 2. Because the sin of Uncleanness is a most polluting and defiling sin.
It is most opposite to Holiness, and is properly called Uncleanness, 1 Thessalonians.
4. 7. It pollutes a man's person, Mat. 15. 19, 20. Out of the heart proceed Evil
thoughts. Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, etc. these are the things which
defile a man. It pollutes the Body, and turns the Temple of the holy Ghost into
an Hog-stie, and a Dogs Kennel. 1 Cor. 6* 18, 19. He that commits
fornication sins against his own body. What, know ye not that your body is
the Temple of the holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man defile the Temple of
God, him shall God destroy. Such as wallow in the lusts of Uncleanness are Dogs
and Swine: 2 Pet. 2. 22. The Dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the Sow
that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. When Abner was charged with
defiling Rizpah, he answers, Am I a Dogs head? 2 Samuel 3. 8. The hire of a
Where and the price of a Dog are put together, Deuteronomy. 23. 18. They are near of
kin, even let them go together. It pollutes the Noble Faculties of the Soul,
the Mind and the Conscience, Tit. 1. 15. It blindes the Mind, darkens the
Understanding, extinguisheth the Light of Nature, and of Common Grace, and
makes a man a fool; as Tamar said to Amnon, 2 Samuel 13. 13. Thou shall be as one
of the fools in Israel. Solomon tells us that a young Wanton is a simple man,
and void of understanding, and goes after the strange woman, as an Ox goes to
the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the Stocks, Prove. 7. 7, 22.
This sin besots and infatuates the Heart, estrangeth it from God, and breeds an
hatred and loathing of Piety and Honesty. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine,
take away the heart, Hos. 4. 11. The impure Gentiles, who gave themselves over
to lastiviousness, were alitnated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19.
Seducers, which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with
sins, led away with diverse lusts, are men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the faith, 2 Timothy 3. 6, 8. This sin makes men haughty and scornful,
so that they mock at Counsels and Warnings, and are enraged against wholesome
Admonitions. The men of Sod^m said to Lot, Stand back. This one fellow came in
to so^ourn, and he will needs be a Judge. Now will we deal worse with thee,
then with them, Genesis 19. 9. Lot admonished his Sons in Law to get out of that
place, because the Lord would destroy it; but he seemed to them, as one that
mocked, ver. 14. This sin pollutes a man's speech, and makes his Communication
rotten and unsavory, Ephesians. 4. 29. It pollutes a man's Course and Conversation,
and makes it filthy and loathsome, 2 P^t. 2. 7. It pollutes a man's Name, and
makes it stink, Prove. 6. 33. A wound and dishonor shall he get, and his
reproach shall not be wiped away. 2 Samuel 13. 13. And I, whither shall I cause
my shame to go? The unclean person is Burnt in the Hand, and Branded on the
Forehead. Repentance it self cannot so thoroughly heal this Wound, but some Scar
will remain in this world: as is evident in the History of Samson, David, and
Solomon. This sin pollutes the Company, with whom such converse: They are spots
and blemishes in Christian Societies, 2 P^t. 2. 13. Yea, it pollutes and
defiles the Land where it is committed, and causes it to spue out its
Inhabitants. The Earth groaneth under the burden of such horrible Enormities,
and would willingly empty and cast up its gorge: yea, the Lord visits the
Land with Sword, Famine and Pestilence for such Abominations, Lev. 18. 25. 27.

Reas. 3. Because the sin of Uncleanness is most dishonorable and reproachful
to the Name of God. Romans 2. 22, 23, 24. Thou that s^^est a man should not
commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? Thou that make thy boast of the
Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? For the Name of God is
blasphemed amongst the Gentiles, through you. What greater disgrace or infamy
can be cast upon the Grace of God, then to turn it into laseiviousness? What a
reproach is this, that the Sons of God are become flesh, carnal, sensual,
debauched; that the Members of Christ are made the Members of an Harlot; yea
the members of a Beast: that the Temple of the holy Ghost is become a Stews,
and Brothel-house, yea a Cage of unclean Birds, yea a very Hog-sty! What horrid
Profaneness, what hellish Sacrilege is this!

Reas. 4. Because the sin of Uncleanness is most off^nsive and displeasing to
the holy Spirit of God. Genesis 6* 3. The Lord said, My Spirit shall not always
strive with man, because he also is flesh: and ver. 6. It repented the Lord
that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. Corrupt
Communication grieves the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 29* 30. They that are
sensual, are destitute of the Spirit, Jude ver. 19. The stinking Lake of Sodom
is not so unsavory and loathsome to the Traveller that passes by, as the lewd
and filthy person is to the most holy God: Such are the abhorred of the Lord,
Prove. 22. 14.

Reas. 5. Because the sin of Uncleanness provokes God to indignation, and
augments his fierce wrath against vile sinners. Jer. 5. 9. Shall I not visit
for these things? says the Lord: and shall not my soul be avenged on such a
Nation as this? Ephesians. 5. 6. Because of these things comes the wrath of God
upon the children of disobedience. Where do the Guests of the strange woman
lodge? In such a Tavern or Ordinary? nay, they lodge in the depths of Hell,
Prove. 9. 18. Fornicators, Adulterers, unclean and eff^minate persons, and
Abusers of themselves with mankind, have no inheritance in the Kingdom of
God, but are shut out among the Dogs, and cast into the Lake which burns with
fire and brimstone: which is the second death, 1 Cor. 69; 10. Gal. 5. 19, 21.
Ephesians. 5. 5. Rev. 21. 8, 27. and 22. 15.

USE I. Of Instruction. This may serve to Vindica^e the holy Name of God, and
clear in Throne, in his dreadful Severity toward this vile and wicked Youth, in
making him a Pattern and Monument of his fierce Wrath and Indignation. It may
be some among us stand astonished and amazed at this fearful and tremendous
hand of God, in making such a Youth, a Child of Religious Parents, and that in
his tender years, such a Dreadful Example of Divine Vengeance. I pray consider,

1. The heinous and atrocious nature of his Sin and Transgression. It is a
Crying sin; it makes a ^lamorous noise in the ears of the holy God: it will not
suffer God to rest in Heaven. It does not only trouble our Isra^l, but it
troubles and disquiets the God of Israel. This his sin is exceeding grievous in
the sight of God: it is an Abomination; it is Confusion. It defiles the Land;
the Earth groans under the burden of such Wickedness. You pity his Youth and
tender years, but I pray pity the holy Law of God, which is shamefully
violated; pity the glorious Name of God, which is horribly profaned; pity the
Land, which is fearfully polluted and defiled.

2. Consider the Equity of Gods severe Dispensation toward this vile Youth.
The Lord has proceeded slowly and leisurely, and has endured this wicked
Youth with much long-suffering; until his sin grew to this prodigious height,
and cried for Vengeance. For, (as he himself confesses) he lived in
Disobedience to his Parents, in Lying, Stealing, Sabbath-breaking, and was wont
to flee away from Catechism. He would not hearken to the Voice of God, and
therefore he gave him up to his own hearts lust. He was extremely addicted to
Sloth and Idleness; which is a great breeder and cherisher of U^cleanness. The
standing Pool gathers filth, and harbors Toads and filthy Vermin. Lust is
usually warm and stirring in idle bosoms. He gave himself to Self-pollution,
and other Sodomitical wickedness. He often attempted Buggery with several
Beasts, before God-left him to commit it: at last God gave him over to it, and
he continued in the frequent practice thereof for several Months. Being at
length, by the good hand of God, brought under the Yoke of Government and
Serv^ce, (which might have bridled and restrained him from such wickednes^) he
violently brake away from his Master, and with an high hand boldly and
impudently, like a child of Belial, shook off that Yoke of God, casting
reproach and disgrace upon his Master. Having now obtained a licentious
liberty, he grew so impudent in his wickedness, as to commit this horrid
Villainy in the sight of the Sun, and in the open field, even at Noonday;
proclaiming his sin like Sodom. Though he be a Youth in respect of years, yet
he is grown old in wickedness, and ripe for Vengeance. The Church cannot be
cleansed, until this wicked person be put away from among us. Ishmael stood in
the same relation to the Church of God, was younger in years, yet being convict
of a heinous Transgression, though far inferior to this before us, was cast
out, and that according to the Commandment of God, Genesis 21. 9* 10, 11, 12. If
we will not pronounce such a Villain Accursed, we must be content to bear the
Curse our selves. The Land cannot be cleansed, until it has spued out this
U^clean Beast. The execution of Justice upon such a notorious Malefactor, is
the only way to turn away the wrath of God from us, and to consecrate our
selves to the Lord, and obtain his Blessing upon us. Numb. 25. 4. -- Hang them
up before the Lord against the Sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord may be
turned away from Israel. Exodus 32. 29. Consecrate your selves to day to the
Lord, even every man upon his Son, and upon his Brother, that he may bestow
upon you a blessing this day.

USE II. Of Exhortation unto us all, To sanctify the Name of God in this
tremendous Dispensation, in making such an one amongst us a Sign and an Example
of Vengeance. When Nadab and Abibu were burnt with fire, for offering strange
fire before the Lord, M^ses said unto Aaron, This is that which the Lord spoke,
saying, I will be sanctified in them that come nigh to me, and before all the
people I will be glorified, Lev. 10. 3. This is the right interpretation and
true improvement of such signal and judicial Strokes, viz. To sanctify the
Name of God according to his Word, and give him the honor and glory due unto
his Name. Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is known by the judgment which he executes:
the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion, Selah. This is a
deep Meditation. Let us look upon this sad and woeful Example with diligent
Observation; let it sink down into our hearts, ponder and weigh it in the
Causes, Circumstances and Aggravations thereof. Let our thoughts dwell upon
this lasting Monument of Divine Wrath. Content we not our selves with transient
thoughts, in contemplating such a permanent Sign and Example of Vengeance, left
God lose of that Honor and Glory which he expects from us, and we fail of that
Spiritual fruit which we might and ought to reap thereby.

Quest. How should we sanctify the Name of God in this tremendous Dispensation?

Ans. I. In general. Fear and Tremble before this holy Lord God. Isa. 8. 13.
Sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread. The fearful Judgments of God executed upon the wicked, ought to
strike a holy fear and dread of God into the hearts of the Hearers and
Spectators thereof. R. v. 15. 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify
thy Name? For thou only art holy: for all Nations shall come and worship
before th^e; for thy judgments are made manifest. This is that which the Lord
expects and looks for. When the Enticer to Idolatry is stoned to death, the
Lord says, All Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness, as this is, amongst you, Deuteronomy. 13. 11. When the presumptuous
Contemner of the Sentence of the Supreme Council is put to death, the Lord
says, All the people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously, Deuteronomy.
17. 13. When the False Witness is punished according to his demerit, the Lord
says, Those which remain shall hear and fear, and shall henceforth commit no
more any such evil among you, Deuteronomy. 19. 20. When the Stubborn and Rebellious
Son is stoned to death, the Lord says, All Israel shall hear and fear, Deuteronomy.
21. 21. When God cut off the Nations, made their Towers desolate, laid their
streets waste, and destroyed their Cities, the Lord said to Judah, Surely thou will fear me, thou will receive instruction, Zeph. 3. 6, 7. It has been the
ancient manner, and commendable practice of the people of God, to tremble at
the execution of Gods Judgments upon the wicked. When Pharaoh and all his host
were drowned in the Red Sea, Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon
the Egyptians; and the people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, and his
servant Moses, Exodus 14. 31. Ananias and Sapphira, being convict of horrible
Hypocrisy and D^ssimulation, of ^acrilegious Fraud, and prodigious Lying, and
presumptuous tempting of God, yea and of mutual Agreement and Conspiracy
therein, were smitten by Gods immediate hand, and fell down dead at the
Apostles feet, and great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as many as
heard these things, Acts 5. 11. David's observation of the grievous mischief
that ensued upon the vile and vicious courses of the wicked, how the Lord trod
them down as the mire of the street, and put them away like dross, and cast
them out to the dunghill, it made not only his Soul, but also his flesh, even
his whole man to tremble before God, and to be horribly afraid of the like
sins, lest he or his should incur the like Wrath and Vengeance: Psalm. 119. 120.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy Judgments. And
indeed there are many and weighty Reasons, why the execution of Judgments upon
the wicked, should make such awful impressions upon the hearts of the
Spectators. For,

1. There are sins with the Spectators, as well as with the Sufferers, which
deserve the like Judgments, 2 Chronicles. 28. 10. -- Are there not with you, even
with you, sins against the Lord your God? If we ransack our own hearts, and
search and try our ways, we shall find such sins with us, as may justly
provoke Divine Wrath and Vengeance. Our cursed Natures are propense and
inclined to all manner of sins. Every imagination of the thoughts of the heart
of man is only evil continually, Genesis 6. 5. The heart is the Seed-plot of
Murder, Adultery, Fornication, Lasciviousness, and of all manner of iniquity,
Mat. 15. 19, 20. The gross and flagitious pract^ses of the worst of men, are
but Comments upon our Nature. Who can say, I have made my heart clean? The
holiest man has as vile and filthy a Nature, as the Sodomites, or the men of
Gibeah. Yea, there are many actual sins and transgressions with us, which if
God should enter into judgment with us, would bring heavy wrath upon us. In
many things we all offend. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good
and sins not.

2. The holy and just God hates sin wherever he sees it, and is impartial
in the execution of Justice. 1 Pet. 1. 17. If ye call on the Father, who
without respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, pass the time
of your sojourning here in fear. The Judgments that light upon some, are
testimonies of the jealousy of God, and his severity against all sin. The Lord
hates sin now, as much as ever he did formerly. Whoredom, Adultery,
Self-pollution and Sodomy, are as odious and abominable in his sight now, as
ever they were heretofore.

3. Gods End in inflicting remarkable Judgments upon some, is for Caution and
Warning to all others. The Sodomites suffering the vengeance of eternal fi^e,
are set forth for an Example, not of Imitation, but of Caution and Admonition,
Jude ver. 7. 2 Pet. 2. 6. Lots wife looking back, became a Pillar of Salt, to
season aftergenerations, Luke 17. 32. Korah and his Company became a Sign, to
warn all succeeding Ages to beware of Faction and Sedition, Numb. 26. 10. The
destructive Calamities that befell the Israelites in the Wilderness, happened
for Ensample, and are written for our Admonition, 1 Cor. 10. 6, 11. Christ's
Severity against J^zabel and her Paramours, is an Instruction to all the
Churches, Rev 2. 22, 23. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that
commit Adultery with her into great Tribulation, except they repent of their
d^eds: and I will kill her Children with death; and all the Churches shall know
that I am he which searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every
one of you, according to your works.

4. Fearful Judgments do likewise abide all other impenitent sinners, as well
as those that are made Examples. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish, Luke 13. 3, 5. The particle [likewise] is to be understood of the
certainty, not of the similitude of punishment. Perdition is the certain
portion of every impenitent sinner. Without Repentance there is no escaping the
Wrath of the Almighty.

5. The fear and dread of the Majesty of God, upon the sight of the Mischief
that follows upon any sinful and wicked course, will make men wise and wary.
Smite a scorner, and the simple will beware, Prove. 19. 25. When the scorner is
punished, the simple is made wise, Prove. 21. 11. The fear of God will curb and
restrain men from the like sins. All Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do
no more any such wickedness, as this is, among you, Deuteronomy. 13. 11. A wise man
fears, and departs from evil, Prove. 14. 16. The fear of God will reduce and
recover such as are fallen into the like Snares and Temptations. Jude ver. 23.
Others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment
spotted by the flesh. Bold and presumptuous sinners cannot be saved, except
they be made afraid of the Wrath and Vengeance of God. If lewd and filthy
persons be not scared and frighted out of their vile Haunts and las^ivious
Courses, by the Terror of Wrath and Judgment, there is no hope of their
Salvation.

All these Considerations are a sufficient Conviction of our duty in reference
to this sad and woeful Spectacle before us. Has the Lord singled out one of our
Cong^egation, Apprehended and Arr^igned him for his Abominable Lewdness, cast
him out of his Visible Kingdom, delivered him into the hand of Satan, made him
an Anathema; yea, and cut him off by the hand of Justice, and s^^ept him away
as dung and filth from the face of the earth? Let no man insult over him, nor
yet flatter himself in his sins, but let us all learn to fear and tremble
before the Lord, who walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, having
his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet like fine brass, and will have
all the Church^s to know, that he starcheth the reins and hearts, and renders
unto every man according to his works. We have often heard the voice of the
Word, and have neglect^d and despised it, now hearken to the Voice of the Rod,
and of him that has appointed it. Such Judgments as these have a voice, a
loud voice, a clamorous voice, a dreadful voice, calling to all Israel, to Hear
and fear, and do no more so wickedly. The denunciations of Wrath against
vicious and unclean persons, have for a long time sounded daily in our ears,
and have not been believed nor regarded by many: behold now the Execution of
Vengeance upon this lewd and wicked Youth, whom God has Hanged up before the
Sun, and made a Sign and an Example, an Instruction and Astonishment to all
New England; which is as a Divine Seal annexed to all the former Comminations.

Is there any root of bitterness among us, that bears gall and wormwood, who
has not only heard the words of the Curse pronounced, but has also seen the
Curse executed in this dreadful manner, and yet is not afraid to go on
impenitently in the same sins, even in Idleness, in Stubbornness, in Lying, in
Steali^g, in Profaning the Lord's Day, and in all manner of Carnal Uncleanness;
but blesses himself in his heart, and says, I shall have peace, though I walk
in the imagination of mine heart, and add drunkenness to thirst? I shall have
peace, though I live in Selfpollution, in Fornication, in Sodomy and
Bestiality? Know, that your sin is inexcusable, and your destruction
inevitable, The Lo^d will not spare you, but the anger of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against you, and all the Curses that are written in this
book, shall lie upon you, and the Lord shall blot out your name from under
heaven, Deuteronomy. 29. 18, 19, 20. God shall wound the head of his enemies; and the
hairy scalp of such an one, as goes on still in his trespasses, Psa. 68. 21.
When the sight or report of Gods Judgments executed upon the wicked, does not
awe the heart, nor deter from the like ungodly practices, it is a great
aggravation of sin, and provocation of wrath. Jer. 3. 8. And I saw, when for
all the causes whereby backsliding Israel committed Adult^ry, I had put her
away, and given her a bill of divorce, yet her treacherous sister Judah feared
not, but went and pl^ye^ the har lot also. For any to go on in the sin of
Uncleanness, after such a solemn Warning as this, it is to sin presumptuously;
it is to sin in contempt of the Holmess of God, in contempt of the Jealousy of
God, in contempt of the fierce Wrath and Indignation of the Almighty. He that
will rush into the Gulf, and cast himself into the Wh^rlpool, where he has
seen his neighbor drowned before his eyes, he is a wilful Self-murtherer.

Go to now, ye wanton and las^ivious persons, go on in your Frolicks and mad
Pranks, take your swinge in your lusts and vicious courses; He that is unclean,
let him be unclean still; he that is filthy, let him be filthy still: He that
is addicted to Self-pollution, let him continue herein still; he that is a
Fornicator, let him be a Fornicator still; he that is a Sodomite, let him be a
Sodomite still; he that is a Beast, let him be a Beast still. Make haste, and
fill up your measure: run through all sorts of vile lusts; work all uncleanness
with greediness. Justify this poor Condemned Wretch in all his Villainy: Be a
Comfort to your lewd Predecessors, who are long since gone down to the lowest
Hell, and lie in the nether parts of the bottomless Pit. There are your
Voluptuous Fathers, the renowned Epic^res that lived before the Flood: There is
your L^bidinous Mother Jezab^l, with all her Paramours: There are your Filthy
Sisters, S^dom and her Daughters: There are your wicked Brethren, Ouan, the
unclean Son of Judah; Hophui and Phinehas, the Belial-sons of Eli; Amnon and
Absalom, the Incestuous Sons of David: There are your V^nereous Kinsmen, the
Nicolaitans, the Guosticks, the Menandri^ns, and innumerable others. Hasten you
after your lecherous K^ndred into the stinking Lake: sit down with your
Brethren and Sisters in the depths of Hell. As you have partaken with them in
their sordid Pleasures, partake with them also in their Plagues and Torments.
Let thy lustful Body be everlasting Fuel for the unquenchable fire: Let thy
lascivious Soul be eternal Food for the never-dying Worm. Let Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish be thy portion world without end. Hell from
beneath is moved to meet thee, and is ready to entertain thee. All your
fellow-guests wait and long for your Company: Your judgment of a long time
lingreth not, and your damnation slumbereth not. Shall it be more tolerable for
Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for those that embrace not the
Gospel? How terrible and dreadful then shall be the Condemnation of such, who
notwithstanding their Profession of the Gospel, justify Sodom in all her
Abominations?

II. In particular. Let me commend unto you these few Directions.

1. Let the awful Apprehension of the Wrath of God, which has lighted upon
this Youth, be a Bridle to curb and restrain the rest of our Youth, and all
others, from indulging themselves in any kind of Carnal Uncleanness. God is
mercifully willing to prevent the ruin of our lewd and vicious Youth,
therefore has he set before them this awful Example for their Admonition and
Caution. He has cut off this rotten and putrid Member, that he might prev^nt
the spreading of the Infection. In this tremendous Providence the Lord says to
all wanton and lascivious persons, as Abner said to Asahel, Turn aside, lest I
smite thee to the ground. If after this solemn Warning, any shall refuse to
turn aside from the eager pursuit of their vile Lusts, they are worthy to be
smitten, not only to the ground, but even to the bottom of Hell. Wherefore in
the fear of God, hearken to the Exhortation of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly
lusts, which war against the Soul. With youthful Lusts fight like the
Parthi^ns, flying. 2 Timothy 2. 22. Flee youthful Lusts. This is an honorable
Retreat, and a Warlike Stratagem. Flee Fornication, 1 Cor. 6. 18. Is it safe
standing near to a deep and narrow Pit? A Whore is a deep ditch, and a strange
woman is a narrow pit, Prove. 23. 27, 28. He that is abhorred of the Lord falls
into it, Prove. 22. 14. He that commits Adultery with a woman, lacks
understanding: He that does it, destroys his own Soul, Prove. 6. 32. Abhor
Self-pollution: the holy God detests and abhors it. The thing which Onan did,
was evil in the sight of the Lord, and therefore he slew him, Genesis 38. 10. Can
any man be so blind and ignorant as to question whether it be a sin, to
practice Uncleanness with his own Body alone, wherein he makes himself both
Bawd, and Who^e, and Whoremaster! Know assuredly, that it is an impious,
loathsome and de^estable evil in Gods account, very offensive and provoking to
the eyes of his glory. This is that sin which according to the opinion of many
learned men, is properly called (...), Uncleanness; I am sure it is at least
comprehended under it, Col. 3. 5. and it brings the wrath of God upon them that
practice it, ver. 6. who are thought to be those whom the Apostle calls (...),
soft, or ^ff^minate, and they have no inheritance in the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6. 9. Detest and abominate the sin of Sodomy. The Law of God is made for
the Condemnation of such as abuse themselves with mankind, 1 Timothy 1. 9, 10.
It Is a fearful Judgment of God to be given up to this kind of wickedness,
Romans 1. 24 -- 28. It Is a Capital Crime, for which the parties guilty ought to
be put to death, Lev. 20. 13. and except they repent, shall certainly be
excluded from the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Tremble at the thoughts of that
ho^rid and prodigious sin, of mingling thy self with a Beast; which is
^bominable Confusion in the sight of God, Exodus 22. 19. Lev. 18. 23. and 20.
15, 16.

Take heed and beware of those fond Conceits and Imaginations, whereby many are
deceived, and led into the sin of Uncleanness. It Is not without cause that the
Apostle in his discourses of this subject, so often inserts that Caution, Be
not deceived, 1 Cor. 6. 9. and 15. 33. Ephesians. 5. 6. All sin is deceitful, but
especially the sin of Uncleanness. It promises Pleasure, Secrecy, Impunity,
and future Repentance: but all these flattering promises are mere deceits, lies
and false-hoods.

Be not deceived with the bait of Carnal pleasure and delight. How can thou
take pleasure in that, which is so displeasing and offensive to thy Maker and
Savior? Genesis 39. 9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
Shall that be delightful and pleasureable to thee, which is hateful and
loathsome to the heart of God? This pleasure is short, it lasts but for a
season, but it will be bitterness in the end. Prove. 5. 3, 4, 5. The lips of a
strange woman drop as an honeycomb, and her mouth is smoother then oil: but
her end is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword: Her feet go down to
death; her steps take hold on hell. Chap. 9. 17, 18. Stolen waters are sweet,
and bread eaten in secret is pleasant; but he knows not that the dead are
there, and that her guests are in the depths of hell. Job 20. 12, 13, 14.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue,
though he spare it, and forsake it not, but keep it still within his mouth; yet
his meat in his bowels is turned, it is the gall of Asps within him. Yea, the
more pleasure thou take in sin, the more to^ment and sorrow shall thou have
hereafter, Rev. 18. 7.

Be not deceived with the hope of Secrecy. How can thou say, No eye sees me,
there is no witness? Does not he see thy ways, and count all thy steps! Job
31. 4. His eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings, Job 34.
21. The ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings, Prove. 5. 21. The more secret thy wickedness is, the more God looks upon
it with abhorrence. 2 Kings 17. 9. The children of Israel did secretly those
things that were not right against the Lord their God. Those sins which men
commit in secret, make light of, forget, and cast behind their backs, those
the eye of God is always upon, they stand before his face, he cannot look off
from them, they stand in the light of his countenance. Psalm. 90. 8. Thou have
set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
countenance. Is there no witness? The Lord himself will be a witness, yea a
swift witness against thee, Mal. 2. 14. and 3. 5.

Be not deceived with the hope of Impunity. Is not destruction to the wicked,
and strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? Job 31. 3. This ye know,
that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, has any inheritanc^ in the Kingdom
of Christ and of God, Ephesians. 5. 5. The Lord knows how to plague you; he
watches a fit season to be avenged on you: The longer he defers, the greater
wrath shall be poured out at last, 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10. The Lord knows how to
r^s^rve the ^nj^st unto the day of Judgment to be punished, but chiefly them
that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness.

Be not deceived with the hope of future Repentance. No sin hardens the heart
more then the sin of Uncleanness. It s^upisies and infatuates, and makes
reprobate to every good work, Hos. 4. 11. Tit. 1. 16. Impudent and impenitent
sinners are said to have a Whores forehead, Jer. 3. 3. They are not ashamed,
neither can they blush, Jer. 6. 15. There are very few unclean persons that
ever savingly repent and turn to God: Prove. 2. 19. None that go unto her,
return ag^in, neither take they hold of the paths of li^e.

If we would be preserved from the sin of Uncleanness, we must take heed and
beware of the inlets, occasions, incentives and provocations thereunto.

1. Beware of Pride: This was one of the sins of Sodom, and it is a principal
root of the sin of Uncleanness. For Pride makes man d^spise the Commandment of
God, and presumptuously parley with temptations, and expose themselves to
snares. 2 Samuel 12. 9. Wherefore have thou d^^^^sed the Commandment of the Lord,
to do evil in his sight? Pride makes men haughty, scornful, so as to cast off
Instructions, Counsels, Admonitions, which might restrain them from such
wickedness. Genesis 19. 9. Stand back, etc. Pride makes men despise the Ordinance
of Marriage, the remedy which God has provided for the quenching of such
boiling and burning lusts. Pride breeds Jars and Breaches between married
persons, so as to take no complacency or delight in each other; hence they
thirst after stolen wa^ers. Pride is the object of Gods special hatred and
abhorrency: Prove. 16. 5. Every one that is proud in heart, is an abomination to
the Lord. Pride provokes the Lord to withdraw his grace and Spirit, and plunge
them into this filthy puddle. God resists the p^oud, Jam. 4. 6. He that is
abhorred of the Lord, shall fall into this deep pit, Prove. 22. 14.

2. Beware of Fullness of Bread, i. e. Gluttony and Drunkenness. This was
another of the sins of Sodom, and it is the very fodder and fuel of the sin of
Uncleanness. Jer. 5. 7, 8. When I had ^ed them to the full, then they committed
Adultery, and assembled themselves by troops in the harlots houses. They were
as fed horses in the morning: every one neighed after his neighbors wife. 2
Pet. 2. 13, 14. Sporting themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast
with you; having eyes full of Adult^ry, and that cannot cease from sin. The
unclean Spirit finds no rest in dry places, in sober and temperate livers, but
loves to wallow in the m^re of Riot and Intemperance. The sensual and
voluptuous Epicure is a sit Sty for the unclean Spirit to lodge in. Christ has
given us solemn warning to take heed of Excess: Luke 21. 34. Take heed to your
selves, lest any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting, and
drunk^nness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares.
It Is a lamentable thing to see Christians Belly-gods, Phil. 3. 18, 19.

3. Be^are of Sl^th and Idleness. This was another of Sodoms sins, and it is
the Nurse and Fosterer of vile lusts. Stow b^l^ies are usually evil beasts,
Tit. 1. 12. When men are sluggish and slothful in the work which God calls them
unto, the Devil will s^t them about his drudgery. The standing waters pu^risie,
and grow corrupt and noisome. The untilled ground is soon overgrown with
stinking Weeds. The beginning of David's fall, was ^^s ^l^th: He gave himself to
carnal ease and rest, rolling himself upon his bed, when he should have been in
the Field, sighting the Bat^els of the Lord; thereupon Satan assaulted him, and
tempted him to uncleanness, 2 Samuel 11. 1, 2, 3. Of Idleness comes no good.
Laziness breeds Lewdness. No business, debauch^ry. By doing nothing, men learn
to do evil. While the Oyster opens its shell to the Sun, the Crab thrusts in
its Claws, and devoureth the Oyster. Idle and slothful persons are easily made
a prey by Satan. Otia si tollas, etc. If you would escape the darts of Lust,
avoid Idleness and Sloth.

4. Beware of Disobedience to Parents and Masters in Families, and of ^asting
off the Yoke of Government, which would check and restrain the Enormities of
Youth. The younger Son, who would have his portion, and live at his own hand,
grew riotous, debauched, devoured his substance with Harlots, L^ke 15. 12, 30.
The Sons of Ell were Sons of Belial, they cast off the yoke of government, and
soon became Gluttons and Adulterers.

5. Beware of evil Company, the society of vicious and lascivious persons. A
little Leaven leaveneth the whole lump. A Companion of fools shall be
destroyed, Prove. 13. 20. He that is a Companion of riotous men, shameth his
father, Prove. 28. 7. Wise-hearted Joseph flees his Mistresses company; he
would not so much as be with her alone in the room. It Is dangerous bringing our
Corruptions and Temptations to an interview. Dinah out of curiosity goes abroad
into the City, to see the daughters of the Land, to observe their Persons,
Habits, Fashions and Behavior, but she is more curiously viewed, and is taken
and defloured, G^n. 34. 1, 2. Isreal's ta^ling, and talking, and feasting with a
company of le^d women, brought more mischief upon them, then all the Host of
Moab and Midi^^, yea, then all the Enchantments of Balaam could do, N^mb. 25.
1, 2, 3. and 31. 16. One root of bitterness may defi^e many. The strange woman
increases transgressors among men, Prove. 23. 28.

6. Beware of Irreligion and Profaneness. Israel would not hearken to Gods
voice, nor be content with the Lord alone for their Portion; therefore he gave
them over to their own hearts lusts: Psalm. 81. 11, 12. The Gentiles liked not
to retain God in knowledge, but grew vain in their imaginations, representing
the true God by Images of Men and Beasts; wherefore God gave them over to vile
affections, and to a mind void of judgment, so that they ran mad into
Sodomiticall wickedness, Romans 1. 18, 21, 24, 28. If men grieve away the holy
Spirit of God, it is just with God to let loose the unclean Spirit, and give
him a Commission to haunt them. A profane person may easily be come a
Fornicator, Heb. 12. 16. He that despises the holy Ordinances and Spiritual
Privileges, preferring the satisfaction of his sensual Appetite, above
Gospel-mercies, may easily fall into the sin of Uncleanness. The children of
disobedience, who cannot be persuaded to embrace the Gospel, and yield up
themselves in professed subjection to Christ, they are usually addicted to vile
lusts, Col. 3. 5, 6. Ephesians. 5. 5, 6.

Secondly, Let the fear and dread of God move and provoke such as are guilty of
the sin of Uncleanness, timously to Repent, and turn to God, lest they also
perish. Luke 13. 3, 5. Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. If God
has not spared this lewd Youth, but made him an Example, how shall he spare
thee, who art an old practitioner in Sodomitical wickedness? Do not linger nor
defer thy Repentance, but hasten out of Sodom, and flee to the Mountains, lest
thou be consumed in this iniquity. Call to mind all thy former lewdness, thine
unclean Speculations, vile affections, unchaste desires, filthy jestings,
dishonest and vicious practices, and lament and bewail them with bitterness and
anguish of Soul. Solomon having applied his heart wisely to find out his own
wickedness, madness and folly, cries out, I find more bitter then death, the
Woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as bands, Eccles. 7. 26.
Is the heart of the holy God broken with thy whorish heart, and shall not thy
whorish heart be broken? The only Sacrifice which God requires of thee, is a
broken and contrite heart: none other will he accept at thine hand, Psalm. 51.
17. Imitable is the Example of that woman, in Luke 7. who had been infamous for
Uncleanness, and became famous for Repentance. She stood at Jesus feet behind
him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with the
hairs of her head, and kissed his fe^t, and anointed them with the Ointment,
ver. 38. She finds more bitterness in her lascivious Courses, then ever she
found sweetness. Her eyes had been formerly full of Adultery, now are they
filled with the salt Tears of Repentance. Her hair she was wont to plair, and
adorn her self therewith to please her Paramours, but now she makes it a Towel
to wipe the feet of Christ. Her lips which she formerly used to unclean and
whorish kisses, she now applies to Christ's feet. Her choice and precious
Ointment, such as formerly she anointed her self and her bed withal for her
Lovers, she pours out upon the feet of the Lord Jesus. Lament and bewail the
filthiness of thy Heart and Nature, which is the Spring and Fountain, whence
all the streams of Uncleanness flow. Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in
iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me. Cry unto the Lord to purge and
cleanse thee from the guilt and filth of thy sin. Psalm. 51. 7. Purge me with
hysop, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then the snow. Your
sin cries for Vengeance, do not you neglect to cry for Mercy. Wash in the
Fountain of Grace opened in the Gospel: Zech. 13. 1. In that day there shall be
a fountain opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
for sin and for uncleanness. 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you: but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of our Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 John 1. 9. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. Labor through the grace and help of Christ, to mortify thy
lusts and crucify the flesh: Coloss. 3. 5. Mortify your members which are
upon the earth, Fornication, uncleanness, inordinate affection, evil
concupiscence. Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of
the body, ye shall live. Take the Sword of the Spirit, and thrust it into the
bowels of thy lusts, and let out their heart blood. Deal with them as Samuel
dealt with Agag, Hew them in pieces before the Lord. Hearken to the Counsel of
the Lord Jesus, Matthew. 5. 29, 30. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out
and cast it from thee: for it is profitable for thee that one of thy members
should perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. And if thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off and cast it from thee: for it is profitable
for thee that one of thy members should perish, and not that thy whole body
should be cast into hell. If the eye or^nand be infected, infl^med and
gangrened, the whole Body is in danger: The gangrened part must be cut off, or
the whole Body will perish. He that has a la^civious eye, has a Spiritual
Gangrene in his eye; he that has an unchaste ear or hand, has a Spiritual
Gangrene in his ear or hand: either cut off the gangrened part, or Soul and
Body shall be cast into hell fire, where the worm die^h not, and the fire is
not quenched. Indulgence to thy Lusts is cruelty to thy Soul: Thy life shall go
for their life. What a madness is this, for the satisfaction of a vile lust, to
expose thy self to everlasting ^orments? Oh! you purchase your pleasures at a
dear rate! you must suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. What, art thou a
complete Sensualist? Thou withholdest thy heart from no carnal joy, or fleshly
delight. Thou have two eyes, and two hands, and two feet; thou can not endure
to maim and mangle the body of sin, and render thy self absurd and ridiculous
to the world: Verily, thou had better go a Creeple to Heaven, then being a
perfect Epicu^e to be cast into Hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched, Mark 9. 43 -- 48. If once thou have escaped out of Sodom, tremble to
think of returning thither again. Joh. 8. 11. Jesus said unto her, Neither do I
condemn thee, go and sin no more. Nay, look not back, lest thou become a Pillar
of Salt. Remember Lots wife. A man that has been sick of a dangerous Disease,
and is hopefully recovered, if he relapse through carelessness, his condition is
far more dangerous then at the first. 2 Pet. 2. 20. If after they have escaped
the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome, the latter end is
worse with them then the beginning. When the unclean Spirit is gone out of a
man, he is restless until he returns again: he delights not so much to
dwell any where, as in his old habitation; he is resolved to assail and recover
his former possession: He is not afraid of the length of the siege, or the
strength of opposition, It Is no small encouragement unto him, that he finds
his house empty, (...), vacant, idle, unoccupied, swept and garnished, secure,
living at ease, given to pleasure, sit and prepared to entertain such a guest:
now he assaults with greater force and fierceness then at his first entrance,
and his latter possession is far more dangerous and irrecoverable then his
first, Mat. 12. 43, 44, 45.

Thirdly, Let the fear of God excite and quicken in all our hearts the love of
Holiness, and due care to preserve and maintain the purity of our persons. 2
Cor. 7. 1. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. The purity of our persons is an
excellent and honorable thing, and that which God commands and requires, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 7. yea it disposes and fitteth a man for the Presence,
Worship and Service of God, Matthew. 5. 8. 2 Timothy 2. 21. First, cleanse the
Fountain; Wash thy heart from wickedness, Jer. 4. 14. Purify your heart, Jam.
4. 8. Then, watch the motions of the heart, in its thoughts and affections,
Prove. 4. 23. Job 31. 1. Look well to the doors and gates of the Senses: Keep
thine Eye from gazing upon such objects as may be allu^ing and ensnaring,
Matthew. 5. 28. Stop thine Ears at filthy Jests, amorous Songs, corrupt
communication. Abhor all lascivious Touches, unchaste Embracings. Restrain
thine Appetite from excess in Meat and Drink, Prove. 23. 1, 2, 3, 31, 32, 33.
Feed not, feast not without Fear, Jude ver. 12. Devote and consecrate thy self
to the Lord. Prove. 23. 26. My son, give me thy heart, and (...) thine eyes
behold my ways. Hearken to the Word of God, and meditate thereon with delight
continually: Prove. 2. 10, 11, 16. When wisdom enters into thy heart, and
knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, discretion shall preserve thee,
understanding shall keep thee: to deliver thee from the strange woman. Prove. 6.
23, 24. The Commandment is a lamp, and the Law is light, and Reproofs of
instruction are the way of life, to keep thee from the evil woman, from the
flattery of the tongue of a strange woman. Be frequent and fervent in Prayer:
Psalm. 51. 10. Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right Spirit
within me. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. The very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I
pray God your whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Let thy Speech be gracious and savoury, Ephesians.
4. 29. Col. 4. 6. Thy Behavior modest and grave, Tit. 2. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Timothy
2. 9. Thy Conversation ordered aright, according to the direction of the Word
of God, Psalm. 119. 9. Study how to please God, and be good and do good in his
sight, and he will preserve thee from the snares and nets which the heart of
the strange woman has made, and her hands spread to catch and entangle poor
sinners. Eccles. 7. 26. Whosoever pleases God, shall escape from her.

Fourthly, In the fear of God let us carefully Watch over our Children,
Servants, and all that are under our Care and Charge, lest they be stained and
defiled. Wherefore did the Lord acquaint Abraham with his Counsel and purpose
concerning the destruction of the filthy So^omites? because he knew that
Abraham would charge his Children and Family to beware of the like wickedness,
and Command them to live soberly, righteously and piously, Genes. 18. 17, 19.
Holy Job was afraid lest his Sons in the midst of their mi^th and good Cheer,
had sinned against God, and therefore sent and called them, and sanct fied
them, and offered Sacrifices for them. Thus did Job continually, Job 1. 5.
Great care and circumspection is here to be used, for the prevention and timous
eradication of any ro^t of bitterness that may trouble and defile us: H^b. 12.
15, 16. Looking diligently, l^st any man fail of the grace of God, l^st any
root of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and many be defi^ed: lest there
be any Fornicator, or profane person.

What Means are to be used?

1. Diligent Instruction. Prove. 22. 6. Train up a Child in the way he should
go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. Sow the Principles of Piety
in tender years, 2 Timothy 3. 15.

2. Solemn Charges and Commands. Solomon's father taught him, and said unto him,
Let thy heart retain my words: Keep my Commandments and live, get wisdom, get
understanding, forget it not, etc. Prove. 4. 3, 4, 5 His Mother also taught him
Chastity and Temperance, and with holy Precepts fore-armed him against the
vicious inclination of his Nature, Prove. 31. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Yea, King David
gave him (as his Successor in the Throne) a solemn Charge in the audience of
all Israel, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

3. Serious Reproofs of Instruction: Prove. 6. 23, 24. Save them with fear.
Fright and startle them out of their lewd Courses: Pluck them as brands out of
the fire, Jude ver. 23.

4. Seasonable Correction for their folly and lewdness. Prove. 22. 15.
Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child: but the Rod of Correction shall
drive it far from him. Eli's lenity and indulgence to his wicked Sons, brought
inevitable ruin upon his house.

5. Faith and Prayer. Is thy Son haunted by an unclean Spirit? follow the
Example of the father of the Lunatic; Bring thy Son to Christ, affectionately
spread his afflicted and distressed condition before him: He is able to cast
out Satan, though he rage never so much, Luk^ 9. 38, 39, 42. Is thy Daughter
haunted by an unclean Spirit? Follow the Example of the Syrophaenician woman;
Fall down at the feet of Christ, beseech him to cast forth the Devil out of thy
Daughter, Mark 7. 25, 26. Be not offended nor discouraged by reason of any
d^fficul^y, objection or temptation which the Lord exercises you withal, but
through the grace of Christ wrestle through all by Faith and Prayer, you shall
c^r^ainly ob^ain your request, and that with advantage. There is a d^fference
of evil Spirits, some are more wicked then others, Man. 12. 45. but the worst
kinds may be cast out by ^asting and Prayer, Matthew. 17. 21. Faith is the
Instrument, under God, that exp^ls Satan out of his old possession. Fervent
Prayer quickens ^a^th, and Religious Fasting is a special help and futherance
to servent Prayer.

To conclude. Be pleased to account of this Doctrine, as of the Angels Message
to Lot, to arise and depart out of Sodom, lest he should be consumed in the
iniquity thereof; and look at these Instructions and Exhortations, as the
Angels laying hold upon his hand, while he lingered, and upon the hand of his
Wife and two Daughters, the Lord being merciful to him, and bringing him forth
out of that cursed City. It Is an Angelical Service to pluck poor sinners out of
the Snare of Lasciviousness.

FINIS.

