Dr. Pierce HIS PREACHING Confuted by HIS PRACTICE. Sent in a Letter by N. G.
to a Friend in LONDON.
Dear George,
I Send thee a Copy of the Lampoon upon the President of Maudlins, that you may
see at what distance his Court-preaching stands with his College-practice. For
there he twitted the Romanists with I know not what Novelties both of Doctrine
and Practice cunningly brought into the Church; whilst here, by a tyrannical
and arbitrary way of Governing, he puts down all the good old Customs which
seemed fit to be preserved by his Predecessors, (some whereof were as good, and
others better then himself) and, under pretense of Reformation, has innovated
more in a year and half, than the Romanists had done in many Ages. What his
Innovations are I need not say here in Prose; thou will find in great part they
are told in Verse: whereof but five or six Stanza's were proclaimed on
Act-Monday by Mr. Brooks of Christs-Church, than whom in many years there has
not been a more courageous, or a more comical, Terrae-filius. But his most
execrable Novelty was his imperious way of Proceeding against Harry Yerbury;
who (for all his Degree, and his Sufferings for the King 1648, his great
Ingenuity, and civil Carriage) was not only put out of Commons like a Boy, for
I know not what Peccadillo's called Verba brigosa; but cast out of the College
like any Dog, for but appealing to the Visitor from such Correction. Now to
scare our own Governors from presuming to deal with us, as the Statute-monger
of Maudlins dealt with him, be sure to publish this Ballad as far and wide as
thou can, so thou be'st but so honest as to hush up the Name of

Thy affectionate Servant, N. G.

NEar to the Ford, over which an Ass
Or an Ox at least did pass,
And where the once-bless'd, Magdalen
A sinner is possessed again,
The man that sets up Innovation
By the primitive Rule of Reformation,
And preached down Popery too, in hope
To be in time Himself a Pope,
Makes new Religious Modes to grow,
Which from the Beginning were nothing so.
Demyes, and Fellows too, they say,
Are in the Chapel brought to pray,
As often as the Organs blow;
But from the beginning it was not so.
The Founder's Laws are so set up,
That Scholars, when they dine and sup,
Must bandy Latin to and fro;
But from the beginning it was not so.
The tree, which Walnuts forth did shoot,
Is voted down both branch and root:
And where Bowls ran, there Turnips grow;
But from the beginning it was not so.
Demyships, which were bought and sold,
Cannot now be had for Gold;
And things called Merits, current go;
But from the beginning it was not so.
Fellowships eke are nothing worth,
Which eightscore Pieces did bring forth,
And a Gratuity too, I trow;
But from the beginning it was not so.
A Belly-full now for a Feast must suffice,
Whilst by an abatement of Plum-broth and Pies
Men are taught to be temperate; but yet we know
That from the beginning it was not so.
Depraved manners now must be
Reformed by Easter-scrutiny,
Where none must his Accuser know;
But from the beginning it was not so.
In time of Term it is lately said,
That weekly Preachments must be made
Whether the Preacher will or no;
But from the beginning it was not so.
Gold is now wrested from the Fists
Of all the late Spurroyallists
Sent Prisoners to the Tower, as though
From the beginning it had been so.
The Grammar School has also cause
To say, New Lords do make new Laws,
Though Busby's followers needs must know
That from the beginning it was not so.
Amongst the other Modern fashions
All men are brought to Disputations,
Both great and small, from top to toe;
But from the beginning it was not so.
If a good Fellow be Maudlin drunk,
Speak Verba brigosa, or keep a Punk,
He straight must out of Commons go;
But from the beginning it was not so.
If thereupon he make Appeals
For having fasted all those Meals,
He never must have Commons more;
But from the beginning it was not so.
FINIS.

