

THE DISCOVERY Of a late and Bloody CONSPIRACY At Edenburg, in SCOTLAND.
Related in a Letter sent to Mr. PYM, and the rest of the Committes of the House
of COMMONS. From the Committes of Scotland, October. 14. 1641, and read in the
House of Commons assembled October. 20. With the Names of those Lords that should
have bin Slain. And the Names of the Conspirators.

London Printed for John Thomas. 1641.

THE DISCOVERY Of a Plot by some of the Anti-Covenanters in Scotland, and sent
to M. Pym in a Letter, October. 14 1641.
SIR, things were lately in a very hopeful way of Accommodation. But on Monday
night last, there fell out a great interruption, for upon information given to
Marquise Hamilton, the EARL of Argile, and the Earl of Lanericke, that there
was a design to seize upon their persons that night, they removed presently
from their Lodgings, and stayed in the City all night, and the next morning, the
Relation being made to the Parliament, there was present order given for the
shutting of the Ports, and setting of the Guards of the Town, which continue
so still, and the same day, the Marquess Hamilton, the Earl of Argile, and
the Earl of Lanericke, departed hence to a house of the Marquesses, about
12-miles of, where they continue still.

The Depositions of one Captain Stewards and the Lieutenant Colonel Hurry,
and Hume were read upon Tuseday in full Parliament; The King being present, and
upon the reading whereof, the Parliament thought fit to restrain the Earl of
Craford, Col Stewart; and Col. Cockron, who are not yet examined, Before this
Conspiracy fell out we had the Treaty delivered unto us, under the great Seal
of Scotland, and that which remained of our business, being to get the two
Regiments disbanded, and their works slighted, to perfect an account between
the King and some Inhabitants of New Castle and the Scots, about some Arms
which was taken away in their late troubles, and the assisting of some English
in their Demands, of the reparations (of losses, which they sustained by the
Scottish army) were put into such a way, as we expected to have seen them all
at an Issue presently. But this plot has put not only ours, but all other
businesses to a stand, and may be an occasion of many and great troubles in
this Kingdom, if Almighty God in his mercy do not prevent it, which being an
accident of such great moment (as well to prevent as far as in us lies) the
many inconveniences that may arise by false reports, as also in discharge of
the trust reposed in us, we thought fit to send you timely advertisement of it,
and we shall give you a more full account, when by examination it shall be
further discovered.

Edinburgh Castle, October. 14. 1641. Sir, we are your friends and servants, JOHN
HAMDEN, NATH. FINES, IO. ARMINE. PHIL. STAPLETON.

Subscribed To our worthy Friend John Pym, Esquire, And to the rest of the
Commit of the house of Commons, these present. The Names of those Lords that
should have been cut off in this Plot of Scotland.
The Marquise Hamilton. The Earl of Argile. The Lord Balmerido. The Lord
Lowden. General Lesly. The Lord Lindsey the Marquisses brother, and some
others.
The Conspirators Names.
The Earl of Craford. The Lord Aymond, Lieutenant General. The Lord Carre,
The Lord Craford, committed as a Prisoner.


These were discovered by the Depositions taken in the Parliament House at
Edingburgh in Scotland, of Lieutenant Colonel Hurry, Captain Stewart, and
Lieutenant Colonel Hume.



FINIS.

