A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING, Aug. 14. 1666. Being the Day of
Thanksgiving for the late VICTORY at Sea.

By J. Dolben, D. D. DEAN of WESTMINSTER, and Clerk of the Closet.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S especial Command.

woodcut of a ship

London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1666.

Psalm. 18. Ver. 1, 2, 3. 1. I will love thee, O Lord my strength.

2. The Lord is my Rock, and my Fortress, and my Deliverer, my God, my
strength, in whom I will trust; my Buckler, the Horn of my Salvation, and my
high Tower.

3. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be Praised, so shall I be saved
from mine Enemies.


AMong the Laws of the Roman Triumphs, as some were very Bloody and Barbarous,
so others were wise and worthy our Imitation. In all those ostentations of
their Glory, there was ever a mixture of Religion, such as it was; a
ceremonious and pompous application to their imaginary Deities, Livius Passi n.
Ut ob res been gestas Diis immortalibus honos habeatur sibique Triumphanti
urbem invehi liceat, was the form of their Petition who sued for that honor.
Idolatry (the great Mother of Atheism) was not able to extirpate the natural
Conviction which every one has in himself of an Almighty Power governing the
Universe. But it kept a room; even in those men's Breasts who were so full of
themselves, that they expected to be adored by the rest of Mankind. That
Triumphant Dictator, who lorded it over the Lords of the world, before whose
Axes Consuls and Pretors trembled, while he trod proudly on the necks of
Captive Kings, and dragged them chained like slaves after his Chariot, would at
the same time fall down before a Captive Stock or Stone; lower his Rods and
Laurels; Prostrating himself with all the Ensigns of his Power and Honor, to a
rotten deformed Idol which he had brought home in a Cart. This was another
Triumph in and over their Triumphs, a victory of Religion over Infidelity in
its greatest strength and exaltation; for though the Devil did so far debauch
the understandings of reasonable Creatures, as to make them worship him instead
of God; yet while some worship was practiced, and they chose rather to adore a
ridiculous abominable Deity then none; Even by these Profane sacrilegious
Rites, the Principle of a God was kept alive and warm in the minds of men; for
a Handle whereby in fullness of time, Christ and his holy Doctrine took hold on
a lost World, and pulled them back to the service of the True God. Another
thing I observe which will be more to our present purpose; They admitted not a
General to triumph, unless he had finished the design upon which he was
employed, Perduellibus victis, Confecta Provincia.
and so broken the enemy that he might bring his army home with him, leaving
the Province quiet to his Successor. But upon any considerable success they
would make solemn and public supplications to all their Gods and Goddesses, in
the name of their absent Commander, that he might by their favor perfect the
Conquest which he had already happily began or advanced. This is our case. We
are not yet ready for a Triumph, but have matter enough for Supplications and
Thanksgivings. Our Enemies are not subdued, but by Gods help they are in good
measure broken and defeated; Our Noble Consuls are not yet sailing homeward
with Laurels on their stems, but they are very conveniently posted on the
Enemies Coast, as Pregnant instances to them of one victory already obtained,
and hopeful Pledges to us of another to follow. And therefore although our joy
be bounded and circumscribed, to keep us modest, and sober, and humble; yet
have we not only ground sufficient, but many high obligations that our
Thanksgivings be hearty, and zealous, and universal; full of Devotion and sense
of our Duty to God; expressed by ardent Love to his Goodness, Trust and
affiance in his Mercy, worshipping his Majesty by constant Prayers and Praises:
the only means to bless and consecrate our past successes, and to procure his
assistance in our future undertakings. All which (that I may not seem to teach
a Christian Congregation only by Heathen examples) you will find recommended
to your imitation in the Practice of David upon a like occasion. So the Title
enforms us, both here, and 2 Samuel 22.

The Text look two ways, Backward upon all the Mercies and Deliverances which
God had bestowed upon David, which he acknowledges in the many glorious Titles
ascribed to God, in the first and second Verse, My Strength, my Rock, and my
Fortress, and my Deliverer; my God, my Buckler, and the Horn of my Salvation,
and my High Tower.

Forward, in the returns of Duty, to which he engages himself: Of Love, verse.
1. Trust, verse. 2. Praise and Prayer, verse. 3. Upon all which he] grounds to
himself a firm Hope of being saved from his Enemies; So shall I be saved from
mine Enemies.

I begin with David's acknowledgment of Gods mercies, expressed in the Titles of
Strength, Rock, Fortress, etc. Of all these words I shall not need to speak
Particularly, they being but so many Synonymous Phrases, signifying one and the
same thing, That God had often with great Demonstrations of his Power and
favor succored, and saved David. (...)
Wherefore the Greek Translaters have chosen rather to deliver the mind and
intention of the Psalmist in plain words, then to render literally the
metaphors of the original. Yet must we not take this merely for the exuberance
of a Poetical style, much less can we imagine David to be guilty of that
Battology, and those vain repetitions in his Devotions which our Savior
condemns in the Heathens, Matthew. 6.7. It was their practice to worship Vanity
with Vanity, heaping in their Prayers a multitude of empty insignificant names
upon their vain and more insignificant Deities. But this exaggeration in David's
Hymn flows from the abundance of a devout and grateful heart, laboring to
empty and discharge its fullness, struggling with Human infirmity the narrowness
of our Conceptions, and the poverty and barrenness of Speech, and endeavoring
by any means to intimate, if not express those transports and ecstasies which
possessed his soul upon the contemplation of Gods Majesty and Goodness. Besides
(as the Title both here, and 1 Samuel 22 directed to observe before) this Hymn
was made in commemoration of all the great things God had done for David, and
so many various mercies could not be comprehended under any one Notion: His
dangers and distresses had been so numerous, and both in their kind and
circumstance so different, and Gods ways of vindicating his servant so unlike
one another; sometimes by warning him of treacherous designs, that he might
avoid or counterwork them; sometimes by defeating dangerous Councels, and
turning pernicious wisdom to folly; By diverting his Enemies, By defending him
against their force, or by enabling him to overcome it. And as so many and so
different things could not be put together in one stanza of a Psalm, otherwise
then in general terms, so David could not satisfy himself but by crowding in
all the general words and Appellatives which plain or figurative speech
afforded, (...) Theodoret. in Locum.
accompanying doubtless every several word with a proper distinct act of
Devotion, a new heat and flame of love and zeal; so that all together (like the
Milky way) they seem one Celestial fire, but are many.

That we may see how well such a full acknowledgment would become us, how well
all these Names and Titles attributed by David to God would sound in our
mouths, if we would ascribe them with David's Devotion and Affection; Give me
leave to look back, not so far as he does, to the whole life of a Man, but to
that new Epoch of our lives, the new Birth and Restoration of all things to
us. Methinks that should be remembered every Thanksgiving-day, without which we
should never have had any Thanksgiving day at all. Consider then in what
condition we were this time seven years, when the last Effort we could make, or
Project for the recovery of our Country, was miserably defeated; Shall I say by
the Treachery of some, the folly and cowardice of others, or rather by the good
Providence of God? who designed to show us the vanity of all our contrivances,
and the impossibility of our being saved by any other means, then the
miraculous interposition of his help, and thereby make us humble enough for
such a Deliverance. You cannot but remember, That we did not then draw our
Breath, otherwise then Precariously, and at the mercy of impotent Fanatical,
and now enraged Tyrants, from whose Principles, as well as malice, nothing was
to be expected but Robberies, Massacres and Desolations; private mischiefs and
public Ruin. Men that could not possibly agree to establish themselves, and
besides that they conspired to undo all but themselves; their very disagreement
(had they designed nothing toward it) must necessarily have destroyed the
Nation.

Who would have expected, that through this black Cloud, a comfortable light,
and day of Salvation, should dawne and break upon us within a few Months? Who
durst hope, or almost Pray, (in so deep a despair) that out of this horrid
Chaos, a World of Beauty and Order should arise so soon, and we be surprised
(as in a dream) with a perfect rescue from all we feared, and a quiet enjoyment
of whatsoever we could wish? This was clearly the Work of God, and God alone; a
mere miracle of Mercy, wrought in despite of so much actual force at home, so
much Council of all States and Princes abroad, and the yet more dangerous
oppositions of our own Provocations, perversely and insolently contending
against Gods goodness, and making it far more reasonable for us to look for a
hand upon the Wall, writing a visible inreversible sentence of extirpation,
then secretly and powerfully working our deliverance behind it. And therefore
were there nothing else in our case, we must confess that this alone has
filled all the expressions of David in my Text, and we shall think our selves
bound for ever to celebrate our Good God as our Refuge and Defense, our
Deliverer, the Horn of our Salvation, and our High Tower, etc.

TO come close and home to our present business; When the impudent injustice of
our Neighbors made this War necessary, we soon saw we should be engaged to
contend with the most powerful enemies in the World, without the assistance of
any friend; And, perhaps this little world of ours, were it unanimous and
entire, vigorously exerting all its force, might be able to defend it self
against so much of the greater. But we are full of Caprice, and humorous
Emulations and Piques, which trouble and discountenance, and worse things which
hinder and obstruct Public Enterprises. The infirmities of some, and the
wickedness of others weaken our hands, and make us little more then half our
selves: One sort do no good, and others all the harm they can. So desperately
mad are they, Live. l. 2.
that like Appius his Legions, they would rather be destroyed by any Enemy,
then live to see their Prince have the honor of saving and defending them.

These things shame us, and disadvantage our Cause; but they exalt the Glory of
God, and make his help afforded us more conspicuous: For notwithstanding all
this, He gave us the last year a glorious Victory, which brought forth good
fruit and great effects. And this year he has not been wanting to us. In the
First Fight he brought us off without dishonor, nay, perhaps with more honor
(the circumstances of the Battle considered) then a full Victory could have
challenged, had we been evenly matched. And your Enemies Behavior then will
teach you how to value the Victory you have now. Lord! how did they insult and
brave it all over Europe? How unable were they to govern themselves, when they
pretended to have mastered us? If Bonefires and Dutch Wit, French Brags, and
some English Despondence could have conquered us, we had been utterly undone.
But now behold how the Scene is changed; we have seen our Conquerors fairly
beaten; and they who lately told the World that the narrow Seas were become as
subject to them as their own Ditches, and talked, as if like Xerxes, they would
bridle and fetter the Captive Ocean, are shamefully fled like him broken and
shattered through those very Seas, and left them to the possession of their
ancient rightful owners. And now their countenance is altered with their
fortune: Heretofore they were like the Grecian Wrastler, who being thrown,
would spring up nimbly from the ground, and confidently aver, that he had given
his adversary the fall. Now they are more ingenuous and modest, but not more
quiet; their Rants and Huffs are exercised among themselves: And having by a
calm escaped an imminent ruin at Sea, they are shaken by Tempests and Storms
at Land; Revilings and accusations fly like Broadsides among their great
Captains, and the wise men cannot make the valiant ones agree which of them
contributed most to their being beaten. That all this has been done for us,
and in a time while the devouring Pestilence rages in our bowels, and kills
far more at home, then our Enemies can abroad; That the spreading Contagion,
which has seized all quarters of our Land, has been restrained from hindering
our great business, either in the Fleet, the Court, or this City, is of the
wonderful goodness of God, who though he will chastise, will not destroy us,
though he take us into his own hand to correct us for our amendment, yet
suffers us not to fall into the hands of Man, but both in Judgment and Mercy
approves himself our Strength, our Deliverer, the horn of our Salvation, and
our high Tower; and all this, to try us by one experiment more, whether when we
have found him as good to us as he was to David, we will be as thankful to him
as David was; Love him, Trust in him, Praise him, and Pray to him.

1. Love him.

Who can do other then love God, in whom he lives, and moves, and has his
Being? How can we refrain loving that Infinite Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness,
which has made the Universe, and wonderfully disposed it in a beautiful
Harmony, and mutual correspondence, and does so sweetly govern, and carefully
sustain all the parts of it? Beside David knew Love to be the sum of Gods Law,
and the Compendium of man's Duty to him, and could not be a Man after Gods own
heart without doing this before, and then what new thing does he promise in my
Text? Further, To love God for his Benefits only, is but to love our selves,
and our own conveniences; to love him as we do fair weather, and sweet air; as
we love meat, drink, and sleep; And the insincerity of such a love would be
sure to appear upon the trial which Satan desired to put on Job: J b 1.9, 10,
11.
While God makes a hedge about its, and blesses all that we have, perphas we
shall love him; But if he put forth his hand, and take all we have, our Love
being grounded on no other Principle, will go away with our goods, and we shall
be in danger of Cursing him to his face.

We are to love God for his own Excellencies; We are to love him because he
requires it; and the more, Because having a just Right and Power to exact from
us the most painful hard services: He is so gracious, as to demand no more, but
that we love him; that we be not so much his Servants, J^hn 15.15.
as his Friends. This is our standing ordinary Duty; Indeed, this is all we can
perform; We can do no more then love God; That is both the Perfection of our
Obedience here* and shall be of our Happiness in Heaven. But yet this love is
capable of degrees; The affection may and must be at sometimes, and on some
occacasions more intense then at others, and the acts more lively and vigorous,
when our hearts are impregnated, and our services called forth by signal
extraordinary demonstrations as instances of Gods love to us. We ought ever to
love God with all our Souls. that is, heartily and entirely; yet this hinders
not, but that the love which was always true, and void of Hypocrisy,
proceeding (as S. Paul derives it) out of a pure heart, 1 Timothy 1.5.
and a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, may now be more ardent then usual.
That the fire which was alive in the Embers before, may now burn out, and flame
with a Seraphick heat and brightness, when God has descended thus to stir it
up, to invite, and court, and even ravish our affections with the abundance of
his favors. This David intimates in the very Text; For though we have it
only, I will love, yet the Original expression signifies, I will ardently or
affectionately love thee: (...) out of my Bowels, or from the bottom of my
heart will I love thee, Ex intimis viscer^hus. Tr^m^l.
and so some of the best Translations render it.

To t'ame^o affettu^sa mente. Dio dati.
Well then, if this be the Scale and Standard of our Duty in this behalf, that
our Love ought to rise in proportion to the Benefits we receive; As our Savior
indeed sets it in the Gospel, Luke 7.47.
where he tells us, that the most obliged person will love most; and were it
not so, there could be no such sin as Ingratitude in the World; that odious
inhumane Crime would lose all the ground and reason both of its guilt and
shame. Then it will presently be evident to all men, how much we of this Nation
ought to love God, who has so abounded in his favors to us. But how much we
do love him is hard to say; for the expressions of our affection are very
untoward: L^ke the Course and rude Caresses of Russian Husbands to their Wives;
our kindness looks much more like to Anger and ill nature, then Love. If to
disobey, dishonor, injure, and affront, to do every thing that will displease
God, and grieve his Holy Spirit, be Love; then we love him extremely.

But if there be any Truth, in what Common Sense, and the Uniform Voice of
Mankind affirm of Love, That it is an active vigorous Principle, working
mightily in the hearts of Men, Provoking, and even constraining them to do
every thing which may be agreeable to those they Love, and accordingly has
produced wonderful, Prodigious effects in Humane Friendships. If the Holy
Scriptures and Histories of Times truly Christian, deceive us not, in
representing the sincere Love of God, as an affection which can neither be
dissembled, nor suppressed, being always cheerfully and indefatigably employed
in his service. If it devoureth Difficulties, casts out 1 John 4.18.
Fear, Psalm. 119. saepe.
Renders Labor easy and desirable, delighting not only in the sweat of its
Brows, but in the most Bloody Agonies and Conflicts; breaking through the
Briars and Thorns of an accursed World, and the many flaming swords which Satan
draws against it; making it self a Paradise, and Heaven upon Earth, in the
doing Gods Will, in walking with, and 1 John 4.15* 16.
dwelling in him: For which reason Love is called, The Romans 13.10.
fulfilling of the Gal 5 10.
Law; The keeping God's 1 John 5.3
Commandments; That whereon all the Law and the Prophets Mat. 22 40
depend; The 1 J^hn 4 7.8
knowing God, and being known of him: The E^h 3.17.
Root and Ground of Religion, and the choicest, most excellent Ga^^5.22.
F^uit of the Spirit.

If this be the true Character of that Divine Virtue (as indeed these are the
Lineaments and Features by which it was most eminently discernible, in the
unparalleled Example of our dear Lord and Savior, and in the first Copies
taken from thence, the Primitive Martyrs and Confessors) Then may something
like to it be found in our Fancies, our Discourses or Professions, but not the
least shadow of it appears in our Lives and Conversations. Unhappy Nation that
we are! for whom the essences of things, and the Definition of Duty must be
quite changed, ere we can pretend to that disposition toward God, which Nature
dictates, and the bare apprehension of a Deity exacts! I am not willing to
utter words of ill Omen this day; but thus much I cannot refrain from saying,
That had God expressed his kindness to us, no otherwise then we have done our
returns of Love to Him, we had not now been here.

Surely David loved God at another rate; else we should not have found him in
one Psalm panting and languishing after him like an embossed spent Dear; Psalm.
42. 1^ 2.
Grieved and afflicted for being kept from his presence; Psalm. ^20.84* 2.69.9.
Languishing and fainting, with desire to get into his Temple; burnt up, and
devoured with Zeal for it in others. Not only his Book of Psalms, but his
whole life could not otherwise have been so full of jealousy for God's Honor,
Delight in his Commands, and every thing that may express a Will knit and
united to that of God (as the Chaldee has it here) which is the true and
proper effect of Love.

Indeed David could not without such a love of God, have performed well those
acts of Piety and Devotion which he promises in my Text; Could not Trust in
him, Praise him, or Pray to him acceptably, with hope to be saved from his
Enemies. Nor can we (however our Fancies and Dreams of Religion deceive us) and
therefore must be sure to take it along with us throughout* And first to help
us, and give us ground and foundation for our Trust in God; the next thing in
my Text.

TRust, we know is an act of Friendship, and the greatest fruit it yields,
Mutual Confidence, springing naturally from Mutual Affection. I can safely rely
upon that Person whom I therefore love, because I esteem him so good, that he
will not fail any just expectation, and whose affection to me is my double
Pledge that he will surely answer mine. But if I doubt either of these two
things, Love and Trust vanish together; so that we must both love God, and
believe that he loves us, before we can Trust in him: For though God's Goodness
be Infinite, and have wonderfully abounded to us, yet being free in its
exercise, it will be presumption and folly, not trust, to expect any thing
further from him but according to the methods of his Wisdom revealed unto us in
his Promises, and he has promised his favors only to those that love him;
And if we love him, then shall we Trust in him, both with a steady and humble
Confidence: Not murmuring when we want the success we expect, nor growing
insolent when we have it. Love will not suffer us to suspect his Goodness if
every event come not up to our wishes; Nor censure his Wisdom, though sometimes
we discern not the reason of his Providence: Much less shall we justle him out
of his Throne, and put in for our share in governing the World, setting up a
Counter-Deity of our own Council and Force. These are generally the two great
faults of men in our Condition; Not submitting to the Wisdom and Goodness of
God; And relying too much upon the Arm of Flesh* And have we never been guilty
of either of them? Have we never quarrelled and grumbled if there were a ship
less taken then we had predestined in our Fancy? Any thing fallen out otherwise
then we had set it down in the Gallery, or the Coffee-house? Do we not in the
computation of our strength for the War, make false Musters, passing our own
Force and Courage twice over upon the Rolls, and leaving God quite out? Imagine
our selves sufficient Deliverers and Saviors to our selves, and forgetting
that God is our Strength, The Rock of our Defense, and the Horn of our
Salvation. I fear something of this may have been the Provocation which has
moved God to Discipline us with his own Sword, the Plague, at home, while he
saves us from that of the Enemy abroad. Lately to show us danger in an unequal
Encounter, and even now to check our Victory, and snatch much of its fruit out
of our hands when we were just grasping it, and seemed to our selves almost
possessed of a full and final Conquest: And this has he done, not by animating
our drooping Enemies with new Courage, or strengthening their feeble hands with
fresh force and activity; but merely by withholding the Breath of his Wind,
that we may be convinced upon how Particular and constant attendance of
Providence upon us, our felicity depends; which if it be suspended but for one
moment, we presently falter; if the influence of God's Power and Goodness (that
soul of our affairs) do not exert it self in every instance, immediately our
nerves are relaxed, and our spirits damped, and we begin to languish without
strength or motion. This being duly considered, I hope will engage us not only
to Love God more ardently, and Trust in him more entirely and firmly, but doing
both, to Praise and Pray to him more affectionately, That so we may both now
and always be safe from our Enemies. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy
to be praised; So shall I, etc.

I fear there is not so much of my time left, as of my Subject; Wherefore I
will join these two Duties of Prayer and Praise in my Exhortation, as the
Chaldee and Greek do in the Text it self, who read both of them; Praising I
will Pray: And they cannot be more joint and united in any Expression, then
they are in their own natures, Praise being one, and the most noble Part of
Prayer, that which is most peculiarly and eminently the Worship of God; For
though when we Petition him for the Benefits we desire; or against the Evils we
fear* we do tacitly and by consequence acknowledge both his Power and his
Goodness, yet do we more expressly and directy Honor and Glorify God, when our
souls are poured out in cheerful Hallelujah's, hearty and joyful celebrations
of his holy Name, who is the Lord Blessed for ever. Whosoever offers me Thanks,
and Praise, he Ps 50.23.
Honors me, says David; and how much David thought so, appears by this that
all his Psalms are so full of those oblations, as in the Original they are
justly called, The Book of Praises: And why are not our lives as full of them
too? We mistake our selves, if we think this Duty confined to great Festivals
and solemn Thanksgivings, to depend upon our Calendars, or the Kings
Proclamations; Holy Job, in the depth of his sorrows, and the midst of his
great distresses, when he had at once lost both his Wealth, and his Children,
all the supports and comforts of this life, Even upon the Dunghill Job 1 21.
Blesses the Name of the Lord his God, who had both given, and taken away; To
teach us, that we can never be in a condition so wretched and uncomfortable,
wherein we may not find somewhat, for which we ought to Praise God, and adore
and magnify his goodness toward us; not only although we be afflicted and
cast down, but even because we are so.

Would we allow our selves some time to meditate seriously on the
incomprehensible Excellencies of the Divine Nature; To consider how all God's
Attributes have been employed and exercised for our Good, To understand what it
was at first to be created out of nothing, and put into a capacity of hapiness;
What need we had of Mercy, and how unworthy we were of it, when by a foolish
Disobedience we had obliged and confined our selves to endless woe; and then at
what a rate our Redemption was procured; That by the Blood of Christ, not only
Pardon, but Eternal Happiness was purchased for us; Would we recollect the
several instances of God's Care and Providence in the preservation of our
lives, and all our worldly concernments; but especially the continual
endeavors of his Grace and Holy Spirit, to conduct us safe to the enjoyment of
that Blessedness which his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness have prepared for us:
Such Reflections as these (would we suffer them to settle and fix upon us) must
needs fill our souls with the Love of God, and our mouths with his Praises:
This would kindle in us a zealous Concern and Passion for the Glory of God, and
we should apprehend no happiness upon Earth, but in the promoting his honor
among men; Our hearts would be like Altars of Incense, with a perpetual
Heavenly fire burning on them, and sending up continually our Eucharistial
oblations, that odor of sweet smell made of holy Oil and fragrant Spices, Love
and Joy in the Lord, and the Cloud of this Incense would cover the Mercy Seat;
The assistant Angels would (as the Jews say) go up in this Cloud to offer our
Lauds unto God, and bring back from him Grace, and Peace, and Salvation in
returns unto us. It Is for want of this (because we are such strangers to God
and our selves) that the life of every Christian is not a continual Eucharist;
That we come so seldom, and with such coldness and Indevotion, to join with the
Church Militant in her Sacrifice of Praise, the Holy Communion, Hebr. 13 15.
that great peculiar instance of our Religion, wherein Christ has commanded us
to continue a perpetual thankful remembrance of all God's Mercies, and
particularly of his Death (which comprehends them all) and there to connect our
poor Prayers to his powerful eternal intercessions, that so both our Petitions
and Praises may be acceptable to God. It Is for want of this that the Children
of God are so unwilling to have their Conversation in Heaven, to join and
communicate in this Honorable, delectable Duty of Praising God with the Church
Triumphant, where Saints and Angels incessantly Praise God, having nothing to
ask or beg of him, but in behalf of us. We deceive our selves grossly and
dangerously, while we think we can be Religious without Praising God often, and
heartily, and cheerfully, in Private as well as Public. Alas! our loud and
clamorous Prayers, how many or importunate soever they be, separate from this,
are but Hypocritical Devotions, terminated in our own interests, not in God, or
his Glory: And our Prayers would be as few as our Praises, but that the love of
the world and our selves, which damps the love of God in our hearts, and
suffers us not to delight and rejoice in Praising him; sometimes prompts us to
call on him, to fly to his help in distress; make us look up (like the Jews in
the Wilderness) when we feel our selves stung. And this strange fire on the
Altar, looks like the True, burns and blazeth for a while, and makes us think
our selves very Religious, when alas! we are only very fore, or very fearful,
and our necessities and distresses are devout, not we. I need not Press that
further, whereof every one has a sufficient conviction in this, that while our
case is thus, Devotion comes upon us only by catches and starts, and even as
in an Ague, we have as many cold Fits as hot. When the violence of that impulse
pulse which warmed us, is spent, we freeze again, when the Calamity or terror
which put us into a hasty fermentation is taken off, immediately we settle upon
our lees; When he kills us, then we seek him; we turn early and enquire after
God, when we remember that God is our strength, Psalm. 78.
and the most High God is our Redeemer; but as soon as the Judgment is removed,
and we have swallowed and digested the Mercy, we turn back and tempt the Holy
One of Israel; We think no more of his Hand, and of the Day wherein he
delivered us from our Enemies: Whereas were a habit of Religion firmly settled
in us, rooted and grounded on the love of God, and conscience of our Duty, it
would be both Permanent and Uniform in all its exercises, We should not think
to use God only as a Property or Convenience, but adore the Majesty of our
Almighty Sovereign Lord, and delight as much to Praise him for the Benefits we
have received, as to receive any new ones from his hand! What then shall I
say? Shall I reproach a Christian Congregation, by exhorting them to love God?
I am ashamed to do that, and I have said enough already, (if any thing be
enough) by telling you, that without Loving God, you ought not to Trust in him,
you cannot Praise or Pray to him; your Praises will be but Flatteries, and your
Prayers indignities and affronts. Shall I desire you to be more frequent, and
more zealous in your Praises? Sure I need not request you (if you mean to go to
Heaven) to practice that beforehand here, which must there be your only
Employment; to beseech you not to think that a trouble now, which then will be
your Happiness and Glory: I will rather tell you, that God needs none of all
these things from you; Your Love does not benefit, nor your Praises exalt him;
He is the same Omnipotent Majesty, Infinitely happy in Himself, whether you
depend on his Protection, and beg your daily Bread and all other good things at
his hands; or whether neglecting both those Duties, you live as without God in
the World: But He is pleased, when you love and honor him, because he is
delighted in the obedience of his Creature; and nothing is so agreeable to him,
as that we should give him those occasions to love us, and do us good: which if
you thus qualify your selves to receive his favor, I can assure you he will
do, as the Prophet David here assures himself. Upon these Terms we shall be
safe from our Enemies. So shall I, etc.

SO shall I be safe, otherwise I shall not: We cannot promise our selves to be
safe by our own strength, For were it never so great, it may be matched and
exceeded; And were we never so much Masters of our Enemies, we are not Masters
of Occasion; We may, and have been obliged to fight upon disadvantage; We are
not Commanders of the Seas, nor of the Winds, which God keeps in his Treasure.
Last year they were helpful to us, They were otherwise this year. And if we
cannot protect our selves, Who shall protect us? I have heard, that one of our
enemies has said with contempt and scorn enough, We have no Friend But God!
Does he make such But's? I pardon his raillery, and heartily embrace the good
Omen of it. If we have no Friend but God, then we have him, and if he be our
Friend, I am sure we need not fear what man can do against us. Neither they, we
have so often conflicted with, nor they who hover further off, expecting an
opportunity to fall upon us when we are sore, can be able to do us harm. He is
too much a Coward, that dreads any Enemy, when he has Omnipotence it self to
second him. But he is more a fool who may have such a Second and Patron, and
yet will be so far wanting to himself, as not to procure his favor and
assistance; Especially, when the terms upon which it is to be had, are so
easy, nay so desirable, that the Condition of acquiring it is more valuable
then the thing it self, it being a far greater happiness to love and serve God
as we ought, then to be secured by him from all the harm this world can do.

For my part, it shall suffice me that I have brought the business home, and
laid it at your own doors. I dare say there is no Person in this Congregation,
who wishes not all safety to his Country, Honor to the King and Victory to
his Arms. You must therefore think it an advantage to be directed how your
selves may have the satisfaction to bear a part in the atchieving all this,
which you do (and are so much concerned to) wish. I will presently take of that
regreat which your gallantry has raised in many of your thoughts, for your
being detained by employment, or any other circumstance of your Conditions,
from showing your courage, and gaining a share in the honor of the late
Engagements. Courage! break off your Sins by Repentance, live a Christian,
devout, holy life and pray earnestly for Gods gracious favor and succor, so
shall you serve the King as considerably as any Volontier in the Fleet. Here is
a Project to raise an Army easily, speedily, without charge or trouble, and
such a one as could I see formed, I should be so much tempted to despise all
our Enemies: No Age or Sex but are fit to be listed in it. The impotent Old man
on his Couch, the Lady in her Closet, the Sick and Weak upon their Beds,
without Danger or Fatigue at Sea, every one in their own station, where
infirmity or tenderness has ranked them, may fight and be certainly
victorious. Whoever can but mortify a Lust, forsake a Sin; kindle an ardent
love to God in his heart, shed a Tear, send up a Prayer, a sigh or groan to
Heaven; may thereby without any other Artillery reach and gall the Enemy at
what distance soever. By the secret invisible influence of your Devotion, you
may strengthen the hearts and hands of your Friends. While your hearts are
right with God, and you hold up pure hands in Prayer (like Moses in the Mount)
theirs will be victorious in Battle. But then remember that though, when Moses
his hands were up, Josua prevaild, yet when they were set down, Amalek
prevailed. Success varied and shifted from the People and Army and Cause of
God, to the accursed Nations whom he had vowed to destroy, Exodus 17.11.
upon every intermission of Moses Prayer. And therefore unless we think Gods
honor more concerned in our affairs, then in theirs whom he had chosen and
promised, and avowed to all the world that he would give them the spoils and
inheritance of their Enemies. Unless we think our adversaries more accursed
then those whom God had sworn to have War with for ever, Exodus 17.14.16.
whom he had devoted to ruin and extirpation; We cannot hope to prosper and
prevail upon other Terms then Josuah did. And truly you are too unkind, if
while your Countrymen fight for you, you will not Pray for them; While they
patiently endure Toil, Sickness, Wounds, nay, lose their Lives, you will not
amend yours, will not do so delightful, so proprofitable a thing, as to love
and serve God, both for their sakes and your own, to procure Peace and safety
in this World; and eternal Happiness in that to come. Which God grant us all
for the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

