Christopher Dodsworth's Proceedings against the Exportation of SILVER by the
JEWS and others.
Mr. Cory's Affidavit.
JOhn Cory, of the Parish of S. Clemens Danes, in the County of Middlesex, Gent
makes Oath, That about the Month of May 1689. he this Deponent was desired by
the Right Honorable the Earl of Monmouth to bring one Mr. Michal Levy, a
Merchant and Jew to speak with him; which soon after this Deponent accordingly
did, at his Lordship's House at Parsons Green: where, in this Deponent's
hearing, his Lordship told the said Mr. Levy, That the occasion of his sending
for him, was to acquaint him, That their Majesty's wanted Money, and that he
believed the Jews to be a wealthy People, and could lend them a considerable
Sum upon the Act of Parliament, at seven per cent, for carrying on the War
against France, and that if ever they expected Favor from the present
Government, then was the time to deserve it, by complying with their Majesty's
Occasions, or Words to that effect. To which Mr. Levy replied, in this
Deponent's hearing, That there was not above seventy or eighty Families in
England, and of them not above seventeen or eighteen were Men of any
considerable Estate; nevertheless he would use his Endeavor to serve their
Majesty's in what they desired; but nothing further was done in it. And this
Deponent did soon after receive intimation, That the Jews had made Entry in the
Months of June and July of one hundred forty eight thousand and two hundred
Ounces of Silver, or thereabouts, for beyond the Seas, as by the Custom House
Books may appear, to which this Deponent refers himself. And this Deponent did
soon after intimate the same in Writing to the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury; who sent it enclosed to the Commissioners of the
Customs: Who sent to this Deponent to speak with him upon the said matter;
which he accordingly did, and averred the Entries of the said Silver. But the
Commissioners were pleased to answer this Deponent, That Foreign Silver
imported might be exported; and Mr. Booth in particular gave him an undue
Reprimand for his endeavoring to serve their Majesty's in such an important
affair: So that it went beyond the Sea unsearched, as this Deponent verily
believes.

John Cory.
Jurat vicesimo quarto October. Anno secund. Will. and Mar. Rex and Regin.
coram me

N. Lechmer.



Mr. Lawrence Swann's Affidavit.
LAwrence Swann of the Parish of S. Saviors Southwark, in the County of Surrey
Founder, makes Oath, That this Deponent, at the Request of Captain Leneve, a
Custom House Officer, on Saturday the thirteenth day of this instant
September, did go on board the Soes-Dyke-Yatch, to see some Bars or Pigs of
Silver, amounting to about thirty thousand Ounces, and a quantity of Pieces of
Eight, to the number of about five thousand; which by the said Captain were
seized: And this Deponent says, that upon view of the same, he informed the
said Captain, That the quantity he then set aside was Bad, the whole whereof
amounted to about sixteen thousand Ounces, as this Deponent was informed, and
verily believes the same to be. And this Deponent further says, That he, at
the Request of the said Leneve, made an Essay of eleven Grains, which to the
full value was not worth above four Shilling the Ounce, which should be worth
five Shillings and two Pence the Ounce. And this Deponent verily believes the
Pigs or Bars were cast in England.

Geo. Bradbury.
Jurat decimo octavo die Septem. Anno secundo Willielmi and Mariae Rex and
Regina, coram me

Lawrence Swann.



Mr. Attorney General's Opinion.
Whether diverse sorts of Silver, imported and melted down together into Pigs,
whereby the Quality of the whole Mass being altered, be not a Manufacturing of
it? And whether it can then properly be called Bulloyn, or ought to pay Duty
outward?

It seems to me, that by reason of the Alteration it has undergone here, it
does not remain Foreign, Bulloyn, but may be liable to Duty outward.

20 Sept. 1690. George Treby

Mr. Dodsworth's Petition to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury.
To the Right Honorable, the Lords Commissioners of their Majesty's Treasury;
The humble Petition of Christopher Dodsworth Merchant, shows,
THat of late Years the Exportation of Silver out of this Kingdom has been so
great, that the Working Goldsmiths, the last Sessions of Parliament, petitioned
for Redress thereof, and in their Petition and Paper they assert, That the
Milled Money of this Kingdom is usually melted down and exported, not only to
their own Disadvantage, but to the Nation in general, (a Copy of which Petition
and Paper are annexed).

That your Petitioner taking notice thereof, has examined and found, That by
the Entries at the Custom house London, from the third of March last to the
11th of this instant September, about 600000 Ounces of Silver has been
publicly shipped off for Holland or other Foreign Markets.

That the Law gives leave for Exportation only of Foreign Bulloyn, and that he
was informed if it were melted down here, 'twas an English Manufacture, and
ought to pay Custom outward; and being advised, that above 60000 Ounces was
lately shipped and shiping off, your Petitioner acquainted Captain Leneve and
Mr. Wright two Officers of the Customs therewith, and went in person with them
on board one of the Ships, where they found about 35000 Ounces, and that about
16000 Ounces was found mixed Metal, not worth 4 s. per Ounce, when the Standard
was 5 s. 2 d. and thereon concluding it an English Manufacture, the Officers
seized it, as per Affidavit. annexed appears.

That soon after they acquainted the Commissioners of the Customs thereof, who
drew up a Quaere to be put to Mr. Attorney General (a Copy whereof is likewise
annexed) and both Parties concluded to be guided thereby, as to point of Law;
But Mr. Attorney's Opinion favoring the payment of the Customs, Sir John
Worden declared against breaking an old Custom, and would not give any order
for bringing that which was seized on Shore; and in fine discouraged the whole
Proceeding, so that the Officers are fearful to act any farther.

That the Custom of the parcel now so lately shipped amounts to 800 l. and for
6 Months past to 6000 l.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays your Lordships to take this into your
Consideration, both with regard to their Majesty's Revenue and the public
Good, and hear what may be said by Counsel on both sides, if to your great
Wisdom it shall seem meet; and that in the mean time such Pigs of the said
Silver, as upon view shall be found to be cast in England may be brought into
the King's Warehouse and there remain.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
Mr Dodsworth's Petition to the Commissioners of the Customs.
To the Honorable Commissioners of their Majesty's Customs. The humble
Petition of Christopher Dodsworth Merchant, Shows.
THat your Petitioner having waited on the Right Honorable the Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury, about the Exportation of Silver, their Lordships
have referred the consideration thereof to your Honors, and in regard
considerable Quantities of Silver have been shipped since the Seizure made by Mr.
Leneve, without examination whether manufactured in England or not, and that
both Parcels, together with others, are still on board some Ships in the River.

Your Petitioner humbly prays this Honorable Board either to cause all the
Silver now on Board the said Ships to be brought on Shore to the King's
Warehouse, and there examined, or two able Workmen may be sent on Board with
your Petitioner, to examine what Pigs of the said Silver are of English melting
down and manufacturing; and such as are so to secure in the said Warehouse,
till the case be legally decided,

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
Mr. Dodsworth's Affidavit.
CHristopher Dodsworth, of the City of London Merchant, makes Oath, That he
this Deponent having on the 26th of September last past waited on the Right
Honorable the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, with his Petition and
Papers annexed about the Exportation of Silver, their Lordships were pleased to
refer the Consideration of the same to the Honorable Commissioners of their
Majesty's Customs, to give their Opinion therein with expedition; which
Reference he presented to their Honors the 30th day of the faid Month of
September, when Sir John Worden said, they were of the same Opinion as before:
Which this Deponent believes was, That no Examination should be made whether
the Silver in question was of English Manufactory or not, nor that the Seizure
made by Captain Leneve of part thereof should have any effect. This Deponent
further says, That he waited again on the said Commissioners of the Customs
this present 2d of October 1690. and desired to know if their Honors had given
their Report, but Sir John Worden answered, They were extreme busy and could
not yet give their Opinion: And this Deponent verily believes, the Vessels on
which the said Silver is shipped, are now ready to depart.

Geo. Bradbury.
Jurat 2. Octobris 1690. coram me

Chr. Dodsworth.


They are gone with about 110000 Ounces of Silver, the Custom whereof omounts
to 1375 l.



Copy of the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury's Letter to the Commissioners
of the Customs.
Gentlemen,
Whereas the Lords Commissioners of their Majesty's Treasury referred to you,
the 27th of September last, the Petition of Christopher Dodsworth, directing
you to make your Report thereupon with all convenient Speed; but you having not
yet sent us the same, their Lordships direct you forthwith to (...) your Report
upon the said Petition, which in the (...)sense of Mr. Jepson is signisied to
you by, Gentlemen,

Treasury Chamber October. 7. 1690 Your most humble Servant William Lowndes.
The Ships went away on Saturday the 4th of October.



Mr Dodsworth's Petition to the H. of Commons
To the Honorable the Knights Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament assembled,
the humble Petition of Christoph. Dodsworth Merchant, Shows,
THat your Petitioner having for some Months past taken notice of the unusual
shipping for Holland great quantities of Silver, by the Jews and some others,
and also being acquainted that the Working Goldsmiths had, the late Session
complained thereof in this Honorable House, asserting that the Milled and
other heavy Coin of this Kingdom was melted down, occasioned him to enquire,
Whether the Silver thus shipped out was really Foreign Silver, as entered in the
Custom House, and so by Act of Trade 15 Car 2. to pass out free, or Silver
melted down here, and so an English Manufacture, which by the Act of Tonnage
and Poundage 12 Car 2. continued anno primo Gull. and Mar. ought to pay Custom
ad valorem.

That on Saturday the 13th of September last your Petitioner, together with
Captain Leneve and Mr Wright, Officers of the Customs, and Mr, Swann an
Artis(...), went on Board one of the Ships outward bound, where they found
about 35000 Ounces of Silver, all of English casting, about 16000 Ounces was
found on the Test to be worth not above 4 s. per Ounce, and consequently a
mixed Metal; this the Officers seized, and on Monday following acquainted the
Commissioners of the Customs therewith: Who did not only discourage that
Seizure, but suffered about 70000 Ounces more to be shipped off, without
Examination whether English or Foreign, and without Payment of Duty, though
Mr. Attorney General was of Opinion, That such as was altered in England was
liable to the Duty.

That thereon your Petitioner laid the case before the Lords Commissioners of
the Treasury, who referred him to the Commissioners of Customs, from whom no
Report came till the Ships were gone. Copies of all his Papers relating
thereunto are ready to be produced.

That for 16 Months past about 1400000 Ounces of Silver has been thus exported
(which some Custom Officers say is more than was in 16 Year before, except to
the East Indies) and the Custom thereof unpaid amounts to 17500l. sterling.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays this Honorable House to take the
Premises into Consideration, both with regard to the King's Revenue and the
Public Good, and order thereon as to your Honors great Wisdom it shall seem
meet,

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
The Names of the Exporters of Silver, as by the Customehouse Entries appear.
Jews ALvato de Costa, Jacques Gonsalez, Alphonso Rodreguez, Antonio Rodreguez
Marquis, Joseph Bueno, Antonio Gomezsera, John Fermaco, Caleb P^pall, Solomon
Levi, Peter Henriquez, Peir Henriquez, Simon Gato, Elias de Meudza, Pas. Levi,
John De Leau, Antonio Corea, Joseph Meex, Jasper Francisco, Joseph Papez, Simon
Byrloam, Josias Malez, Simon Francia, Moses Carroen, George De Lapo, John
depont, Joseph Levi, Jasper Perrero, Joseph Marquez, James Carroon, Mordecay
Isaac, Deigo de Medina, Oder Pomea, Antonio Rodriquez, Peter Perrera, Isaac
Gomez, Peter de Faxaia, William de Cocquet, James Zibezberto.

Dutchmen. John Scopens, John Vanhine, John Vanderpool, G, Vanvolgli, Derrick
Symons, Solomon Blockar, John Vanderhorne, Geo. Vanderboon.

Englishmen. William Robertson, Peter Jackson, John Johnson, Geo. Smith, John
Palmer, John Bryan, Tho. White, Alexander ^yer, John Vallentine, John Thompson,
Peter Ramsay, Tho. Allen, John Sweetaple, Peter Newman, Peter Harris, Antho.
Stone, Peter Bull, John Sherriff, Joseph Butler, John Phillips, Alexander
Goodman, Joseph Bull, William Harton, Will: Snelling, Walter Nash, James
Seymour, Sir Stephen Evans.


