THE DESIGN For the perfect DRAINING of the Great LEVEL of the FENS, (called
Bedford Level) Lying in Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingtonshire,
Northamptonshire, Lincolnshire, and the Isle of Ely.

As it was delivered to the Honorable Corporation for the Draining of the said
Great LEVEL, the 4th. of June, 1664.

AS ALSO, Several Objections answered since the Delivery of the said Design:
with Objections to the Design now in agitation.

And as for the New Works intended in this Design, appears in the annexed Map;
and the Charge of the whole Calculated, BY Colonel William Dodson.

London, Printed by R. Wood, and are to be sold by Henry Twiford in Vine-Court
in the middle Temple, and by Rich. Marriot over against the middle Temple-gate
in Fleet Street, 1665.

To the Right Honorable, WILLIAM, Earl of Bedford, Governor of the
Corporation for the Draining of the Great Level of the Fenns, called Bedford
Level.
Right Honorable,
I Have no ambition to appear in Print, but where His Majesty's Service, the
Good of the Honorable Corporation, and the Improvement of the whole Level, and
Counties adjacent, are effectually the Question. I shall without much
difficulty subject this following Discourse to the view of the Public; and I
take a Confidence to beg of Your Lordship, that it may come abroad under Your
Patronage. I hope it will not be needful for me to proclaim my Integrity in
this Affair, having had the Honor to spend a great deal of Time, and Money, in
prompting it; and being at last dismissed for Causes, which in modesty I shall
conceal. As to my Abilities of making good what I undertake, I shall readily
submit my Reasons and Proposals to the strictest Examination; and if I fail in
the Main, I shall patiently abide the Reproach: But if my Design shall be found
in the end practicable, and not only that, but incomparably less Expensive,
then any way hitherto practiced, or propounded, I persuade my self, that Your
Lordship will not repent the owning me in what I now say, or in what I shall
hereafter do, as

Right Honorable, Your Honors most humble and faithful Servant, William Dodson.

To the Reader.
THis is the first time I have ventured my self in Print, and I might very
truly take up the common Apology of doing it, to gratify the earnest desires
and instance of certain Honorable, and Worthy Friends; (for I do not publish
my own single Judgment) but I shall rather declare my self to be governed in
this action, by the Love and Duty which I bear and owe to my Country, then by
any private and particular respects: And whether my Conception be vain or
profitable, let the Reader judge.

The Point in Question, is the perfect Draining of the Great Level of the
Fennes, called Bedford Level; some are for cutting the whole Level into Dikes
and Banks; others, to let the Sea to flow into the Level, to lodge its Silt,
for the repairing of the Banks; besides several other ways, which upon
Experience, and after infinite Charge, have been found fruitless at last. That
which I propound is, briefly to effect the thing; and to make appear in this
Discourse, to any unbyassed person, the facility, and the certainty of doing of
it; and finally, of doing it upon such easy Terms, that the whole Charge
shall not amount unto much more, then has formerly been spent in a Year or two
Reparations: And for satisfaction herein, I shall refer the Reader to the
Account and Calculation which follows.

A MAPP Of the Great Level of the FENNS called BEDFORD LEVEL.



The pricked Lines represent the New Rivers to be made in and about the Great
Level*

By WILLIAM DODSON Gent:

The Design, For the perfect Draining of the Great Level of the Fens, called
Bedford Level.
By Colonel William Dodson.
IT is not to be expected this whole following Discourse to be all new, since
the necessity of making it to appear rational, compells me to a recital of many
things as well known unto others as my self; and so to usher your judgments to
approve of it as reasonable, (which the whole Level as an entire argument does
persuade) I shall extract no other cure for her present Distemper, then what
Nature her self has appointed for a Remedy.

And, in the first place to acquaint you with the Circumference and Quantity of
Ground I am to treat of; and likewise to acquaint you with the Soil, or Earth
we are to work upon, and then the several Rivers and Rivilets which fall into,
and run through this great Level, and how the unruly Tides do beat back our
Freshes into our bosoms, when they are poasting to the embraces of their Mother
the Sea.

I shall not divide this great Level into piece-meals, but as my industry, and
thirty years Experience and more has taught me, I shall give you the Descent
of each part of it, as it is naturally inclining to the Sea, as also those
Rivers which Nature has appointed to conduct the supernumerary Waters to it;
and then I shall lay down the Rules, and way for the perfect Draining of this
great Level, and at a small charge, and to take off all hazzards of being
drowned for the future, and also the vaste expenses of yearly Repairs, whereby
will easily appear the great advantage which will accrue to his Sacred Majesty,
the Honorable Corporation, and to the whole Country, resolving as much
brevity as the weightiness of so important an affair may permit.

The Circumference beginning at Saltors Load in Norfolk, The Circumference of
the Level.
and so by the hard Lands of Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Huntingtonshire,
Northamptonshire, and Lincolnshire to Croyland, and so to South Ea Bank, to
their Drain to Tidgoat, from thence to Wisbidge, so to Well, and to Saltors
Load again; which Circumference contains at the least 120. miles, within which
lies at the least 400000. Acres of good Land, if once perfectly drained.

The Soil or Earth is generally a black or red Moor, The Nature of the Soil or
Earth.
the black Moor is naturally a rich Soil, the red is not so strong; but both
the red and black being laid dry, becomes a perfect black mould, and good
Soil: witness Thorney Fenns, and all others which have lien dry for some years
past. The Soil is good and profitable, and lies in most part of the Fens a foot
deep, and in some places more, though Nature and Art have taken their way
through the worst of our Fens, Morton's Leam and Bedford River.
I mean the two Rivers of Morton's Leame, and Bedford River, (the last made by
the Right Honorable Francis Earl of Bedford, and the first by that Reverend
and Learned Prelate Bishop Morton, were the two most famous Works as ever were
made in this great Level, as useful to the draining of it; but the banks being
made of this light Moor, The light Moor not good for banking.
(which could not possibly be avoided) which now being rotten with long lying
dry, has lost its tufness, and is become a light black mould, and yields to
those waters lying on the banks, and makes the banks mere water, by which means
they have lost their former strength to withstand a reasonable Flood.

To and through this great Level runs certain Rivers and Rivilets, The River
Welland excepted in this Design.
I exclude the River Welland, as not to meddle with it in this Design; and
those which I call Rivers, (which we have to deal withal) are new Nean, alias,
Morton's Leame, Bedford River, and great Owse: The River Nean is very
considerable, it runs out of Northamptonshire, and brings many Rivers and
Rivilets which fall into it; and with reason we may believe Northamptonshire to
be the highest County in all England, there being no River which runs into it,
but many which run out of it East, West, North, and South.

Bedford River is equal with Nean, Bedford River.
and brings with it all those Rivers and Brooks out of Bedfordshire and
Buckinghamshire.

Old Owse I call it a considerable River for those of Grant, Old Owse.
Milnall, Brandon, and Stoke makes Owse (before it meet with Bedford River) at
Saltors Load, a great, and considerable River.

As for South Ea, South Ee, Whittlesy Dike, March River, Bevils leam etc.
useful in draining.
Peakirk Drain, Bevils Leam, Whittlesey Dike, Swards Delft, Elm Leam, March
River, Ox-willow Load, Sandy Dike, Downham Load, Dr. Williams Load, Reach Load,
Fordhorm Load, and Samms Cut, with many other small Creeks, which are no way
prejudicial to our Work, but much to our benefit, and ease, and will be much
for our use.

As for the several Descents in this Level, The descent of Borough and Thorney
Fen, etc
you shall find them thus, from the height of Borough Fens, and Thorney Fens,
and from Bull Dike, and Catt water; the descent lies to the lowest part of
Thorney Fens by Clows Cross, and Murrow Plash.

All those Fens and Grounds from Stanground, The descent of Stanground,
Whittelsey Ug Ramsey etc. Mare
Whittlesey Mare, Ug Mare, and Ramsey Mare, Kings Delft, West Fen, all those
Grounds or Fens of Ramsey, Pedley, Doddington, Chatris, and March; all those
Grounds lie descending to the River of March, and the West Water.

All those Grounds and Fens which lie East of the West Water to the North Bank
of Bedford River, The descent of the Grounds on the East of the West water to
the North Bank of Bedford River.
have their Descent inclining to Well River, and Welney to the Po Dike.

All those Fens and Grounds lying South-East of Bedford River, have still their
descent Eastward to Littleport, and to Priest-houses, and so into great Owse.
The descent of the grounds South East of Bedford River.


Yet though it be true (as it is) that all those Lands and Fens from Morton's
Leam to the River Owse, have their Descent still Eastward, yet is as true, it
is not above half a foot in a mile, and that is no considerable Draught to
convey our downfall to our two Rivers of great Owse and Morton's Leam, which
upon necessity must drain the Country; but if Morton's Leam and great Owse
cannot be brought to run so low, as to gain a Draught into them, we cannot be
perfectly drained: but this without all doubt may be effected.

Those Fens and Grounds which lie on the East side of great Owse in Norfolk and
Suffolk, The descent of the Fens on the East side of great Owse.
with Sohame Fens, Swaffam Fens, Ditton, Burwell Fens, Isesam, Milnall, Whelps
Moor, and the Fens of Feltwell have their Descent West to the River Owse, but
is little or nothing. Yet there is no doubt but to gain these Rivers two foot
fall into the River Owse, and that Sohame Mere shall never come within four
foot of its former height in ordinary Floods.

For besides the Sock, and downfall into this Level, we have three
considerable Rivers which runs through it into the Sea. Three considerable
Rivers run through the Level
Morton's Leame, whose way is through Wisbidge, and so into the Washes, and
Bedford River, and great Owse, which join together at Saltors Load, The Design
of former Undertakers.
and run entire to Lynne, and fall into the Sea below the Washes. There has
been great industry, and much money expended in making of great and vaste Banks
to keep those Rivers within their Bounds, and to carry our Freshes to run at
that height as to ride the Tides; and this has been the Design of all the
Undertakers since Lyn Law was first made: but if ever they had found the
Descent (which they hoped for) the Tide (their greatest enemy) could not then
have possibly prevailed to flow into the very Center of this great Level every
twelve hours, The Tide a great enemy.
though the late made new Rivers do run high by reason of the imbanking and the
flux of the Tide.

One other enemy (though not so dangerous) to this great Level, Want of Freshes
a great enemy.
is, the want of Freshes in the Summer to water the Grounds and Cattle, The
light fuzzy Moor to make Ba^ks withal, another enemy.
and to scour the Out-falls. And the other enemy is the fuzzy light Moor to
make Banks withal, which moorish Earth has deceived all the worthy Undertakers
from the beginning, and therefore is not to be trusted any more.

Neither is it without reason, that those three I last named are such obstacles
to the perfecting of this great work of Draining this Level. Reasons why the
Tide is an enemy to Draining.
For if we consider the Floods which fall down into this Great Level, intending
for the Sea, which for want of descent cannot run quick, and the Tide every
twelve hours meets our Freshes, and beats them back; the Tide by reason of his
great ascent at Sea, flows quick into the very bowels of our Fens, so far as
above Welney upon Bedford River, which is no less then eight and twenty miles
from the Sea: And likewise it flows above Guy-heirne in Morton's Leame into
the midst of our Fens; and it must be confessed the Tide flows into us three
hours and an half, and we allow four hours for the same quantity of water to
ebb back again, so that at the most we have but four hours and an half in
twelve hours, to run out our Freshes which drown us.

Thus the Floods increase in our Rivers between the Banks, and rises, and
lies on them at a great height, and as I have said, these moory Banks will
deceive all that trust in them: It is confessed that the moor Earth is tuff so
long as it lies wet, but is good no longer then till it is rotten, and that it
will be if it lie dry four or five Summers, Reasons against the Banking with
light Moor.
and then it sinks, and becomes a light black mould; and if it chance that a
Flood lie upon it but three or four days, it soaks in the water and becomes
sobbed, and is neither Earth nor water, and then it leaves you when you have
most need of it, and drowns the Fens more, then if there were no Banks at all.

The third enemy is the want of Freshes in the Summer, which does not only
make the Country, and the Cattle miserable, but the Out-falls will be
destroyed for want of water to scour them in dry Summers: Reasons why the want
of Freshes is a great enemy to Draining.
Nor would I have the late dripping Summers be an encouragement, that the
Out-falls are so good that there is no cause to fear them, (may they always
continue good I wish) but if the Out-falls once fail, it will be a greater
inconvenience then the breaking of a Bank only, my fear hereof is just enough;
In a dry Summer you have none, or very few Freshes, either by the River
Morton's Leame, or great Owse, and ye are sure to be visited with the Tide
every twelve hours; and then I may tell you, if you have Northernly winds, you
will have such foul waters from the Sea, that quickly will lodge up your
Out-fall at Wisbidge, and Lyn, by reason your Rivers in those places are wider
then they ought to be, (which may be helped by this my Design) so that the Flux
and Re-flux of the Sea, does not grind but feed.

The River Owse which has its Out-fall at Lynne, The River Owse much
obstructed with shelves of Sand below Lyn.
is for some miles at Sea below that Town much obstructed by several shelves of
sands, which are moveable as the wind and sea forces them; and yet the winter
Chennels are kept by the winter Floods; but in Summer our want of Freshes or
Floods make us not able to maintain our winter Chennel, and so we lose it till
our first Floods in November (or thereabouts) can gain their own Chennel again;
in the mean time all our Banks and Works are in great danger, and the poor
Countryman in hazard of utter ruin, and the Navigation of Lynne very
uncertain and dangerous; the same hazzards in all respects are in the River of
Wisbidge through the Washes to the Sea.

And now to prevent these dangers, and to make our Fens and Level secure,
without trusting to the hazard of our Out-falls without us, or the breaking,
or the sinking of the Banks within us, the taking away all those great charges
of maintaining and repairing all those Banks made to hold up our Inland Floods
at such a vast height as to rid the Spring tides (as I have said before) I dare
be bold to say, that twenty years hence for want of Earth at a reasonable
distance, the Banks will cost more in one year then now they do in four; I wish
the Charge of those Fen Lands may not exceed the Profit, as some of them have
already done, and much good Land without the Level in likelihood to come into
the same condition if not prevented.

When I was DIRECTOR, I would have cut through Murrow-gate to the Horseshooe at
Wisbidge, Murrow-gate cut to the Horseshooe at Wisbidge.
which would have cost less then the widening of that River, and there to have
fallen into Wisbidge River close to the Apron of that gallant Sleuce then
standing; and so far I had (as I did then believe) obtained the Adventurers to
consent unto, and they at a general meeting at Wisbidge 1649. did make a
personal view of the place, and found what I affirmed to be truth; and this
River I would have completed by reason of the great benefit it would have been
to all the North-side of Wisbidge, and other parts adjacent, to drain them, and
a certain Slaker in all Floods to ease Morton's Leam and all the Banks upon it
upon all occasions.

Then take the River Owse, The River Owse and Morton's Leam made to run quick
below Downham and Wisbidge.
and all the Branches which fall into it before it come to Downham-Bridge, and
likewise cast your eye upon the River called Morton's Leam as it runs at the
Horseshooe below Wisbidge, to meet there with my new River that is to be made
through Murrow-gate; and this is the first part of my Design, to bring all our
Floods and Freshes to run quick below Downham, and Wisbidge.

In the next place, to give more particular satisfaction, I question not but
all rational men will grant, and allow, that if by this Design, those two
considerable Rivers of great Owse, and Morton's Leam, can be be brought to run
all the year, and every hour of the year, in two great Rivers at
Downham-Bridge, and Wisbidge-Bridge, notwithstanding the Spring Tides or the
Ebb Tides; they must needs confess that they then believe they shall be
perfectly drained, yet they cannot believe this can be done, The Tide stopped
but that the Tide must be stopped; and it is true, and good reason for it;
which as I said before, flows into us every twelve hours into the midst of our
Fens, and flows no less then three hours and an half, or four, and then four
hours to ebb back again, so shall we have not above four hours in twelve for
our Freshes to run out of the Level.

But it is intended, and will be made good by this my Design, the Freshes shall
run quick all the year, and every hour of the year, at Downham-Bridge, and
Wisbidge, if they may have leave by a Sleuce below them some miles distant; and
though I name this last, The great Sluice to be at German-Bridge, or near
Magdelen in Norfolk.
yet it is the first thing to be perfected, that is by a substantial large
Sleuce made at German-bridge, or Magdelen in Norfolk; and near unto it one Soss
to maintain Navigation, from Lynne to Cambridge, Wisbidge, and to all other
places formerly used into the adjacent Contreys: And this being once
substantially performed, the whole work of Draining is in a manner perfected.

And as for the River of Wisbidge, and the Slaker through Murrow-gate, A new
River to be cut through Marsland.
I carry them jointly in a River through Marsland, from the Horseshooe to the
great Sleuce at German-Bridge, or near Magdelen, by sufficient Banks of good
sollid Earth; then have I sufficient water way for all those Freshes to the
Sea, which will force good Navigation, and maintain the Chennel Winter, and
Summer, to the great benefit of all those Sea men which use that Port of Lynne;
and all the Rivers in and out of the Level will be much bettered, and improved.

As for the sleighting any Banks upon Bedford River, No Banks to be slighted.
or Morton's Leam, A small new bank at Guy-heirne.
or to make new ones, (except a small one at Guy-heirne) it is no part of my
Design, but I do wish those Banks which are upon Bedford River and Morton's
Leam, had not been placed at so great a distance one from another.

And as for the Sosses at Stanground, The Sosses at Stanground, Erith Well,
etc. are useful.
Erith, Well, and others, they are of singular good use, yet I do affirm, there
will be a necessity of having a Soss, and Sleuce near Ditton, otherwise the
Navigation to Cambridge is lost, A Soss and Sluice at Ditton.
by reason the waters will be so low both Winter and Summer in the River Owse,
that the Rivelets of Millnall, Brand, and Stoke, must be either held up or
bottomed.

The like it will be with Morton's Leam from Guy-heirne to Peterborough, A Soss
and Sleuce to be made at Guy-heirne.
otherwise it will not be always navigable either Winter or Summer, unless we
keep the waters in the new River through Marsland and in Wisbidge Town at a
great height always. The use of that Sluice, and of that at Murrow Plash.
This Sluice, and that at Murrow Plash, commands the River through Wisbidge, and
that through Murrow-gate with your new River through Marsland, by the help of
the great Sluice and Soss at German, that if need should require, would lay the
very soles dry, insomuch that at all times you drain the North-side of
Wisbidge, North-side of Wisbidge drained with the Smee, and the great Common in
Marsland.
and parts adjacent, the Smee, and the great Common in Marsland: neither will
there be any need of raising the Bank from Guy-heirne to Bevis-hall, for the
security of the North-side of Wisbidge, whereof many complaints have been made;
for here that great River will run low in a great flood with great swiftness.

One other small work I would do, A small Cut from Owse to Little-port Chair.
which is a Cut from the River Owse near Ely, to the Chair at Little-port,
which will be about three miles, and this I would make fifty foot wide without
Banks; this is to help old Owse to take off a sudden flood, which otherwise
will hang long upon Water-beach, Swaffam Fens, the Phillips, Stretham, and
other Grounds adjacent, being the shelves, and stops in the River Owse are
taken away.

Croyland had always Navigation into Norfolk, Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, and
all other parts of this great Level, and from thence to Boston, Lynne, and unto
the City of York, which is now obstructed. I mention this place, by reason I
know it is very easy to make from this Town good Navigation to Stampford, The
benefit of Navigation through Croyland.
to the great benefit of that Town, and Country, likewise to Boston, Lynne,
and other parts; the Honorable Earl of Bedford is no small loser for want of
this Navigation through this Town of Croyland into the River Welland, and his
Tenants at great charges to cart their Corn and other commodities to the River
Welland, and elsewhere, to the damage of the Earl, and his Tenants, I do
verily believe Five hundred pounds per annum. But I shall say no more to this,
but I know the want of Navigation makes many Towns poor, and the having of it
makes many Towns and Countries rich; and the making of this Navigation good is
performed at a small and inconsiderable charge, Great Benefit to Thorney
Lordship.
and without any danger of drowning of Thorney Grounds (as some have alleged)
but will prove beneneficial to all that part of the Country in a dry Summer.

And as for Sheir-Drain I have no intentions of sleighting it, Sheir-drain not
to be slighted.
it is good to convey fresh waters into the Country, and of great use and
benefit unto Holland.

It may now be conjectured what my Design is for the perfect Draining this
great Level; and lest I should be mistaken, I will farther express my self: It
is to cause our Waters and Floods to run low and quick in our two great Rivers
of Owse and new Morton's Leam; for if once these two great Rivers be brought to
run low, the Fens cannot be drowned, nor can any other River or Rivelet in our
Fens run high.

Likewise, as for the Dimentions of these new Works I have named, and what
water way I would make both in the new Rivers, and through our new Sleuces, I
shall give you particularly; and in the close of this Design, I shall give you
my Reasons, and show you the Benefit, the King, Kingdom, Undertakers, and the
Country will receive by this my Design, and way of Draining. And likewise give
you my Answers to diverse Objections that are, or may be made, either out of
peevishness or ignorance, self ends or malice, whereby to obstruct the carrying
on so Honorable a work, as the perfect Draining this great Level.

The River through Marsland from the Horseshooe at Wisbidge to German-Bridge,
The Dimention of the River through Marsland.
or near Magdelen in Norfolk, will be in length about eight miles; I make this
River six foot deep to a perfect sole quite through: likewise I make it eighty
foot wide, yet inclining wider toward the new Sleuce, to help the Draught of
this River. I leave Foreland to this Bank to the River-ward twelve foot, the
seat of this bearing Bank shall be five and forty foot; I leave Forelands of
this my bearing Bank to the Land-ward eight foot; the two In-drains* I make
both of them eighteen foot wide, and six foot deep; by which means I gain good
firm Earth out of the River, and the two In-drains, to make my bearing Bank
twelve foot high from the superfices of the Soil, and ten foot broad on the top
of the Bank, which being flagged to the River-ward must needs grow well.

As for the Slaker through Murrow-gate I held it always very necessary, The
Slaker through Murrow-gate.
by reason the River of Wisbidge was and is so full of short Angles, and every
shoulder of those short Angles checks our Freshes running to the Sea, and that
small neck of that River at Guyheirne too hard to be found by such a sea of
Freshes between those Banks to Whittlesey, that the waters grope the way to
find that small quill to creep out at; wherefore I make from Guyheirne to
Murrow-plash, which is two miles, A single Bank from Guyheirn to Murrow-Plash,
2 miles.
one single Bank, which is on the South Side of that Bank that now is to
Murrow-plash, to stand with it equal in height, and that old River to be
bottomed six foot to raise that Bank to the Plash, and to have there a
convenient Sluice with sufficient water-way into our Slaker in Murrow-gate; this
River or Slaker from Murrow-plash to the Horseshooe is about four miles and an
half: The river from Murrow-Plash to the Horseshooe, four miles long, six foot
deep, fifty foot wide.
I make this River fifty foot wide and six foot deep to a perfect sole
throughout; I leave Foreland to each Bank to the River-ward ten foot, the seats
of those Banks to be forty foot each; the Foreland from the Seat of the Bank to
the Land-ward, ten foot each; the two In-drains fifteen foot each, The
dimention of the Banks.
and six foot deep. This is all sollid good Earth as Marsland, and will raise
the Banks to stand at eight foot high from the superfices, and ten foot broad
at the top: There will be no haste of this work, till the Banks above be sunk
to about five foot high; and till then the North-side of Wisbidge has no good
Drain.

These two Rivers leads us to the new Sluice at German-Bridge, The new Sluice at
German-Bridge.
or near Magdelen in Norfolk; and I conceive most are at a stand in their
Judgments, as believing this not easily to be performed, yet tacitly do
allow, that if this can be effected to be a durable work, the Country then
must needs be Drained: Yet for better satisfaction of those which doubt, it
will not be unnecessary to take the judgments of able, and honest Artists, and
good workmen, so to understand their sense of the feasability of this work:
viz. This Large Sluice, and Navigable Soss, and to give me leave to inform them
what I have known, and seen in the like Works.

The soil, The Soil for the new Sluice to stand upon.
and foundation whereupon this large Sluice, and Soss is to be placed, is very
good, being a firm and sollid clay, or galt, which is not to be found for that
purpose elsewhere; and our materials are most of them by us, The Materials for
the new Sluice where to be had.
as Brick, at Ely and Saltors Load; at Ely and Reach, Lime plenty and cheap
enough; good seasoned Oak Planks and Timber in Norfolk and Suffolk; and good
Deal Timber at Lynne, and Iron, as good, and as cheap as elsewhere; and there
is nothing wanting except Tarras, of which we must use in this Work good
plenty, and this is to be had at Dort or Roterdam much cheaper then here: at
Peterborough and Ely, rough Stone for our Foundation and Fillings.

Now I have brought you to the Materials, with which you are to make this
Sluice, and Navigable Soss, now follows the Dimentions of them both.

The Sluice I divide into four and twenty Arches, The Dimention of the new Sluice.
each Arch containing seven foot in wideness for the water-way; the sole of
these Arches shall lie level with the sole of Great Owse at German-bridge, or
near Magdelen; the Foundation under the sole of those Arches shall be four foot
deep; the Supporters or Peires between each Arch, or Water-way, shall be six
foot thick, made of good Brick, and other good Stone, for that purpose; and the
outwardmost Bricks to be laid in Tarras and Lime; these Arches for the
Water-way are made ten foot high from the sole, beside the Crown of the Arch,
and so built, and finished above to what height and weight may be thought
fitting.

The breadth of this Sluice composed of four and twenty Arches, from their
Butting upon the River Owse, to the Butting upon the new River which runs to it
through Marsland, shall be forty foot, besides the Apron to the River Owse, and
the Apron to the new River of Marsland.

To finish this Sluice, What is required for the finishing this great Sluice.
there must be four and twenty double Gates to Sea-ward, to play with the Tide
when need shall serve; but these cannot play but with leave of the Fall-gates,
which are eight foot broad, and ten foot deep; all those Fall-gates, or so many
of them as shall be needful, according to the Floods which are coming down, are
drawn up, and then our Gates to Sea-ward play to run out our Floods. In Winter,
by reason of the great Floods, they may all play; and in Summer Droughts one
may be sufficient to do the work, so uncertain are our Waters, yet shut
themselves at the rising of the Tide, or Back-water, and Butt in the bottom
against the soles of the several Arches, and Butt on the top as well as on the
sides they hang on; and these Gates are to be ten foot high, yet the Spring
Tides will overtop them five or six foot, but cannot hurt us, but make us
stronger. In this Sluice you have Water-way an hundred sixty eight foot in
breadth, and ten foot in depth; this Sluice will vent more Water then will ever
come to overcharge it.

Your Soss for Navigation must be placed twenty Poles below this Sluice, The
placing of your new Soss.
for if it stand in it or near it, it cannot be useful at all times, by reason
of the great force and stream of water at the Sluice in a flood* and the Cut
which leads from the new river to the Soss must be twenty Pole before the
Sluice, lest that coming too near the Sluice, the great Draught of the River
there may force down the Vessels to the Sluice, and there they must either break
or sink.

The Soss may be made as large as you please, to hold ten or twelve Boats at a
time, The great use of a large Soss.
and the charge not much more then though it were made for two or three Boats,
seeing we shall not need to fear the loss of waters. I do wish the Soss may be
made large, for there is no question but Navigation will increase within us,
being it is so feizable to be made to Stampford in Lincolnshire, to Rockingham
in Rutlandshire, and to Bedford in Bedfordshire.

As for your Sluices at Ditton, at Croyland, at Murrow-Plash, at Guyheirne, with
that small Cut which I desire may be made at Littleport Chair, these are but
small Works, and will cost but little money; I have given the reason for them,
and the great use of them before.

One thing more I shall add to what I have already said, The Slaker through
Murrow-gate is four miles and an half long, The Dimention of the several Rivers.
and it is fifty foot wide; Wisbidge River from Guyheirne, with the new River
to German-Bridge, or near Magdelen, is twelve miles long, and eighty foot wide;
Great Owse from Saltors Load to the same Sluice at Germans is eight miles long,
and an hundred and twenty foot wide; these Rivers being joined all together
make a goodly Indraught, as well as Rivers, at your very Out-fall, all of them
bound in with gallant Banks of good sollid and durable Earth, The said Rivers
to receive more Waters then the Receptacles now made.
as can be desired; which Rivers will receive more waters from a Flood, then
all those Receptacles upon Bedford River, and Morton's Leam, which are so far
within Land, to the great danger of the Country, and the vast expenses of the
Undertakers; and in our greatest Floods, and most sudden Rains, our waters
shall never rise so high within us at the great Sluice at Germans, as does the
half Floods at the Ordinary Tides without us; then I hope it will be confessed,
that our Fens, and the whole Level, and all those Grounds mentioned, must be
dry as well in Winter as in the Summer.

This was the DESIGN I would have finished in the Year 1649. when I was
DIRECTOR.

But it will be Objected, This was the Design, Anno 1649.
that the former Works I mention will cost much money; I shall answer to this,
and other Objections; but this first, because it concerns the Adventurers which
lay out the money.

If that the old and new Adventurers have laid out in the Draining of this
Great Level, Several Objections answered.
these thirty years and more, five or six hundred thousand pounds, and if they
believe this Design and these Works will perfect the work of Draining, surely
then they will lay out one whole years Rent and an half to make all their
moneys good, and free themselves from such vast expenses, which will be
swallowed up in the yearly Repairs of those uncertain Banks.

If this Design, being perfected, does take away all fears as well as future
charges, and bring the Level into repute and credit, it will be worth their
expenses, and twenty times more.

And when this Design is thoroughly understood, and the insufficiency of the
moory Banks, this Design is to be followed, otherwise this Level must be left
in a worse condition then it was found.

And lastly, since this Objection is of such force that it will cost much
money, I then say, if a year and an halfs Rent will treble my Rent yearly, to
what it yields at present, I must conclude my self none of the best Husbands,
that will not lay out so much money to such an advantage. I will now answer
some other Objections.

That there is as much done for the Draining of this great Level as can be
done, 1. Object.
and that it is not in the Invention of man to do more then what is already
done.

This is the opinion of those which give credit to our moory Banks, Answ.
and understand not the Descent nor Ascent of this Level in general, nor do
they know the Descent that may be gained to the Sea, but will say, if Banks
will not do the work, there is no more to be done; but do dishearten all men
from doing or attempting any thing, lest their weakness should appear.

Why did you then, 2. Object.
when you were Director for the Work, make such great and high Banks upon
Morton's Leam, of two and fifty foot in the seat, twelve foot high, and eight
foot broad at the top?

All this I did it is true, Answ.
but those Banks I did not make for Sea Banks, or to withstand such a Sea or
Wash as now they have, but laid them near to avoid a Winde-catch; and I told
the Adventurers at Wisbidge in 1649. at their Meeting there, that those Banks
made so high by me then, would not stand above four or five foot high twenty
years after their making; and I did promise them then, that (my Design being
finished) the Floods should never charge those Banks above two foot: and it
must have been so, if this Design of mine had gone on, and been perfected;
neither was it possible that this two foot of a Flood should have lain out of
the River three neaps of a Tide, if the Sluice at German-Bridge be suffered to
run.

Many wise men are of opinion, 3. Object.
that the Banks being Repaired every Year, the Draining may be perfected.

Wise men may think so, Answ.
and the Country men which get all the money for Repairing every Year will
tell them so, till the Charge exceed the Profit; but if they look upon Deeping
Fen drained with moory Banks by Captain LOVEL, and continued a small time rich
Ground, till the moory Banks were rotted to a mould, then the Banks failed,
though there was no cost spared by the Right Honorable the Earl of Exeter, to
repair or maintain them; yet it is now, and has been these twenty years under
water, and nothing to be had from it but a little Fish; yet this Fen does
contain thirty thousand Acres of good Land (if drained.) Look upon Bishop
Morton's works, the Lord Popham's works, Governor Peyton's works, the
Honorable Francis Earl of Bedfords works, all these Honorable persons were
wise men, and undoubtedly did act by a great scale of Prudence in their
Undertakings, yet could not make their moory Banks any longer durable, then
till the moor became mould: These Presidents are all within our Level, and in
the memory of this our age.

But if you run our freshes so low in Winter, 4. Object.
what shall we do for water for our selves and Cattle in Summer?

Whilst you have water at Deeping-Bridge, Answ.
at Peterborough-Bridge, Saint Ives-Bridge, Cambridge-Bridge, and at the
Bridges of Milnall, Brandon, and Stoke, undoubtedly our Level cannot want
water; for under these Bridges come all those waters which drown us, and under
these Bridges shall come those waters for us, and our Cattle. Yet take notice,
that the great Sluice at German-Bridge, or near Madelen, is able to hold up the
waters, with little helps, as high as you please; then it will be confessed to
be an absolute Draining, when we can Drown, and Drain at our pleasure.

But how shall those Fens in Norfolk, 5. Object.
Suffolk, and Cambridgeshire, which lie on the East Side of Owse, be drained,
for they lie the lowest of all the Fens in this Great Level?

If great Owse run low, Answ.
then all these Fens you name will lie dry, for still your great Sluice drains
all your waters out of Owse, and Morton's Leam, if you please; but then
Navigation will be hindered, which is to be helped by bottoming of those Rivers
where there may be occasion, neither is the bottoming of a River so chargeable
as banking.

Wisbidge River may run where it does, 6. Object.
as well as at German-Bridge* to go through Marsland, the Ground will cost
dear, and that money may be saved.

To answer this I have much to say; Answ.
first, Wisbidge Out-fall lies high upon the Washes, and then it is too near
our Fens to check our Freshes; my drift is to keep the Sea at a greater
distance, that I may have our Freshes at all times both night and day, to run
quick under the Bridges of Wisbidge, and Downham, without the least check.
Again, the River at German-Bridge lies lower then the River at Wisbidge-Bridge,
and there is more fall from Wisbidge-Bridge to German-Bridge at low water, then
at the fall from Peterborough-Bridge to Wisbidge; and our Out-fall at Lynne is
below the Washes, and this River of Wisbidge joined with the River Owse at the
Sluice, makes a gallant In-draught, and will gain Lynne a complete Channel to
Sea, to the great benefit of that fine Town, and the Town of Wisbidge. As for
the charge of the Ground through Marsland, I may justly answer, good and great
things are not done without cost; but the cost of this will not be much, by
reason we may carry much of the River through the Common, viz. the great Common
belonging to the seven Towns in Marsland, and the Common called the Smee, and
Drain them both, which the Marsland men will thank you for.

The River of Wisbidge is (as it is now widened) sufficient to carry in it all
those waters which fall from Peterborough, 7. Odject.
and therefore you may spare your pains and cost at Murrow-gate.

Wisbidge River is wider then it was, Answ.
especially at the Out-fall, which does, and will destroy us; but it is not the
depth nor the width of the River that will drain that Level, it is the descent,
and quick current, that must do our work: But this River is so full of small
Angles, to shoulder up our Freshes, yet I will say, it will serve till the
moory Banks in the Fen be sunk. But it is good to be sure in this great Work,
for if this River should prove defective, to receive and carry away a great
Flood, it is not only the loss of having our Grounds drowned, but may be the
ruin of many good man's Estate, to the value of ten times the charge of making
the Slaker through Murrow-gate, to the Horseshooe; beside, the benefit of this
River, and the In-drains to drain all the North-side of Wisbidge, which is many
thousand Acres of good Land.

The Tide being stopped at German-Bridge, 8. Object.
or near Magdelan, will rise higher, and run over our Banks, and drown us in
Marsland.

This Objection is easily waved, Answ.
the Tide has its bounds, and cannot rise higher then its center at Sea, and
though it be stopped at German-Bridge, it shall not rise higher by the
thickness of one hair, as if it never had been stopped at all.

But your great Sluice and Soss at German-bridge, 9. Object.
or near Maddelen, will be quickly silted up, and what will become of the Fens
then?

It is impossible it should, Answ.
being no silt comes near it, nor any salt water, for which I give this reason;
viz. The Freshes at low water have got the Channel at Lynne, there the Tide
comes in, and beats the Freshes back; the fresh and salt water unwilling to
mix, the Tide beats back those Freshes to its own height, that so two miles
below the Sluice at Germans it will not be brackish. I hope the River of Thames
at Blackwall and London Bridge will give you an experiment; and if no salt
water at the new Sluice, and Soss, it must be confessed, no silt and sand.

We have great Frosts some years, 10. Object.
and then upon a sudden thaw the Ice comes down and will choke your Sluice and
Soss.

Sosses and Sluices are the means to prevent the danger of the Ice in a sudden
thaw. Answ.
It is confessed, many Bridges by the force and weight of the Ice have been
beaten down, but the use of Sluices prevents that danger thus: In great and long
Frosts we can have no Floods, and if our Rivers are frozen over to make it
impassable for Boats, then are our Sluices to run; by this means I sink the
Water, and the Ice with them, as low as I can, then by our Sluices I hold up our
waters, and this water rises one foot or two above the Ice, which is frozen
fast to the bottom of our Rivers after a night or two lying there; and although
they be not dissolved, yet they are so rotten, brittle, and short, and cannot
hurt either Bridge or Sluice: this I have made experience of by Sluices, and can
prove it; and this is practiced in Holland, Freezeland, and Gronning.

Our Division Dikes, 11. Object.
and all our Dikes in our Fens, though they be made twelve foot wide, and six
foot deep, they keep their width, yet in our dry years the bottoms rise two
foot, and our Dikes become shallower, and they are no good fences.

Observation and experience will teach you, Answ.
that the bottom of your Dikes grow not up, nor rise as you say, but it is your
Ground lying dry, the Moor Earth grows sollid to a good and fruitful soil;
and it is not your Dikes bottoms which rise, but your Grounds which sink, and
become much better; therefore when your Grounds are thus sunk with lying dry,
bottom then your Dikes two foot, and your Dikes will hold good for many years.

It is perceivable by your Design for the Draining of this great Level, 12.
Object.
that in a flood we shall have no Navigation upwards from your new Sluice up
Bedford River, up Owse to Cambridge, or up your new River to Wisbidge, and
Peterborough* by reason the waters will run so quick that we cannot hale with
our Horses against the stream, but our three Rivers will become like the river
Rhyne for swiftness in a flood.

It is granted, Answ.
the Rivers in a flood will run quick, by reason they have water-way, and fall
sufficient at the great Sluice; but this force of a flood will not last for
above a day or two, it may be longer, and it may be not so long, therefore you
must stay while the flood be past; neither are these Rivers so much your
enemies, as constantly to oppose you, as the river Rhyne does* All which work
against a constant stream must have patience, and so must you; yet the motions
of these great Vessels down the river Rhyne are quick, and so will yours be in
a flood, which lasts not long, neither will they be common with us; for the
Comparison will not hold between the river Rhyne and any of our Rivers in our
Level.

If this Design of yours be perfected, 13. Object.
we may then lay all our Boats aside, as having no use for them; for Owse,
Bedford River, Morton's Leam, and the new River through Marsland, will draw in
all our Land waters.

It is confessed that Morton's Leam and Owse will run low, Answ.
by reason that at German-bridge at low water mark, the River will be lower
then the height of the Level soil at Saltors Load, by twelve foot, and much
more; and so likewise it will stand with Guyheirne, and there shall be no need
of raising the Banks from thence to Bevis-hall, for there is Bank enough, and
the River will run lower then the Soil or Superficies of Wisbidge high Fen, for
Wisbidge River will quickly grind it self to its old bottom, and keep it; and
it is feizable and necessary to bring part of Owse from Erith unto Wisbidge, by
the West-water, through the Town of March, and the other branch by Chatris,
Doddington, and Wimbleton-hook, without the hazard of drowning any part of the
Level; This is of great use to the Corporation and the Country, for
Navigation, and watering the Middle Level.
and will water all the parts of the middle Level, even to Maney, the two
Wells, and to Saltors Load, and will prove good for Navigation to the
Undertakers, and the Country which have quantities of Grounds lying upon this
West-water; and if the Divisions of the Intercommons be laid out, there will be
a necessity that this Work of the West-water be made good: This (you will say)
will afford you water-way for your Boats, No, ye are deceived, for without the
use of means at our Out-falls into Bedford River, Owse, and Morton's Leam, to
hold up your In-drains, you will still have no waters for your Boats, and this
will cost money; which to do, I compare it to Paper and Packthred, in
comparison of the rich Commodity bound up in it.

We have now two gallant In-draughts, 14. Object.
as Bedford River, and Morton's Leam, for our Floods to bed in, as Receptacles;
and after the Flood is spent, those run and scour the Out-falls, and maintain
them.

I know not what you mean by an In-draught, Answ.
but if you believe either of those Rivers to be your In-draughts, in which
your Waters now bed, whose Banks are at such a wide distance, and at so great a
distance from your Out-fall, as near twenty or thirty miles, it is a Riddle to
me, and beyond my understanding, and in my judgment against all the rules of
Draining; for in all Draining we have respect to our Out-fall, for if we cannot
be master there, all other endeavors signify nothing. You may as well call
Whittlesey Mare, The Receptacles between the Banks no In-draughts.
Ramsey Mare, Soham Mare, In-draughts; and the Dutch may better call Harlem
Mare an In-draught, for none of those I have named are In-draughts; for there
can be no In-draught, but it must be close to the Out-fall, The proper place of
the In-draught.
otherwise it works no effect. You have an example in Holland, and in all the
Low Countries, their In-draughts are at their Sluices close to the neck of their
Out-falls; neither is there any Haven, River, or Creek, lying upon foul Seas,
that has not sufficient Freshes to maintain its Out-fall, but he must by Art
gain an In-draught, which In-draught must be at hand to use when there is
occasion for it; The Reason wherefore.
for all true In-draughts are to be held up, and are to be made use of at the
last quarter Ebb, or before, and so it works its effect; but when the
In-draught is about a mile or two above its Out-fall, it is so weak upon its
stream by that time it comes to its Out-fall, that it cannot work any effect to
the cleansing of either Haven, River, or Creek.

I shall only instance in two Havens or Harbors, though I could trouble you
with many; Dunkirk and Delfts Haven.
the one is Dunkirk in Flanders, the other is Delfts Haven in Holland: As for
that of Dunkirk I have seen it when upon the Wharf they have been forced to use
a Ladder to go up into a Ship of an hundred Tun at low water, the next day they
have been forced to use the same Ladder down from of the Wharf into the same
Ship; this might seem strange, but it was strange to me to see by what a small
means this Effect was wrought, which was thus: viz. In all dry Summers the
Haven is very subject to be silted up by the Sea bearing its foul waters into
it, by reason of the many shelves of sand upon that Coast, so that the ordinary
strength of that small River coming from Bergue, Wynox Bergue
is not able to carry out of that Haven what the Sea lodges in it, but then
Reason and Industry does the work of that Haven thus: When the Haven is silted
up to such a height, the Town causes the River aforesaid to be kept up by their
Sluice, or Soss, for some eight or ten days together, then they command the
Ships and other Vessels in that Haven to ride in the midst of it as close to
each other as they can; How the Haven of Dunkirk is cleansed by the In-draught.
and being thus placed, they at a Level water open their Sluices and Sosses, and
give liberty to the pinned up waters from Bergue to run through the Haven, so
that it grindes the bottom through the Intervals between the Ships, that it
carries away all the silt and sand out of the Haven, whilst the ships rock too
and fro, as if they would fall one upon another; and by this means the Haven
becomes as deep again. It is much the same with Delfts Haven in Hollaud, and
that small River which comes from Overkey to the Town and Haven, does the like
effect with that of Dunkirk, otherwise there could be no Haven, but by reason
the Sluices which cast their In-draughts into both these Haven, stand at the
very entrance of them, otherwise they could not grind and effect so great a
work.

Now look back to our selves which have been so much mistaken, The Receptacles
in Waldersey dangerous to Coldham and Waldersey
as to make Receptacles of In-draughts within Land so remote from the
Out-falls, and you may be assured, that if the Receptacle or In-draught made at
Waldersey, had taken that effect as was supposed, to have received from a
Spring Tide from Sea six foot water, yet it could not have done you any good,
by reason it lay so far from the Out-fall: but certain it is, that if it had
proved that that In-draught had but gained from the Sea, four, five, or six
foot water, the Banks had been gone long e're this; and Wildersay and Coldham
had been both lost, or little worth.

I shall give you no farther trouble, but to assure you of my readiness to
answer any other Objections which may be made against this my Design, or way of
Draining, to the best of my knowledge and judgment.

Now give me leave to give you my sense of the great benefit which will arise
to his Sacred Majesty, the Honorable Corporation, the Country, and the whole
Kingdom.

His Majesty's Subjects in this Level, Considerable benefit to the King and
Kingdom.
who were formerly very poor, by reason of the uncertainty of the Banks, and
their Ground lying dry, but being once perfectly Drained, will grow rich and
populous, to the strengthening of the King and Kingdom.

It will better Navigation and Trade to all his Towns in this part of the
Kingdom. Advantageous to some Towns His Majesty's Land secured from drowning
Fifty thousand Acres of good Land gained from the Sea, called the Washes, the
Kings Waste.


It secures His Majesty's Land, being ten thousand Acres lying in this Level,
from all farther charge or fear of being drowned by any Flood, either in Winter
or Summer.

His Majesty gains hereby fifty thousand Acres of good Land, called now the
Washes, or Salt Marshes; this Land is equal to those Lands in Marsland, or
Holland, for goodness, the one lies on the East and the other on the West Side
of these Washes or Salt Marshes, which is all the Kings Waste: and I do affirm,
that those Washes contain more Land then lies in Marsland it self; and more,
those Washes lies much higher then does Marsland or the North-side of Wisbide;
yet through this Wash does Wisbidge River, Sheir-Drain, and Spalding River make
their way to the Sea. But when Wisbidge River, Sheir-Drain, with Spalding
River, are forced to a better Out-fall, as Wisbidge to great Owse, and Spalding
River, and Glean secured, to the great benefit of North and South Holland; then
must those spacious Washes suddenly become good Land for this reason, viz. for
these Rivers by force of winter Floods do scour and cleanse these Washes, and
will not suffer the silt or sand to bed upon them; but these Rivers being taken
away, which run through, and spread themselves upon these Washes every low
water, does carry away to Sea what the Tide has left behind; but the Cause
being taken away, the Effect cease, and all those Washes will become good
Land at little or no considerable charge; and yet the Navigation of His
Majesty's Towns of Lynne, Boston, and Wisbidge, much bettered, and prove great
Out-falls, and Navigable Channels to the North Sea.

Yet let me tell you, The Washes get height upon the Freshes.
that though the Freshes work this effect, to cleanse and scour the Washes, yet
the Washes grow and get height upon them; and though formerly Wisbidge was the
best Out-fall in this Great Level, and took much of our waters into it, No good
out-fall through the Washes for Wisbidge, Spalding, or Sheir-Drain.
which now run by Lyn, by reason of late years the Sea has left us, and the
Washes have gained a great height; and in my judgment it is impossible ever to
gain any good Out-fall through those Washes, either for the River of Wisbidge,
Sheir-Drain, or Spalding River.

As for the Noble and Honorable Adventurers I shall say little, only assure
them, that this Design, and way of Draining this Great Level, being perfected,
the Great Level will be perfectly Drained; The charge of two hundred miles in
Banking taken off.
whereby the great charge of maintaining two or three hundred miles in Banking
already made, will be taken off; which being of no farther use, will be of no
farther charge: neither are they freed from this charge alone, but from the
charge of many of their Sluices and Sosses; Some Sluices and Sosses become
useless.
as that of VVell-creek, and that upon Owse, at Saltors Load, and those works
at Ely, which will become as useless as the two or three hundred miles of
Banking. And in fine, it may be believed, that Six pence the Acre per annum,
will maintain the Charge of upholding the Works, and procure a Stock, if the
beforementioned works be once sufficiently effected, for there will be no need
of repairing of Banks any more.

The benefit which will arise to the Inhabitants of this Country will be very
considerable, in being freed from all danger of being drowned any more; that
they may freely plow, and sow, build, and plant; and then there will be no
fear of the want of water in the Summer, for themselves or Cattle; and which
will be very considerable, is the Navigation to almost every small Town in this
Level, especially if their Inter-Commons be divided, The Division of the
Inter-Common.
which will be a great benefit both to the Lords and the Tenants: but in all
these Navigable Cuts avoid Banks, and then these Cuts and Division Dikes may be
done at a small charge, having a care to carry your leading Drains into their
proper Out-falls of Bedford River, Great Owse, and Morton's Leam.

I shall not deviat from my present Discourse, if I tell you, that by my
Observations abroad, both in my youth and age, I gained some Experience to
serve my native Country; and that one Province of Holland, The Province of
Holland.
I compute to be equally as large as this Great Level; and I do verily believe
that there is one hundred times more money expended in this Province, in
Rivers, Sluices, Sosses, and Bridges, then can be needful in this Great Level of
the Fens. The Provinces of South and North Holland, Freizeland and Gronning,
admits no Tides to run into them.
The Provinces of South and North Holland, Freizland, and Gronning, admit of no
Tides or Rivers from the Sea to run into them, only South Holland admits of
the river Maze to run to meet the river Rhyne; yet this Holland runs her water
into the river Maze by substantial Sluices, and Navigable Sosses, as I have seen
at Mazelandt, Ulerdine, Skeydam, Delfts-haven, and at Roterdam, all these play
into the river Maze, which runs by the Brill to Dort. On the North-side of this
Province is Harlem Mare, by Sluices and Sosses, at Amsterdam there are many, at
Myden, Nardam, all these run into the Zuyder Sea, and yet those Sluices, and
those upon the river Maze, have not one quarter of the ebb to run at.

North Holland upon the Zuyder Sea has its Sluices to run at Sardam, North
Holland has not a quarter Ebb to run at.
Monkenden, Horn, Ancusen, and Middle-bleak, and they have not above a quarter
Ebb to run at; though they force their waters into those leading Rivers by
costly Mills; and in this North Holland much of their richest Grounds, where
they make their best Cheese, lie under the low water mark at Sea, Draining with
a multitude of mills.
at least six or seven foot; as the Bempster, the Skermer, and the Wart, etc.
they are all Drained by a multitude of Mills, each Mill costs near six hundred
pounds Sterling. In the Skermer I have seen four Mills, Four mills to cast up
water sixteen foot.
one standing four foot higher then the other, and they have worked one to
another, till they have brought the water sixteen foot high, to run into the
Drains which leads to the Sea.

Freizland and Gronning; Great care to prevent the flowing in of the Sea into
any part of the Provinces.
from Campen in Gilderland to Dam in Gronning, is all drained by Sosses and
Sluices to Sea-ward; the length of those three Provinces is no less then an
hundred and twenty miles along the Sea Coast, and yet they have no Rivers run
into them from the Sea. I did observe in all those parts of the Netherlands
where I have been, they do not admit the Sea to flow into any of their
Provinces, The Sea kept out by Sosses and Sluices.
but keep it out by their Sluices and Sosses, so far as Art and Cost will
promise them security.

These Works of theirs will confirm all rational persons, that if they have but
one quarter of the Ebb to run at, and lie dry, what can be said against a Sluice
and Navigable Soss at German-bridge, The Sluice at German Bridge runs at half
Ebb, and more.
upon old Owse, and new Nean, which has half the Ebb but in a Flood more,
because the Freshes do rise one foot within the Sluice, for two foot the Tide
rises against the Sluice without* to Sea-ward.

I hope the experience we all have of Holland, Marsland lower then the great
Level of the Fens, and yet is Drained into the River Owse.
the North-side of Wisbidge, with that of Marsland, all of them lie below the
Fens of the Great Level five or six foot, yet drain themselves into great Owse
and the Sea: Neither are the benefits inconsiderable, which Holland, the
North-side of Wisbidge, and Marsland, will receive by this Design.

As for Hollaud, South Ea bank secured.
all that Bank called South Ea Bank, from Dowesdale to Clowes-Cross, being
eight miles, which was believed formerly to have been a thousand pounds per
annum charge, will be secured.

The North-side of Wisbidge will by this means save the repairing of that Bank
from Clowes-Cross to Guyheirn, and part of the Bank upon Wisbidge River which
formerly cost much money; but the greater benefit this North-side of Wisbidge
will receive, The North-side of Wisbidge drained, and the flat of Tid St. Mary's
is the perfect Draining of all that flat and low Country; for which, they of
the North-side of Wisbidge, and Tid St. Mary's, in the County of Lincoln, did
contract for the giving a great proportion of Land for the Draining thereof.

Now as for Marsland their benefit will be the greatest, for this work being
done, they save the charge of repairing all those Banks from Germans-bride
upwards, on both sides of the River Owse, 1600l. per annum charge taken off
from Marsland.
to Saltors Load, which is eight miles; and all those Banks called new and old
Po Dike, which by their confession cost them yearly 1600l. And withal, they
recover hereby the great Common belonging to the seven Towns in Marsland, and
the Common also called the Smee, The great Common of the 7. Towns of Marsland
Drained, and the Smee.
for which a great quantity of Land was offered to those which should undertake
the Draining of it, as I have been informed. And another considerable benefit
is, they will constantly have fresh water out of the River from Wisbidge to
German-bridge, and the Bank lying upon the West of Marsland upon the Washes,
Constant fresh water in Marsland.
near fifteen miles in length, it costs much money, and many times in danger of
breaking, is hereby secured, the Washes or salt Marshes being gained from the
Sea, which will be effected in a short time.

If this Work be performed, it is at the pleasure of the Corporation to Drain
the great Common in Marsland, belonging to the seven Towns, The Benefit to the
Corporation toward their charge.
containing five thousand Acres, with the Common called the Smee, containing
about fifteen hundred Acres; likewise, the Draining of the North-side of
VVisbidge, containing twelve thousand Acres; also, all those Grounds in
Holland, belonging to Gedney, Drove, Chapple, Holbidge, Fleet, St. James, Tid
St. Mary's, which is reported to me to contain eight thousand Acres of Drowned
Land: And if the Corporation please, they may Drain all that part of the Queens
Manor in Croyland, called Posant, which will be rich Ground if once Drained,
and contains in it seven thousand Acres, six whereof belongs to the Queen.

William Dodson.

FINIS.
Answers to the several Objections against this my Design, since the Delivery
of it to the Honorable Corporation.
FIrst, 1. Object.
it is objected, that the place that I intend to set the great Sluice upon,
which is near Magdalen, is a Quick-sand.

To this I answer, Answ.
that the place I have designed to set the great Sluice upon is no Quick-sand,
but a firm and sollid Clay, as the place where Magdalen Bridge stands, or the
Sluice at Saltors Load, or Well-Creek; and this is at an easy charge made
appear to them that doubt, by sinking the place twelve foot, where they will
find what I have asserted in my Design to be truth.

Secondly, 2. Object.
It is objected, that the River is deep there, and that it is not possible to
set a Sluice in the River.

It was never intended to set this Sluice and Soss in the River, Answ.
for that were great folly to undertake; but this Sluice is set near the River
of Owse, and so cut into the River; and although the River were as deep again
as it is, it is all one; for I set not the sole of the Sluice two foot below the
Channel (as it is pretended) but I set it two foot below the sole of the River,
or low water mark, and therefore the depth of the River is no prejudice to me
by being so deep, but contrary a great advantage, and of much benefit to carry
away the Freshes.

Thirdly, 3. Object.
It is objected, that if a Sluice should be set there, that the Doors of that
Sluice must be thirty foot in length.

The Sluice I have Designed is in height from the lowest stone in the
foundation, Answ.
to the highest stone in the work, but eight and twenty foot high; the several
water-wayes in this Sluice but ten foot high; neither does the greatest Freshes
within us rise above ten or twelve foot upon the Sluice, why should the
Floodgates then be made thirty foot high for ten or twelve foot water: you
have a president by all those Goats that stand upon the River Owse in Marsland,
that drain all Marsland into that River, otherwise Marsland could not be
drained, yet their Floodgates are not above five foot high set to low water
mark, so that the Spring Tides flows about thirteen foot of plum water above
them.

Fourthly, 4. Object.
It is objected, that if this Sluice and River through Marsland were finished,
it would do no good to the Draining of the Great Level, but no reason is given
for it.

If that the gaining of a great and considerable Descent to the Sea, Answ.
at the very Out-fall, will do no good to drain that great and flat Level, that
lies in a Flood above twenty foot higher then low water mark at the Out-fall,
and yet this Out-fall but twelve miles from this flat Level, makes this
Objection frivolous. But to give farther satisfaction, I did desire a view
might have been made of that River called the Horseshooe, below Wisbidge, where
they might have seen the Tide rise to the height of eight or nine foot up the
Banks of that River, higher then the Superficies of Marsland; and if you will
stay until it be low water, you shall see this River two or three foot within
soil, lower then the superficies of Marsland; and yet the River of Owse at the
great Sluice, at low water mark, will be ten or eleven foot below the
superficies of Marsland there; for all the descent of Marsland lies from the
Bank upon the Horseshooe, to the new Sluice near Magdalen; and the Goats in
Marsland on the River Owse does Drain the whole Country into the said River,
following the refluxes of the Tide.

It is objected, 5. Object.
that the stopping of the Tide by a Sluice at Magdalen, will not take away the
great waters in a Flood from off the Banks at Sutton and Meapool.

If the Tide be not stopped here at Magdalen, Answ.
or Germans, yea, lower to Sea, if it were convenient, it is not possible but
that in a Flood, Swacy, Over, Erith, the Washes, and those Banks about Sutton
Meapool, Witham, Witchford, and Welney, must all suffer. My reasons are,

First, 1. Reason.
the Floods come quick from St. Ives, making their way to Sea; the water-way is
large enough at Erith, it is confessed, but at Sutton, Galt, and Meapool, in
the new Bedford River, there it runs upon an Ascent, the like again at
Pyemoor-hill, which is a great Obstruction of the Freshes in a flood running to
Sea; for Gravels and Fords in Rivers are a great hinderance to the free passage
of all waters: for although the River be never so deep, it must be allowed
where such Obstructions are; you can run no more waters in those Rivers then
what runs over your Gravels or Fords, and it is the same with Sutton, Galt, and
Pyemoor-hill, in new* Bedford River. Besides this, there is another great
Obstruction, which is the weeds that are admitted to grow in this, and many
other of our Rivers, and are of very dangerous consequence; for in a Flood,
where our Freshes in this River has but small descent, they hold them up,
insomuch that the Freshes are enforced to soil through those weeds as through a
C^eve, which must of necessity cause those quick waters from the Uplands to
swell backwards, to the great damage of Erith, Swacy, and Over, on that side
of the Country.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
after the Flood has passed these three great Obstructions in this River, it
meets with another rather worse then the former, which is the Tide, and
Winde-catch; for when these great bodies of Freshes come to run to the Sea,
they then at the very Out-fall meets with the Tide (who visits that River twice
in four and twenty hours) and does not only stop the Current of those Freshes,
and forces them back even as far as Sutton-bridge upon new Bedford River; and
if the wind blow hard almost in any Point, when the Floods are within the
great Wash of that River, the Banks are in great danger of being lost, or blown
up; for it makes so rough a Sea, that it washes and undermines the Banks; and
if it do not break them, it puts the Corporation the next Summer to a vast
charge of repairing.

Now on the contrary, to free this Level from the bad Effects of this indirect
River, the Tide, Winde-catch; and weeds, to give this River from Erith free
passage, by the old and famous River by it, (for it is old Bedford River that
is the River) though it has been much slighted; yet if it had not been made
use on of late years, it had been much worse for the Country then it was. For
I dare and will affirm, that the Freshes in a Flood shall vent themselves,
running from Erith a day or two, at Saltors Load, by the old River, before they
come down thither by the new: now, these two Rivers having their free passage,
the weeds being cut and roded, and the Tide stopped at Germans or Magdalen,
will free this part of the Level, that is so much oppressed by St. Ives waters,
the Winde-catch, and the flux of the Tide up that River, for the Freshes then
in those two spacious Rivers has no Obstruction; for the Tide being stooped at
Germans, these Rivers will run continually, having so great a Receptacle as
seven or eight miles in length, without the Level, from Saltors Load to Germans
Bridge; for the Freshes at the great Sluice must rise at least ten foot higher
then its usual height, to maintain Navigation, before the water can run back at
Saltors Load to obstruct the Current of this River, which is impossible, if the
Sluice and Soss be admitted to run; for the water-way in this Sluice and Soss is
no less then an hundred eighty two foot broad, and ten or eleven foot deep,
which is more water-way by much, then runs through those two Bridges of
VVisbidge and Downham; now these Rivers running thus continually in the
greatest Floods, it will be allowed, that the waters cannot lie long, or rife
so high as formerly, by six foot upon those Banks; if so, then the VVinde-catch
cannot in the least prejudice those Banks. By this, I hope, it may be
perceived, that the waters cannot lie upon those Banks of Sutton and Meapool,
or in the least damnifie Erith, Swacy, and Over. This may be an answer for the
River of Morton's Leam to Peterborough, and that part of the Country, for the
Obstructions are the same.

Sixthly, 6. Object.
It is objected, that my Inlet of the River from VVisbidge into Marsland Cut,
cannot be performed at six foot deep, at the River called the Horseshooe, as I
have Designed it, and they give this reason for it, That if I make my River
there six foot deep, the height of the Tide will not reach the sole of that
River to be cut through Marsland.

I shall not need to answer this Objection, Answ.
it being altogether without reason or sense, but refer you to my Answer to
the fourth Objection, which will give any one full satisfaction.

Seventhly, 7. Object.
It is objected, that the Charge of a Sluice, the Purchase of the Grounds
through Marsland, and the rest of the works Designed by me, will cost 200000l.

To this I answer, Answ.
That certainly they that made so large an Estimate upon those works I have
Designed, know how to set a price upon their own; for it is well known, the
Estimate I gave in to the Honorable Corporation, with my Design, did not
amount to above 46000l. for I had rather, and it was my resolution, to ask
more, or at least as much as would do the work, (having so short a warning)
then ask less, and the Corporation should find it more, thereby to induce the
Corporation to make use of my Design; but upon further consideration, and
having better digested the charge, I have since for the better satisfaction of
this Honorable Corporation, made a Moddel of part of the great Sluice, and the
Soss proportionable, to show the true Dimention of the same; which Sluice and
Soss will be undertaken at a price, by able and sufficient Workmen. And that
such mistakes as these may not affright the Corporation from going on with so
Beneficial a work, I have here annexed to my Design, the Estimate of all my
works* as they are, and will be undertaken; and shall be ready when this
Honorable Corporation please, to make every particular of this Account appear.

Eighthly, 8. Object.
It is objected, that this Sluice is to master a quick water, which is not
believed it is proper; for the reason is, they have not known the like
practiced elsewhere.

As to this I hope to give full satisfaction, Answ.
by several Reasons, and Examples of other Countries in the like case, as also
some known to our selves within the Isle.

I shall instance in the first place Freizland, which is a larger

Secondly, It is the like with North Holland and South

Thirdly, If we look at home, we shall find that we had a was no waters
intended to that Sluice, but what run under Peterborough Bridge, from Borough
Fen and Thorney, and the water-way was made accordingly in that Sluice; and that
Sluice was useful and convenient in that place, and might have been to this day.







Now give me leave to give you my Reasons, that a Sluice upon a Quick water is
as useful, with as little danger, as a Sluice upon a Dead water, as it is
termed; it is confessed, that a Sluice upon a Quick, that has not water-way
sufficient, is little better then a Dam to obstruct the Current of those Rivers
in a Flood, and is destructive; but if there be water-way sufficient, and to
spare, in the greatest Flood, then this Sluice or Soss preserves that Country
from all sudden and quick Floods without danger. And for the prevention of all
sudden Floods, it must be granted, that no Flood falls into this Level, but by
great Rains, or sudden Thaws, in the Upland Countries; of which we cannot but
be sensible some days before it come down, in which interim of time we pull up
all our Fall-gates, and run out all our Freshes that are holden up by the Sluice
to maintain Navigation, so that when the Floods come down, the Rivers are empty
(if clear of weeds) to receive them; and if I run twice the water of those
Bridges where the Floods must come under, certainly I may wait three hours in
twelve upon the re-flux of the Tide, and yet not so much if the Flood be great;
for as the Tide rises two foot without us, the Freshes in a Flood rise one
within the Sluice, by which means we run the sooner, for our Freshes run whether
the Tide be coming in or going out, until the Tide rise higher then our
Freshes, and shuts the Floodgates.

These Examples and Reasons I hope may be sufficient,
and give full satisfaction to them that doubt of the truth I have asserted in
my Design; for unless (in my judgment) we can master the Tide, it is not
possible to Drain this Level.

Ninthly, 9. Object.
It is objected, that the Sluice I have designed will not bear the weight of
water that will lie against it, and that the Eager will carry away the Sluice.

To this I answer, Answ.
that the Sluice I have Designed is in the Foundation two and fifty foot broad;
the breadth of the Sluice upwards is forty foot, and besides this breadth, between
every Arch a Butterice raised from the foundation, on both sides the Sluice, of
three foot square, all of good Brick, Stone, Lime, and Tarras outwardly, which
I do affirm is thrice the strength of any Bank in Marsland: And further, to
support this Sluice, which in my judgment needs none, I keep the water eight
foot high constantly to Land-ward, to maintain Navigation, so that I can have
but the weight of ten foot water upon my Sluice in the greatest Tide. Now as to
the stopping of the Eager, which is no more then the flux of the Tide from Sea,
which comes in quick, I shall only say this, That if the Tide be once stopped
in any River whatsoever, by Sluice or Dam, it has no more force; for when the
Current of the Tide is so stopped, it rises against that Sluice or Dam
insensibly, and those Sluices or Dams bears no more but only the weight of
water that rises upon them.

Tenthly, 10. Object.
It is objected, that if the Tide have not his Flux and Re-flux up Owse, it may
be feared that Lynne River may be lost.

Where Sluices with In-draughts are placed to any Out-fall near the Sea, Answ.
they always make good the Channel or Out-fall without them, as well as deepen
the Channels of those Rivers within them; now the flux of the Tide is but a
small distance from this Sluice, and the re-flux the same, which continual
motion of the Tides ebbing and flowing in so short a distance, it cannot filt
up that River, especially when there is so great a Fresh within our In-draught,
in those two great Rivers, that leads all our Freshes and Floods to that Sluice,
and follows the tail of the Tide to Sea; which must in all reason grind the
Channel to Sea, to a great depth, below Lynne; and as it is now uncertain and
dangerous, this will improve it to the admittance of greater Vessels then
formerly, to the great benefit of that Port. And if the way that I have
Designed to Drain this Great-Level should prove any ways injurious to this
Town of Lynne, I would soon desist from prosecuting it any further; but I hope
by this they understand a benefit and no damage to that Town.

If I divert Wisbidge River from running through the Washes, 11. Object.
or salt Marsh, then all those Washes will become good Ground; but then that
part of Holland from the Sheir-Drain to the River Welland, with the North-side
of Wisbidge, will be lost, by reason they will lose the Out-fall of
Sheir-Drain, Sutton-Goat, Fleet-Goat, Quapload-Goat, and Weston-Goat, which are
their Drains into the Washes.

To this I answer, Answ.
to Drain one part and Drown another, is no part of my Design, but what I
endeavor, is to perfect and Drain that part of Holland, with the North-side of
Wisbidge, and yet Drain the great Washes containing near fifty thousand Acres
of the Kings and Queens Waste, without prejudice to any Land-holder in that
part of Holland, or North-side of Wisbidge, but to their great benefit. For it
will be confessed, that the Town and High Lands of Tid St. Mary's, Sutton,
Gidney, Holbeach, Quapload, Molton, to Spalding, lies higher by six foot then
the low Grounds on the North-side of Wisbidge and Holland, and all these High
Lands before named, lies betwixt the Sea and these Low Grounds; so that Cubbet,
Spalding, Drove-Chappel, Gidney, St. James, and Fleet, are forced to Drain
themselves by small Cuts through this Ascent betwixt the Sea and them, in some
place three, four, five, or six miles, and many of them seven and nine foot
deep; yet for all this great depth of those Drains, a great quantity of those
Low Grounds are drowned commonly two foot; although you are at great charge
with the spade to keep your Goats and Sluices open into the salt Marsh or
Washes, and yet cannot Drain your selves: (the reason is plain) for it is well
known to the ancient Inhabitants, that the Sea of late years has lodged its
silt and sand some feet above your Sluices or Goats to Sea, and in short time
the loss of much good Land may be feared, yet to help you I do endeavor, but
to hurt you, or any part of the Country, is no part of my Design. Now to free
you from these inconveniences, the turning of Wisbidge River through Marsland
near to Germans-Bride, will be of much advantage and benefit to those low
Grounds; for by the help of the Sluice at Germans, we keep Wisbidge River, when
we please, as low as we will; and this River of Wisbidge will prove the
Out-fall for all those low Grounds of Holland, and the North-side of Wisbide,
and perfectly Drain them Winter and Summer: My reason is this, Those low
Grounds in Holland lies higher then those low Grounds on the North-side of
Wisbidge, and those waters in Wisbidge River will lie lower by six foot then
the superficies of those Lands or drowned Grounds on the North-side of
Wisbidge; so that at all times, by the help of a Navigable River, through that
part of Holland, from Cubbit upon Welland, to Grammoke-house upon Sheir-Drain,
and from thence to Murrow-gate, and so to Leverington, into the River of
Wisbidge; where you have so great a fall, that it absolutely Drains all those
drowned Grounds aforesaid, and the best and most certain Outfall for
Sheir-Drain, when Clowes-Cross will give leave, to the great benefit of
Thorney, Borough great Fen, and the Town of Croyland. This work will not only
be of use to the perfect Draining of all those Grounds, but likewise better
Navigation from Lynne, Wisbidge, and Peterborough, to Spalding, to Boston, to
Croyland, to Deeping, and to Stampford, by the help of a small single. Soss
placed upon Welland River near Cubbit. This I have now said may be performed at
an inconsiderable Charge, considering the Profit it brings with it, with the
consent and allowance from the Honorable Corporation; of which there is no
doubt, but they will be very willing to serve the Country upon so Public an
Account, being of so great Advantage to those parts and little or no damage to
themselves.

Thus having (to the best of my judgment) Answered the aforesaid Objections,
and do confess my obligation to him, or them that did make them; by which
means, Reason will find the better allowance, and truth appear with more
Iustre. I shall now trouble the Reader with some few Objections of my own,
against that Design last intended to be put in practrice, which were made
according to the Order of the Honorable Corporation; and shall as willingly
receive satisfaction from him, or them, which are the present Directors, as I
am desirous my Judgment, in this Affair, may receive their Approbation.

According to an Order of this Corporation, the 17th. of November, 1664. I do
here, with submission to the said Corporation, humbly tender these my
Objections following, against that Design now in agitation.
WHereas it is designed by this last new Design, that all

First, 1. Object.
To this I object, that if the flux of the Tide from Sea be admitted to flow up
old Owse, Bedford River, and Morton's Leam, that the Banks that are made, and
to be made, in Order to this Design, cannot secure the Level from Inundation,
or Drowning. My Reasons are as follows:

First, 1 Reason.
The Tide flowing up the River of Owse, and Wisbidge, has been the destruction
of all those Undertakings, for the Draining of the Great Level, the reason is
plain; the Spring Tides at Germans rise twenty foot from low water mark, and at
Wisbidge it rises fourteen foot at least above low water mark, running to Sea;
now the ascent of the Tide from Sea flowing so high within our Level, obstructs
the Freshes in their Current to Sea; and not only that, but bears our Freshes
back (as I am credibly informed) that the Freshes have been seen to run back
through Sutton-Bridge toward Erith, which is near thirty miles from Germans;
the same it is with Morton's Leam up to Eldernel: therefore the flux of the
Tide is not to be admitted into any of our Rivers.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
If the Rivers be open to Sea every Spring Tide, if the winds blow hard at
North or North-west, all the Level is in danger of drowning; (as for example)
the last Winter when you had little or no Land Floods, the Spring Tides putting
in with a strong North wind, put Morton's Leam in great danger; and as for
Bedford River, it raised the waters so high, that it carried away a
considerable part of one of the best Banks, to the great damage of the
Corporation and Country.

Thirdly, 3. Reason.
If the three Rivers be left open, and admit of the Tide to flow up them, then
Peterborough and those parts adjacent must suffer, and so must Erith, Swacy,
and Over, in that part of the Country: neither can Haddenham, Swaftham,
Water-beach, Stretham, or Wilberton, be freed from the said inconvenience, for
it must be confessed at all hands, that Morton's Leam lies much higher then
Bedford River, and Bedford River lies much higher then old Owse; and likewise
it will be allowed, that the Tide will flow equally up these two Rivers of Owse
and Bedford River, (for water will find his level) now certainly it was very
indiscreetly done of him, whosoever he was, that did give direction for a Bank
of six foot to be made upon Owse, and Grant, against the Tide, Owse being the
lowest River in the whole Level, when they make Banks of ten and twelve foot
upon Bedford River and Morton's Leam, which lies higher then this River by
much. And as for those Banks designed to be made upon Mildenhall, Brandon, and
Stoak, with those from Stretham-Ferry up to Aldry Causey, they will not be able
to secure that Country; for as it is with Bedford River at Erith, Swacy, and
Over, the same it will be with Stretham, Wilberton, Haddenham, and that part of
the Country; yea, rather much worse, by reason the River lies so low, it will
give the greater reception to the Tide: for when the Tide did flow up Owse
formerly, I have seen the water rise a foot at Stretham-Ferry in a Spring Tide;
and now the River being widened from Saltors Load to Littleport, you will find
it will flow into those parts with a more Eager then formerly, to the
destruction of that Level.

Fourthly, 4. Reason.
If Owse and Bedford River be open to Sea for the Tide to have his flux and
re-flux, then will all Marsland be put in a hazard of utter ruin, they being
now at a vast charge to keep their Banks from the fury of the Eage^, by lineing
their Banks with Brink wood, which is caused but by the admittance of the Tide
into one River; but when it shall have its free ingress and regress into those
two spacious Rivers of Owse and Bedford River, it will double the strength of
the Eager in his flux from the Sea, having so great a reception above: And
farther, in a Frost when the Ice shall come down those two great Rivers,
expecting to go to Sea, the Tide sends it back again, so that of necessity it
will gore their Banks, and hazard their Bridges; the like it will be with the
Banks of Owse, Bedford River, and Morton's Leam. And whereas it is supposed,
nay believed, that the flowing of the Tide up Owse will ease Bedford River,
that the waters shall not rise so high there as they use to do, it is a great
mistake, for the Sea is as well able to furnish the whole Level with a conflux
of waters, as those two Rivers; and there is no doubt but the Tide will rise as
high in both Rivers, as ever it did in new Bedford River; but if his water-way
be not wide enough in Owse at present, he will run so much the stronger, and in
a short time he will make his way, having so great a reception, as is now
allowed him, though to the great prejudice of Marsland.

Whereas it is likewise Designed, that a new Cut be made

To this I object, 2. Object.
That if you make this new River from Rassels Dam to Littleport Chair, and dam
out Owse, and suffer the Tide to flow up, (which must of necessity when Saltors
Load Sluice is taken up) you hazard the loss both of the new Cut and old River;
for the making of this new Cut is no more, then what was done by the Right
Honorable, Francis Earl of Bedford, and his participants in Lynne Law, and
was called Sandys River, yet they did never attempt to dam up Owse; this River
was made then in a direct line to Littleport Chair, and they then admitting the
Tide to flow up Owse, it was in four or five years silted up and utterly lost,
although they had four times more Freshes to maintain it, then this Designed
River is like to have: And as to old Owse, if you admit a Dam upon that, then
the Tide will without all question silt up that River, having little or no
Freshes admitted to run through it to scowr the silt away; so that consequently
you must lose both the new Cut and the old Rieer.

Whereas it is Designed, that for the maintaining of Navigation,

To this I object, 3. Object.
That if you keep not your Rivers and Leading Drains to them-well roded twice
in a Summer, you hazard your Meadows, and other good Grounds, to a sudden
flood from the Land-water, for the Weeds hold up the Freshes more then Sluices;
and these Weeds admitted, decays those Rivers and Drains they are suffered to
grow in, and destroys Navigation.



To this I object, 4. Object.
That the number of the several Works in this Design, is an hundred and odd,
and most of them vast and chargeable; and if the Sea be admitted to flow into
the Country, they are no ways able to withstand the flux of the Tide, brought
in by a Northerly or North-West wind, meeting with the Land-floods: On the
contrary, if the flux of the Sea be stopped at a distance from the Level, then
they are useless, and may prove hurtful, and hinder the descent of the
Downfall, or small Drains, into the three Rivers that will run low to receive
them. Now before this Design was known, it was declared, that there was no less
then three hundred miles of Banking to to be repaired, and this new Design
speaks of more Banks to be made, with new Cuts, In-drains, and Counter-Banks;
which charge of making and repairing, I fear will cost more then the Annual
Rent of the 95000. Acres is able to maintain: And although these Works
mentioned were finished, the whole Level would be in a perpetual danger; for it
is no other then what has been practiced these fourteen years, to carry the
Freshes so high, as to ride the Tide; which I doubt not but both the
Corporation and Country are sensible of the difficulty to effect it with Banks
of Moor Earth, and in truth not to be performed. As for your Brick-tunnels
under your Rivers, they are no ways useful in this flat Level, whether you
admit the Tide in, or keep it out: If you exclude the Tide, it may be requisite
to have small Sluices upon the Out-fall of your Creeks and Leading-Drains, where
it may be needful, into the three Rivers, to hold up water for your Cattle, by
reason your three Rivers will run so low.

By this you see my Objections and Reasons against the flux of the Tide into
this flat Level, which if that should be stopped, then you need not the help of
those chargeable Moory Banks, which has so often deceived you, excepting
Bedford River, and Morton's Leam Banks, which in twenty years will require no
repairing, nor can suffer any Breaches, by reason the Freshes cannot lie three
neaps of a Tide two foot upon the Banks. Besides these two now named, there is
Borough single Bank, from Peakirk to Croyland, four miles in length; likewise
Croyland single Bank, from Croyland to Clout-house, two miles in length; these
must be kept in repair to resist the River Welland, which lies much above our
Level, and is excluded from us; so that it is easily perceived, that four or
five hundred miles of Banking will be laid aside as useless: For if you exclude
the Tide, your vast and uncertain Charges will be taken off; but on the
contrary, if you admit the Tide to flow into the Level, as is intended by this
new Design, your Banks, Counter-Banks, Weer-Dikes, and Tunnels, will not secure
the Level from Inundation.

Thus, according to your Order, and for the better satisfaction, that so the
truth might the better appear, I humbly tender these my Objections and Reasons
against that Design now in agitation, and leave my self, with them, to the
Judgment of this Honorable Corporation.

William Dodson.

A Breviat of the whole Charge of the Works mentioned in Colonel DODSON'S
Design, for the perfect Draining of the Great Level of the Fens, called
Bedford Level.
lb s. d. IMprimis, The great Sluice and Soss at Germans near Magdalen, as they
are Designed to be builded with Brick, Stone, Floodgates, Fall-gates,
Soss-gates, Iron-work, and Workmanship, and allowed by Workmen, will cost 09833
15 06 The making the River through Marsland, from the River called the
Horseshooe to Germans-Bride, with Banks and In-drains, at 5lb. a Pole, will
cost 12800 00 00 The Purchase of the Land in Marsland, where the River, Banks,
and In-drains are cut out of, at 15lb. an Acre for the Purchase, will cost
01575 00 00 The Purchase of the Land, with the making of Banks and In-drains of
the New Cut, from the River of Owse to the great Sluice, will cost 00384 07 06
The making of Sandy's River, from Ely to Littleport Chair, at 1lb. 15s. 00 a
Pole, will cost 01680 00 00 The Sluice and Soss at Guyheirne, allowing the
Timbers of the Sluice and Soss at Saltors Load, there to be delivered, will cost
500lb. otherwise the Charge of that Sluice and Soss will be double 00500 00 00
The Sluice and Soss at Ditton by Cambridge, allowing the Timbers of Knowl's
Sluice, with the Timbers at the Brick-kills, there to be delivered, will cost
200lb. otherwise the Charge of that Sluice and Soss will be double 00200 00 00
The taking up the Shelves and Flats in the Rivers of Owse and Grant, will cost
00600 00 00 The making of the two Dams, one over the River of Owse by Magdalen,
and the other over the River called the Horseshooe below Wisbidge, will cost
00600 00 00 The making of the Pit for the great Sluice at Germans, or near
Magdalen, may cost 00200 00 00 The Tarras to be made use of in and about the
great Sluice and Soss, may cost 00200 00 00 The Total 28573 03 00
FINIS.

