A DISCOURSE Concerning SANCHONIATHON's Phoenician History.

By HENRY DODWELL, M. A. and sometimes Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin
in Ireland.

LONDON, Printed by M. Clark, for B. Took at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1681.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Occasion of this Discourse,. I. The Usefulness,. II. The Credit of
Sanehoniathons Work depends either on Porphyry, or Philo Byblius,. III. The
Philosophers allowed a Liberty of Beneficial False-hoods; and they who first
produced this Author were, in Interest concerned for him,. IV. Theodoret and
Cyril of Alexandria quote him only at the second hand from Eusebius. Several
gross mistakes of Cyril,. V. VI. Sanchoniathon very little known before he was
produced by Porphyry,. VII. VIII. No rea^^^ why he might not have been known,
even before the time of Philo Byblius, if he had been really genuine,. IX. He
might have been taken notice of, not only as a Historian, but as a
Philosopher,. X. Concerning his Means of Information. The Writings of Taautus.
The Ancient way of preserving Antiquities by Inscriptions on Sacred Pillars,
sometimes abused, and very fit for the designs of Deceivers,. XI. This was
generally pretended to by those who Rivalled each other for Antiquity. The
Prophecy of Cham and the Pillars of Seth contained the same Doctrines with
those of Mercury,. XII. XIII. Taautus the same with Mercury. The Ammonian
Philosophy the same with the Egyptian,. XIV. It is improbable that
Sanchoniathon could derive his Information from the Books of Mercury,. XV.
Mercury no Phoenician,. XVI. The Pretenses of Philo Byblius for defense of his
Author,. XVII. It is not probable that the Ancient Egyptians would have
suffered Mercury to have Revealed their Mysteries,. XVIII. It is not probable
that the Egyptian Mercury either would or could have Revealed them,. XIX. The
Son of Thabion perhaps the Second Mercury called Agathodaemon. He is supposed
to be the Author of the Modern Greek Writings Fathered on Mercury, (which if
meant by Sanchoniathon must be a certain Conviction of his False-hood) perhaps
first published by Numenius,. XX. By Hierom-baal Priest of the God Jevo he
meant Gideon. Sanchoniathon could not mistake him for a Priest. Bochart
mistaken,. XXI. It is not Credible that Gideon ever left any Memoirs behind
him,. XXII. Sanchoniathons account of Jewish Affairs could not have been taken
from them,. XXIII. Intrinsic Arguments of just Suspicion against this Author.
His arrogating to his own Country the glory of all Famous Persons and
Inventions,. XXIV. Several Instances hereof,. XXV, XXVI, XXVII, XXVIII. An
Account of the design of Philo Byblius in this Imposture. He was disaffected to
the Jews, and perhaps set on this design by occasion of Josephus's Books
against Appion,. XXIX. Josephus there insisted more particularly on the
Testimonies of Phoenicians. Other things that recommended the Jewish Scriptures
to the esteem of the Learned Heathens of that Age. Several Eminent Jewish
Writers who, by Mystical Expositions, brought their own Doctrines near the
received Systeme of the Dogmatical Philosophers,. XXX. Heathen Oracles in
favor of the Jews owned for genuine by the Heathens themselves. The good
Characters of Abraham and Moses in the received Orphaicks. Joseph and Moses
taken for Egyptian Priests,. XXXI. A Set of Philosophers, several of them
Antienter than Philo Byblius, who received the Authority of Moses as a Wise
Legislator and a Prophet, and mentioned him with respect. Chalcidius a
Heathen,. XXXII. The Jewish (...) taken into the counterfeited Works of Hermes,
about the time of Philo Byblius. XXXIII. How this might come to pass,. XXXIV.
Philo Byblius's Partiality appears in his making Sanchoniathon prefer his own
City Byblos before all the Cities of Phoenicia for Antiquity, even before
Berytus it self. Why he makes his Sanchoniathon enquire into the Archives of
the particular Cities,. XXXV. He had, in this Work, a particular design upon
the Jews. Why he makes his Sanchoniathon live in the time of Abibalus,. XXXVI.
The time of Sanchoniathon fixed, not by the Age of Semiramis, but of Abibalus.
His time, by the Tyrian Records, either Equal, or a little before the War of
Troy,. XXXVII. Why he was to Father his Informations, concerning Jewish
Matters, on a Jew and a Priest,. XXXVIII. Why on a Priest of the God Jevo, and
on Gideon particularly. How he might from his Name collect his being a Priest.
Hierombaal, (...) and (...),. XXXIX. Why he was to begin with a (...). All
Books concerning Egyptian Notions Fathered on Hermes. The Fashion of Fathering
all latter Inventions of a Sect on the First Author of it, especially in their
Dialogues,. XL. The Egyptian Philosophy followed by Sanchoniathon. How he
secured himself from suspicion of mistake in Interpreting Mercury. How the
Greeks came to be mistaken,. XLI. How the Egyptians. (...),. XLII. How Philo
Byblius secures his Sanchoniathon from the suspicion of Fabling, and what
Fables he means,. XLIII. XLIV. Yet he forgot himself and Fathered a Scandalous
Fable upon him,. XLV. The Name of Sanchoniathon perhaps borrowed from the
Famous Egyptian Sonchis. The Atlantic Theology probably the same with that of
Mercury,. XLVI. Recapitulation,. XLVII. The Scripture needs no Confirmation
from Heathen Authors,. XLVIII.

A DISCOURSE, Concerning SANCHONIATHON's Phoenician History. In Eusebius. Praep.
Evang. l. 1. chapter 10.
. I. HAVING in the latter of these Letters intimated some suspicion concerning
the genuineness of Sanchoniathon, N. IX.
and considering how generally Learned men receive and quote him for an Author
of that Antiquity he pretends to; as it will become me to purge my self from
the suspicion of Heterodoxy, so I believe it will not be ungrateful to the
ingenious inquisitive Reader to understand what may be said concerning him.
Which I shall do from some Letters which passed between me and a Learned Friend
concerning him before the Publication of these Letters of Advice, and which
were, in truth, the Reasons of my passing that censure upon him.

. II. THE Credit of this Author does the rather deserve an accurate and
impartial Examination, because of the great use which is made of him in
clearing several Historical and Philosophical passages of the Old Testament;
and because he is generally taken for the Faithfulest, and Antientest, and
consequently the most useful Heathen Author that was extant within the Memory
of Learned Ages. Which might make all who either have formerly, or do still
believe him so, think nothing too difficult to be confirmed by his Credit. So
Theodoret. Therap. II. (...) etc. And so his Translator. But I had rather
correct him from Eusebius whom he Transcribes; who, in two places where he has
occasion to cite this same passage, agrees with himself, and yet differs from
Theodoret. So therefore he: (...) etc. (...). Reading (...) for (...); and
opposing Sanchoniathon's writing in the Phoenician to the Greek Translation of
him by Philo Byblius, and referring (...) to what follows (...), not to
Sanchoniathon mentioned before, Pr. Eu. l. 10. X. 9. And then there will appear
no footsteps of any Etymology of his Name. Yet Bochart gives a likely Etymology
for that purpose, which, if it hold, will show, at least, a design of Philo
Byblius in giving him that particular Name. * Eusio. Pr. Ev. l. 10. 31. A. X.
9. 485. Theodoret Therap. II.
His very Name was observed to signify (...), which if it were given him by
his Contemporaries, must needs have been a great attestation of his Integrity
from them who had best reason to know him.* As for his Age, he is pretended
equal to Abibalus, to whom he is said to have Dedicated this his Phoenician
History, that Abibalus, I mean who, by the Phoenician Records, is supposed to
be the Father of Hieromenus or Eiromus, conceived to be the same with Hiram,
contemporary with David and Solomon as appears, not only from the Scriptures,
but also from the same Phoenician Records, on whose credit, no doubt, it is
that Josephus makes the Eleventh year complete, XIo Hirami, Ant. VIII. 2. p.
259. Ed. Gene. XIIo c. App. l. 1. p. 1043.
or Twelfth begun of Hiram, to concur with the Fourth of Solomon, wherein the
Temple was built. For he had the sum of those Records Collected to his hand by
Menander Ephesius and Dius and Hieronymus Tyrius, and others, Vid. Joseph. Ant.
VIII. 2. Cont. Appion. L. 1. Theoph. Antioch. L. 111. ad. Autolyc.
without whose assistance he could not have been so particular in fixing the
certain year of Hiram. [The Learned Bochart would have this Abibalus King of
Berytus distinct from him who was King of Tire, and Antienter. But if the
account hold which we shall afterward give from the Phoenician Records, to
show him to have been Equal or a little Antienter than the War of Troy,
(exactly as this Abibalus the Father of Hiram is placed by them who mention
him) it will then appear that no other was meant than the Father of Hiram. That
he is called King of the Berytians, was for no other end but to signify that
he was Sanchoniathon's Prince who was of Berytus, exactly as Sanchoniathon
himself is in Athenalus and Suidas made a Tyrian, because his Berytus was, in
his time, under the Jurisdiction of Tire, which is again another probability
that his Abibalus was the same with the K. of Tire.] Porphyry himself who first
produced this Sanchoniathon against the Christians, makes him equal to
Semiramis, who as he tells us in Eusebius's Preparation, Pr. Eu. l. 9. p. 31. B.
was either before or equal to the Wars of Troy; Chron. L. 11 in it.
but he is confuted by Eusebius who makes her Eight hundred and fifty years
earlyer than that same War. Her Husband Ninus is generally, Tertul. de Pal c.
2. ubi Salmas. and a Cerda. Eus. Pr. Ev. x. 9. p. 485. 486. Macrob. in somn.
Scip. 11. 19. Oros. L. 1. Chron. Con. Egypt. Sec. XVII. p. 522. Edit. Lips.
by Heathen Authors, made the utmost Period of all Histories they were
acquainted with, who yet mention many things Antienter than that War of Troy.
[But this matter is excellently accounted for by the Learned and Judicious Sir
John Marsham, who shows that Porphyry herein followed the more likely account
of Herodotus, though Ctesias's larger account had the luck to be more received.
Deioces (the First King of the Medes after their revolt from the Assyrians
according to Herodotus,) began his Reign Olymp. 17. 4. according to Eusebius.
Eus. Chron. Herodot. L. 1. c.
The whole time of the Assyrians was Five hundred and Twenty years according to
Herodotus. If therefore we reckon backward from that Fourth year of the
Seventeenth Olympiad, the time of Semiramis who succeeded her Husband Ninus,
will fall out much about the time where Porphyry places it. Nor was Porphyry
alone, though he had indeed few Companions, in following Herodotus. He shows
that Appian did so too, and the most Judicious Dionysius Halicarnassaeus,
Appian, Praef. Diox. Halicarn. L. 1. Philo ap. Steph. Ba^^.
and Josephus. And, which is more particularly observable to our present
purpose, Philo Byblius also agrees with him in placing Semiramis later than
usually, whom he makes Two thousand years later than the Building of Babylon.]
Besides the Authenticalness of the Records, from whence he derived his
Information, is extremely considerable, (if it should prove really what it is
pretended) the Sacred Writings of Taautus, that is Mercury, Philo Byblius ap.
Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 9. 31. D.
(of whom there is so much mention in those yet earlier Times, of which he
wrote his History) the (...). Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 9. 32. B. the (...) of Hierombaal
Priest of the God Jevo. ib. p. 31. the (...) of their Cities, and the (...) of
their Temples, Ib. But as so great Recommendations of Fidelity, of Antiquity,
and sufficient means of Information, must needs make him very useful for the
Discovery of many and momentous Truths, if justly challenged; so, on the
contrary, must they make his Authority very mischievous for seducing those, who
trust it, into numerous and dangerous Errors, if they should after all be found
False and Groundless. Let us see therefore, whether these challenges be as just
as they are specious and plausible.

. III. AND here I consider First, that all these Arguments of his Credibility
depend, as to Us, either on the pure Testimony of Porphyry, who was the first
who produced him with any great applause and confidence, and who is therefore
justly suspicious, if not of wholly coining him, yet at least of a partial
favor to him, and of the first endeavors to justify and defend him after the
neglects that had been cast upon him since the time that he had first been
Published and Translated by Philo Byblius, or else of Philo Byblius himself.
Athenaeus is the only Author extant that quoted him, that we know of, from the
time of Philo Byblius to Porphyry, supposing that the (...), Athen. Deipnos. L.
3.
whose Phoenician Antiquities are quoted by him, and joined with Mochus another
very Ancient Phoenician Writer often taken notice of, were the same with our
Sanchoniathon, as he is commonly conceived to be, and I believe, not
improbably, though he in Athenaeus was a Tyrian, ours a Berytian, a difference
not very difficulty reconcilable, as has been shown. If it should prove
otherwise, then Porphyry alone must answer for both, not only the pretended
Sanchoniathon himself, but the pretended Greek Translation also of him by Philo
Byblius. But to allow him all the favor that is reasonable, and to grant that
this Philo Byblius is to be suspected of the Original fraud, because of this
more Ancient citation of him by Athenaeus, which could have been from none but
Philo Byblius; yet Porphyry must needs be looked on as the retriever of a
neglected, and therefore suspicious Author, who must have been by that time
very Famous, if he had been thought genuine, which is very considerable for my
present purpose.

. IV. FOR I consider further, that as the Principles both of the Pythagoraeans
and Platonists (who were both of them admired by Porphyry) allowed the
Lawfulness of Medicinal falsehoods, For the Pythagoraeans, see Tim. Locr (...).
For the Platonists, Plato himself de Rep. L. 3. v. S. Hieronym. adv. Ruff. L. 1.
as they called them, which was no doubt the Original first of those
Mythological Stories with which they first beautified their Dialogues, then of
all those Forgeries which were afterward introduced by the Monks, who from
their first Institution were of a Philosophical Extraction and Genius; I say
besides these Principles which may let us see that it was possible he might
deal disingenously with us; the occasion of his first producing him, and his
design, were such as may make him further suspicious of using the utmost
liberty of his Principles actually. For it was purposely to confront the
Antiquity of the Scriptures, See the words of Porphyry in Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 9. X.
9. Theodoret Therap. 11.
and in that very work which was designed to overthrow the Credit of
Christianity. The like I shall. 36.
hereafter observe concerning Philo Byblius.

. V. BUT that I may not therefore conclude him guilty of a disingenuous Fact,
only because it was agreeable, not only to Principles, but his Design, and
Interest; Let us consider t^^ thing it self, and see whether it be likely that
either Sanchoniathon, or his Translator Philo Byblius, were ever had in any
esteem till Porphyry vouched for them. If they were, how comes it to pass that
none but Athenaeus should take notice of an Author so extremely valuable, if he
had been genuine? How comes it to pass, that those few Christians that mention
him afterward should quote him only at the Second hand from Eusebius, or at
the uttermost from Porphyry? Why had they not rather recourse to Philo Byblius
himself, if he had been common? And what imaginable reason is there why he
should not have been Common, especially in those Eastern parts so near
Phoenicia, if he had been valued, or thought genuine? Yet Therap. 11. 111. from
Eus. Pr. Ev. x. 9.
Theodoret it seems had never seen him, but only in Eusebius. Cont. Julian. l.
vi
St. Cyril of Alexandria was so far from quoting what he had occasion to
produce out of him from the Original of Philo Byblius, as that his memory, on
which he seems to have quoted him from Eusebius, betrayed him into several and
great mistakes. He first pretends to have had what he says concerning him from
Clemens Alexandrinus's Stromat. (...) A plain sign he had not seen Philo
Byblius himself. Yet who can doubt but that he also mistook Clemens
Alexandrinus for Eusebius? It is certain there is no mention of Sanchoniathon
or his Translator in the Stromat (...) of Clemens as we have them extant at
present. Was it therefore in what is lost? There are but two Imperfections in
the whole Work, the beginning of the First Book, and the Eighth. What was
wanting in the beginning of the First Book, we know by what remains to have
been nothing but Introduction, where he had yet no occasion of meddling with the
Antiquity of Phoenician Writers. Not in the Eighth Book, Strom. VI. p. 617. A.
where by what he promises in the Sixth, we know he designed to answer the
Heathens concerning the Coming of our Lord, that is, I suppose, concerning his
coming so lately, and in so mean appearance (which were the Popular Objections
of that Age) or else concerning his Second coming to Judge Persecutors and
Unbelievers, which ordinarily concluded their Controversial Writings. So the
Sacred Writers of the New Testament frequently. So St. Cyprians Second Book of
Testimonies, ad Quirin. which seems to have been the last of that Work. So
Irenaeus in the last Chapters adv. Haer. So Lactantius Lib. VII. Div. Inst.
Phil. Commodianus is more particularly large on this Argument. But neither of
these could afford him any occasion of mentioning this Author. Cod. CXI.
For none can doubt but what now, and in Photius's time, possessed the place of
the Eighth Book had no affinity with the Argument of this Work. And yet neither
is there any mention of Sanchoniathon or his Translator. But to put the matter
out of doubt that this was only a mistake of St. Cyril, as I said; where
Clemens had indeed occasion to dispute the Question of Antiquity between the
Heathen and the Sacred Writers, Stromat. 1.
there he has not the least intimation of either of them; and the very words
quoted by St. Cyril are exactly in Eusebius, Pr. Ev. l. 9.
but not as out of the Text of Sanchoniathon, but the Preface of Philo Byblius.
Which he could not so easily have confounded if he had used the Book it self;
but might very probably in borrowing them from Eusebius, who comprises all he
or Porphyry had collected both out of the Text and the Preface, in the same
Chapters immediately following each other. Besides Porphyry reckons but Eight
Books of Sanchoniathon de Abst. 11. n. 56. but Eusebius Nine, reckoning it
seems the very Preface of Philo for a distinct Book. Which being quoted for
Sanchoniathon's by Cyril, Bochart conceives the Physiology or Theogony to have
been a distinct Book from the History. But see what is said hereafter.
shows that he follows the very division of Eusebius, and therefore took what
he had from him.

. VI. BUT what is it he pretends to tell us from Clemens Alexandrinus? That
Sanchoniathon's Book was Translated by Josephus. But who ever mentions such a
Translation amongst the Works of Josephus? How is it credible that he should so
far favor the cause of the Phoenicians who so professedly maintains the
greater Antiquity of the Scriptures against them in his Books against Appion?
And who can reconcile this pretended Testimony from Clemens with Porphyry, who
certainly, if any, conversed with the Original Translation? If he be to be
credited, here are again two great mistakes of St. Cyril, First his mistaking
Philo Byblius for the famous Alexandrian Philo the Jew; then his confounding
that Philo with Josephus who was of the same Nation. Which again plainly show,
that he quoted him by memory, and at the Second hand.

. VII. BUT besides that this silence, or Second-hand Quotations, even after the
time he was divulged and applauded by Porphyry, are strong suspicions that he
was either not known; or not regarded, (either of which are equally serviceable
to my purpose;) yet further, what should be the reason that so useful and
Ancient an Author should be so little known even before the time of Porphyry?
Was it because he was locked up in the Phoenician Tongue? But why should he not
at least, have been better known after the Greek Translation of him by Philo
Byblius? Yet even then so little was he known that, were it not for the
forementioned Testimony of Athenaeus, we might justly doubt whether such a
Translation was ever undertaken by that Philo. Voce (...)
Suidas mentions this Philo, and reckons up others of his Works, and fixes his
time. He places him near the Reign of Nero, and makes him Threescore and
Eighteen years old, at the Consulship of Severus Herennius in Olymp. 220. Which
if it be true must fall at least about the Reign of Trajan, though no such
Consulship appear in our present Fasti, possibly because he might have been
either a Suffectus, or expunged out of the public Fasti for some Crime. Nay,
he expressly makes him to have Written concerning the Reign of Hadrian. And
therefore, in all likelihood the broken number of the odd Olympiads above Two
hundred and twenty is wanting in Suidas. Scaliger, in (...)
But what ground Scaliger had to fix the year of the 229. Olymp. I do not
understand. Yet no such Translation appears in that Catalogue of his Works,
unless it were contained under the (...).

. VIII. AND why should he never have been mentioned by those ancient Apologists
for the Christian Religion who wrote before Porphyry? They had a just occasion
for it in that great Dispute concerning the Antiquity of the Scriptures above
all Heathen Authors. On this occasion they drew up Catalogues of the Antientest
Heathen Authors they knew of, yet Sanchoniathon, the most apposite Instance of
them all, never being so much as thought of. Not by Justin Martyr in the time
of Antoninus Pius, though he was a Samaritan, and had thereby the opportunity
to have known the Famous Writers of his Neighboring Phoenicians, nay to have
understood them though they had not been Translated to his hand. (...). Just.
Mart. Paraen. p. 13.
Yet he knew of nothing Ancient either amongst the Greeks or the Barbarians.
Which how could he have said if he had known any thing of this most Ancient
Sanchoniathon? Not by Theophilus Antiochenus in the time of Verus, with whom he
ends his Chronology, though he were nearer the Phoenicians than the Grecians,
nay and had special occasion in mentioning the Phoenician Antiquities. Ad
Autolyc. L. 111.
Not by Tatianus the Scholar of St. Justin, and so not long, if at all, after
him, when he wrote his Oration against the Greeks (it does not appear that St.
Justin was then dead, though I know how Tatianus is mistaken by Eusebius,
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. IV. 16. He only says that Crescens had endeavored the
death of St. Justin ((...) is his Word) but he has not the least intimation
that it was in his power to accomplish it. What he says was only taken from
Justins own words in his Apology. Or. adv. Graec. p. 171 and ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev.
X. 2. p. 493. Strom. 1.
who has also generally deceived the Learned who have followed him) though he
was an Assyrian, and takes particular notice of the Antientest Grecian and
Phaenician Authors, and names all the most Ancient Phaenicians that he knew of,
which were but Three, Theodotus, Mochus, and Hypsicrates. Not by Clemens as has
already been observed, who deduces his computation to the death of Commodus,
though he also had occasion, in disputing that same Controversy concerning the
Age of the most Ancient Heathen Writers. I think St. Cyril's mistake concerning
him, has been sufficiently discovered and convicted. Apolog. c. 19.
Not by Tertullian in the times of Severus and Caracalla, though he had also
the like occasion given him in his Apology. Not by Origin, though he refers to
Josephus against Appion, C. Cells. lib. 1. p. 13. 14.
and Tatianus for a Collection of such Phoenician Authors as had mentioned any
thing concerning Jewish Affairs; nay mentions Herennius Philo who had written
concerning the Jews, if this be the Philo to whom the Translation of
Sanchoniathon is ascribed by Porphyry, as in all likelihood he is the Philo
mentioned by Suidas, who had said of himself that his Sur-name was Herennius.
And the Title of Herennius Philo is given him in the Inscription of a M. S.
Work of his on Aristotle's Metaphysics, now in the Library of the most
accomplished and truly Great Dr. Isaac Vossius. And my very Dear and very
Learned Friend Dr. Lloyd conceives that he might have borrowed that Sur-name of
Herennius from his Patron Herennius Severus the Consul, which was usually for
Liberti to When they were made Liberti they were not only made Romans, but
taken into the Families of their Patrons, as appears from the Inscriptions of
their Family Sepulchers, which were generally conceived in that Form, FILIIS ET
EILIABuS, LIBERTIS ET LIBERTABVS POSTERIS QVE EORVM. And then how proper was it
for them to receive the Gentile name of their Patrons Family?
do in those times; and that the Consul was the same with him mentioned in
Pliny, Ep. Lib. IV. 28. who there appears to have been a Lover of Learning, and
himself a very Learned Person. The Times do very well agree; and it is not
otherwise easy to conceive how Philo a Phoenician should come by a Roman Name.
And that he was very intimate with that Consul appears both by his dating his
own Age by his Patrons Consulship and by his bringing Hermippus his Countryman
and Scholar acquainted with him. See Suid. in (...).
Yet even on this occasion, Origin makes no mention of his Sanchoniathon among
those Phoenician Writers which he immediately refers to as mentioning Jewish
affairs. How could he have slipped such an opportunity as this was, of mentioning
him, if he had known him? Not even by Celsus himself, whom Origin places under
Hadrian, though he must certainly have lived later if he be the same to whom
Lucian dedicated his Pseudomantis after the death of Marcus Antoninus whom he
calls (...), nay must have Written this very Work against the Christians later
than Hadrian, for ap. Orig L. v. p. 272.
Marcellina and ap. Orig L. VI. p. 326. and ubi supra.
Marcion, both of them mentioned by him, as they first broached their Heresies
under Anicetus, so most probably after the death of Hadrian. Philo was as his
work mentioned by Origin shows him, sufficiently disaffected to the Jews, so
that if he did Translate any such work of Sanchoniathon, he would most probably
have designed it as Porphyry, to confront the Antiquity of the Jews. And how
greedily would Celsus have seconded him if he had known of any such work
Published by him? Thus it appears that this Sanchoniathon was either generally
not known, or (which amounts to the same thing) generally neglected by all
sorts of Authors, both Christians and Heathens too, from the time of Philo
Byblius to Porphyry.

. IX. BUT to ascend yet higher, what should hinder him from being known even
before Philo Byblius, if he had been what he is pretended? It is true, he could
neither have been known nor deservedly valued by the Greeks till he was
Translated. But what imaginable cause is there why he was not Translated more
Anciently? The Phoenician Records, and Histories had been searched and
Translated and divulged by Hieronymus Tyrius, Vid. Bochart. Chanaan L. 11. c.
17. Joseph. Ant. VIII. 2. c. Appion. L. 1
Menander Ephesius and Dius, Hestiaeus and Philostratus and others; nay the
very Original Records themselves are quoted by Josephus, and the Original
Copies of the Epistles between Solomon and Hiram are still mentioned as extant
in their Archives by the same Josephus and Theophilus Antiochenus. Theoph. Ant.
L. 111. ad Autolyc.
How comes it to pass they should all of them overlook this most considerable,
most creditable Author? Why should they omit this most Ancient account of their
most Ancient times, when the great design of all these Enquiries seems to have
been a General Dispute concerning the most Ancient Nations? Why did they not
Translate him then? Why did they not, at least, take out of him, and vouch him
for their Authority? Had they done so, why should not Josephus have had
recourse to him, if not in his Phoenician Original, yet at least as to those
particulars they had borrowed from him? Why does he never mention him either in
his Antiquities, or his Books against Appion, especially in those things which
he relates concerning Abraham, Ant. l. 8.
which he was particularly careful to confirm by the best Testimonies he knew
of?

. X. Sanchoniathon had been useful even to those who had enquired only for
their Histories. But consider we him further as a Philosopher; for such the
Writers of the (...) and especially of the (...) whereof much of
Sanchoniathon's Work consisted, were then reputed, that being the usual
Mystical way whereby they concealed the secrets of their Natural Philosophy. So
also Suidas (...). Indeed the (...) seems to have been the same with the (...).
For what Eusebius had called the (...) of the Phoenicians Pr. Ev. l. 9. that he
calls their (...) c. 10. To which he adds the (...) also for completing it.
For both these were pretended to be taken from the (...) of Taautus. Yet even
so, there were several fair occasions of discovering, and Translating him,
Antienter than Philo. For their Antientest Philosophers had been also enquired
into long before Philo. What was Pythagoras's design in Traveling amongst
them? Was it only to see their Countries and their Fashions? Was it not rather
to acquaint himself with their Philosophical Improvements? Jamblich. de vita
Pythag.
And would he, who is so much celebrated for his Conversation with the
Phoenician Prophets, the Posterity of Mochus, not rather have employed his time
in inquiring after this equally, if not more, Ancient both Historian and
Philosopher Sanchoniathon? After the Macedonian Conquests had opened an access
for the Greek Philosophers to the Phoenician Archives; they then Translated as
many as were valued by them. Theodotus and Hypsicrates and Mochus were
Translated by Asitus or Chaetus as Tatianus tells us; Orat. adv. Graec.
Chaetus. But Asitus in a fragment of the Oration, as quoted by Eusebius. Pr. Ev.
X. 11. But Bochart corrects it Laetus, and rightly Geogr. Lib. XVI.
and the same concerning Mochus and many others appears from Strabo. How comes
Sanchoniathon, if there had then been any such Author extant, to have escaped
their diligence?

. XI. HE pretends to have had his Information from the Writings of Taautus,
from the Mystical Books of the Ammonians, and the (...) or Memoires of
Jerombaal the Priest of the God Jevo, the (...) of the particular Cities and
the (...) of their Temples. Things very considerable indeed, if they had been
truly pretended to. But let us see whether there be any reason to believe them
on his credit. It was indeed a very Ancient way of preserving knowledge to
inscribe what they would preserve in Pillars to be kept in the Temples of their
most Eminent Gods, the better to be secured from Weather and the Violence of
Profane hands. Thus they did with their Laws, with their Leagues and
Covenants, with their Histories, and their Arts and Sciences. Instances might
have been given of all these sorts, if I had thought it necessary.
Particularly, for Histories there was that of Euemerus from the Inscriptions in
the Temple of Jupiter Triphylius; Vid. Plutarch de Isid. and Osirid. Lactant.
Div. Inst. L. 11. Ap. Simpl. in Arist. de Caelo. L. 11. Com. 16. Plin. Not.
Hist. VII. 56.
for Arts, those from whence Callisthenes gave Aristotle an account of the
Eclipses observed by the Chaldaeans, those of the same Babylonians referred to
by Epigenes, Berosus and Critodemus, and the Famous Pillars of Seth mentioned
by Josephus. Out of such Pillars as these no doubt the Publisher of
Sanchoniathon would have us believe his History to have been gathered. Nor was
it unusual for Deceivers to impose on the World on the credit of such Pillars.
Plutarch. de Isid. Osirid. p. 360.
Euemerus now mentioned was looked on by Antiquity as a Famous instance of it.
For it was certainly the easiest way for broaching False-hoods. These were
Monuments which could be produced on the sudden concerning the most remote
Antiquities without the attestation of Ancient Writings, because themselves
were supposed to be Originals of the times they pretended to give account of;
were supposed remote from Vulgar Knowledge or understanding, being either kept
in the Adyta, or locked up in some obsolete unknown Character, which none but
the Learned and the Priests could understand; were contrived in Hieroglyphics
or such ambiguous notes as were capable of what Interpretation those designing
Persons who produced them were pleased to put upon them; depended generally on
Oral Tradition, than which there is not a more unfaithful Conveyer of Monuments
to Posterity; depended wholly on the credit of the Priests, being withal
generally interessed in the things thus preserved, making for the credit of
their false Religion, or the credit of their Nation, for Antiquity, or rare
Inventions; were to be found and examined only in one place (not like Books
every where) nor even there it self without the Leave and Directions of such
interessed Priests. Upon this account their very humoured Stories with which it
was fashionable in those times to adorn their Dialogues, were grounded on the
credit of such pretended Inscriptions. So Cebes's Table, and the Samothracian
Inscriptions referred to by Axiochus, and those concerning the Atlantides in
Timaeus.

. XII. AND thus it was generally in the disingenuous dealings of those Nations,
which upon the appearing of the Jewish Scriptures in the common Tongue, began
to rival them, and one another for Antiquity. Thus the Babylonians in
Democritus preserved their Moral Discourses in the Pillars of Acicarus. Clem.
Alex. Strom. 1. p. 303.
Thus Xisuthrus in Berosus is said to have preserved the Chaldaean Inventions
Engraven in Plates from the Deluge. Thus Manetho pretended to have gathered his
new Dynasties from the like Pillars of Mercury. Eusebius. Gr. p. 6.
So Cham is pretended to have preserved Cassian. Coll. viii. 21
his inventions in Judicial Astrology by the like invention of Ingraving them
in Plates, which Plates they usually fastened to Pillars; from whence I am apt
to think that the Gnostics might take occasion to forge that Prophecy which
was among them obtruded in those times under his Name. Clem. Alexandrin. Strom.
VI. p. 642. A.
And as Egyptian Notions were the Principal ingredient in most of those
Ancient Heresies that were comprehended under the common Name of Gnostics; so
I am apt to think that Chemi the Ancient Name of Egypt gave them occasion to
Plutarch. de Isid. and Osirid.
father what they pleased on a Scripture-Patriarch of a Name that had some
affinity to it, besides that the Scripture it self calls Egypt so often the
Land of Ham, so that the Inscriptions of Cham and Mercury were probably the
very same. The like I also conceive concerning the Pillars of Seth
aforementioned from Josephus. Nor is the mistake so difficult as may be
imagined. It is very well known that the Dog Star was by the Egyptians called
Horus Apoll. C. 3. Plutarch. de Isid. and Osi. Chalcidius, in Pla. Timaeum male
(...). Porphyr. de antr. Nymphar.
Sothis; That the revolution of their great year was accordingly from it called
Sothiaca Clem. Alexand. Strom. I. p. 335. C.
Periodus, because the Dogstar then returned exactly to the very same place
where he had been before; That their great year was therefore called (...) or
Canicularis, as Censorinus tells us, because it began exactly on the first day
of that Month on which the Dog Star rose, De die not. c. 18.
which was the Egyptian Thoth. Who sees not that the whole contrivance of that
year was exactly fitted to the course of that Star? And that therefore Thoth
was reckoned for the first Month in the year because the Dog Star rose in it?
If therefore its Name were given it with any design, it seems to have been
therefore called Thoth because their Sothis rose in it, and therefore that
those two Names are indeed designed for the same. Nor is the change of S and Th
either difficult or unusual in those Tongues, as might have been shown by
multitudes of Examples if I had leisure.

. XIII. BUT whether the Name of Thoth and Sothis were Originally the same or
not; yet it seems clear that the Notions of Mercury were inscribed to Sothis.
So Manetho's Sacred History (in the same Sense no doubt, that Ennius's
Translation of Euemerus's History, Lactant. Div. Inst. L. 1. c. 11.
pretended also from Sacred Pillars was also called Sacred) is called the (...)
in Eusebius. ib. And, which yet comes more fully home to what I am now proving,
the very Name (...) is used in this matter from Petosiris an Egyptian Writer,
by Vettius Valens, Antiochenus in Scaliger and others, In loc Eus. Chr. Graec.
p. 6.
and that in the Masculine Gender. But this whole matter will be yet plainer if
we remember that the design of Manetho So Concharis is reckoned in the XVI.
Dynasty (...). Syncell. p. 103. C.
was to fit his Chronology to that Sothiac Period. We see it accordingly
prevailed in most of the later Egyptian Chronologies, which pretended to any
more than ordinary Exactness. So the Destruction of Troy is noted in Clem.
Strom. I.
Alexandrinus, most probably from an Egyptian Author. So were the years of
Nabonassar in Ptolomies Canon, and the Babylonian Eclipses fitted to the same
Canicular year by Ptol. L. IV. c. ult. p. 104.
Hipparchus. Now this Sothiac Period was purposely invented to give a full and
exact account of the Suns course, till he was to rise exactly in the same place
of the Zodiac where he had risen before. For proceeding on this Hypothesis that
the true Solar year consisted of 365 days and, this Fourth was not intercalated
every Fourth year, as in the Julian account, but permitted to run on (purposely
that their Festivities might pass through the whole year,) till those Fourth
parts of a Day made up a whole Year, which they did in 1461. Egyptian,
equivalent to 1460. Julian years. That this was purposely designed to signify
the Course of the Sun, appears from their calling the whole Period by the Name
of Censor. de d. not. c. 18.
Annus (...), and (...), as the Name of (...) simply taken, signifies the Sun
in Ancient Authors. But the Sun, whose Course this was, was called Typhon, as
Typhon was also called Seth, as Plutarch (...). Plutarch. de Isid. and Osirid.
p. 367. C. And a little after: (...). Where we have the signification of Seth
in the Egyptian Tongue, and the reason why the Sun and Typhon were called so.
Again, (...). p. 371. B. Again (...). p. 376. A.
assures us. Accordingly as most of the Egyptian Names of Persons and Places
were taken from their Gods, so we have still footsteps of this Gods name in the
Names of Sethron, Sethos, Sethosis, etc. And then it cannot be thought strange,
that as his whole Book is denominated from his Chronological Period, so that
Period it self should be ascribed to the Egyptian Seth, and consequently the
Pillars also from which these accounts were taken. It may be another account
may be given of this matter, that by the Pillars of Seth may be meant only
their belonging to Egypt. So it appears that the same King who was called
Egyptus by the Greeks, was by the Egyptians themselves called Sethos, and as it
seems from thence concluded by Manetho to have been the same with him whom the
Greeks called Aegyptus the Brother of Danaus, (who neither was himself known to
the Egyptians, by the name of Danaus but Armais) because Sethos in the Egyptian
Tongue, signified the same thing as Aegyptus in the Greek. Now the Name of
Egypt was derived from the Name of Aegyptus, by which he was known to the
Greeks, and therefore proportionably the Name of Sethos must have derived the
like denomination of Sethos to his Country. So Theophilus Antiochenus from
Manetho: Theoph. Antioch. L. III. ad Autolyc
(...). Which, being once admitted, will open a further way of expounding
Josephus's (...), Ant. l. 3.
which must be reconciled with the place where the Mercurial Pillars were
placed by Manetho, and is by him called (...). And to derive this yet higher,
the usual occasion these emulous Nations took for challenging the glorious
Actions or Persons of each others to themselves, was when themselves also had
Actions or Persons of the same Name. Now Heliopolis in Egypt was Famous for
those Mercurial Writings. And therefore they who were ambitious of challenging
them to themselves, were to take occasion of doing so from a Heliopolis of
their own. Accordingly the Chaldaeans, for their Xisuthrus pitched on
Heliopolis in Sippara, and the Phoenicians had their Heliopolis at Mount
Libanus, Bochart. Chanaan L. 11. c. 2.
a Sacred place, and particularly Famous for their Baitulia. And when they had,
on this pretense, claimed Mercury as their own, the change was very obvious,
from (...) to (...), for them who were willing from thence to conclude, that
these Mercurial Pillars were to be expected only in Syria, where their
Heliopolis was placed. The very Analogy of Grammar is sufficient to show that
it was a willful and designed variation. (...) had indeed been Greek, but
(...), though in the Dative Case, seems to have been a change from (...), as
that also from (...), on the design now mentioned. And there is still a
footstep of (...) as the Antientest Reading in Josephus, that Eustathius reads
it (...), Hexaem. And this very Origination of this Word is a strong
Presumption that (...) rather than (...) (as some Learned Persons would have it
from Ammian) is indeed an Ancient Reading in Josephus. Ammian Marcellin. L. 22.
Vales. in loc. Sir John Marsham. Chro. Can. Sec. 1. p. 39. Ed. Lips.
That I may not now mention the Ancient Translation of Josephus by Cassiodore,
and as many of the Ancients as followed either that or the Greek near those
times, who generally take it for Syria on the account now mentioned. I confess
I cannot easily distrust Ammian in what he says concerning those Syringes,
where those Sacred Hieroglyphical Inscriptions were, which were designed to be
preserved from a deluge, because he pretends to write visa pleraque, what he
had seen with his own Eyes. Ib. p. 413.
I confess I am apt to think that these Syringes, were the places designed for
the so much celebrated Pillars of Mercury, though these Inscriptions were in
Vaults under ground (those were properly Syringes) and in Walls rather than
Pillars (though I know how largely the Notion of (...) may be understood)
because I cannot think they had them in two places, for that same reason of
preserving them from the Deluge. Yet the Country where they were, might have
been called Seriadica, and that it was so, we have, before Josephus, the more
Ancient Testimony of Manetho. Besides it is considerable, that the Doctrine of
the two Destructions of the World, one by Fire, another by Water, which is
pretended as the occasion of erecting these two Pillars, is originally
Egyptian. And they, Vid. Platon in Tim. qui ea habuit ab Aegyptiis
no doubt on pretense of such Pillars, boasted themselves alone to have
preserved their Histories, through the several Deluges and Conflagrations. And
from this confounding the Babylonian and Egyptian accounts, which followed
upon their several respective Emulations, I suppose it was, that these
Inventers of the Fable of Seth, were so particular in telling us the very
materials of those Pillars. The Egyptian Syringes were, as it appears from
Ammian cut out of a Quarrey, and therefore were of solid stone. Ammian, L. XXII.
But the Babylonian mentioned by Epigenes were Coctilibus Laterculis, Ap. Plin.
N. H. VII. 56.
for which that place was Famous. These two so well fitting the design of
preserving them from the Conflagration and the Deluge, made them, who were
willing to confound things for Interests of their own, to be as I said so very
particular, not considering that by the account given in Plato's Timaeus, the
Egyptians had another pretense of preserving their own Inscriptions from the
Conflagration as well as from the Deluge.

. XIV. So also, for the Writings from whence our Sanchoniathon is pretended to
have Collected his History, there seems little doubt but they were also
designed for the same with those of Mercury; as also that the Subject of these
Writings, were taken from those Plates, and Pillars now mentioned. Philo
Byblius himself expressly says, that Sanchoniathon enquired very carefully into
the Notions of Taautus; That Taautus, to whom they were ascribed, was no other
than Philo Byblius says so expressly in Eusebius. Pr. Ev. l. 9. p. 32. A.
Mercury, will, I believe, need no proof. And these Mystical Books of the
Ammonians being joined with them, makes it yet more probable. For even among
our present Counterfeits under the Name of Mercury, we have an Epistle of
Asclemus to Ammon, concerning the Concealment of their Philosophical Mysteries,
with several other Fragments of the like address in Stobaeus Eclog. Phys. by
which we see that those unfaithful dealers with Hermes, did both join this
Ammon with him whom they make a King in Libya, (very probably with some
relation to the Famous Libyan Oracle of Jupiter Ammon) and withal, made the
same Ammon a very zealous Patron of those Philosophical Mysteries. So that this
holds exact correspondence with those other Cheats, and looks as if it belonged
to the same Forge. Unless possibly we may refer it to that more Ancient
Conjunction of Thoth and Thamuz, and the God of the Egyptian Thebes, called
Ammon in Plato himself, In Phaedr. p. 213.
whence it comes to pass that the Egyptian Thebes has, in the Prophets, the
Name of No-Ammon, as it was usual, and, as Diodorus observes, most proper to
the Egyptians, to denominate their Cities from their Deities. It may be this
may be the reason why the Name of Ammon is so usually made use of in the
accounts of the Egyptian Philosophy, because the Name it self seems an
offspring of Ham, ascribed in the Scripture to the Land of Egypt it self, so
that the Ammonian Philosophy is no more than a Colony of the Egyptian. And
these (...), these Mystical Writings were most properly ascribed to this God,
whose very Name, as Manetho expounds it, Ap. Plutarch. de Is. and Osirid.
signified in the Egyptian Tongue, (...). How much more proper an Etymology is
this, than that which Bochart gives elsewhere from the Hebrew, De Phoen. Col.
11. 17.
where his Interest for Sanchoniathon, obliges him to make these Ammonian
Writings Phoenician?

. XV. But to examine now the Credibility of his pretense to these Means; it is
first considerable that, seeing these Records were Egyptian, it is not easy
to explain how Sanchoniathon himself, a Man of another Nation, could have
access to them. The difficulty Pythagoras found notwithstanding the powerful
recommendation of Polycrates to Amasis who was his Hospes, shows how averse
they were to communicate their Mysteries to Foreigners. But it was not at all
to be expected by Persons uncircumcized, as the Phoenicians were undoubtedly in
the pretended Age of Sanchoniathon. Porphyr. de vit. Pythag. p. 183. vid. Not.
Holsten.
But supposing he had Conquered the difficulties of access, and submitted, as
Pythagoras seems to have done, to Circumcision; yet the Mystical Books of the
Ammonians, and much more the Mystical Hieroglyphics of the Egyptians, (of
which kind the Sacred Inscriptions of their Pillars generally were,) depended
still on a higher degree of good will and fidelity of the Priests for their
Explication. And who can undertake that they would, after all, deal Faithfully
with him? Especially if they had suspected the least design in him of
committing them to Writing, and divulging them to Posterity? And after all,
what judicious Person would not rather enquire for this Information Originally
from the Egyptians themselves? Who would not rather have trusted their present
sense in which they were agreed, even in later times, than such Second-hand
Relations concerning the sense of their Ancestors? And then, what will become
of this so much applauded Testimony of Sanchoniathon, if Phoenician matters
must not be expected from him, as they could not from such means of
Information; and if the Testimony even of the later Egyptians must be
preferred before him? I am very well aware that the whole credit of this Author
depends on the contrary supposition, that both these Pillars of Taautus, and
Apocryphal Books of the Ammonians, were in Phoenicia, and concerned Phoenician
Affairs, and in the Phoenician Tongue or Characters, that a Native Phoenician
might be presumed fittest to understand them.

. XVI. THIS will indeed, and will alone, make him so credible as he is thought
to be. And it is plainly supposed in the Author himself, who makes Hermes a
Native Phoenician, Apud Euse. Pr. Ev. 1. 10. p. 36. A. 39. B.
and to be made King of Egypt by one that was. And this seems the most likely
account how the Pillars of Seth (which I said seem to be the same with those of
Mercury) came to be placed by Josephus in Syria, that he had met them placed
there by some who were thus in Interest, concerned to place them so, to
justify their other Fictions. Besides (...) in Manetho was easily corrupted
into (...) in Josephus, by them who were willing to have it so, as has already
been observed. And the Egyptian Name of Seth, so exactly agreeing with the
Hebrew Name, was a likely occasion of mistake, and an Argument too, for them
who had rather have him believed to be a Hebrew than an Egyptian. But then
against this I oppose all the contrary, both Testimonies and Arguments that
might be produced to prove that Hermes was a Native Egyptian, and that Egypt
was never so subdued by the Phoenicians as to receive, nor Phoenicia in such a
strong and flourishing condition, as to give them a King of their own Nation.
That is as many Testimonies, as there are or have been Egyptian Writers, not
only after, but before the publishing of this pretended Sanchoniathon; as many
of them, at least, as mention such a Person as Hermes, as many of them as wrote
before these Disputes of Antiquity of Nations were started, as well as they who
wrote afterward, to abet parties now made, and to drive on designs by this
time already formed to their hand. The highest account of all the Mercuries in
Cicero's time, De Not. Deor. L. III
that was given by them who had then the curiosity to enquire into the Gods of
the same Name, amounted not to above five, and among them no mention of any one
that was a Phoenician, a sign none such was so much as challenged by them, till
this pretended Sanchoniathon. The same account is followed by others
afterward, by Ampelius and Arnobius, Arnob. adv. Gent. L. IV.
a sign that even then this fictitious Phoenician was not of that credit, as to
be thought worthy to increase the received Number. And these were sufficient to
be opposed to the true Sanchoniathon himself. The Original Writings of Taautus,
and the Mystical Books of the Ammonians must have been theirs, and could have
been Interpreted by none but them, if we will allow any thing to the concurrent
Testimonies of disinteressed Antiquity. But how much more than sufficient are
they to over-sway the Vouchers for him, and for all those things also which
recommend him as so very creditable? How much Antienter? How much freer from
design? That I may not now descend to Personal Comparisons.

. XVII. BUT, (possibly to avoid the difficulty to be supposed in understanding
Writings of this Nature;) it is supposed that Taautus either found or made all
things clear; that he Originally wrote them so whatever he wrote upon his own
knowledge; that he made them so, where he did not, as in his discovery of these
Mystical Books of the Ammonians, from some Monuments of their own, Sanchon.
apud Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 9. p. 32. B.
concealed in their Adyta, and of difficult access, but yet procured and
divulged by him; that he unriddled the Tales and Allegories, wherein they had
been Originally concealed. But that the later Priests again retrieved their
Mythologies and Arts of concealment. That as for the Mercurial Books themselves
the Son of Thabion was the first who turned them into Allegory, Ap. Eus. ib. p.
39. C.
from whom they came to the Greeks. That many Generations afterward
Surmubelus, Ib. p. 40. B.
the God (I suppose so Sur-named like Antiochus, and Diodorus Cronus the
Philosopher, from Saturn, and Pior the Egyptian from Apollo, that I may
instance also in private Persons who were Sur-named from Gods, not only
denominatively,) and Thuro a Woman Sur-named Chusarthis, explained those
Allegories. That by this means they might come clear to Sanchoniathon from
Writings, without Personal Discoveries of the Priests, which was not to be
expected. This seems contrived, as if it were on purpose to defend the Credit
of these Informations.

. XVIII. BUT how many things are here supposed no way consistent with the
Notions of those times? We see it is acknowledged that the Arts of concealment
of Mysteries, had been taken up and used before, because Taautus is said to
have unriddled those of the Ammonians. And who knows not how great a Piaculum
it was thought to divulge Mysteries? How particularly Superstitious the
Ancients were that way, as appears from the Fables of Phineus and Prometheus?
And (concerning the Egyptians) from their Worship of Harpocrates? How it was
Capital for the Person who endeavored it, and how they would no doubt have
suppressed such Publications of their Mysteries if it lay in their power to do
so? How then could Sanchoniathon come by them who lived so many Ages after? Was
it because they could not suppress all Copies of what had once escaped them at
first, especially not such as were in the Hands of the Phoenicians, who were
not obnoxious to their Jurisdiction? But would they, at least, have paid that
Honor to the Memory of a Person guilty of a crime then reputed so very impious
as to make him a God? Would they not rather have erected Pillars to his
disgrace (from whence came afterward the popular notion of (...)) than
borrowed all their Sacred Rites and Inventions from his Books or Pillars? Would
they have ascribed all their Solemnities of Religion (as it appears they did
from Clemens Alexandrinus) to such a Prophaner of their Secrets, to so impious
a violator of their received Religion? Strom. vi.


. XIX. AND who indeed was more unlikely to have such an accusation laid to his
charge, than he that was reputed the First Institutor of their Religion, the
first Imposer of that Sacred silence which they took for so necessary a Duty of
all that would pretend to be Religious? Why should they ascribe their
Hieroglyphics and their Sacred Characters to him, Sacrarum literarum peritos
facit. Jul. Firmic Mathes. Lib. 111. c. 8. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. l. 10. p. 36. A.
if they had not thought that he had invented them purposely for this
concealment? But consider him even as the Inventor only of their Letters (an
Invention expressly ascribed to him by this pretended Sanchoniathon himself) and
they cannot show it possible for him to make that discovery he is pretended to
have made from the very Writings of the Ammonians. For all other Sacred ways
but Letters, were of so aequivocal signification, as nothing could be gathered
from them without the Oral Traditions of their Priests. And therefore he could
not have made so great Discoveries by Books, if himself were the first Inventor
of Letters.

. XX. BUT who is this Son of Thabion, who is said to have turned them back into
Allegories, and from whom they came at last to the Greeks? I suppose
Agathodaemon, or the Second Mercury the Father of Tat, who is said by Manetho
to have Translated the Books of the said Elder Mercury into Greek, but yet
(...), that is in the Sacred Egyptian Letter, Ap. Eusebius. Gr. p. 6. Ed.
Scaliger.
contradistinct from that which was of common use, possibly that though the
words were, yet the Characters might not be understood by the Greeks without
the Priests assistance, which he also secured by placing them in the Adyta. All
these things seem exactly to agree with the present Fragments of the Mercurial
Writings in Greek, where the Elder Mercury is blamed by Ammon for divulging
their Mysteries; where the Second Mercury is he who generally speaks in his own
Person, the Elder is spoken of in the Third, and Tat is mentioned as his Son,
and the (...) is so often mentioned, where the very Pillars are mentioned, and
that they were to be divulged to Posterity from those Pillars, as appears from
a Fragment of them extant in Stobaeus. Stob. Eclog. Phys.
Yet it does not appear that Manetho published that Text of those Mercurial
Books he pretends to have used out of the Sacred Egyptian, into the common
Greek Character. That he might forbear to do as a Priest. Possibly Numenius
might have contributed hereunto, who is therefore charged by his own Heathen
Brethren for divulging Mysteries. Whoever did so, seems also to have enlarged
those of Manetho, Macrob. in somn. Scipion. L. 1. c. 2.
with other things he took for Mercurial, as will appear hereafter. However
these very allusions to these Greek Mercurials, are sufficient to convict this
pretended Sanchoniathon of falsehood, in the opinion of such as believe the
Mercurials themselves to be Forgeries, and Forgeries much later than the time
that Sanchoniathon pretends to. However, if they were again involved by this
Second Hermes, how comes Sanchoniathon to have understood them? But if this
Surmubelus and Thuro had extricated them before the time of Sanchoniathon, how
comes Orpheus (who must have been Elder or contemporary with him, if he
flourished at, or a little before, the War of Troy, and who is generally
supposed to have borrowed his Notions from the Egyptians,) not to have
understood them free from Allegories, as well as this pretended Sanchoniathon?
But to proceed.

. XXI. HE is pretended also to have borrowed his Informations from Hierombaal
the Priest of the God Jevo. There is little reason to doubt but that he meant
Gideon, who was by his Father Joash Sur-named Jerubbaal. Jud. VI. 32.
The putting of H before Hebrew words beginning with I, (that is, putting
Aspirations where in the Original, the I is Consonant,) is so common, that I
believe none will doubt of it. Instances are very obvious, as in Hieremias,
Jerusalem, Hiericho, etc. And the M S. Greek (...) is as easy to have been
mistaken for a u, which is their Mark for (...). which is an ordinary occasion
of mistake in multitudes of MSS. Especially in the less skillful Publishers of
Printed Books from MSS. and this Name is at this present Written Jerobaal, with
an o in the Vulgar Latin Text, Judge. VI. 32. And almost as little reason is
there to doubt, but that the Name Jevo, is only a Greek imitation of the
Tetragrammaton, the middle and final Aspirations being utterly unexpressible in
the Greek Tongue. But neither is this account of his Information, any thing
more creditable than the others. How could Gideon be a Priest, who was of the
Tribe of Manasseh? Jud. VIII. 27.
Was it on account of the Ephod which Gideon made? But where is there the least
intimation that he wore it himself? Nay, when he is said to have placed it in
his own City of Ephra, it seems to imply, that it was placed there for
another's wearing. And how comes it to pass, that the Scripture should pass it
over in silence, that is so punctual in taking notice of Violations of the
Priesthood, in matters of lesser consequence in Jeroboam and others? But how
could Sanchoniathon have been guilty of such a mistake, in so fresh a memory of
Gideon, in so near a Neighborhood of the Jews, in a matter wherein then the
meanest of them could have informed him, (so careful they were then to keep up
the memory of their Tribes,) if he had been so diligent in procuring
Information, as is pretended? Suppose he had been so negligent himself; yet,
(...) Verba Porphyrii ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. l 9. 31. A.
how could King Abibalus, to whom he is said to have Dedicated his Book? How
could all his contemporary Enquirers after Truth, from all whom, he is
pretended to have received commendations, be yet all so mistaken in a thing of
so easy Information? Yet to make this fancy concerning Gideon's Priesthood
look more likely, the excellent Bochart conceives that the Baal Berith, Ph.
Col. 11. 17. Judge. VIII 33.
with whom the Israelites committed Idolatry after the death of Gideon, must
have been the God of Berytus, Sanchoniathon's own City. But it seems most
likely, that this Baal Berith was the God (not the Goddess) to whom Gideon's
Ephod was Consecrated, at his own City Ephra. Judge VIII 27. Judge. IV. 4.
That Ephod is said to have been a snare to Him and his Family. And accordingly
this Baal Berith's Temple, furnished the Sichemites with Arms in their
Conspiracy with Abimelech, which proved the ruin of the greatest part of
Gideon's Family. If so, then there was no ground to make this Baal Berith the
same with Jao, to whom Philo Byblius would have us believe that Gideon was
Priest. However, there is no probability that Berith (if it must needs be the
name of a place,) could be the same with Berytus. This Berith, where the
Sichemites dwelt was in all likelihood under the Dominion of the Israelites,
but Berytus was in Phoenicia, and was in Sanchoniathon's time (if we may
believe Philo Byblius) under a distinct King from Israel. Besides the different
ways of writing these words in the Hebrew, gives little occasion for such a
mistake. The Phoenician Berytus was so called as Stephanus tells us, rather
from (...). And it is observable, that Stephanus seems to have taken what he
had concerning these Phoenician places, from Philo Byblius himself, as might
have been shown in several Instances, and is on another occasion confessed by
Bochart himself. Phoen. Col. 11. 12.
If this were taken from him also, then it will at least follow, that this
affinity between the Names of Berith and Berytus, could have been no occasion
of mistake to Philo Byblius. Which as to our present purpose, is of much
greater consequence, than what that same Learned Person observes from Nonnus,
who takes Berytus for Beroe, the Daughter of Venus and Adonis. This therefore,
looks like one of those illmeant Blunders, which those Modern Greeks were
ordinarily guilty of in the Jewish History, who pretended, no doubt from the
like Records, to give other accounts of them, than their own writings had done
of themselves, only with a design to asperse their Nation. Thus Moses is made a
Woman, Suid. (...). ap. Joseph. c. Ap. 1. 1057.
called Moso by Alexander Polyhistor. Moses and Joseph are joined together as
contemporaries in Chaeremon. But Moses is the Son of Joseph in Trogus Pompeius,
Just. Hist. XXXVI. 2.
Epitomized by Justin. Many more Instances might have been given, if it had
been necessary. Nor will the Answer of Bochart serve to excuse him here. (...)
may indeed alone signify a Prince as well as a Priest. But when it is joined
with the God, to whom he is said to have been Priest, that were alone
sufficient to determine the signification, from any ambiguity of which it might
otherwise have been capable. But besides I shall 38.
hereafter have occasion to show his design in making him a Priest, for
recommending what he was to deliver on his Testimony.

. XXII. BUT possibly his pretended Memoires of Gideon, might have given him the
Title of Priest, and Sanchoniathon a Stranger, a likely occasion of such a
mistake. If they did so, then this it self had been a sufficient Argument, that
they could not have been Gideon's. And then, what credit must that part of his
History be of, which relyes on so uncreditable Informations? And indeed, how
unlikely is it, that Gideon should have left such Memoires behind him? In all
likelihood, what had come from him, would have been accounted Prophetical; at
least, if it had been undoubted, would have been made so by the attestation of
the Sanhedrim, who were by God himself established for the Authentical Judges
of Prophets. Which is the most defensible way for asserting the Divinity of the
Anonymous Authors of the Old Testament. And if so, what probability had there
been of their miscarriage? Nay, supposing them only Humane, and of no higher
repute among the Jews; yet, who can think they would have neglected so precious
a Monument of their Antiquity, from so sure a hand as Gideon's? But there is
not the least Memory of such a work among the Jews, not in their Canonical
Histories; not in the multitudes even of Counterfeits, that were Ancient, or
were ever received, even among the Hellenists, of which we have any account,
either in the Ancient Stichometriae, or in any Ancient Quotations; not so much
as in any Quotation of those Canonical Writers that lived near those times, and
quote several extant then, which have since miscarried, as the Book of Jather,
of the Wars of the Lord, etc. Not even in the Book of Judges, where his
Testimony had been most useful for continuing the Jewish History, from the
death of Joshua, to his own time. Can we think they would thus generally have
neglected him, if they had known him, or thought him Genuine? Can we think the
Phoenicians would have valued him, if his own Countrymen had so neglected him?

. XXIII. Certainly, if he ever had any such Memoires, or made use of them any
where, it must have been, most probably, where he gives account of Jewish
matters. But his accounts concerning them, are so full of mistakes, of mistakes
so inconsistent even with Jewish Interest, as could not, with any probability,
have been occasioned by any Jewish Testimonies; much less by so grave and
unexceptionable a Testimony as that of Gideon. I have had occasion to mention
one instance already, that of his making Gideon a Priest. And such generally
are the rest of his accounts of Jewish affairs, as far as we can judge of them,
by the few Fragments preserved to us by Porphyry. He makes Abraham a Native
Phoenician, By the Name of Saturn ap. Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 10. p. 36. C. p. 38. D.
and the same with the Greek Saturn, who bestowed Attica on Minerva. What Jew
would have robbed his Nation of their Father Abraham they so much boasted of,
would have derived them from the Uncircumcised Philistines, so much abhorred
and despised by them? Would have dishonored Abraham himself, so far as to have
made him a Heathen Deity, a thing so detested by the Jews? He makes him
actually Sacrifice his Son. It is plain what Interest obliged him to say so,
viz. that he might hereby give an account of that Ancient, but Inhumane Custom,
of Sacrificing their own Children to him, under the name of Saturn or Moloch.
For this was generally the design of the Heathen Mysteries, to commemorate some
memorable Action of their Deity. Thus the pleasure that Ceres took in the
obscene behavior of Baubo, was commemorated in the Eleusinian Mysteries. And
the like delight that Hercules took in the Plow-man's Curses, when he was
eating his Plow-Oxen, was also remembered with the like Curses still repeated in
the Solemnities of the Worship of Hercules. But what ground could he have in
doing so, from the Old Testament? He might indeed from the later Mystical
Expositions of the Hellenists, who speak of it as done, because it was reckoned
to him as done in the Divine acceptance, Genesis XXII. 16. Therefore St. Paul
says he Offered him, Heb. XI. 17. adding withal, that he received him from
Death in a Figure, V. 19. And the expression of having actually offered him, is
also used by St. Clemens in his Epistle to the Corinthians. Clem. ad Corinth.
Ep. 1.. 10.
If it were hence that he derived his mistake, that will also prove him
Counterfeited about the time he was first produced. He gives also different
accounts of the reason why Abraham should have offered his Son. Sometimes,
(...), P. 40. D. P. 38. D.
sometimes again, (...). I know not whether any occasion of the former account,
might have been taken from 2 Kings iii. 27. Am. i. 16. where the King of Moab
being pressed by distress of War, offered a Firstborn Son; but not his own,
but the King of Edoms. But there is no pretense of either in Abraham's case
from any Jewish Records, nor consequently could he have these different
Informations from the Memories of Gideon, unless we can suppose them, not only
different from all the Authentic Records of his Nation, but from themselves
also, these things being the Principal in this Author, that concern the Jews,
and yet, being so impossible to have been taken from any Memoires of Gideon,
make me verily suspect, that the Forger of this Author himself, as he did not
use, so neither did he know of any such Memoires, either truly or pretendedly
passing under the Name of Gideon, at least, not owned for such among the Jews.
Which as it is a clear conviction of his designed disingenuity in a matter not
excusable by any pretense of Ignorance; so it will render him justly liable to
a suspicion of a like disingenuity in his other fair pretenses, though we had
not the like evidence of conviction of them. At least no such pretenses to
means of Information must be trusted on his word, and there is no better
pretended for them.

. XXIV. BUT, to let the Informations alone, the work it self affords Intrinsic
Arguments enough of just suspicion. A great occasion of the Forgeries of those
times, was the Emulation of several Nations, for glory of Inventions and
Antiquity. Hence it came to pass, that of all glorious Inventions, and of all
Famous Persons, so very different and inconsistent accounts are given by the
Historians of the several Rival Nations, each of them challenging them for
their own. Hence such a multitude of Jupiters, Hercules's, Aesculapius's,
Diana's, etc. nay, and of Homers too, different not only in Nation, but in Age
too, yet pretending generally to the glory of the same Actions. It must needs
be, that of so inconsistent reports concerning the same Person, all but one
must have been not mistakes, but designed Forgeries. Which I therefore note to
show that, as it was not unusual, so neither was it new, to Forge on such
occasions. Yet they pretended generally to honest means of Information. Now
this pretended Sanchoniathon, is full of this vanity of arrogating useful
Inventions and Persons to his own Phoenicia. Which, as they will prove him
later than these Aemulations of several Nations about Antiquity, much later
than the time pretended for the true Sanchoniathon; so they will expose him to
all the Testimonies and Arguments that may be produced for the several Nations
against him in all, or any of the respective Particulars. If he can be
disproved or charged with indirect dealing in any one particular, that will be
sufficient to weaken his credit in all the rest. Let us come therefore to the
particulars.

XXV. THus he ascribes the Invention of Iron, to the Phoenician (...), in all
likelihood, Ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. l. 10 p. 35. C.
the same with (...) in Hesiod, whom he makes the Famous Vulcan; whereas the
Scripture attributes the same to Tubal Cain, and the Graecians to the Idaei
Dactyli, ^log. 287.
not long before the Wars of Troy. Str. 1 (...) 430.
For there we find that all the Arms of the Heroes, both offensive and
defensive, were of Brass, as appears by Homer, and is observed by the
Scholiast, on Apollonius Rhodius and Pausanias, La(...). p. 84
which are great suspicions that the Invention of Iron was late, because it had
not as yet reached those Parts. But it is indeed strange, that Vulcan should
here be taken for a Phoenician, (...).
who is by the Egyptians, reported to have been the notorious Original of the
first Generation of their Deified Kings; (...)crip. ^VII. Eus. (...) l. 9.
D.(...) 1. Cl. Prot. (...) 10. D.
The design of which Deifying being observed by this Philo himself, to have
been the honor of some profitable Invention for Humane Life, will make it
likewise probable, that he was also taken for the Inventor of Fire and Iron.
There were indeed several Vulcans observed by the Ancients, but not above Four,
and among them none that appears to have been thought Phoenician. Thus also he
makes Magus the Son of the (...) and Titanes, which were accounted bad Demons.
Who sees not here an instance of that ordinary vanity of the Graecians, of
turning the Name of the Sect into a proper Name of a Man, and thence pretending
to give an account of their first Institution? Who sees not a plain design to
rob the Chaldaeans of the Magi, and to make them a Phoenician Invention? Which
let him believe, who can find in his heart to do so. I need not to observe,
that the whole Sect of the Magi, if they were first Instituted by the Chaldaean
Zoroastres, (who seems to have lived near the time of Pythagoras, and is said
by some to have conversed with him) they must have been Instituted long after
the time of our pretended Sanchoniathon, and therefore could not have been
taken notice of by him. As for the Bactrian Zoroastres, I doubt the very
pretending to him was only such another design of robbing the Chaldaeans of
him. L. 11. Bibl. ex Ctesia.
Diodorus calls him Oxyartes, and that was, it may be, his true Name. I might
also observe, that when he makes this Magus the Son of those bad Demons, he
evidently alludes to the bad sense of the Name of Magus, which was yet very
much later than the Institution of the Sect it self.

. XXVI. He also makes the Dioscuri, not only Phoenicians, Ap. Eusebius. ib. p. 36.
A.
but the same also with the Corybantes and Curetes. It is evident he could not
understand the Castores, who were not only later than Sanchoniathon, but than
those Curetes and Corybantes also. The most candid sense that can be put upon
it, is by the name Dioscuri to understand, not the Sons, but the Nurses of
Jupiter. So indeed the word (...) is used in Hesiod for Nursing. And so the
Curetes or Corybantes, are in Truth, said to have Nursed him in the Antrum
Idaeum. But then, the word being Greek, could not have been known to the
Phoenician Sanchoniathon; and what word must have answered it in his Original
Phoenician, is not easy to guess. Nor do I know why Philo should use it in so
unusual a Notion, ^useb. 37.
which yet he elsewhere uses for them absolutely, without the explicatory
Addition of the Titles of Curetes or Corybantes. And is not this a plain design
upon the Cretan Jupiter, to make him, as well as his Nurses, Originally
Phoenician? But this may possibly be thought excusable as an Interpolation of
the Translator, who must at least, have been the Author of that Greek word. For
it seems evident, not only from this, but the mention of several other Greek
words, ^words, (...) (...) p. 36. because (...), p. 37. (...) etc. and p. 39.
^he quotes Hesiod, etc.
and of the Greek Nation, nay, of the very Alexandrians, that he did use the
liberty, rather of a Paraphrast, than of a faithful accurate Translator. But
then, how shall we be able to distinguish between his Interpolations, and the
Text of his pretended Sanchoniathon. It seems also strange, that these
Corybantes or Cabiri, or Samothraces, which, by the Graecians account of them,
seem to have been the same, and to have accompanied the Matter Deorum out of
Phrygia into Crete, should here be made immediately Phoenicians, though I am
apt to believe indeed that their Mysteries had some Originally-Phoenician
ingredients. Bochart. de Phoen. Colon. 12.
But it is yet more strange, how they should have found Crete Inhabited, where
they must have Nursed, or at least, received Jupiter, if themselves had been
the first Inventors of Ships, Ib. p. 36. A.
as is here pretended, unless possibly they made use of those hard shifts,
which are here also mentioned, as invented before. Which yet is hardly credible
of so great a Multitude as might be thought sufficient to People the whole
Island.

. XXVII. Other instances there are of the like Vanity and Affectation in this
Author. Some I have had occasion to touch at formerly. Who can endure to see
Ap. Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 10. p. 38. D. and p. 40. C.
Abraham, to see the famous Egyptian (...) 9. B.
Hermes, made Original Phoenicians? This alone, one would think, were
sufficient to overthrow those great Elogies that are given him for his
Faithfulness and Diligence, (...). A.
but this is not all. Jupiter Belus, the Famous Founder of the Assyrian
Monarchy, Typhon the Brother of the Famous Egyptian Osiris, must also be made
Originally Phoenicians; than which what can be more certainly false, if any
thing be certain in the Ancient Assyrian or Egyptian Histories? So must also
Adodus the Father of Benhadad King of Syria in the Scripture, and in Trogus
Pompeius, and Worshipped by the Syrians for a God. So must Aesculapius, (...)
whose Sons were Peloponnesians, and on that account present at the War of
Troy; besides that himself is reported to have been the Son of Arsinoe the
Daughter of Leucippus a Messenian. So must also Minerva, if she had Attica
bestowed on her by the Phoenician Saturn. But when were the Phoenicians so
famous for their Conquests, as to have so great and remote Dominions as Egypt,
Assyria and Attica at their disposal: What writer, even of their own, however
partial to his own Country, did so much as pretend it before our pretended
Sanchoniathon? But it is a strange mistake in Chronology (in which it seems to
have been a special Providence of God for their Discovery, that Counterfeiters
have generally been unskillful) that she should be made contemporary, or rather
later For she is made the Daughter of Saturn, p. 36. D. But Esculapius is made
the Son of Syduc, the Brother of Misor, whose Son Mercury is said to have been
Counselor to Saturn as soon as he was come to Man's Estate, p. 36. D. And the
Posterity of the Dioscuri are made contemporary with Saturn p. 37. B. Which
Dioscuri themselves were Sons of Syduc, and consequently Brethren to
Aesculapius. See p. 36. A.
than Aesculapius, as will appear by our Authors computation; whereas
Aesculapius flourished, as I said before, but little before the War of Troy,
but Minerva strove with Neptune, for the Dominion of Attica in the time of
Cecrops Diphyos, some hundreds of years before. There were indeed several
Minervae, and Aesculapii pretended by them, who had the curiosity to enquire
into them, in order to the exposing them. But this very pretense of a
Multitude, was later than the times of Aemulation, and yet none of those
Multitudes pretended to have been Phoenicians. The passage of Damascius
concerning a Phoenician Aesculapius, Damasc. vit. Isidor. ap. Phot. Cod. ccxl
11. p. 1073.
seems plainly Transcribed from Philo Byblius, and therefore ought not to be
taken for a distinct Authority.

. XXVIII. AND why should Abraham, ^ 3. D.
if he were the Phoenician Saturn, Circumcise himself, as this Author also
pretends, when it is so well known, that the Ancient Phoenicians were so averse
to it, that a long time after Abraham's death, they are still stigmatized by
the name of the uncircumcized Philistines? But the design is plain. He had a
mind to challenge a Person of such Note for his Countryman; and because the
Story of Abraham's making a Covenant with God by Circumcision, was one of the
most memorable passages of that Great Man's Life, therefore he thought it fit
to assert it to their Saturn. And it may be the rather, because by this time,
when this work was Counterfeited, the Phoenicians themselves seem also to have
received Circumcision from the Egyptians. Who knows but that such Tales as
these might have been the reason why Abraham was Worshipped at Mamre, (...)
111. Zozo. Eccl. 1. 4.
for some considerable time before Constantine who first forbad it, with Idols
and Sacrifices; by Gentiles as well as Christians; by Phoenicians as well as
those of Palaestine and Arabia? That Humane Sacrifices were not among those as
they are particularized by Sozomen, (though they were otherwise the properest
for the Phoenician Saturn) there was very good reason, because they had been,
long before that time, forbidden by Roman Laws. The First Roman Law against
them was at Rome, An. II. C. 657. Cn. Cornelius Lentulus and P. Licinius
Crassus being Plin. Not. Hist. XXX. c. 1.
Consuls. After that it was particularly forbidden the Druids by Plin. Not.
Hist. XXX. c. 1.
Tiberius, at last forbidden every where by the Emperor Porphyr. de Abst. 11.
56.
Hadrian. Besides that by the account Philo Byblius himself, as well as other
Writers of Phoenician affairs, give concerning them; these Humane Sacrifices,
by the Rules of the Phoenicians themselves, seem not to have been ordinary, but
only reserved for some very great distress, as an expiation to that angry
Demon. But all these instances do abundantly show how extremely partial this
Author was, in adorning his own Nation with the spoils of others. Which is not
reconcilable either with the Veracity or Antiquity of the true Sanchoniathon.
Nor will any supposable mistakes of Philo in Translating him, serve to bring
him off in so gross and designed instances concerning his Neighbors and the
Famous Persons now mentioned. For they concern Things, not Words and
Expressions; Things very notorious, not only of Probable or Conjectural
Evidence.

. XXIX. I cannot therefore but think this Author Counterfeited purposely with a
design of confronting the Antiquity of the Scripture. But who was the Impostor,
whether Philo Byblius or Porphyry, that I confess I cannot easily determine. I
confess I should rather charge it on Porphyry, the abusing of the Name of
Philo, as well as that of Sanchoniathon, were it not for that only Testimony of
Athenaeus, and I have given my reasons why I should otherwise have thought it
improbable that Philo was the Author of that Translation. But because I cannot
tell what to say to that express Quotation of Athenaeus before the time of
Porphyry, I doubt Philo will not easily be discharged of it. For by his
Exceptions against the Testimony of Hecataeus for what he had Written in favor
of the Jews, That either his work must have been counterfeited; (...)
or if genuine, that he himself must have been carried away by the plausibility
of the Jewish pretenses: It appears that he was engaged in that Dispute
concerning the Antiquity of the Jews, and engaged against the Jews, and
therefore was a Person sufficiently interessed to set on such a disingenuous
design as far as his Principles would give him leave. And I have already shown
how far Platonical Principles did so. If I may venture to guess in a matter
that affords no better Arguments than guesses, I should suspect that Josephus's
Books against Appion were the occasion of engaging Philo on this Subject, What
Josephus had there produced in defense of the Antiquity of the Jews, was very
probably the (...) alluded to by Philo. I cannot think any other was meant,
because Josephus seems to have been the first that engaged in that Dispute, (he
does not intimate in the least that any had engaged in it before him) and
because the time was so short between Josephus and Philo, that there could
hardly be any new occasion for any one else to undertake that cause that
Josephus had so very lately, and so accurately defended. For Josephus wrote his
Books against Appion immediately after his Antiquities and his Life, in the
Thirteenth year of Domitian, because he Dedicated these also to the same
Epaphroditus, who was put to Death in the year following; and Philo seems to
have written under Hadrian. Besides the fame of Josephus; with all well-wishers
to Learning, and the Eminent capacities he served in, both among his own
Countrymen, and in the Courts of the Vespasians, added no doubt a greater
Authority to what came from him, and recommended it to the Reading of all
curious Persons, not now to mention the attestations of the Emperors, and of
King Agrippa, and of other Learned Men, Heathens as well as others, among whom
himself reckons Julius Archelaus and Herod. C. App. 1. 1037. F.
And this very Testimony of Hecataeus, which it seems so gravelled Philo, had
been produced, and insisted on, in this very work by Josephus. Cont. Appion. L.
1. p. 1048. B. 11. p. 1063 F.
Which will therefore make it very probable, that this Work of Philo Byblius
against the Jews, was designed in answer to Josephus against Appion.

. XXX. WHICH being supposed, I consider further that Josephus in that same Work
had principally insisted on the Testimonies of Phoenicians and Egyptians,
Cont. App. L. 1. p. 1039. C.
for proving the Antiquity of his own Nation, as of those who had best reason
to know them; but the Phoenicians most of all, C. Appion. L. 1. p. 1043. F.
Antiq. viii. ^. p. 258. F. ^. Appion. ^. p. 1042. ^.
as being nearest. Accordingly he Appeals not only to their Writers that were
extant, but their Written Records, their (...), which were preserved to that
very time. This could not choose but particularly move Philo Byblius as being
himself a Phoenician, and who might very well have known Josephus himself, if
he were Threescore and Eighteen years old, at the Two hundred and Twentieth
Olympiad, as has been observed out of Suidas, though possibly the odd number of
the Olympiad, above Two hundred and twenty, which is requisite to make him live
to Write concerning the Empire of Hadrian, is wanting. I mention not Scaliger's
(...) which tells us more particularly, not the Olympiad only, but also the
very year wherein he conceives him to have Written, because it is of no
Authority. But there was another thing that added further to the reputation of
the Jews about that time. Their Essenes had been in great reputation with as
many as had occasion to hear of them, as a very Philosophical sort of Persons.
Not. Hist. v. 17. de Abstin. IV.. 11. etc.
Pliny the Elder had mentioned them with great respect, as afterward Porphyry
did also. But this concerned only their Philosophy of living. There was also
among them, others who had written Books of Philosophy, not only Aristobulus
the Peripatetick in the time of Ptolomaes Philometor; not only many others
intimated, though not named by Philo the Jew, and Josephus, if he ever lived to
finish that work of the Sentiments of the Jews, Praef. ad Antiq. in fin. and
Ant. xx. 9. and alibi saepe.
so often promised by him, as I doubt, he did not. These, by Mysticizing the
(...) of Moses to a sense, not very distant from that received among the wisest
Philosophers, and in a most elegant, rapturous, modish style (such was that of
Philo particularly.) They gained so much further on the good opinion of the
wise ones of that Age, as to have their Nation, which had formerly been
despised as Barbarous, now to pass among the Nations which were Famous for
Wisdom. And the rather because this way of Mysticizing the Poets, for the
Greeks, into a Systeme of Philosophy, was already taken up by the Stoics, and
the other Dogmatical Philosophers, who were concerned for the defense of the
received Religions against the Atheists and Epicureans, and Scepticks, who had
taken great advantage from those Fables, for exposing them. Who had withal,
been herein imitated by the Egyptians, who had Allegorized Isis and Ostris,
and all their own most Ancient Histories. From whom the Alexandrian Jews seem
willing to differ as little as was possible. Accordingly Laertius, Prooem. ad
vit. Philos. p. 3. B.
who wrote not long after, takes them into that Number; and endeavored, Numen.
ap. Orig. c. Cells. 1. p. 13. and Eus. Pr. Ev. IX. 7.
ash was able, to give some account of them, though on the ill Informations of
Clearchus the Peripatetick. So also Numenius before him.

. XXXI. BUT there were also other things that contributed hereunto about the
time of which I am speaking. One was the attestation of some Oracles received
among the Heathens themselves, which also commended them for that very cause
wherein they differed from the rest of Mankind. Such was that produced by St.
Justin Martyr, not long after the time of Philo, as given by a Heathen Deity to
a Heathen Enquirer: Parnaetic. p. 12.
So he, (...).

(...)
(...).
God might possibly in this Case, make the Devil speak against his own
Interest, as he did in the case of Balaam. To the same purpose we have other
Oracles also owned by Porphyry, Ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. X. 10.
(very probably in his Body of Philosophy Collected out of Oracles,) whereof
some might have been Antienter than the time of Philo Byblius. I am not
concerned to Dispute what real Credit these Oracles deserved, yet certainly
they could not choose but have been very powerful recommendations to those
Philosophers who did actually believe them Divine, and that is all for which I
am concerned at present. To the same purpose, also I refer the advantageous
Characters of Abraham and Moses, in the Orphaicks first mentioned in these
first times of Christianity. And as Orpheus had among the Heathens the
Reputation of a Sacred and Inspired Person, so his word must have been
reverenced by them all, but particularly by the Egyptians, and the Disciples
of Mercury, because he was taken for a great promoter of their Philosophy. But
there was yet a further reason that might peculiarly recommend him to the
Egyptians. That is, that he was, by some Traditions, received by Persons of
great Authority among themselves, pretended to have been a Sacred Person to the
Deity of Heliopolis. So Chaeremon, a (...) himself, Ap. Joseph. cont. Appion.
L. 1. p. 1057. B.
makes Joseph and Moses also to have been Egyptian (...), in the same Notion
as the Jews also had their Sacred Scribes. And Manetho a High Priest and
Scribe, Manetho ap. Joseph. cont. Appion. L. 1. p. 1053 A. and 1054. A. 1055. C.
also had delivered the same concerning Moses, that his Egyptian name was
Osarsyph, and that he was called so from Osiris. So I read (...) rather than
(...) the God of Heliopolis to whom he was Priest. The occasion of pretending
this concerning Joseph, might possibly be his Marrying the Daughter of
Potipherah Priest of On, which by the Greek Interpreters and Demetrius,
Demetrius ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. IX. 21.
was rendered (...). Concerning Moses, possibly it was his skill in all the
Learning of the Egyptians, that which was Philo Jud. de vit. Mos. Lib. 1. p.
606. B. Clem. Al. Strom. 1. p. 343. C. D.
Sacred as well as other sorts, which they might think he could never have got
in such Perfection, if himself had not been a Sacred Person. It is no matter
how far they were mistaken in believing so concerning him. Their actual
believing so, is sufficient for my purpose, to make them entertain a great
reverence for his Philosophy.

. XXXII. ACCORDINGLY there was about that time a Sect of the Philosophers
themselves, that began to take notice of those Mystical Expositions of the Law,
and to produce them with respect as Authorities, with honorable mention of
Moses under the Titles of Legislator and Prophet. A name not unusual to them
among the other Orientals that were Famous for Wisdom, but particularly used
among the Phoenicians and Egyptians, and very properly belonging to him as a
Scribe or Priest of Heliopolis. L. III. adv. Christian. ap. Eusebius. Eccl Hist.
VI. 19.
Porphyry that inveterate Enemy of Christianity, takes notice of them, as they
who had led our Christian Origin the way in his Allegorical Expositions. For
such he reckons Numenius, Cronius, Apollophanes, Longinus, Moderatus,
Nicomachus, Chaeremon and Cornutus. These did not only follow the way of
Allegorizing, in turning the Heathen Theogonyes into Mystical Senses, as
appears in the work still extant of Cornutus, on that Subject. That was not
new. The Stoics whom both Cornutus and Chaeremon followed, had begun that long
before. They also followed the Allegorizing Jews, in allowing the Authority of
Moses, in quoting him by the name of (...) only, which I think is not usual
with any but those Allegorical Writers. Thus Numenius, Orig. c. Cells. 1. p. 13.
IV. p. 198. 199
with whom it was very ordinary. Thus Longinus in that only work which is
extant of his, (...). And no doubt it would have appeared concerning more of
them, if they had been extant. Nay thus even afterward (when the rancours of
the Philosophers themselves against the Scriptures were grown higher) Porphyry
himself, De antr. Nymph. P. 256.
and Chalcidius, who is therefore by some less considering Persons mistaken for
a Christian, who yet presumes to confute He reckons Moses among those who make
matter to have a beginning. p. 372. Edit. Meursii. But he afterward joins
himself with those who make it Eternal. p. 376. 401. 409. 410. etc. Besides his
saying concerning Moses, divina, ut ferunt, Inspiratione vegetatus, plainly
implies, that he did not believe him so inspired himself, but that he only
delivered herein the Sense of others.
his Prophet where he dissents from him, though he do it indeed, as became the
time he lived in, when the Empire was Christian, with civility and great
respect. And the first of these which are mentioned by Porphyry will, in all
likelihood, be earlier than Philo Byblius. So will Apollophanes, if he were the
same who was meant by the Counterfeiter of the Works now extant under the name
of Dionysius the Areopagite, who is there made to observe the Eclipse at our
Saviors Death at Heliopolis in Egypt; and if that otherwise Learned Impostor
have but observed the due decorum of time. Athen. Deipnos. VII. 6. vid. Menag.
in Laert. L. VII. p. 186.
Much more, if he were the Stoic, mentioned by Athenaeus, but under the
corrupt name of Aphanes, as contemporary with Eratosthenes, and Fellow-Disciple
with him to Ariston Chius. And some of his Companions in this passage of
Porphyry were Stoics, as Cornutus and Chaeremon. So will Numenius, if it were
to him that Apollonius Tyanaeus wrote that Discourse, whereof we have a
Fragment in Stobaeus. Eclog. Physic.
So will also Cronius for the same reason, whom Porphyrius assures us to have
been (...), a Friend and acquaintance of Numenius. De Antr. Nymph. p. 263.
So was Annaeus Cornutus certainly, To him Persius writes Sat. V. Lib. XI. Ep.
58. Not. Quaest. L. VII. C. 5. confer. Orig. c. Cells. l. p. 45.
and Chaeremon the Stoic, contemporary with Martial under Domitian, who must
yet have been old at that time, if it were his Book de Cometis which was
mentioned by Seneca. And he is certainly quoted by Josephus.

. XXXIII. BUT there was also another occasion about this time, which made the
Jewish (...) more taken notice of. Which, though it seems indeed to have
proceeded from this, yet recommended it farther, to many who knew nothing of
the favorable esteem the forementioned Philosophers had for the Jewish
Philosophy it self. That is, that it was about this time, taken into the
pretended Philosophy of the Egyptian Hermes. The name of Hermes had indeed
been mentioned by many Authors before the coming of our Savior. In Eusebius.
Graec. p. 6.
His Pillars also are said to have been consulted by Manetho for compiling his
History. But for any Philosophical Discourses published under his name, such as
the Poemander and Asclepius now extant, such as were many more now lost, but
mentioned by the Ancients, I believe there can be no Testimonies produced much
Antienter than Philo Byblius, at least not as extant in the common Greek
Character as well as Tongue. And yet they could hardly have been much later,
considering that St. Justin Martyr quotes them about the time of Antoninus
Pius, as also his Contemporary Apuleius, if the Latin Translation of Asclepius
be his, considering withal, that De Isid. and Osirid. (...), etc. p. 375. F.
Plutarch also mentions them, an Author undoubtedly equal, if not Antienter
than Philo Byblius; that He quotes (...) concerning the marks of Apis, probably
out of those Two and Forty Mystical Books of Hermes, which contained the
Rituals of the Egyptian Priests, mentioned by Clemens Alexandrinus, unless
possibly he did not mean a Book, but a Tradition Fathered upon Hermes, like
those mentioned by Manetho.
Aelian does so who lived under Hadrian,, Contemporary with Philo; considering
also that before them, the Egyptian Heretics, the Basilidians especially, and
the Valentinians, made use of many of his Notions. Now those Heretics are
generally by the consent of Antiquity, said to have risen about the time of
Hadrian. But our most Learned Bishop of Chester Vind. Ign.
thinks them Antienter, to whom I refer the Reader for satisfaction that
desires it. However, the Author from whom they borrowed their Heresies, should
in all reason, be some while Antienter than they. And from him it is most
likely that the Valentinians took their Ogdoas, and the Basilidians their
Magical Practices, that I may not now descend to a more particular Parallel.
Nor yet can I think, as the Learned Casaubon does, that any Christian (even of
those Heretics) counterfeited him. There are such other marks in him, that the
Author was indeed a Heathen. Poemand. c. 3. 25.
He calls the Sun the greatest God of those that are in Heaven, to whom all the
Heavenly Gods pay respect, as to their King and Potentate. Ib. c. 3. 17.
And he elsewhere mentions the Gods appearing in the Stars. That he should call
the Sun God, might indeed seem agreeable to the Basilidian Hypothesis, who made
Abraxas theirs. But that he should allow all the Stars for Gods also, seems
more than any Christian could grant. Yet even this Expression the Hellenistical
Jews did not scruple. So Philo the Jew, speaking concerning the Creation of the
Heavens, says, that it ought therefore to be created first, and of the purest
part of Matter, (...). De Mund. Opif. p. 5. E
These (...) were no doubt the Stars. However there were many more things
extant then, in the time of Philo Byblius, which did undeniably prove the
Author to have been a Heathen. Such were those Books mentioned by Clemens
Alexandrinus, Strom. vi. p. 633.
wherein all the whole Order of the Egyptian Worship was particularly
prescribed, by which their Idolatrous Priests in those times were guided.

. XXXIV. YET though the Author of these Counterfeited works, pretending to the
name of Hermes were a Heathen, I must withal grant, that the great Person now
mentioned, had an occasion for mistaking him for a Christian, from those
frequent allusions to the Old Testament Scriptures, which he had observed in
him. But I have already shown another way how these Allusions, not express
Quotations, might have been used by a Heathen of that Age. That is, that the
Counterfeiter of them, might have been one of that Set of Philosophers, who
had, as has been shown, taken in the Jewish Philosophy into theirs, from the
Writings of Philo and such others as had recommended it to them, by their
Mystical Expositions of it. Accordingly, their Quotations of the Scriptures
themselves, are generally at the Second hand, as they found them already
produced by such Writers as they dealt with, not mentioning, or but very
rarely, either Book or Author, as in all likelihood they would, if they had
taken them immediately from the Originals. And this Party was more likely to
propagate among the Egyptians, (such as these undoubtedly were who Forged the
Works of Hermes,) because the Alexandrian Jews were most Famous both for
Numbers and Learning, above any of their Nation in any other Colony; had
multitudes of their Philosophical Essenes, and a flourishing Temple among them
to the days of Vespasian; and did, no doubt, suit their notions as near, as
Truth would give them leave, to the received Doctrines of the Egyptians, which
were very plausible recommendations to them. And when it had thus got into the
Hermetical Philosophy, by this means it was unawares insinuated into those who
were most averse either to the Jewish or the Christian Religion, who yet had a
great Veneration for the Philosophy, as was pretended, of the Ancient and
Deified Hermes. Longinus was one of them, who yet wrote against the Christians.
And Porphyry another, Ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. xv. 20.
who yet was one of the greatest Adversaries, perhaps, that the Christians ever
had. And this was the more likely to prevail among them, when Moses himself was
taken for one of their own Priests, and that of Heliopolis, where those very
Pillars are pretended to have been, from whence the Doctrine of Mercury was
pretended to have been Collected, the custody of which must, by their customs,
been properly his Province as a Priest. So that on this account, they might
presume his Doctrine to have been the same with that of Mercury. But how much
more might they presume it, if they took his Person to have been the same also?
And some of them were of that opinion, if we may believe Artapanus. This I take
to be a more likely account, Artap. ap. Eus. Pr. Ev. ix. 27.
how Scripture Notions got among the Philosophers, than the common mistaken
passage concerning Ammonius and the (...). I am sure it agrees much better both
with Historical Truth and Experiments than the other, however it has had the
Fortune to take among Learned men.

. XXXV. To return therefore to Philo Byblius, this I take to be the most likely
design of his forging the whole History of his pretended Sanchoniathon. He was,
no doubt, as a Phoenician, zealously concerned for the honor of his Country.
Nay his concernment for his own City Byblos appears, (...). ap. Eus. b. Pr. Ev.
l. 10. p. 37. A. and from him Stephanus. Not. Hist. v. 20.
in that he makes his fictitious Author pretend that it was the First City in
Phoenicia. Had it been so, it is strange, it should never have been mentioned
in the Scriptures before the times of the Prophets, where notwithstanding so
many other Phoenician Cities are so frequently mentioned. The (...) in Josua
seems to be rather from Gabala a City of Phoenicia, distinct from Byblos,
Ptolomy and Gamala in Pliny. This very thing is a shrewd suspicion that
Sanchoniathon was to say nothing but what Philo Byblius would have him, that
though we have seen him so full of a partial design for the honor of his
Country; and though we have seen him guilty of so many instances of notorious
disingenuity in that regard; and though this pretense concerning Byblos,
appears, from the Scripture-description of Phoenicia, to have been as
groundless a fiction as any he had been guilty of: Yet he should yield to the
Interest of Philo, and make his Byblos a more Ancient City even than his own
beloved Berytus, when he might with as much ground have preferred his own City
before it. The name of Berytus does certainly better resemble a Phoenician
Original than that of Byblos. Philo therefore being thus concerned; and being,
by his concernment, prompted to say many things both new and false, and which
could not be made appear from any Monuments as yet produced; thought himself
therefore obliged to pretend some new means of Information for his pretended
Sanchoniathon, in such matters as he was to deliver without any known Authority
of extant Authors. And because he knew the Tyrian Records and Inscriptions had
been searched and published before; he therefore makes his Sanchoniathon to
enquire also into the Records and Inscriptions of the other particular Cities.
(...), etc. Porphyr. ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. l. 9. p. 31. B.
This seems to have been his Artifice to recommend what he had to say in favor
of his own City, in opposition to the other Cities of Phoenicia, or in favor
of his Country, in opposition to such Countries as had not Authority of their
own Records to oppose against him.

. XXXVI. BUT these were not the only Adversaries against whom his Ambition had
engaged him in this Work. He seems also in this very Work to have had a
particular design upon the Jews. One whole Book of this work seems to have
related to them in particular. For that very same passage concerning Abraham's
Sacrificing Isaac, Pr. Ev. l. 10. p. 40. B.
which Eusebius relates from the work of Philo (...) that he produces elsewhere
from the First Book of his Phoenician History. Pr. Ev. iv. 16. p. 156. D.
By this it should seem, both that the proper Title of the First Book was
concerning the Jews, (as many Thus it appears from the abrupt beginnings of
many of Philo's Works, that they were designed to continue others, though of
different Titles. So St. Lukes (...) was his Gospel, his Second is (...),
written, no doubt at the same time, and intended to continue the same History
where his Gospel left it. So Josephus after his Antiquities, immediately
subjoyned his Life, (as has already been observed by the most Learned Dr. Isaac
Vossius) and after his Life his Books against Appion, yet so as that his Life
and his Two Books against Appion kept their distinct Titles, none ever
mentioning any more than Twenty Books of his Antiquities, excepting Cassiodore,
who reckons Two and twenty, Div. Lect. c. 17. No doubt the Two odd Books were
those against Appion. So that it seems his Life, though added as an Appendix to
his Twentieth Book, yet did not increase the Number. So (...) Antiochenus's
Third Book Ad Autolye. was not Anciently called the Third Book as it is now,
but by a proper Title, Liber de Temporibus ad Autolyc. as appears from
Lactantius, Div. Inst. l. 23. and it plainly begins with a new address, as if
designing a new Argument. So Clemens Alexandrinus's Protreptick, Paedagogus and
Stromat (...) carry on the same design. So Eusebius's Book De Martyribus
Palaestinae plainly connects with the end of the Eighth Book of his
Ecclesiastical History, yet so as not to disturb the account of his Ten Books
of that whole work. So the same Eusebius's Three Books against Marcellus
Ancyranus, and Two De Ecclesiastica Theologia belong plainly to the same work.
So the Seven Books of Lactantius of Divine Institutions, have every one of them
distinct Titles. But the instance of the Books of Lucifer Calaritanus is most
remarkable. They were all designed as parts of the same work, written
continuedly, and intended to be presented at the same time to the Emperor
Constantius. Yet no continuation of any one number of Books, or Title. There
are Two in defense of Athanasius, one De Regibus Apostaticis, another De non
conveniendo cum Haereticis, another De non ^arcendo in Deum delinquentibus, and
lastly, one De eo quod moriendum set pro Dei filio. I have been the more
particular in these instances, because as the Observations are useful, so I
have not found them commonly taken notice of.
Instances might have been given of such proper Titles of Parts of larger Works
in those times,) and that this Book distinct from Philo's Preface, was reckoned
as the First Book, which would again confirm what I said before to reconcile
Eusebius, who reckons Nine Books of this Phoenician History with Porphyry, who
reckons only Eight, that this First Book was taken into the Number of the whole
Work by Eusebius, but left out by Porphyry, because it had a distinct Title by
it self. Unless possibly the same passage in the First Book of the Phoenician
History, were quoted by Philo in that other work of his concerning the Jews,
for I confess there is some difficulty in making them the same. However, for
the present, supposing that he designed one Book principally to give an account
of Jewish Affairs; and that he had withal, a farther design of arrogating the
principal ornaments of their Nation to his own, (of which his other Work is
alone sufficient to render him suspicious, though he had no particular Book of
this that bore such a Title) and that he knew that an account from Phoenician
Records here, would not be taken for sufficient to confront their own so much
better, and more Authentic Testimonies concerning themselves, especially when
confirmed with such a concurrence of Testimonies of other Nations, Phoenicians
as well as others, as he had seen produced by Josephus: Therefore it may be, he
thought it fit his Sanchoniathon should live in the time of Abibalus the Father
of that Hiram, whose time was the highest Period of any Phoenician Testimonies,
yet produced concerning Jewish Affairs.

. XXXVII. This time he makes either equal, or a little before the Destruction
of Troy, when he makes his Author equal to Semiramis, who was, as he tells us,
either equal, or a little before that War. Which yet is not so to be
understood, as if he had fixed this time by the Age of Semiramis. No, he would
have his Abibalus equal with her, whose Husband Ninus was taken, as I said, for
the utmost Period of Heathen History. But the fixation of this time, was from
the time of Abibalus, and that Abibalus no other than the Father of Hiram. His
time indeed, according to the account that had already been given from the
Tyrian Records by Menander Ephesius, will agree with what is said concerning
the War of Troy. For from the Twelfth of Hiram, concurrent with the Fourth of
Solomon wherein the Temple was begun, to the building of Carthage by Dido are
reckoned One Hundred forty three years and Eight Months, by Josephus from
Menander. If therefore Dido received Aeneas coming from Troy, Joseph. c.
Appion. L. 1. p. 1042. B. 1043. F. and apud Eus. Pr. Ev. X. 13. From whom
Theophilus Antiochenus's account of that same Number from the same Authority is
to be corrected L. iii. ad Autolyc. cxliii. for cxxxiv. And Lactantius who
usually followed Theophilus in his Chronology has cxl. neglecting the smaller
number. Div. Inst. iv. 8.
as Virgil and his Authors will have it (as undoubtedly so exact a Man as he
had Authors for what he said, and there is nothing so certainly agreed among
Authors concerning the building either of Carthage or Rome to contradict it)
Sanchoniathon must then have been so much and more (as contemporary, (...).
Porph. ap. Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 9. p. 31. D.
not with Hiram, but Abibalus) before the War of Troy, as Porphyry himself does
expressly place him. Which there would yet have been more pretense for with them
who had followed the account of Appian, Appian. Punic. init.
who makes the very building of Carthage to have been Fifty years Elder than
the Destruction of Troy. I doubt not but it was a great mistake, but I am only
concerned to show what account, right or wrong, they might have followed who
made him Elder than the War of Troy. But if this same number of One hundred
forty three years and Eight Months was the distance between the War of Troy and
the building of Carthage, Chron. L. ii. Number. Eusebius. 971.
as Eusebius does conceive; then it will follow that he was about the time of
that War. And to this exactly agrees the account of the same Menander and
Laetus, Menander and Laetus ap. Cl. Alex. Strom. 1. p. 326.
(the Publisher and Translator of Mochus, Hypsicrates and Theodotus) who make
Menelaus put in at Phoenicia in his return from Troy in the time of Hiram. This
I take to be the true account of this doubtful dis-junction concerning this
time, because it is so very agreeable with the then extant Phoenician Authors.
As for the making Sanchoniathon equal with Semiramis, as it was indeed done
very unskilfully; so it seems (as I said) to have been with a design to put him
beyond all possibility of conviction by different Authors, making him hereby so
far superior in time to any Records that might pretend to rival him, as that he
must have been equal to the utmost Period of time, that they pretended with any
confidence to give any account of.

. XXXVIII. AND having placed him thus high, he was in course obliged to derive
his Means of Information yet higher. But being to give an account of Jewish
Affairs, upon the Credit (as I said) of Jewish Testimonies, yet very different
from those which were owned and received among the Jews themselves; he was
therefore obliged to bethink himself of some Jewish Name to Father his Records
upon, of whose Writings the Jews themselves had never heard. And the reasons,
why he was to make him a Priest, might be of two sorts: That he might hereby
recommend his Authors Credit, because those most Ancient accounts of things
were generally, as we have seen, derived from Sacred Inscriptions in Temples,
pretended also to have been written either in Hieroglyphics, or Sacred
Characters, to which as the Priests were supposed to have the easiest access,
so they were also, by those Mystical Instructions which they were obliged to
know as Priests, best qualified for understanding them: And that he might also
give an account why such unheard of Writings might have been so long concealed
from Vulgar knowledge, because being Sacred, and written by a Sacred Person,
they might have been kept within the Adyta, only among the Priests, which might
also give an account how they might afterward miscarry, before the pretended
Sanchoniathon was to appear to quote them, though they might have been supposed
really extant when he was to Collect his Observations from them. Accordingly,
whoever of the Philosophers, made it his business to enquire into the Monuments
of any place, whether Historical, or Philosophical, made his addresses to the
Priests of the place, whose Antiquities he was desirous to learn. So Pythagoras
in Phoenicia to the Prophets the Posterity of Mochus, in Egypt to the
Heliopolitane, Jamblich. de vit. Pythagor. Porphyr. vit. Pythag. Plutarch.
Solon and de Isid. and Osirid. Clem. Al. Strom. 1. p. 303.
Memphitane and Diospolitane Priests, particularly to Oenuphis or Psenuphis,
and perhaps Sonchis; Solon and Lycurgus, but particularly Solon, to the same
Priests now mentioned; Eudoxus to Chonuphis, and Plato to Sechnuphis. And for
Plato, on occasion of his Story of the Island Atlantis, and the Exploits of his
own Countrymen the Athenians against them, for which he was beholden, not to
any Athenian Monuments but only to those pretended to by the Egyptian Saitane
Priests: So he thought himself concerned, as well as he could, to defend their
Credit, and to do it by these degrees. First, though this was only a matter of
Secular History, In Tim. init.
yet for the better recommendation of it, he refers, not to Secular, but Sacred
Records. Next he assigns these Sacred Writings, as was undoubtedly most proper,
to the custody of the Priests. Then he insinuates a Recommendation of the
Credit of their Priests, beyond any of other places that might be opposed to
them, from the particular conveniences they enjoyed, above others, for
addicting themselves wholly to the employment of their own Profession, and
their unmixedness with the Profane Vulgar. Accordingly they who, before
Sanchoniathon, pretended to Publish their own Records, were generally Priests.
So was Berosus and Manetho, Ap. Eusebius. Chr. Gr. p. 6.
and Chaeremon. And Manetho assumes the Title in the very Dedication of his
Work, as if it were purposely to add the greater credit to his performance. And
though the Jews pretended to no such Sacred Pillars or Inscriptions; nor ever
kept their Sacred Books so reserved from the Vulgar, either in Sacred unknown
Characters, or by laying them up in the Adyta; yet because it was fashionable,
they also insisted on the same way of defending their own Records against the
Heathens who contradicted them. So Josephus also reasons. Cont. Appion. L. 1.
p. 1036.
He also derives his Information from the Sacred Records of his own Nation. He
makes the preserving these Records the peculiar Province of their Priests. He
insists on the same Qualifications of their Priests, which Plato had used
before him, their Separation from Secular Employments, and their unmixedness
with Vulgar Affinities. And as often as he has occasion to vindicate his own
Credit, either against Justus Tiberiensis, or the then Gentile Authors who had
given other accounts of the Jewish War, than he had done, though this were not
a Subject wherein he could pretend any Sacred Records, yet still he insists on
this Topic of his being a Priest for Vindicating his own Historical Credit
against them. Antiq. xvi. 11. p. 563. E. cont. Appion. L. 1. p. 1038. A.
So that from hence the Learned Bochart might have seen a very useful reason
why Sanchoniathon, when he makes his Hierombaal not only a Jew, but a Priest,
should also understand the name Priest in the Sacred and Popular signification.

. XXXIX. AND having thus made him a Jew and a Priest, it followed farther, that
he was to be made a Priest of the God of the Jews. But Jao (which is the same
name with Jevo, and is read for it in this same passage of Porphyry concerning
Sanchoniathon, Theodoret. Therap. ii.
as we have it in Theodoret) is the name by which the God of the Jews was known
among the Heathens, even before the time of Philo Byblius. Bibliothec. L. ii.
Diodorus Siculus in the time of Augustus, had expressly made Jao to be the God
from whom Moses, as he would have it believed, pretended to have received his
Laws. And it may also hence be conjectured why he pitched on Gideon rather than
any other on whom he was to Father his Forgeries. He designedly chooses to call
him by his Sur-name of Hierombaal, rather than his Original name of Gideon,
possibly because it was the Fashion, as on other occasions, so on the
undertaking the office of a Priest, for those Orientals, to change their names,
as one Ceremony of their Consecration. Thus Joseph, whom they made a (...), had
the Egyptian name given him of Psonthom-phanech in the Scripture, but Peteseph
in Chaeremon; Moses that of Osarsiph in Manetho, Chaerem^n ap. Joseph. C.
Appion. L. 1. p. 1057. B.
Tisithen in Chaeremon, Joachim, but especially Melchi with the Mystae in
Clemens Alexandrinus. Osarsiph ap. Maneth. Jos. C. Appion. L. 1. p. 1054. A
Tisithen ap. Chaeremon. Joseph. ib. p. 1057. B.
And this might also have been the reason why Nebuchadnezzar changed the names
of Daniel and the Three Children when he had given them up to the Institution
of the Chaldaeans who were reputed Sacred among them. Joachim. and Melchi after
his Assumption into Heaven. Clem. Alexandr. Strom. 1. p. 343. C.
And upon this account, as I said, he might the rather make a Priest of Gideon,
because there is none of the Judges but he that has any more than one name
given him in the Scripture. But insisting on his Authority as a Priest, he
might think it more convenient to call him by his Mystical name, rather than by
that by which he was commonly known. Besides who knows but he might purposely
pitch upon the name (...) that the very name might seem to the Greeks, (for
whom he designed his pretended Translation,) to imply his being a (...)? There
are innumerable examples of the like absurd Etymologies of words of other
Tongues, especially among Mystical Writers of all sorts, both Jews and
Gentiles, from Greek Originals, which yet generally prevailed. How much more
easy was it for him to impose on them in a Tongue so little understood by them
as the Hebrew or Punick? They themselves took a Liberty of doing it, when they
had a mind to prove their own Fictions from such ignorant Etymologies. Thus
Lysimachus proved that the Jews had built their City Jerusalem, Lysimach. ap.
Joseph. cont. Appion. L. 1. p. 1058. G. So Eupolemus derives Hierosolyma quasi
(...), ap Eus Pr. Ev. ix.
with the Sacrilegious spoils of all other Temples and Altars they met with in
their way from the Etymology of Hierosolyma quasi (...) Who knows also but he
might himself gather a thing he was so willing should prove true from the very
Hebrew name of Gideon? It may be he might think it to have some affinity with
the (...) rendered by the LXXII. Vid. Seldom de Diis Sir. Syntagm. 1. c. 2. and
Buxtorf.
(...) and (...), which none can doubt to have been proper to the Superstitious
Priest-hoods of those times, of which kind it is most likely this Heathen would
make that of Gideons. As for the Letter G, where it stands for (...), there it
is frequently neglected, and even where it stands for (...), as it does here,
yet it is easily changed for another Letter of the same Organ, as (...) is.
But, if we must needs take in the (...), yet he might possibly collect the same
from (...) the root of (...). If it signify to destroy, we know the Sacrifices
were Symbols of destruction, either as acknowledged due for past crimes, or as
imprecated in case of any new violation of Faith for the future, as in those
which were used in the making of Covenants. Accordingly the word (...) is used
for destruction, St. Matthew. xxiv. 51.
no doubt in allusion to the (...) which were cut into two pieces for the
Covenanters to pass through. But if it signify to divide, that is yet most
properly the Priests Office, whence the Notion of (...) in the Apostle, applied
to Sacrifices Genesis iv. 7. in the LXXII. Whether by dividing, we understand the
dividing the whole for the Parties to pass through, or the dividing the back
(whence the Notion of (...) in the Apostle) to look into the Entrails, or the
dividing the Fat to Gods part to be burnt, not reserving it to themselves, of
which the famous Story of Prometheus among the Heathens, Ap. Hesiod. Theogon.
which is supposed most properly to belong to the Case of Cain.

XL. It was also further usual in those Precedents, whom our pretended Author
seems to emulate in Forging this work, to begin their Antiquities with a
Philosophical (...). So had Moses, whose Translation by the LXXII. very
probably first set the rest upon it. So had Berosus, In Eusebius. Gr. p 6. In
Eusebius. Gr. p. 6. and de Pr. Ev. II. P. 44. C.
as appears by what we have from Alexander Polyhistor out of his First Book. So
Manetho's in his Book Sothis, the same it should seem with his (...), in which
was contained his Theologia, another name of the Mystical accounts of those
First Originals, and it may be the same with the (...) mentioned by Suidas, and
seems to have been also the beginning of his Voce (...).
History. Thus therefore Philo also thought it convenient to begin his
Sanchoniathon with a Philosophical, but Mystical account of the beginning of
the World. And here also the Egyptian Notions had generally obtained. I have
shown how Berosus and the Phoenicians came to pretend to them. I have also
shown how the Doctrine even of Moses came to be taken into them. But it seems
to have been the custom of the Egyptians, to father all their Arts and
Monuments, and Sacred Constitutions on Hermes. Thence so many thousand Books
ascribed to him in Jamblichus. De Mist. Egypt. and Chald.
Nor was it only taken up by them. It was usual in those times to father the
Monuments of a Sect on the first Author of it. Thus the Golden Verses, and
other works among the Pythagoreans ascribed to Pythagoras, who yet is said to
have written Joseph. c. Appion. L. 1. 1046. E. Lucian de laps. in salut. S.
Hieronym. adv. Rufin. Plutarch. de Fort. Alexand. L. 1. p. 328. A. Porphyr.
vit. Pythag. p. 208. Claudian. Mam de Stat. Anim. L. 11. C. 3.
nothing, and that with a design that his Disciples might not read, but live
according to his Injunctions. Thus Plato's Discourses fathered on Socrates who
yet disowned Laert. L. 111. Platon. p. 78. B. The same Athenaeus says
concerning Gorgias and Phaedon Deipnos. L. xi. c. 15. p. 505. 2. 507. B.
his being the Author of many things there attributed to him. Thus Clem. Al.
Str. 1. p. 304. D.
Zoroastres's works kept secret among the Disciples of Prodicus, a shrewd
suspicion of their being Forged by them. And this modish way of those times
was, in all likelihood, the occasion of so many Supposititious works Forged by
the Primitive Heretics under the name of the Apostles. So also Eupolem. ap.
Eus. Pr. Ev. L. ix
Enoch being owned by the Babylonians for the Author of Judicial Astrology, and
other Arts and Sciences, being pretended to have been revealed to his Son
Mathuselah by an Angel, was in all likelihood the occasion of Forging the
Prophecy of Enoch, and those Discoveries pretended in it by the (...), though
it also appears that the Books of Mercury favored the same accounts of the
fall of those Angels, Fragm. ap. Stob. Eclog Phys. and Lactant. Div. Inst. ii
15, 16.
because the Babylonians and Egyptians both pretended to the same Traditions
at Heliopolis. But in no sort of Writing was this more frequent than in their
Expressly owned by Cicero Ep. ad Varron. ante Quaest. Academ. and Macrob.
Saturnal. L. 1. C. 1.
Dialogues, which was the Form generally observed in these pretended works of
Mercury. And I cannot tell, but these same Traditions of the Heliopolitanes
were so far countenanced by the Jews themselves, as their own Revealed Religion
would give leave. The account of Moses's Expedition into Aethiopia, and several
other things much for his advantage, was taken by Artapanus from the
Heliopolitanes, Artapan. apud Eusebius. Pr. Ev. ix. 27. p. 432. D. Joseph. Ant.
ii. 5.
and greedily followed by Josephus, which shows no ill understanding among
them. So also does the Jews choosing that place above all others, Joseph. Ant.
xii. 15. xiii. 6. xx. 8. Bell. Jud. vii. 30.
to build their Egyptian Temple of Onias, I mean at the Heliopolitane
Leontopolis in contradistinction to Leontopolis, that was the head of a
distinct (...). Nor is there any heed to be taken of the Rabbis who place it
in Alexandria, though I believe, Vid. Seldom de Success. in Pontif. Hebr. L.
ii. c. 8.
by Alexandria they mean the whole Egyptian Colony of Jews, in opposition to
their Colonies in other Countries.

XLI. THIS Egyptian Philosophy therefore, being that which was ingredient in
most of the received (...), at least being pretended and conceived to be so,
how different soever the accounts were, which were pretended from that same
Original; therefore Philo Byblius also thought it fit to take it into his
pretended Sanchoniathon. And because he had found it Fathered on Authors who so
little agreed concerning the Particulars of it, where it was to be had, and who
must therefore some of them be certainly mistaken; it was therefore necessary
to pretend to some very certain means of Information. Accordingly he also
pretends to the Writings, not the Pillars of Taautus or Mercury. Which, by the
way, makes it suspicious that he took his Informations from the Books as
Published from the Heliopolitane Pillars, seeing he does not himself, so much
as pretend to the Original Pillars themselves; and yet to secure his credit
from being only at the Second hand, he pretends that Mercury caused them to be
written Originally, not in Pillars, but in Books. But because so many before
him who had pretended to those same Writings, had yet mistaken in Interpreting
them; he therefore contrives a likely account how they might have a likely
occasion of such mistakes, and yet himself be free from the suspicion of the
like Errors. He pretends therefore that the first Writings of Mercury, had
extricated the Philosophical accounts of the first Originals of things, fnom
the Mythological Arts of concealment, wherein Antiquity had involved them; and
that it was some while after, but yet before any communication with the Greeks,
that the Priests had again involved them. Which yet being done before Orpheus's
time, by whose means they came to the Greeks, was a plain occasion how the
Greek Writers, who followed those latter accounts darkened purposely by the
Priests, might be mistaken. Because they had nothing to inform them but these
designedly obscure Allegories, which were both capable of many senses in
themselves; and if any certain sense had been preserved, yet it had not been
easily discoverable by the Greeks without the Priests, who, as I said, were not
forward to communicate any thing of that nature to Strangers.

. XLII. AND by the same means he had also provided an account how the
Egyptians themselves might be mistaken concerning their own Philosophy. For
those Priests, who first involved them, are said to have delivered them down
thus obscured, both to their own Successors, (...), Ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. i. 10.
p. 39. C.
that is, to such as were initiated in their Mysteries, as I believe Vigerus
has rightly rendered it. It seems then, that they must not have been supposed to
have cleared them, even to such as were initiated, which sure they would have
done, if themselves had preserved any certain Tradition concerning them.
Accordingly they are supposed to have continued under this obscurity, till
(after many Generations from Taautus, Ib. p 40. B.
) Surmubelus and Thuro are said to have again unriddled them. So I understand
those words of Philo Byblius; (...). For this seems to have been the Notion of
that Sacred term (...), as it is used in the counterfeit Writings of Mercury,
(whom this Author follows) and the Penmen of the New Testament, and other such
Writers of that Age, for the Revelation of Mysteries. I suppose from that
Literal (...) and (...), and withdrawing of the Vail before the Shrine of the
Image by the (...), which were in the ordinary course of Initiation to be used
to those who were brought into the dark Adyta, and initiated in the higher sort
of Initiation called (...). These therefore I suspect to have been pretended
for the Authors of the (...), to which this Author pretended, as has already
been observed. Wherein if I be not mistaken, it will then be further
suspicious, that these Authors themselves did not so discover them as to make
them common to the profane Vulgar, but only so as to retrieve the Traditions
of the Priests, which had probably, by that time, quite miscarried, afterthy
had been so long reserved in their Breasts, and entrusted only to
Oral-Tradition. For, if these discoveries had been designed for the Vulgar, the
Writings which contained them, would not have been styled (...), (the proper
term for Mystical Writings) nor confined to the (...), and by that means
rendered inaccessible to uninitiated Persons, as they are supposed to have been.
Besides that, by the present extant Epistle of Ammon, it appears that the
Ammonians must not have been for divulging their Mysteries.

. XLIII. AND in giving this account how all that had before him, written on
this Subject, might have been mistaken, he at the same time secured his own
Authority from the like Exceptions. For having pretended before, that Taautus
had written his Books clear from those Mythologies and Allegories wherein they
had been involved by the Priests, and were afterward again involved till they
were a second time unriddled by Surmubelus and Thuro; and having made his
Sanchoniathon derive his Information immediately, both from Taautus's own
Books, and from the Books of those Expositors, who afterward retrieved his way
of speaking clearly without Allegories: He had hereby secured himself of two
things of great moment for recommending his Credit. One was, that his
Informations were derived from clear and unobscured Originals, not from
Allegorical and Second-hand accounts, from them who had no mind to be
understood by those to whom they communicated their Mysteries. Another was
that, even for those Originals themselves, he did not depend on a single
Authority. The consent of the Writings of Mercury, with those of the Ammonians,
were to be mutual attestations of the Sincerity of each, (at least would be
pleaded as such by him) that neither the Original Writings of Taautus, nor
those retrievements from the Ammonians, might seem suspicious of being the
Fictions of those who first produced them. For having pretended them to be from
distant Writers, and distant places, and Sacred inaccessible Records; it would
be pretended that there could not have been that Communication between them, as
to make them able to agree in Forgeries. Yet was not this excluding of
Allegories to be understood so, as if he had avoided all Fables; but
particularly with respect to the Stoical way, whether by them derived to the
later Egyptians, or borrowed from them. That was to Allegorize their first
Histories into a (...), a Systeme of Natural Philosophy, to make Jupiter
signify the Ether, Juno the Air, Vesta the Earth, Neptune the Sea, etc. and
so to Allegorize the History of the Actions of those Persons into a History of
Nature; as if indeed there had never been such Actions or Persons, but only
that the several Elements of Nature had been Mystically represented by such
Names, and the Phenomenon of Nature had, by a Poetical Prosopopoeia, been
turned into a Romance. That these were indeed the Allegories designed by Philo
Byblius, appears by these words of his: (...) Philo Bybl. ap. Eus. Pr. Ev. l. 9.
And again, (...), etc. Ap. Eusebius. Pr. Ev. L. 10. p. 39. C.
And what with graceful mixtures of Poetical fancy, in the most Ancient Writers
of their First Originals, who were generally Poets; what with that delight of
the Ancients in Parables, and in vesting their Parables with Historical and
likely Circumstances; what with that ordinary Method of these Mystical Writers,
who usually made way for their Allegories by catching at little occasions of
confuting the Historical Truth of what they designed to Allegorize (wherein we
see them imitated by Philo, Origin, and the other Ancients who first began to
practice this way with the Scriptures) I say with all these ways, they made it
indeed seem likely, if not concerning all that was said of those Persons, yet
concerning many of them, that they were not so much as designed for Historical
Truths, but only for Allegorical Representation. Yet these not being
distinguishable from their designed Histories, at least not in later times
after the obliteration of the Original Traditions; and being withal delivered
on the same Authority which delivered the designed Histories; must therefore
render all their Histories liable to just Suspicion.

. XLIV. NOR does it seem to have been the way of Allegorizing only, that Philo
found fault with in the Greek Writers, and that uncertainty of their Histories
which necessarily followed thereupon; but also the indecorousness of their
Allegories to their Deities, which the Epicureans and Jews before, but now in
Philo's time, the Christians had lately made great advantage of, for exposing
the received Religions. When he makes Anobret (designed the same with Sarah) an
(...). Vid. Porphyr. de Antr. Nymphar.
The very name of Nymph is Allegorical, and in the Philosophical Allegories, of
a peculiar signification. This therefore Philo takes particular notice of, that
from these Allegories of the Phoenician Priests, the Greeks had taken occasion
to set up those which were so very offensive, and gave so great advantage to
their common Adversaries. (...). Philo ap. Euseh. Pr. Ev. l. 9.
These were the Allegories so much decryed, not only by Adversaries, but
disowned by the Philosophers generally, and such generally as, with any
judgment, undertook the defense of the received Religions: That the Gods should
have a beginning, and be Born by the Conjunction of Males and Females like
other Mortals, (this he means by their (...)) That they should be molested by
Wars, and reduced to so great extremities, as the Fablers pretended, in the
Wars with the Giants, and Typhon and Euceladus and the Titans, (those were the
(...) and (...)) That they should Emasculate one another as Saturn is pretended
to have served Ouranus, and Jupiter his Father Saturn, (those are the (...)
here meant.) These the wisest Men looked on, not only as corruptions of their
Histories, but as reproaches to their Gods, and Religions. Plato disowned them,
and therefore sends Homer Crowned out of his Commonwealth. De Allegor. Homer.
So did Heraclides, and generally the Stoics, Plutarch. de Audiend. Poet. de
ls. and Osirid. p. 355. 358. Procl. Theol. Plat. Lib. 1. c. 4. Macrob. Somn.
Scip. L. 1. c. 2.
who for this very reason turned them into Allegory. So Plutarch, Proclus and
Macrobius. And therefore here Philo thought he might do an acceptable piece of
service to the common cause of Philosophy and Paganism in general, if he could
from the Originals of these Fictions, show that they were intended for no other
but Fictions, by those who first invented them; and that they had no grounds in
their First and most simple, and most creditable Traditions and Histories, but
were superadded by those who neither did, nor could pretend to any new means of
Information, and by this means disoblige their common cause, from the defense
of what the common consent of their Wise men had granted, to be indeed so very
indefensible.

. XLV. HE pretends therefore, in his own History, to give us, from the
forementioned Records, the Historical Truth concerning those Ancient Persons
and Actions of the Phoenicians, free from those Additional passages concerning
them, which were only invented for designs of Allegory, whether by the Greeks,
or the Phoenician Priests themselves. Yet neither so does his performance agree
with his undertaking. However it comes to pass (whether through the
heedlessness of Philo, or his Injudiciousness in his choice out of extant
Histories, what he was to Father on his Sanchoniathon,) we have some things
intermixed, which neither are likely to have been true, nor to have been
designed for such by the Authors; nay seem to have been designed for no other
than Allegorical senses, and that in the worst most indefensible way of
Allegorizing, from which he had pretended to vindicate their received Religion.
He makes his Saturn Emasculate his Father Ouranus. Here is one of the (...)
which he had before reckoned among the most Scandalous sort of Allegories. But
this he may possibly pretend to have been done by his Man Saturn, who was
afterward by mistake made a God, especially as the name God employed not a
Divine Honor only, but also a Divine Nature. And concerning the Man it might
have been Historically true, and designed for no more by his pretended
Sanchoniathon. But what shall we say to that which follows, where he makes the
Blood that flowed from the wound of Ouranus to have passed into the Springs and
Rivers? (...). ap. Eusebius. Ib. p. 38. B.
What? one Man's Blood, and from such a wound as that was, to have flowed into
the Fountains and Rivers? Certainly this could have been meant for no other but
an Allegory. It is like what is told concerning Osiris among the Egyptians,
and the tears of Sophia among the Valentinians, who seem to have borrowed much
of their Heresy from the Egyptians, where it first appeared. And I can hardly
doubt, but that this was intended by the Authors from whom he took it, to show
the true Original of Fountains and Rivers, that the Waters beneath the
Firmament, as the Scripture distinguishes them, were derived from those above
the Firmament; the Fountains of the Deep supplied from the Windows of Heaven;
the Fountains and the Rivers nourished by the Rain which came from (...), in
the larger Notion of it, as it includes the Air also. And possibly considering
this as taken from Taautus an Egyptian, by the Rivers might be meant the
several Ostia and Cuts of Nilus, from which no doubt all the Fountains of
Egypt proceeded, which were accordingly turned also into Blood, when Nilus was
so; and then he might allude to the Tradition of the Egyptians, that Nilus was
derived from Heaven, as Diodorus tells us.

So Homer calls it (...)
(...) (...).

(...). --
And again,
(...) Ib.

(...).
(...) with him is Nilus. And I am apt to think that the reason why he called
it (...), was because, of all those many Opinions which were afterward raised
concerning the Rise of Nilus, he rather inclined to that which derived it from
the Air which is called Jupiter and (...), as I said in the larger Sense,
whether from the Rain or the melted Snow, both of which belong to Jupiter in
the sense now mentioned. The most Ancient and most Popular Opinions are most
likely to have been intended by the Mythologers. And to prove that this was so,
we cannot have a fitter Testimony than this of Homer. He is one of the most
Ancient of the Pagan Writers. As a Poet, he is most suited to Vulgar capacity,
and of nearest affinity to the Mythologists. He was an Egyptian Born, of the
Egyptian Thebes, if we may believe Heliodorus. But whether we believe him or
not, yet it is more unanimously agreed, that he learned most of his
Philosophical Notions from the Egyptians. Whence it will follow, that this was
most probably the Popular received opinion among the Egyptians in the time of
Homer. And of the Two Opinions (which as I said, do make for this purpose) one
of them was received by most of the Greatest and most Ancient even among the
Egyptians themselves. That the Nilus had its Original from Rain, was the
Opinion of Aristotle. Anonym. ap. Phot. Cod. ccxlix.
Aristotle, Agatharchides. Diodor. Sicul. Bibl. L. 1. Theoph. Simocatta ap.
Phot. Cod. LXV.
Agatharchides, and of the Egyptian Priests, as Ap. Plutarch. de Plac. Philos.
L. iv. c. 1.
Eudoxus assures us. That it was from Snow was the sense of Diodor. Sic. Bib.
L. 1
Democritus, Diodor. Sic. Bib. L. 1
Anaxagoras, Senec. Not. Quaest. iv. 2.
Aeschylus, Senec. Not. Quaest. iv. 2.
Sophocles, Senec. Not. Quaest. iv. 2.
Euripides, and all Senec. Not. Quaest. iv. 2.
Antiquity, mentioned also by Lucret. L. vi.
Lucretius and Mela. l. 9. Diodor. Sic. Bibl. L. 1.
Mela, whether soever of the two be true, or was thought so by the Ancient
Egyptians, or by the most Ancient Philosophers, (who in all likelihood
borrowed what they said concerning it from the Egyptians) is equally
subservient, to show what might have been the actual sense of the pretended
Hermes in this Allegory. And that Nilus is derived from the blood of the
Genitals of Ouranus, rather than any other part, might have been to express the
Fruitfulness of this River above all others. The Slime it brought along with
it, manured the Land for Corn, and was withal so very Prolifick, as that it
engendered several Animals, and made Women Fruitful that used the Water, and
gave occasion to the Fancy of those Ancient Atheists, who thought the first men
produced out of the Slime of Nilus. Now if I have hit the meaning right in this
instance, this will also afford a new Argument against our pretended
Sanchoniathon. Either he pretended falsely that Taautus was free from these
Physiological Allegories, especially from the Scandalous sort of them, and this
was a mistake that must needs have been willful, and with ill design. He must
needs have known from the Books themselves, if he had indeed any such Books,
whether any such matter was so much as pretended by him. If it was pretended,
but falsely; that will ruin the Credit of Taautus himself, and make him
suspicious of being forged by some Modern concerned Author, which will
consequently ruin the credit of Sanchoniathon also, if he pretend to know
Fictions invented so long after his own time. Or else he did not confine
himself to those Informations of Taautus, which were indeed free from such
Allegories. And this will also be another conviction of his Vnsincerity in
pretending what he did not intend to perform. In all likelihood it was Philo
who here betrayed himself, and forgot the Person he was to Act under the name
of Sanchoniathon. Which will be a conviction of his disigenuous dealing in
this, as well as his other pretended means of Information.

. XLVI. THIS seems to have been this Authors design in pretending to the now
mentioned means of Information. If I might presume yet farther, to guess why he
pitched on the very name of Sanchoniathon, on whom he was desirous to Father
his Forgeries; I do not know whether it might not have been in imitation of the
Egyptian Sonchis, Solon, Plutarch. in Solon. and de Isid. and Osirid.
Pythagoras Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.
to whom Solon and Pythagoras are said to have been beholden for what
discoveries were made to them of the Egyptian Philosophy. He is styled an
(...), and (...), one of the most Learned of their Priests of Sais, Characters
excellently qualifying him for understanding their Sacred Records, those
especially of his Countryman the Egyptian Mercury. But yet because he was to
make him as well as Mercury, pass for Phoenicians; therefore he might think it
fit a little to disguise his name with a termination different from that
whereby he was known to the Alexandrians, as he had done in the name of
Mercury. He calls him designedly Taautus, whom he confesses that the Egyptians
called (...), the Alexandrians (...). Why might he not accordingly call him
Sanchoniathon, whom the Egyptians called Sonchis, especially if by such a
change he could draw such an Argument for his credit from his very name, as
Bochart conceives? This Sonchis had taught Solon the (...). This seems to have
been no other than the (...) in Diodorus Siculus, Diodor. Sic Bibl. L. iii. ap.
Eusebius. Pr. Ev. L. ii.
and in all likelihood was the same with that of Mercury, as this of
Sanchoniathon was professedly. For those Atlantii challenged Mercury for
theirs, and made him the Son of Maja the Daughter of their famous Astrological
Atlas, and it may be this was the reason why our pretended Sanchoniathon also
thought fit to challenge Atlas as a Phoenician, that they might also have the
double Title to that same Philosophy, on account of Atlas as well as of
Mercury. I am apt to suspect that the occasion of this Philosophy of the
Atlantii might have been taken from the mention of the Atlantic Island in
Plato's Timaeus. This, some Author well known to Diodorus, might (in imitation
of the Philosophical Mythologies, then so much in fashion, and particularly of
Euemerus who wrote his Sacred History from a like pretended (...) of a fictious
Island called Panchaia) have made the Subject of new Discoveries. He might have
Personated some who had found it, and in describing the place and the People,
it very well became the Poem, to have given an account of their Sentiments, on
those Subjects concerning which that Age was so very inquisitive and curious.
Yet it also became it to derive them from Atlas, and so to fit their Opinions
to his Person. Or perhaps it might rather have been that yet more ancient
account of Solon, concerning the Atlantes in Verse, from whom Plato took his
first occasion, Plutarch. Solon. p. 92. 96.
but (as Plutarch tells us) never lived to finish it. It should seem the design
of these Atlantic Discourses both of Solon and Plato was much larger than that
small account given in Plato's Timaeus. From some of these, rather than
Timaeus, it is probable that Aelian had his Tradition that the Kings of
Atlantis that were of Neptunes race, Aelian. de Animal. XV. 2.
wore their Diadems of Hee-goats as their Queens did of Shee-goats hairs, The
Nation of the Atlantes are mentioned by the Ancients as inhabiting at the foot
of Mount Atlas, Herodot. Melpom. Mela. 14. 8. Plin. N. Hist. v. 18.
the (...) in Aelian, upon whom these Traditions were immediately Fathered. And
the Country there abouts, Aelian. Anim. vii. 2.
as it is described by the same Aelian probably from the same Traditions, was
very pleasant and Sacred, and upon both accounts, very fit for the Scene of
such a Poetic Philosophy. But though that might have been the Poetic Scene,
yet the Egyptians seem to have been the Poets that contrived these Stories,
that we may not admire how it should agree with the Doctrine of Mercury. For as
Plato had it from Solon, so Solon seems to have pretended it no higher than
Sonchis the Egyptian. And considering the Antiquity pretended of these
Atlantians, no Nation could or did pretend to such Information concerning a
Nation situate in the West of Africa as the Egyptians. Besides Enoch was taken
for the same with this famous Astrological Atlas, Eupolemus ap. Eus. Pr. Ev. L.
ix.
as Eupolemus tells us. How could they have taken up this conjecture, but from
the agreement they had observed between the Doctrines of Atlas, and those of
Enoch? How could they guess at the Doctrine of Enoch, but by the Apocryphal
Writings then extant under his name? The Atlantic Doctrines therefore agreed
with those of the Book of Enoch, and that those agreed also with the Forgeries
then extant under the name of Mercury, has already been observed.. 40.
So that Sonchis taught Solon nothing but what had very well become the Person
of Sanchoniathon.

. XLVII. THUS I have endeavored to give an account of the design of this whole
Fiction, and that such a one as might agree both with the Time and Person of
Philo Byblius. I have shown what liberty the Principles of those Philosophers
allowed them for the Practice of such disingenuities. I have shown how little
such an Author as Sanchoniathon was known before the time of Philo Byblius,
notwithstanding all the search that had been made into the Phoenician Records,
and how little regarded after. I have shown how little he savoured of the
Ancient simplicity, and how much of the Modern Emulations. I have shown how
little creditable he is in his pretended means of Information, and how far from
that singular Love of Truth, for which he would have it believed, that his
Sanchoniathon was so particularly remarkable. I have shown that those means
themselves are also suspicions, either that they never were extant, as the
Memoires of Gideon; or that they were Counterfeited themselves, as the Writings
of Taautus and the Ammonians, and that long after the time that Sanchoniathon
is pretended to have lived in; that he could have followed no Jewish Records in
his accounts of Jewish matters; and that his following the Writings of Mercury
and the Ammonians, divulged so long after his pretended Age, are rather
Convictions of his False-hood, than a Recommendation of his Credit. I have
endeavored also, as far as I could guess from the Circumstances he lived in,
to give a particular account of the occasion and design of each particular
observed in the management of this whole Fraud. And I know not what can be
desired more for the Conviction of it at this distance of time, and loss of
Original Monuments.

. XLVIII. NOR can I see that this discovery will in the least injure the Cause
for which those Pious as well as Learned Persons have been concerned, who have
hitherto made use of this Author for expounding or confirming some Historical
or Philosophical passages of Scripture. If there were any of these Heathen
Antiquities, that could either pretend to the Age of the Scriptures, or to that
even Domestic Evidence of being genuine, there might then be some pretense for
reconciling or confirming some passages of the Scriptures by them for their use
who did not grant the advantage of the Sacred Writers above their own in regard
of their Divine Inspiration. But we never hear of any of those Heathen accounts
of things mentioned in the Scriptures, before the Translation of the LXXII put
them into an Emulation. Then it was that Berosus, and Manetho, and Menander,
and Laetus first made and published their Enquiries. No mention of the
Chaldaean Xisuthrus, nor of the Egyptian Hyesi, nor of Abraham nor Moses, nor
the general Deluge in Ctesias or Xenophon, or Herodotus, or any of those more
Ancient certainly-genuine Writers. When they did publish them, the very Records
pretended for them make them suspicious of Forgery. They were pretended only
from Sacred Pillar^ extant in Adyta, and these very Pillar^ challenged in
several places, yet not accessible by any who had been desirous to convict
them. But the Scriptures were only then Translated. The Originals were extant
long before in Books accessible and intelligible by any who had the curiosity
to learn their Tongue. I do not insist on the Translation pretended to have
been in Plato's time, because I find no better Arguments for it than guesses
that Plato had some things from the Sacred Writings, which I believe he had
not, besides that such a Supposition is directly contrary to the much better
attested Story of Aristaeus concerning the Translation performed by the command
of Ptolomy Philadelphus. I rather choose those more Ancient instances of
Theopompus the Historian, and Theodectes the Poet, who had seen and understood
these Books of the Jews, before the Translation of Philadelphus, as we are
assured by Demetrius Phalereus in Aristaeus, Ap. Joseph. Ant. xii. 2.
besides that even the Book of Daniel, one of the latest of them, was yet shown
to Alexander the Great, if we may believe Josephus. Ant. xi. 8.
So that even from the Greeks we have as early Evidence of their being known,
as we have of their being enquired after, or of their being in a capacity to
understand them; and there can be no reason to expect earlier. Besides the
repugnancy of those other Nations to each other, and of the different Authors
even of the same Nation, Cont. Appion. L. 1. p. 1036. F.
were certain Arguments that they did not write from the same uniform and true
Records, as the Jews who all agreed in the same Books, as Josephus observes.
And for the Pentateuch, that of the Samaritanes must in all likelihood have
been received from them before the time of the LXXII. both because the
Samaritanes were before that so exasperated by the Jews, as that it is not
likely they would receive any such thing from them, and because it should seem
the Prophets were not then collected by the Jews that they might have been
delivered to them, and because they still preserve it in the Old Hebrew
Character, not in that which was afterward introduced by Esdras. Upon all
these accounts it cannot be thought reasonable either to oppose these Heathen
accounts to the Scriptures, or to think that any thing can be made more
creditable in the Scriptures, because it is confirmed by the consent of so
exceptionable Authorities. I have rather shown that the occasion of their
agreeing in Philosophical matters, was rather their imitating and allowing the
Authority of Moses, and making him the Standard of their several (...). Which
may indeed be of use for showing Historically how that part of Moses was
actually understood from those times wherein these Heathen accounts were first
produced; but can be of no farther use for showing either the sense of Moses,
or how the ancient first Deliverers of his Doctrine did actually understand
him, than as these things may be inferred, or presumed, from the actual sense
of those later times, wherein these Heathen Antiquities first appeared.

ERRATA.
Page 4. Marg. l. 4. init. Marg. l. 17. Can. P. 28. l. 20. (...). P. 32. l. 15.
Asclepius. P. 43. l. 19. (...) [not a u but a Greek (...) with the first tail
cut off.] P. 47. l. 7. (...). P. 48. l. 27. Jasher. P. 57. Marg. l. 3. -- lon.
1. 12. P. 58. l. 27. disposal? P. 59. l. 15. Diphyes. P. 60. Marg. l. 5. Sozo.
P. 61. l. 5. V. C. P. 65. l. 25. were. P. 78. l. 10. in Ptolomy. P. 91. l. 6.
(...) [ Daleth for Resh.] P. 98. l. penult. they. P. 112* l. 7. fictitious. P.
116. l. 13. Hycsi.

FINIS.

