IATHANATOS. A DECLARATION OF THAT PARADOXE, OR THESIS, that Selfe-homicide is
not so Naturally Sin, that it may never be otherwise. WHEREIN The Nature, and
the extent of all those Laws, which seem to be violated by this Act, are
diligently surveyed. Written by JOHN DONE, who afterward received Orders from
the Church of England, and dyed Deane of Saint Paul's, London.

Jo: Saresb. de nugis Curial. Prolog. Non omnia vera esse profiteor. Sed
legentium usibus inservire. Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by John Dawson,

TO THE Right Honorable THE LORD PHILLIP HARBERT.
My Lord,

ALthough I have not exactly obeyed your commands, yet, I hope, I have exceeded
them, by presenting to your Honor, this Treatise, which is, so much the better,
by being none of mine own, and may therefore peradventure, deserve to live,
for facilitating the Issues of Death.

It was writ^ long since, by my Father, and by him, forbid both the Press, and
the Fire; neither had I subjected it now, to the public view, but that, I
could find no certain way to defend it from the one, but by committing it to
the other; For, since the beginning of this War, my Study having been often
searched, all my Books (and al-most my brains, by their continual allarums)
sequestered, for the use of the Committee; two dangers appeared more eminently
to hover over this, being then a Manuscript; a danger of being utterly lost,
and a danger of being utterly found; and fathered, by some of those wild
Atheists, who, as if they came into the World by conquest, own all other men's
Wits, and are resolved to be learned, in despite of their Stars, that would
fairly have inclined them, to a more modest, and honest course of life.

Your Lordships Protection will defend this Innocent from these-two Monsters,
Men that cannot write, and Men that cannot read, and, I am very confi dent,
all those that can, will think it may deserve this favor from your Lordship;
For, although this Book appear under the notion of a Paradox, yet, I desire
your Lordship, to look upon this Doctrine, as a firm and established truth,
Da vida osar morir.

Your Lordships most humble Servant Io: DONE.
From my house in Cov^nt-Garden. 2^.
Authors cited in this Book.
BEza. B. Dorothaeus. Bosquierus. Athenagoras. Causaeus. Trismegistus.
Theodoricus A. Niem. Steuchius Engubi. Ennodius. Pererius Zamb ^us Alcoran
Corpus Iur: Canon. Carbo, Summa Summarum Polidorus Virgilius Matalius Metellus,
Praefat. in Osor. Histor. Pierius S. Ambrosius Cardanus Tholosa: Syntagm. S.
Cyprianus Haedri: Junius Emanu^ Sa Nicephorus S. Gregorius Vasques Clarus
Bonars^ius Corpus Iur: Civil. Binnius Bracton Plowden A: Gellius Tertullian
Climacbus Basil Filesacus Campianus S. Hieronimus Ben: Gorion Plinius Paleotus
de Noth. Canones Poenitenti: Clemens Alex: Sotus Bodin Sylvius Middendorpius
Lucidus Arpilcueta Fabricius Hist: Ci^ro. Windeckus Lipsius Porphyrius Damasus
Feuardentius Eusebius Vincentii Speculum Prateolus Diodorus Siculus Tho: Morus
Anto: Augustine. P. Manutius Sebast: Medices Scotus Calvinus Forestus de Venen.
Serarius Biblia Sacra Humfredus Angl. Mallonius in Paleotti Sindon. S.
Chrysostomus Pontius Paulinus Aquinas Azorius Sayr Elianus Cajetanus S.
Augustinus Artemidorus I. Caesar Josephus Vegetius Acacius Jo: Picus He^ nius
Latinus Pacatus Platina Baronius Ignatius Alfon: Castro Schultingius Plato
Simancha Alb. Gentilis Pruckmannus P. Pomponatius Buxdorfius Anto: de Corduba
Thyraeus Lavater Nauclerus Quintilianus Toletus Sulpitius Adrianus Quodlib.
Beccaria Vita Phil: Nerii Maldonatus Bonaventura Gregor: Nazianz. Canones
Apostolorum Lucas de Penna Optinellus Laertius Binsfeldius Pedraca Sextus
Senensis Par acelsus Metaphrastes. Surius Gregor: de Valentia Brentius
Th^phtlact Hesic ius Marloratus Schlusselburgius Agapetus Reuchlin Martialis ad
Tholo: Saravia Sylvester Liber Coformitatum S. Franc. et Christi. Cassianus
Procop. Gazaeus Ardoinus Greg. Turon Supplem. Chronic. Nazarius Paneg. Menghi
Joan de Lapide Hippocrates Bellarminus Revelation. Brigidae Regul. Jesuit.
Franc. Gregorius Oecumenius Origenes Alcuinus Corn Celsus Id^ota Contemplatio
de morte Baldus Aristoteles Stanford Bartolus P. Martyr Declaration des Doctes
en France Sedulius Minorita Io Gerson Lylius Geraldus Mariana Sansovinus
Lambert Fra. a Victoria Wierus Keeplerus Lyra B^rgensis P. Lombard Sophronius
Schultetus Euthymius Paterculus Cassanaeus
IN citing these authors, for those which I produce only for ornament and
illustration, I have (...) my own old notes; which though I have no reason to
suspect, yet I confess here my lazines; and that I did not refresh them with
going to the Original. Of those few which I have not seen in the books
themselves, (for there are some such, even of places cited for greatest
strength,) besides the integrity of my purpose, I have this safe defense
against any quarreller, that what place soever I cite from any Catholic
Author, if I have not considered the Book it self, I cite him from another
Catholic Writer. And the like course I hold in the Reformers. So that I shall
hardly be condemned of any false citation, except to make me Accessorie, they
pronounce one of their own friends principal.

A distribution of this Book, into Parts, Distinctions, and Sections.
Preface.
1 THe Reason of this Discourse. 2 Incitements to charity toward those which
do it. 3 Incitements to Charity toward the Author. 4 Why it is not
inconvenient now to handle this. 5 Dessentious among scholars more, and harder
to end then among others. 6 In such perplexities we ought to incline to that
side which favors the dead. 7 Why I make it so public. 8 What reader I
desire to have. 9 The reasons why there are so many citations. 10 God punishes
that sin most, which occasions most sin in others.
The first part,
first Distinction,
first Section.
1 Why we first prove, that this sin is not irremissible.
Sect. 2.
1 Three sorts of mistakers of this sin.
Sect. 3
1 That all desperation is not heinous; and that Self-homicide does not always
proc^ed from desperation. 2 It may be without Infid^lity. 3 When it is poena
peccati it is involuntarium. 4 The reason why men ordinarily aggravate
desperation 5 Of the second opinion, which is of impenitiblenes. 6 Of Calvin's
opinion, that it may be. 7 None impeccable, nor impenitible.
Sect. 4.
1 Of the third sort, which presume actual impenitence by reason of this Act.
2 Which is the safer side in doubtful cases. 3 In Articulo Mortis, the Church
ever interprets favorably. 4 What true repentance is by Clement. 5 Witnesses
which acquit, more credited, then they which accuse, in the Cannon Law.
Sect. 5.
1 Why we wayve the Ordinary definition of Sin taken from Saint Augustine, and
follow another taken from Aquinas. 2 Of the torturing practice of Casuists. 3
Of the eternal Law of God, in Saint Augustines Definition, against which a man
may do without sin. 4 Of the Definition which we follow.
Sect. 6.
1 How Law of Nature, and of reason, and of God exhibited in this definition,
are all one; and how diversely accepted. 2 In some cases all these three Laws
may be broken at once. As 3 In revealing a secret. 4 In Parricide.
Sect. 7
1 Of the Law of Nature, and that against it strictly taken, either no sin,
or all sin is done. 2 To do against Nature makes us not guilty of a greater
sin, but more inexcusable. 3 No action so evil, that it is never good. 4 No
evil in act, but disobedience. 5 Lying naturally worse then Selfe-homicide. 6
Fame may be neglected: yet we are as much bound to preserve fame, as life. 7
God cannot command a sin, yet he can command a murder. 8 Orginall sin, cause
of all sin, is from nature.
Sect. 8.
1 That if our Adversaries by Law of nature mean only sensitive Nature, they
say nothing, for so most virtuous actions are against nature.
Sect. 9.
1 As the Law of nature is recta ratio, that is, Jus gentium. So immolation,
and Idolatry are not against law of Nature.
Sect. 10.
1 As reason is the form, and so the nature of a man, every sin is against
nature: yea, what soever agrees not exactly with Christian Religion. 2 Virtue
produced to Act, differs so from Reason, as a medicine made and applied, from a
box of drugs.

Did. 2.
Sect. 1.
1 Sins against Nature in a particular sense, are by schoolmen said to be
unnatural Lusts, and This. But in Scripture only the first is so called. 2 Of
the example of the Levite in the Judges, where the Vulgate Edition, calls it
sin against Nature. 3 S. Paul's use of that phrase Law of Nature, in long hair.
4 Vegetius use of that phrase.
Sect. 2.
1 Self preservation is not so of particular Law of Nature, but that Beasts
naturally transgress it, whom it binds more then us. And we, when the reason
of it ceases in us, may transgress it, and sometimes ^ust. 2 Things natural
to the Species, are not always so to the Individual. 3 Thereupon some may
retire into Solitude. 4 The first principles in Natural law, are obligatory,
but not deductions from thence, and the lower we descend the weaker they are. 5
Pellicans. And by S. Ambrose, Bees kill themselves. 6 The Reason of almost
every law is mutable. 7 He that can declare where the reason ceases, may
dispense with the Law. 8 In what manner dispensations work. 9 As nothing can
annull the prerogatives of Princes or of Popes, though their own act seem to
provide against it, so no law so much destroys man's liberty, but that he
returns to it, when the reason of that law ceases. 10 Self-preservation, which
is but an appetition of that which is good in our opinion, is not violated by
Self-homicide. 11 Liberty, which is naturally to be preserved, may be departed
withal, when our will is to-doe so.
Sect. 3.
5 That cannot be against law of nature, which men have ever affected, if it
be also (as this is) against sensitive nature, and so want the allurements
which other sins have. 2. There are not so many examples of all other virtues,
as are of this one degree of fortitude. 3 Of Roman Gladiators. Of their great
numbers, great persons, and women. 4 With how small persuasions Eleazar in
Josephus drew men to it. 5 Wives in the Indies do it yet. 6 The Samanaei
Priests in the Indies, notorious for good life and death did it. 7 Latinus
Pacatus expresses this desire pathetically. 8 By what means the Spaniards
corrected this natural desire in the Indies.

Did. 3.
Sect. 1.
1 After civility and christianity quenched this natural desire, in the place
thereof succeeded a thirst of Martyrdom. 2 How leasurely the custom of
killing at funerals wore out. 3 Philosophers saw, and Moses delivered the state
of the next life, but unperfectly,
Sect. 2.
1 That Martyrdom was by the Fathers insinuated into men, for the most part by
natural Reasons, and much upon humane respects. 2 So proceeded Clement. 3 So
did Tertullian. 4 So did Cyprian. 5 External honouurs to Martyrs. 6 Monopoly
of Martyrdom 7 Gods punishments upon their persecutors encouraged men to it. 8
Privileges of Martyrs extended to many. 9 Contrary Reasons cherisht this
desire in them. 10 Libellatici, or compounders with the state, in Cyprian. 11
Flight in persecution condemned by Tertullian. 12 Death grew to be held
necessary to make one a Martyr. 13 In times when they exceeded in indiscreet
exposings of themselves, they taught that Martyrs might be without death. 14
Professors in Cyprian, men who offered themselves before they were called. 15
Enforcers of their own Martyrdom. 16 Examples of inordinate affecting of
Martyrdom. 17 Laws forbidding more executions, made to despite Christians. 18
Glory in their number of Martyrs.
Sect. 3.
1 That Heretics noting the dignity gaind by Martyrdom, labored to avert
them from it, but could not correct this natural inclination. 2 They labored
the Magistrate to oppose this desire. 3 Basilides denied Christ to have been
crucif^ed; and that therefore they dyed madly. 4 Helchesar, that outward
profession of Religion was not needful; much ^ffo Martyrdom. 5 Which also the
Gnostici taught: and why they prevailed not.
Sect. 4.
1 That Heretics missing their purpose herein, took the natural way of
overtaking the Orthodox in numbers of Martyrs. 2 Petilians new way of
Martyrdom. 3 Another new way of the Circumcelliones, or Circuitores. 4 The
Cataphrygae exceed in number. 5 The Euphemitae for their numbers of Martyrs
called Martyrians.
Sect. 5.
1 Hereupon Councels took it into their care to distinguish Martyrs, from
those who dyed for natural and humane respects.
Sect. 6.
1 Therefore later Authors do somewhat remit the dignity of Martyrdom. 2 The
Jesuits still profess an enormous love to such death.

Distinction 4.
Sect. 1.
1 Laws and Customs of well pollished Estates having admitted it, it were
rash to say it to be against Law of Nature. 2 True and Ideated Commonwealths
have allowed it. 3. 4. Athenians, Romans. 5 Of Depontani. 6 Ethiopians. 7 All
Laws presume this desire in men condemned. 8 In Utopia authorized. 9 And by
Plato in certain cases. 10 Conclusion of the first Part.


The Second Part of the Law of Reason.
Distinct. 1.
Sect. 1.
1 That the Law of Reason is, Conclusions drawn from primary Reason or light of
Nature, by discourse. 2 How much strength such deduced reasons have.
Sect. 2.
1 Of this kind of reasons, general Laws have greatest authority. 2 For it
is of their essence that they agree with the Law of Nature. 3 And there is
better testimony of their producing, then of particular men's opinions.
Sect. 3.
1 Of Laws, the Imperial Law ought first to be considered. 2 The reason of
that Law is not abolished; but the confession of our dependencie upon it. 3 Why
it is called Civil Law. 4 Of the vastnes of the books from whence it is
concocted, and of the large extent thereof. 5 That yet in this so large Law
there is nothing against our case. 6 Of the Law of Adrian concerning this in
Soldiers. 7 Of the other. Law concerning this in off^ndors already accused.

Did. 2.
Sect. 1.
1 Of the Cannon Law. 2 The largenes of the subject, and object thereof. 3 Of
Codex Canonum, or the body of the Canon Law, in use in the primitive Church. Of
the Additions to this Code since. 4 Canon Law apter to condemn then the Civil,
and why.
Sect. 2.
1 That this proposition is not haereticall by the Canon Law. 2 Simancha his
large Definition of Haeresy. 3 No d^cision of the church in the point. 4 Nor
Canon nor Bull. 5 Of the common opinion of Fathers, and that that varies by
times, and by places by Azori^. 7 Gratian cites but two Fathers, whereof one is
on our side. 8 That that part of Canon Law, to which Canonists will stand,
condemns not this. 9 A Catholic Bpa^censure of Gratian, and his decret.
Sect. 3.
1 What any Counsels have done in this point. 2 Of the Council of Antisidore
under Greg. 1. 590. 3 That it only refusd their oblations. 4 That it was only a
Diocesan Council. 5 The Council of Braccar. inflicts two punishments. 6 The
first, of not praying for them is meant of them who did it, when they were
excommunicate. 7 The second, which is denying of burial, is not always
inflicted as a punishment, to an offender; as appears in a punishment, to an
offender; as appears in a local interdict. 8 Romans buried such offenders as
had satisfied the law within the Town, as they did Vestalls and Emperors.

Did. 3
Sect. 1
1 Of the Laws of particular Nations. 2 Of our Law of Felo de se. 3 That this
is by our Law Murder, and what reasons entitle the King to his good. 4 That our
natural desire to such dying, probably induced this customary Law. 5 As in
States abounding with slaves, Lawmakers quenched this desire, lest there
should have been no use of them. 6 Forbid lest it should draw too many: as
hunting, and usury: and as wine by Mahomet. 7 Upon reason of general
inclinations we have severe Laws against theft. 8 When a man is bound to
steal. 9 Sotus his opinion of Day-theeues. 10 Of a like law against
Self-homicide in the Earldome of Flaunders.
Sect. 2.
1 Severe Laws are arguments of a general inclination, not of a hainousnes in
the fact. 2 Fasting upon Sundays extremely condemned upon that reason. 3 So
Duells in France. 4 So Bull-baitings in Spain. 5 The hainousnes of Rape, or
Witchcraft are not diminished, where the Laws against them were but easy. 6
Public benefit is the rule of extending odious Laws, and restraining
favorable. 7 If other nations concur in like Laws, it shows the
inclination to be general.
Sect. 3.
1 The Custom of the Jews not burying till Sunn-set, and of the Athenians
cutting off the dead hand evict not.
Sect 4.
1 The reasons drawn from remedies, used upon some occasions to prevent it,
prove as little.

Did. 4.
Sect. 1.
1 Of the reasons used by particular men, being divines. 2 Of S. Aug. and of
his argument against Donatus. 3 Of S. Augustine comparatively with other
Fathers. 4 Comparison of Navar and Sotus. 5 Jesuits often beholding to Calvin
for his expositions. 6 In this place we differ not from S. Augustine. 7 Nor in
the second cited by Gratian. 8 That there may be Causa puniendi sine culpa. 9
As Valens the Emperor did miss Theodosius, So S. Augustine praetermitted the
right case. 10 Of Cordubensis rule, how we must behave our selves in
perplexities. 11 How temporal reward may be taken for spiritual offices. 12
Of Pindarus death praying for he knew not what. 13 In one place we depart from
S. Augustine upon the same reason, as the Jesuit Thyraeus does depart from him
in another.
Sect. 2.
1 The place cited by Gratian out of S. Hierome, is on our side.
Sect. 3.
1 Lavaters confession, that Augustine, Hierome, Chrysostom, Lactantius, are
of this opinion.
Sect. 4.
1 Of Peter Martyrs reason, Mors malum. 2 Clement has long since destroyed
that reason. 3 Of Malum poenae, how far it may be wished, and how far it
condemns. 4 Possessed men are not always so afflict for sin. 5 Damnation
has not so much rationem mali, as the least sin. 6 If Death were of the
worst sort of evil, yet there might be good use of it, as of Concupiscence. 7
In what fense S. Paul calls Death Gods enemy. 8 Death, since Christ, is not so
evil as before.
Sect. 5.
1 Of Peter Martyrs reason, Vita donum Dei.
Sect. 6.
1 Of Lavaters reason of Judges in all causes. 2 Where Confession is not in
use, there is no Judge of secret sin. 3 Of the Popes Jurisdiction over
himself. 4 Of such Jurisdiction in other persons by Civil laws. 5 10:22.
elected himself Pope. 6 Jurisdiction over our selves is therefore denied us; 7
because we are presumed favorable to our selves, not in cases esteemed
hurtful. 8 In cases hurtful we have such Jurisdiction. 9 Oath of Gregory in
the great Schism. 10 When a man becomes to be sui Juris. 11 War is just
between Sovereign Kings, because they have no Judge. 12 Princes give not
themselves privileges; but declare that in that case they will exercise their
inherent general Privilege.
Sect. 7.
1 Josephus reason of Depositum. 2 A Depositarie cannot be accused De Culpa,
but De Dolo. 3 A secret received Data fide is In natura Depositi.
Sect. 8.
1 Of similitudinary reasons in Authors not Divine.
Sect. 9.
1 Of Josephus his reason of Hostis.
Sect. 10.
1 Of Josephus reason of Servus.
Sect. 11.
1 Of Josephus reason of a Pilot.

Distinct. 5.
Sect. 1.
1 Of Saint Thomas two reasons from Justice, and Charity. 2 Of that part of
injustice, which is stealing himself from the State. 3 Monastike retyring is,
in genere rei, the same fault. 4 The better opinion is, that there is herein no
injustice. 5 Of the other Injustice, of usurping upon another Servant. 6
Though we have not Dominium, we have Usum of this life: And we may relinquish
it when we will. 7 The State is not Lord of our life, yet may take it away. 8
If injustice were herein done to the State, then by a license from the State it
may be lawful. 9 And the State might recompense her Damage upon the goods or
Heirs of the Delinquent. 10 In a man necessary to the State, there may be some
Injustice herein. 11 No man can do injury to himself. 12 The question
whether it be against Charity, respited to the third part.
Sect. 2.
1 Of Aristotle's two reasons of Misery and Pusillanimitie.

Distinct. 6.
Sect. 1.
1 Of reasons on the other side. 2 Of the Law of Rome, of asking the Senate
leave to kill himself. 3 Of the case upon that Law in Quintillian.
Sect. 2.
1 Comparisons of desertion and destruction. 2 Of Omissions equal to
committings.
Sect. 3.
3 In great faults the first step imprints a guiltines, yet many steps to
self-homicide are allowable. 4 Dracoes laws against homicide were retained for
the hainousnes of the fault. 5 Tolets five Species of Homicide. 6 Four of
those were to be found in Adams first Homicide in Paradise.
Sect. 4.
7 Of Tolets first and second Species, by Precept, and by Advise, or Option. 8
We may wish Malum poenae to our selves, as the Eremite prayed to be possessed.
9 That we may wish death for wearines of this life. 10 It is sin to wish the
evil were not evil, that then we might wish it. 11 Of wishing the Princes
Death. 12 In many opinions by contrary Religion, a true King becomes a Tyrant.
13 Why an oath of fidelity to the Pope binds no man. 14 Who is a Tyrant by the
declaration of the learned men of France. 15 How Death may be wished by Calvin's
opinion. 16 How we may wish death to another for our own advantage. 17 Phil.
Nerius consented that one who wished his own death might have his wish.
Sect. 5.
1 Of Tolets third Species of Homicide, by permission, which is Mors Negativa.
2 Of standing mute at the Bar. 3 Three Rules from Scotus, Navar, and
Maldonate, to guide us in these desertions of our selves. 4 That I may suffer a
Theif to kill me, rather then kill him. 5 Of Se defendendo in our Law. 6 That I
am not bound to escape from prison if I can. Nor to eat, rather then starve, 7
For ends better then this life we may neglect this. 8 That I may give my life
for another. 9 Chrysostomes opinion of Sarahs lie, and her consent to Adultery.
And S. Augustines opinion of this, and of that wife, who prostituted her self
to pay her husbands debts. 10 That to give my life for another, is not to
prefer another before my self, as Bonaventure and August. say; But to prefer
virtue before life; which is lawful. 11 For spiritual good it is without
question. 12 That I may give another that without which I cannot live. 13 That
I may lawfully wear out my self with fasting. 14 That this in S. Hier. opinion
is selfe-homicide. 15 Of the Friar whom Cassianus calls a Self-homicide, for
refusing bread from a ^heife, upon an indiscreet Vow. 16 Of Christ's fast. 17 Of
Philosophers inordinate fasts. 18 Of the Devils threatening S. Francis, for
fasting. 19 Examples of long fasts. 20 Reasons, effects, and obligations to
rigorous fastings. Corollary of this Section of Desertion.
Sect. 6.
1 Of another Species of homicide, which is not in Tolets division by
Mutilation. 2 Of Delivering ones self into bondage. 3. By diverse Cannons
homicide and mutilation is the same fault. 4 Of Calvin's argument against
Divorce, upon this ground of Mutilation. 5 The example of S. Mark, cutting off
his thumb to escape Priesthood 6 In what cases it is clear, that a man may
mai^ himself.
Sect. 7.
1 Of Tolets fourth Species of Homicide, by actual helping. 2 Ardoynus reckons
a flea amongst poisons, because it would destroy 3 David condemned the
Amalekite, who said he had helped Saul to kill himself. 4 Mariana the Jesuit
is of opinion, that a King which may be removed by poison, may not be put to
take it by his own hands though ignorantly, for he does then ki^ himself. 5
That a malefactor unaccused may accuse himself. 6 Of Sansovins relation of our
custom at executions, and withdrawing the pillow in desperate cases. 7 Of
breaking the legs of men at executions, and of breaking the halter. 8 Of the
form of purgations used by Moses Law in cases of Iealousy. 9 Of forms of
Purgation called Uulgares. 10 Charlemaine brought in a new form of purgation.
11 And Britius a Bishop, being acquitted before, extorted another purgation
upon himself. 12 Both kinds of Ordalium, by water, and fire, in use here,
till King John's time. 13 In all these purgations, and in that by Battle, the
party himself assisted. 14 Exumples of actual helpers to their own
destruction in S. Dorothaeus doctrine. 15 Of Joseph of Arimathaea his drinking
of poison. 16 Of S. Andrew and S. Lawrence. 17 Casuists not clear whether a
condemned man may do the last act to his death. 18 But in cases without
condemnation, it is sub praecepto to Priests, Curats, to go to infected
houses.
Sect. 8.
1 Of Tolets last species of Homi-cide which is the act it self. 2 How far
an erring conscience may justify this act. 3 Of Pythagoras philosophical
conscience, to die, rather then hurt a Bean, or suffer his scholars to speak.
4 Of the apparition to Hero a most devout Eremite, by which he killed himself,
out of Cassianus. 5 That the Devil sometime sollicites to good. 6 That by
Uasques his opinion, it is not Idolatry to worship God in the devil. 7 Rules
given to distinguish evil spirits from God are all fallible. 8 Good Angels
sometimes move to that which is evil, being ordinarily and morally accepted. 9
As in mis-adoration by Vasques, invincible ignorance excuses, so it may in our
cases. 10 Of S. Augustines first reason against Donatus, that we may save a
man's life against his will. 11 Of his second reasons, which is want of examples
of the faithful. And of S. Augustines assured escape, if Donatists had
produced Examples. 12 Divorce in Rome on either part, And in Jury, on the
woman's part long without example. 13 Saint Augustines Scholars in this point
of examples, (...) st^bborne as Aristotle's, for the inalterablenesse of the
Heavens, though the reason of both be ceased. 14 Of the Martyr Apollonia who
killed her self. 15 Of answers in her excuse. 16 Of the Martyr Pelagia who
killed her self. 17 Though her History be very uncertain, yet the Church
seems glad of any occasion to celebrate such a fact. 18 Saint Augustines
testimony of her. 19 Saint Ambroses Meditation upon her. 20 Eusebius his
Oration incitatory, imagined in the person of the Mother. 21 Saint Augustines
first of any doubting of their fact, sought such shifts to defend it, as it
needed not. 22 S. Augustines example has drawn Pedraca a Spanish Casuist, and
many others, to that shift of special Divine inspiration, in such cases. 23
And so says Peter Martyr of the Midwives, and of Rahabs lie. 24 To preserve
the Seal of Confession, a man may in some case be bound to do the entire act
of killing himself.


The Third Part, which is of the Law of God.
Distinct. 1
Sect. 1.
1 An introduction' to the handling of these places of Scripture. 2 Why I
forbear to name them who cite these places of Scripture. 3 If any oppose an
answer, why I entreat him to avoid bitterness. 4 Why Clergy men, which by
Canons may fish, and hunt, yet may not hunt with dogs. 5 Of Bezas answer to
Ochius Polygamy.

Distinction 2.
Sect. 1.
1 No place against this Self-homicide, is produced out of the Judicial or
Ceremonial Law.
Sect. 2
1 Of the place Genesis 9. 5. I will require your blood. 2 We are not bound to
accept the interpretation of the Rabbis. 3 Of Lyra, and of Emmanuel Sa, both
abounding in Hebraisms, yet making no such note upon this place,
Sect. 3,
1 Of the place De^. 33. 39. I kill, and I give life. 2 Jurisdiction of
Parents, Husbands, Masters, Magistrates, must consist with this place. 3 This
place must be interpreted as the other places of Scripture, which have the same
words. And from them, being three, no such sense can be extorted.
Sect. 4.
1 Of the place Job 7. 1. vita militia. 2 Why they cite this place according to
the vulgate copy. 3 Of Soldiers privileges of absence by Law. 4 Jobs scope is,
That as war works to peace, so here we labor to death. 5 Of Christ's letter
to King Abgarus.
Sect. 5.
1 Of another place in Job 7. 15. Anima elegit suspendium. 2 Why it was not
lawful to Job to kill himself. 3 His words seem to show some steps toward a
purpose of Self-homicide. 4 Of Sextus S^nensis, and of Gregory's exposition
thereof 5 How I differ from the Anabaptists, who say that Job despaired. 6 S.
Hierome, and the Trent Council incur this error of condemning all which a
condemned man says. 7 Uery holy and learned men impute a more dangerous
despair to Christ, then I do to Job.
Sect. 6.
1 Of the place Io. 2. 4. Skin for Skin etc.
Sect. 7.
1 Of the place Eccles. 30. 16. There is no riches above a sound body. 2 This
place is not of safety, but of health.
Sect. 8.
1 Of the place Exodus 20. Thou shall not kill. 2 S. Augustine thinks this Law
to concern ones self more directly, then another. 3 This Law has many
exceptions. 4 Laws of the first table are strictioris vinculi, then of the
second. 5 A case wherein it is probable that a man must kill himself, if the
person be exemplar. 6 As Laws against Day-theeves may be deduced from the Law
of God authorizing Princes, So may this from the commandment, of preferring
Gods glory. 7 Whatsoever might have been done before this Law, this Law forbids
not.
Sect. 9.
1 Of the place Wisd. 1. 12. Seek not death.

Distinct. 3.
Sect. 1.
1 Of the place Mat. 4. 6. Cast thy self down. 2 That Christ when it conduced
to his own onds, did as much, as the devil tempted him to, in this place.
Sect. 2.
1. Of the place Acts 16. 17. Do thy self no harm. 2 S. Paul knew Gods purpose
of baptizing the Iaylour. 3 For else says Calvin, he had frustrated Gods way
of giving him an escape by the faylours death.
Sect. 3.
1 Of the place Romans 3. 8. Do not evil for good. 2 In what sense Paul forbids
this. 3 God always inflicts malum poenae by instruments. 4 Induration it self
is sometimes medicinal. 5 We may inflict upon our selves one disease, to
remove another. 6. In things evil, in that sense as S. Paul takes the word
bear, Popes daily dispense. 7 So do the Civil Laws. 8 So do the Cannons. 9
So does God occasion less sint to avoid greater. 10 What any other may
dispense withal in us, in cases of extremity, we may dispense with it our
selves. 11 Yet no dispensation changes the nature of the thing, and therefore
that particular thing was never evil. 12 The Law it self, which measures
actions, is neither good nor evil. 13 Which Picus notes well, comparing it to
the firmament. 14 What evil S. Paul forbids here, and why. 15 Nothing which is
once evil, can ever recover of that. 16 These Acts were in Gods decree
preserved from those stains of circumstances, which make things evil: So as
Miracles were written in his book of Nature, though not in our copy thereof;
and so, as our Lady is said to be preserved from Original sin. 17 Of that
kind was Moses killing of the Egyptian. 18 If this place of Paul, be understood
of all evil. 19 Yet it must admit exceptions, as well as the Decalogue it
self. 20 Otherwise that application which Bellarmine and others do make of it
will be intolerable.
Sect. 4.
1. Of diverse places which call us, Temples of God. 2 The dead are still his
Temples and Images. 3 Heath^ Temples might be demolished, yet the Soil
remained Sacred. 4 S. Paul's reason holds in cases where we avile our bodies,
here we advance them. 5 How we must understand that our body is not our own.
Sect. 5.
1. Of the place, Ephesians. 4. 15. One body with Christ. 2 This place gives
Arguments to all which spare not themselves for releif of others, and therefore
cannot serve the contrary purpose.
Sect. 6.
1. Of the place Ephesians. 5. No man hates his own f^esh. 2 How Marlorate expounds
this Hate.

Distinct. 4.
Sect. 1.
1 Of the places of scripture on the other part. 2 We may, but our Adversaries
may not make use of Examples. To which the answer of Martyr and Lavat^r is
weak 3 The Nature, Degrees, and Effects of Charity. 4 S. Augustines
description of Her. Of her highest perfection beyond that which Lombard
observed out of Aug. 5 He wholoves God with all his heart, may love him more. 6
Any suffering in Charity, has infallibly the grace of God; by Aquin.
Sect. 2.
1. Of the place 1 Cor. 13. 4. Though I give my Body. 2. By this, it was in
common reputation, a high degree of perfection to die so, and Charity made it
acceptable. 3 S. Paul speaks of a thing which might lawfully be done, for such
are all his gradations in this Argument. 4 Tongues of Angels, in what sense in
this place. 5 Speech in the Ass, understandings of prophesies in Judas, or
miraculous faith, make not the possessour the better. 6 How I differ from the
Donatists, arguing from this place, that in charity there Self-Homicides were
always lawful. 7 To give my body, is more then to let it be taken. 8 How
Niccphorus the Martyr gave his Body in Sapritius his room who recanted. 9
There may be some case that a man who is bound to give his body, cannot do it
otherwise then by self-homicide.
Sect. 3.
1. Of the place Joh. 10. 11. and Joh. 15. 13. The good Shepherd. 2 That a man
is not bound to purge himself, if another crime be imputed to him.
Sect. 4.
1 Of the place Ioh. 13. 37. I will lay down my life. 2 Peter's readiness was
natural; Paul's deliborate.
Sect. 5.
1. Of the place Ioh. 10. 15. Of Christ's example. 2 Why Christ spoke this in
the present time. 3 Of the abundant charity of Christ. 4 Of his speech going to
Emmaus. 5 Of his Apparition to S. Charles. 6 Of the Revelation to S. Brigid. 7
Of his mothers charity. 8 That none could take away Christ's soul. 9 His own
will the only cause of his dying so soon by S. Augustine. 10 And by Aquinas,
because he had still all his strength. 11 And by Marlorate because he bowed his
head, and it fell not, as ours do in death. 12 In what sense it is true that
the Jews put him to Death. 13 Of Aquinas opinion, and of Silvesters opinion of
Aquinas. 14 Christ was so the cause of his death, as he is of his wetting,
which might, and does not shut the window when it rains. 15 Who imitated Christ
in this actual emission of the soul. 16 Upon what Reasons this manner of dying
in Christ is called Heroique, and by like Epithets. 17 Christ is said to have
done herein, as Saul, and Appollonia, and such.
Sect. 6.
1 Of the places Ioh. 12. 25. Luc. 14. 26. Of Hating this life. 2. Jesuits
apply particularly this Hate. 3. If the place in the Ephesians. No man hates his
flesh, be against self-homicide, this place must by the same reason be for it.
4 S. Augustine denying that this place justifies the Donatists, excludes not
all cases.
Sect. 7.
Of the place 1 Ioh. 3. 16. We ought to lay down our lives, etc. 2 All these
places direct us to do it so, as Christ did it, unconstrained.
Sect. 8.
1. Of the place Phil. 1. 23. Cupio dissolvi. 2. Of S. Paul's gradations to this
wish, and of his correcting of it.
Sect. 9.
1 Of the place Gal. 4. 15. You would have plucked out your own eyes. 2 This
was more then vitam profundere by Calvin.
Sect. 10.
1. Of the place, Romans 9. 3. Anathema. 2 That he wished herein Damnation. 3
That he considered not his Election at that time.
Sect. 11.
Of the place, Exodus 32. 32. Dele me de libro. 2 That this imprecation was not
only to be blotted out of the History of the Scripture as some say. 3 It was
stranger that Christ should admit that which might seem a slip downward, when
he wished an escape from death, then that Moses should have such an exaltation
upward, as to save his Nation by perishing, yet both without inordinatenesse. 4
How by Paulinus, a just man may safely say to God, Dele me.

Distinct. 5.
Sect. 1.
1 Of Examples in Scripture. 2 The phrase of Scripture never imputes this Act
to any as a sin, when it relates the History. 3 Irenaeus forbids man to
accuse where God does not. 4 Beza his answer to Ochius reason, that some
Patriarchs lived in Polygamy, reaches not home to our case. 5 For it is not
evident by any other place of Scripture, that this is sin, and here many
examples con^ur.
Sect. 2.
1 Examples of Acts which were not fully selfe-homicides, but approaches. 2 Of
the Prophet who punished him that would not strike him. 3. That when God does
especially invite men to such violence, he says so plainly. And therefore such
particular invitations may not be presumed where they are not expressed.
Sect. 3.
1 Of Jonas. 2 Why S. Hierome calls only Jonas of all the Prophets holy.
Sect. 4.
1 Of Samson. 2 The Church celebrates him as a Martyr. 3 Paulinus wishes such a
death as Samsons. 4 They which deny that he meant to kill himself, are confuted
by the text. 5 They which say, he intended not his own death principally, say
the same as we do. 6 That S. Augustines answer to this fact, that it was by
special instinct, has no ground in the history. 7 Of Sayr his reason, in
confirmation of Augustine, That Samson prayed. 8 Of Pedraca his reason, that it
was therefore the work of God, because God effected it so, as it was desired. 9
That he had as much reason, and as much authority to kill himself, as to kill
the Philistims. And that was only the glory of God. 10 That in this manner of
dying, be^ was a type of Christ.
Sect. 5.
1 Of Saul. 2 Whether the Amalekite did help to kill Saul. Whether Saul be
saved or no. 3 In what cases the Jews, and Lyra confess, that a man may kill
himself. 4 Lyra's reasons why Saul is to be presumed to have dyed well. 5
Burgensis reason to the contrary; That if Saul were excusable, the Amalekite
was so too, is of no force. 5 Of Saul's Armor-bearer.
Sect. 6.
1 Of Achitophel. 2 He set his house in order, and he was buried.
Sect. 7.
1 Of Judas. 2 He dyed not by hanging in the opinion of Euthymius, Occumenius,
Papias S. John's disciple, and Theophilact. 3 By what means many places of
Scripture have been generally otherwise accepted, then the text enforces. 4
Judas not accused of this in the story, nor in the two Prophetical Psalms of
him. 5 Origens opinion of his repentance. 6 Calvin acknowledges all degrees of
Repentance, which the Roman Church requires to Salvation to have been in
Judas. 7 Petilians opinion that Judas was a Martyr. 8 His Act had some degrees
of Justice, by S. August.
Sect. 8.
1 Of Eleazar. 2 All confess that it was an Act of virtue. 3 His destruction
was certain to him. 4 He did as much to his own death, as Samson. 5 The
reasons of thus Act, alleged in the Text, are Moral. 6 Saint Ambrose extols
this by many concurrences. 7. Cajetans reason for justification thereof, is
app^able to very many other cases of Selfe-homicide.
Sect. 9.
1 Of Rasis. 2 His reasons in the Text Moral. 3 Whether it be Pusillanimity,
as Aristotle, August. and Aquinas urge. 4 Saint Augustine confesses that in
Cleombrotus it was greatness of mind. 5 How much great Examples govern. 6
That it was reputed Cowardlinesse in Antisthenes, being extremely sick, not to
kill himself. 7 Upon what reasons Lyra excuses this, and like actions. 8
Burgensis his reason confesses that there might have been just causes for
this act.


Conclusion
1 Why Jrefrained discourse of destiny herein. 2 Man made of shadow, and the
Devil of fire by the Alcoran. 3 Our adversaries reasons contradict one
another. 4 No precapt given of loving our selves. 5 Encouragemens to contempt
of death. 6 Why I abstain from particular directions. 7 Laws forbid ordinary
men to our by extraordinary means, yet Kings o^ England, Fra. and Spain do
it. 8 As Hierom Origin Chrysostom. and Cassianus are excused for following Plato,
in toleration of a ly, because the church had not then pronounced; so may it be
in this.
THE PREFACE Declaring the Reasons, the Purpose, the way, and the end of the
AVIHOR.
BEZA, A man as eminent and illustrious, in the full 1. The reason of this
discourse.
glory and Noone of Learning, as others were in the dawning, and Morning, when
any, the least sparkle was notorious, Epist. ante confessionem.
confesses of himself, that only for the anguish of a Scurffe, which
over-ranne his head, he had once drowned himself from the Millers bridge in
Paris, if his Uncle by chance had not then come that way; I have often such a
sickely inclination. And, whether it be, because I had my first breeding and
conversation with men of a suppressed and afflicted Religion, accustomed to the
despite of death, and hungry of an imagined Martyrdom; Or that the common
Enemy and that door worst locked against him in me; Or that there be a
perplexity and flexibility in the doctrine it self; Or because my Conscience
ever assures me, that no rebellious grudging at Gods gifts, nor other sinful
concurrence accompanies these thoughts in me, or that a brave scorn, or that a
faint cowardlinesse beget it, whenever any affliction assailes me, me thinks
I have the keys of my prison in mine own hand, and no remedy presents it
self so soon to my heart, as mine own sword. Often Meditation of this has
Incitements to charity toward the doer.
won me to a charitable interpretation of their action, who die so: and
prov^ked me a little to watch and ex^gitate their reasons, which pronounce so
peremptory judgments upon them.

B. Dorethcus doctrine. 6.
A devout and godly man, has guided us well, and rectified our
uncharitableness in such cases, by this remembrance, [Sois lapsum, etc. Thou
know this man's fall, but thou know not his wra^ling; which perchance was
such, that almost his very fall is justified and accepted of God.] For, to this
and, says one, Bosq. conc 2.
[God has appointed us tentations, that we might have some (...) for our
(...), when he calls us to ^count.]

An uncharitable mis-interpreter un^tily demolishes his own house, and rep^s
not onothers. He loses without any gain or profit to any. And, as lib. de
patientia.
Te^tullian comparing and making equal, him which provokes another, (...) him
who will be provoked by another, says, [There is no difference, but that the
(...) offen^ first, And that is nothing, because in (...) there is no respect
of Order or Prioritie.] So we may soon becomes as ill as any offender, if we
offend in a severe increpation of the fact. For, Scala paradis. grad 3.
Climachus in his Ladder of Paradise, places these two steps very near one
another, when he says, [Though in the world it were possible for thee, to
escape all defiling by actual sin, yet by judging and condemning those who
are defiled, thou art defiled.] In this thou act defiled, as In quaest. fuse
disp. ad q. 6.
Basil notes, [That in comparing others sins, thou can not avoid excusing
thi^mne.] Especially this is done, if thy ze^le be too fervent in the
reprehension of others: For, as in most other Accidents, so in this also, Sin
has the nature of Poison, that Forest. de venen. not. in observat. 2.
[It enters eas^st, and works fastest upon cholerique constitutions.] It is
good counsel of the Pharisees styled, Serar. Trihaeres. l. 2. c^p. 17.
[(...) judices proximum, done ad ejus locum pertingas. Feeleand wrestle with
such tentations as he has done, and thy ^le will be tamer. For, [ Heb. 2. 17.
Therefore (says the Apostle) it became Christ to be like us, that he might be
merciful.]

If therefore after a Christian protestation of Incitements to charity toward
the Author.
an innocent purpose herein, And after a submission of all which is said, not
only to every Christian Church, but to every Christian man, and after an
entreaty, that the Reader will follow this advise of Tabaus, [ Serar.
Trihaeres. l. 2. cap. 17.
Qui litigant, sint ambo in oonspd^ tuo mali and rei, and trust neither me, nor
the adverse part, but the Reasons, there be any scandal in this (...) of mine,
it is Taken, not Given. And though I know, that the malicious prejudged man,
and the lazy affectors of ignorance, will use the same calumnies and
obtrectations toward me, (for the voice and sound of the Snake and Goose is all
one) yet because I thought, that as in the poole of Bethsaida, 10. 5. 2.
there was no health till the water was troubled, so the best way to find the
truth in this matter, was to deb^te and vex it, (for Athenag. de resur.
[We must as well dispute de veritate, as pro veritate,]) I abstained not for
fear of mis-interpretation from this undertaking. Our stomachs are not now so
tender, and queasie, after so long feeding Why it is not inconvenient now to
handle this point.
upon folid Divinity, nor we so umbragious and startling, having been so long
enlightened in Gods path, that we should think any truth strange to us, or
relapse into that childish age, in which Filesacus de authorit. Epis. cap. 1.
97.
a Council in France forbad Aristotle's Metapbysiq^es, and punished with
Excommunication the excribing, reading, or having that book.

Contemplative and bookish men, must of necessity be more quarrelsome then
others, because Dissentions among scholars more and harder to end then others.
they contend not about matter of fact, nor can determine their controversies
by any certain witnesses, no^ judges. But as long as they go^ toward peace,
that is Truth, it is no matter which way. Dan. 10.
The tutelare Angels resisted one another in Persia, but neither resisted Gods
revealed purpose. Humf. Iesui. part. 2. ad rat. 5
Hierome and Gregory seem to be of opinion, that Salo^n is damned, Ambr^se and
Augustine, that he is saved (...) All Fathers, all zealous of Gods glory.
ejusd. part 1 praefat. ad Com Leicest.
At the same time when the Roman Church canonized Becket, the Schools of
Paris disputed whether he could be saved; both Catholic Judges, and of
reverend authority. And after so many Ages of a devout and religious
celebrating the memory of Saint Hierome, Causaeus has spoken so dangerously,
that Ratio 5. n Such perplexities we ought to enclin to that side that
favors the dead.
Campian says, he pronounces him to be as deep in hell as the Devil. But in
all such intricacies, where both opinions seem equally to conduce to the honor
of God, his Justice being as much advanced in the one, as his Mercy in the
other, it seems reasonable to me, that this turn the scales, if on either
side there appear charity toward the poor soul departed. Notae Mallon. in
Pale^t. Sin. part. 1. cap. 2.
The Church in her Hymns and Antiphones, does often salute the Nails and
Cross, with Epithets of sweetness, and thanks; But the Spear which pierced
Christ when he was dead, it ever calls, dirum M^ucronem.

This piety, I protest again, urges me in this discourse; and what infirmity
soever my reasons may have, yet I have comfort in Tresmeg^tus Axiom, De
pietate et ^blilosophia. Why I make it so public.
[Qui pius est, s^mme Philosophatur.] And therefore without any disguising, or
curious and libellous concealing, I present and object it, to all of candor,
and indifferency, to escape that just taxation, H^er. Apol. advers. Ruffin.
[Novum malitiae genus est, and intemperantis, scribere quod occultes.] For as,
Theodor. a Niem. l. 2. ca. 37.
when Ladijlaus took occasion of the great schism, to corrupt the Nobility in
Rome, and hoped thereby to possess the Town, to their seven Governors whom
they called Sapientes, they added three more, whom they called Sapientes, and
consided in them; So do I wish, and and as much as I can, effect,) that to
those many learned and subtle men which have traveled in this point, some
charitable and compassionate men might be added.

If therefore, of Readers, which Tessarid. 6. What reader I wish.
Gorionides observes to be of four sorts, (Spunges which attract all without
distinguishing; ^owre-glufles, which receive and power out as fast; B^gges,
which retain only the dregs of the Spices, and let the Wine escape; And
Sives, which retain the best only, (...) I find some of the lastsort, I
doubt not but they may be hereby enlightened. And Genesis 3. 6. et 7.
as the eyes of Eve, were opened by the taste of the Apple, though it he said
before that she saw the beauty of the tree, So the digesting of this may,
though not present fair obj^cts, yet bring them to (...) the nakedness and
deformity of their own reasons, founded upon a rigorous suspicion, and wi^e
them to be of that temper, which Hom. de S. Susanna.
Chrysostom commends, [He which suspects benignly would feign be deceived, and
be overcome. and is p^ously glad, when he finds it to be false, which he did
uncharitably suspect.] And it may have as much vigor (as Ste^ch. de Valla de
Don. constable.
one observes of another Author) as the Sun in March; it may stir and
dissolve humors, though not expel them; for that must be a work of a
stronger power.

Every branch which is excerpted from other The reason of so many citations.
authors, and engrafted here, is not written for the readers faith, but for
illustration and comparison. Because I undertook the declaration of such a
proposition as was controverted by many, and therefore was drawn to the
citation of many authorities, I was willing to go all the way with company,
and to take light from others, as well in the journey as at the journeys end.
If therefore in multiplicity of not necessary citations there appear vanity,
(...) ostentation, or digression my honesty must make my excuse and
compensation, who acknowledge as Epist. Tit. Vesp.
Pliny does [That to choose rather to be taken in a theft, then to gave every
man due, is obnoxii animi, et infelicis ingenii.] I did it the rather because
scholastique and artificial men use this way of instructing; and I made
account that I was to deal with such, because I p^esume that natural men are
at least enough inclinable of themselves to this doctrine.

This my way; and my end is to remove God punishes that sin most which
occasions most sin in others.
^andall. For certainly God often punishes a sinner much more severely,
because others have taken occasion of sinning by his fact. If therefore we did
correct in our selves this easines of being scandalized, how much easier and
lighter might we make the punishment of many transgressors? for God in his
judgemen^s has almost made us his assistants, and counselors, how far he
shall punish; and our interpretation of another sin does often give the
measure to Gods Justice or Mercy.

If therefore, since Paulin. Ep. 4. Severo.
[disorderly long hair which was pride and wantonness in Absolon, and
squallor and horridnes in Nebuchodonozor was virtue and strength in Samson, and
sanctification in Samuel,] these severe men will not allow to indifferent
things the best construction they are capable of, nor pardon my inclination to
do so, they shall pardon this opinion, that their severity proceeds from a
self-guiltines, and give me leave to apply that of Ennodius, Epist. ad
Astyriion.
[That it is the nature of stiff wickedness, to think that of others, which
themselves deserve and it is all the comfort which the guilty have, not to find
any innocent.]

THE FIRST PART. OF LAW and NATURE.
Distinction I.
SECT. I.
AS Palaeotus de notbis. c. 28.
Lawyers use to call that impossible, 1. Why we first prove that this sin is
not irremissible.
which is so difficult; that by the rules of law it cannot be afforded, but by
the indulgence of the Prince, and exercise of his Prerogative: So Divines are
accustomed to call that sin, which for the most part is so, and which
naturally occasions and accompanies sin. Of such condition is this
SELFHOMICIDE: which to be sin every body has so sucked, and digested, and
incorporated into the body of his Faith and Religion, that now they prescribe
against any opposer; and all discourse in this point is upon the degrees of
this sin, and how far it exceeds all other: So that none brings the metal
now to the test, nor touch, but only to the balance. Therefore although
whatsoever is in our appetite good or bad, was first in our understanding true
or false, and therefore if we might proceed orderly, our first disquisition
should be employed upon the first source, and origin, which is, whether this
opinion be true or false, yet finding our selves under the iniquity and burden
of this custom, and prescription, we must obey the necessity, and
preposterously examine: First, why this fact should be so resolutely condemned,
and why there should be this precipitation in our judgment, to pronounce this
above all other sins irremissible: and then, having removed that which was
nearest us, and delivered our selves from the tyranny of this prejudice: our
judgment may be brought nearer to a straightness, and our charity awakned, and
entendred to apprehend, that this act may be free not only from those enormous
degrees of sin, but from all.

SECT. II.
They who pronounce this sin to be so necessarily 1. Three sorts of mistakers
of this sin.
damnable, are of one of these three persuasions. Either they mis-affirme that
this act always proceeds from desperation; and so they load it with all those
comminations with which from Scriptures, Fathers, Histories, that common place
abounds. Or else they entertain that dangerous opinion, that there is in this
life an impenitiblenesse, and impossibility of returning to God, and that
apparent to us (for else it could not justify our uncharitable censure;) Or
else they build upon this foundation, that this act being presumed to be sin,
and all sin unpardonable without repentance, this is therefore unpardonable,
because the very sin does preclude all ordinary ways of repentance.

SECT. III.
To those of the first Sect, if I might be as vainly 1. That all desperation is
not heinous; and that this act does not always proceed from desperation.
subtle, as they are uncharitably severe, I should answer, that all
desperation is not sinful. For in the devil it is not sin, nor does he
demerit by it, because he is not commanded to hope. Nor in a man which
undertook an austere and disciplinary taming of his body by fasts or
corrections, were it sinful to despair that God would take from him stimulum
carnis. Nor in a Priest employed to convert infidels, were it sinful to
despair; that God would give him the power of miracles; If therefore to quench
and extinguish this stimulum carnis, a man should kill himself; the effect and
fruit of this desperation were evil, and yet the root it self not necessarily
so. No 2. It may be without infidelity.
detestation nor dehortation against this sin of desperation (when it is a
sin) can be too earnest. But yet Tho. 22. q. 2. ar. 2.
since it may be without infidelity, it cannot be greater then that. And
though Aquinas there calls it sin truly, yet he says he does so, 3 When it
is poena peccati it is involuntarium.
because it occasions many sins. And if it be as Perer. Exodus c. 1. dijp. 4.
others affirm, Poena peccati, it is then involuntarium, which will hardly
consist with the nature of sin: 4. The reason why men ordinarily aggravate it.
Certainly, though many devout men have justly imputed to it the cause and
effect of sin, yet as in the Cau. 17.
penitential Cannons, greater Penance is inflicted upon one who kills his
wife, than one who kills his mother; and the reason added, not that the fault
is greater, but that otherwise more would commit it; So is the sin of
desperation so earnestly aggravated; because springing from Sloth, and
Pusillanimity, our nature is more slippery and inclinable to such a descent,
than to presumptions, which yet without doubt do more wound and violate the
Majesty of God, then desperation does. But howsoever, that none may justly say,
that all which kill themselves, have done it out of a despair of Gods mercy,
(which is the only sinful despair) we shall in a more proper place, when
we come to consider the examples exhibited in Scriptures, and other Histories;
find many who at that act have been so far from despair, that they have
esteemed it a great degree of Gods mercy, to have been admitted to such a
glorifying of his name, and have proceeded therein as religiously as in a
sacrifice; and as Bosquier Con. 2.
one says, elegantly, of Job, venere in gloriosa Proverbia, and of whom we may
properly say, that which Moses said, Exodus 32. 29.
when they punished upon one another their Idolatry, Consecrastis man^ vestras
Domino.

When I come to consider their words who are 5. Of the second opinion,
impenitiblenesso.
of the second opinion, and which allow an impenitiblenesse in this life (of
which Calvin is a strong Authorizer, if not an Author; who 6. Of Calvin's
opinion, Mat. 12. 30.
says, that actual impenitence is not the sin intimated in Matthew. 12. 30,
and 31. But it is a willing resisting of the holy Ghost, into which whosoever
falls, Tenendum est, says he, we must hold that he never rises again) because
these hard and mis-interpretable words fall from them, when they are perplexed,
and intricated with that heavy question of sin, against the holy Ghost, and
because I presume them to speak proportionally and analogally to their other
Doctrine, I rather incline to afford them this construction, that they place
this impenitiblenesse only in the knowledge of God, or that I understand them
not, then either believe them literally, or believe that they have clearly
expressed their own meanings. For I see not why we should be lother to allow,
that God has made some impeccable, then impenitible. 7. None impeccable, nor
impenitible.
Neither do I perceive, that if they had their purpose, and this were granted
to them, that therefore such an impenitiblenesse must of necessity be concluded
to have been in this person, by reason of this act.

SECT. IIII.
But the third sort is the tamest of all the three, 1. Of the third sort, and
that we ought not to presume actual impenitence in this case.
and gives greatest hope of being reduced, and rectifyed: For though they
pronounce severely upon the fact, yet it is only upon one reason, that the
fact precludes all entrance to repentance. Wherein I wonder why they should
refuse to apply their opinions to the milder rules of the Casuifts Azor. Mor.
Instit. pa. 1. l. 2. c. 16.
which ever in doubtful cases, teach an inclination to the safer side. And
though it be sa^er to think a thing to be fin, then not, yet that rule serves
for your own information, and for a 2. Which is the safer side in doubts.
bridle to you, not for another condemnation. They use to interpret that rule
of taking the safer side, that in things necessary (necessitate finis, as
repentance is to salvation) we must follow any probable opinion, though
another be more probable; and that, directly that opinion is to be followed,
Quae favet animae: which they exemplify thus. Zambran. de poeniten. dub. 2. n.
39.
That though all Doctors hold that baptism of a child not yet thoroughly born,
in the hand or foot to be ineffectuall, yet all Doctors counsel to baptize in
that case, and to believe of good effect. And the example of the good theife
informs us, that repentance works immediately; 1. Inarticulo mortis, the
Church interprets ever favorably.
and from that history Calvin collects, That such pain in articulo mortis, is
naturally apt to be get repentance; Since the Church is so indulgent, and
liberal to her children, Idem de bap. dub. 8. n. 1.
that at the point of death she will afford her treasure of baptism to one
which has been mad from his birth, by the same reason us to a child; Ibid. n.
2.
yea, to one fallen lately into madness, though it appear he were in mortal
sin, if he have but attrition, which is but a fear of hell, and no taste of
Gods glory; And ^uch attrition shall be presumed to be in him, if nothing
appear evidently to the contrary: Idem praelud. 1. n. 7.
If she be content to extend and interpret this point of death, of every danger
by sea, or travel; Idem de poenitent. dub. 3. nu. 2.
If she will interpret any mortal sin, in a man provoked by sudden passion,
and proceeding from indeliberation, to be no worse nor of greater malignity,
then the act of a child. If being unable to succor one before Ibidem.
she will deliver him from excommunication after he is dead. Dub. 7. nu. 9.
If she be content that both the penitent and confessor, be but diligentes,
not diligentissimi; Idem de unct. dub. 2. nu. 3.
If rather then she will be frustrate of her desire to dispense her treasure,
she yields that mad and possessed men, shall be bound till they may receive
extreme unction. Sayr Thesaur cas. consci. tom. 1. l. 2. c. 21. nu. 2.
If lastly she absolve some whether they will or no, why should we abhor our
mothers example, and being brethren, be severer than the Parent? Not to pray
for them which dye without faith is a precept so obvious to every Religion,
that even Alcor. azoar. 19.
Mahomet has inhibited it: But to presume impenitence, because you were not
by, and heard it, is an usurpation.

This is true repentance (says Clement) [ Stromat. l. 2
To do no more, and to speak no more, those things, 4. What true repentance
is.
whereof you repent; and not to be ever sinning, and ever asking pardon.] Of
such a repentance as this our case is capable enough.

And of Lib. 3. ad amandum. cp. 1.
one who died before he had repented, goo^ Paulinus would charitably interpret
his haste, [That he chose rather to go to God debtor quam liber] and so to die
in his debt rather than to carry his acquittance. As therefore in matters of 5.
Witnesses which acquit, more acceptable then accusers.
fact, the delinquent is so much favored that Did. 81. ca. Clerici.
a Layman shall sooner be believed which acquits him, then a Clork which
accuses (though in 12. q. 1. c. duo sunt.
other cases there be much disproportion between the value of these two
testimonies;) So, if any will of necessity proceed to judgment in our case,
those reasons, which are most benign, and which, (as I said) favent anima,
ought to have the best acceptance and entertainment.

SECT. V.
Of all those definitions of sin, which the first 1. Why we wave the
ordinary definition of sin ta^en from S. Augustine, and follow that of
Aquinas.
Rhapsoder Pet. Lombard has presented out of ancient learning, as well the
Summists as Casuists do most insist upon that which he brings from Lib. 2.
Did. 35. (...).
S. Augustine, as, commonly, where that Father serves their turns, they never
go further. This definition is, that sin is dictum, factum, concupitum,
contra aternam legem Dei. This they stick too, because this definition (if it
be one) best b^ares their descant; and is the easiest conveyance, and carriage,
Of the torturing practice of Casuists.
and vent for their conceptions; and applying rules of Divinity to particular
cases: by which they have made all our actions perplexed and litigious, in foro
interiori, which is their tribunal: by which torture they have brought men's
consciences to the same reasons of complaint, which Panegyr. Traian.
Pliny attributes to Rome, till Trajans time; that Civit^ f^-aata legibus,
legibus evertebatur. For as Informers vexed them with continual delations upon
penal Laws, so does this act of sinning entangle wretched consciences in
manifold and desp^ate anxi eties.

But for this use this definition cannot be thought to be applyable to sin
only, since it limits it to the external Law of God, (which word though
Lombard have not, Thesaur. Cas. Consc. l. 1. Ca. 5.
Sa^ and all the rest r^tain for this eternal Law is Tho. 22. q. 91. ar. 2.
ratio gub^rnativa Dei, which is no other then his eternal decree for the
government of the whole world, and that is Providence. And certainly against
this, because it is not always revealed, a man may without sin 3. Of the
eternal law of God in Augustines definition against which a man may do
without sin.
both think and speak and do: as I may resist a disease, of which God has
decreed I shall die. Yea though he seem to reveal his will, we may resist it,
with prayers against it, because it is often conditioned, and accompanied with
limitations and exceptions. Yea though God dealt plainly by Nathan, 2. S^. 12.
14.
[The child shall surely die] David resisted Gods decree by prayer and penance.
We must therefore seek another definition of sin which I think is not so well
delivered in those words of Aquinas 22. q. 64. ar. 1. Con.
[Omnis defectus debiti actus habet rationem peccati] as in his other;
[Peccatum 4. Of the Denition which we follow.
est actus devians ab ordine debiti finis, contra regulam naturae rationis, aut
legis aeternae] For here lex aeterna being put as a member and part of the
definition, it cannot admit that vast and large acceptance, which it could not
escape in the description of S. Augustine, but must in this place be
necessarily intended of lex divina. Through this definition therefore, we will
trace this act of Self-homicide, and see whether it offend any of those three
sorts of Law.

SECT. VI.
Of all these three Laws, of Nature, of Reason, 1. How the law of nature, of
reason, and of God, exhibited in this definition, are all one; and how diversely
accepted.
and of God, every precept which is permanent, and binds always, is so
composed and elemented and complexion'd, that to distinguish and separate them
is a Chymick work: And either it does only seem to be done, or is done by the
torture and vexation of schoole-limbicks, which are exquisite and violent
distinctions. For that part of Gods Law which binds always, bound before it
was written, and so it is but dictamen rectae rationis; and that is the Law of
nature. And therefore Jsidore as it is related into the Did. 1. Om^es.
Canons, dividing all Law into divine and humane, adds [Divine consists of
nature, Humane of custome] Yet though these three be almost all one; yet
because one thing may be commanded diverse ways, and by diverse authorities, as
the common Law, a Statute, and a Decree of an arbitrary Court, may bind me to
do the same thing, it is necessary that we weigh the obligation of every one of
these Laws which are in the Definition.

But first I will only mollify and prepare their 2. In some eases all these
three laws may be broke at once.
crude and undigested opinions and prejudice which may be contracted from the
often iteration, and specious but sophisticate inculcatings of Law, and Nature,
and Reason, and God, with this Antidote, that many things which are of Natural
and Humane and Divine Law may be broken. Of which sort Soto de teg. Secr.
membr. 1. q. 2.
to conceal a secret 3. Revealing a secret.
delivered unto you is one. And the Honor due to Parents is so strictly of all
these Laws, as none of the second Table more. Yet in a just war a Parricide
is not guilty; yea by a law of Venice, though de Rep. l. 1. cap. 4.
Bodin say, it were better the 4. Parricide.
Town were sunk then ever there should be any example or president therein; A
son shall redeem himself from banishment by killing his Father being also
banished. And we Aelian. l. 4. cap. 1.
read of another state (and Laws of Civil Commonwealths may not easily be
pronounced to be against Nature) where when Fathers came to be of an
unprofitable and useless age, the sons must beat them to death with clubs: And
of another, where all persons of above 70 years were dispatched.

SECT. VII.
This term the law of Nature, is so variously 1. Of the law, of nature; and
that against it strictly taken, either no sin, or all sin is done.
and unconstantly delivered, as I confess I read it a hundred times before I
understand it once, or can conclude it to signify that which the author should
at that time mean. Yet I never found it in any sense which might justify
their vociferations upon sins against nature. For the transgressing of 2. To
do against nature, makes us not guilty of a greater sin, but more
inexcusable.
the Law of nature in any act does not seem to me to increase the hay
nousnesse of that act, as though nature were more obligatory than divine Law:
but only in this respect it aggravates it, that in such a sin we are
inexcusable by any pretense of ignorance since by the light of nature we might
discern it. Many things which we call sin, and so evil have been done by the
commandment of God; 3. Nothing so evil, that is never good.
by Abraham and the Jsraelites in their departing from Egypt. So that this
evil is not in the nature of the thing, nor in the nature of the whole harmony
of the world, and therefore in no Law 4. No evil but disobedience.
of nature, but in violating, or omitting a Commandment: All is obedience or
disobedience. 5. Lying naturally worse then Selfe-homicide.
Whereupon our Countryman Thesa^. cas. cons. l. 7. c. 9. n. 9.
Sayr confesses, that this SELF-HOMICIDE is not so intrinsecally ill, as to
Ly. Which is also evident by Cajetan sup. 22. q. 37. ar. 2.
where he affirms, that I may not to save my life, accuse my self upon the
Rack. And though Cajetan extend no farther her^in, then that I may not belly my
sel^: Yet de teg. secr. memb. 1. q. 3.
(...) evicts, that Cajetans reasons, with as much force forbid any accusation
of my self, though it be true. So much easier may I dep^rt with life then with
truth, or with fame, by Cajetan. And yet 6 Fame may be neglected; yet we are as
much bound to preserve it, as life.
we find that of their fame many holy men have been very negligent. For not
only Augustine, Anselm, and Hier^ betray themselves by unurged confessi ns,
but Soto ihid.
St Ambrose procured certain prostitute women, to come into his chamber, that
by that he might be defamed, and the People thereby abstain from making him
Bishop. This intrinsique and natural evil therefore will hardly be found.
For, Th. 22. q. 104. ar. 4. ad 2. m.
God who can command a murder, cannot command an evil, or a sin; because the
whole frame and government of the world b^ing his, he may use it as he 7 God
cannot command a sin, yet he can command murder.
will. As, though he can do a miracle, he can do nothing against nature;
because Aug. cont. faust. l. 26. ca.
[That is the nature of every thing, which he works in it.] Hereupon, and upon
that other true rule, Th. 1. q. 105. at. 6. ad. 1.
[whatsoever is wrought by a superior Agent, upon a patient, who is naturally
subject to that Agent, is naturall] we may safely infer, that nothing which we
call si^ne is so against nature, but that it may be sometimes agreeable to
nature.

On the other side, nature is often taken so widely and so extensively, as all
sin is very truly said to be against nature. Yea, before it come to be
sin. For S. Augustine says De li. Arb. l. 13. ca. 13.
[Every vice, as it is vice, is against nature.] And vice is but habit which
being produced to act, is then sin. Yea 8 Original sin is from nature.
the parent of all sin, which is hereditary original sin, which 12. q. 81.
ar. 4.
Aquinas calls, [a languor and faintness in our nature, and an indisposition,
proceeding from the dissolution of the harmony of original Justice] is by him
said to be in us, [ 3. q. 8. ar. 5. ad 7.
quasi naturale] And is, as he says in another place, so 1. q. 100. ar. 1. ad
3.
natural, [that though it is propagated with our nature, in generation, though
it be not caused by the principles of nature.] So 12. q. 81. ar. 4.
as if God would now miraculously frame a man, as he did the first woman, of
another's flesh and bone, and not by way of generation, into that creature, all
infirmities of our flesh would be derived but not original Sin. So that
original sin is traduced by nature only, and all actual sin issuing from
thence, all sin is natural.

SECT. VIII.
But to make our approaches nearer. Let us 1 That if our adversaries by law of
Nature mean only Sensitive Nature, they say nothing, for so most virtuous
actions are against Nature.
leave the consideration of the Law of nature, as it is Providence, and Gods
decree for his government of the great world; and contract it only to the law
of nature in the less world, our selves. There is then in us a Tho. 12. q. 71.
ar. 2. Con.
double law of nature, Sensitive and Rational; and C^rbo Cas. Cons. To. 2. pa.
1. 6. 5.
the first does naturally lead and conduce to the other. But because by the
languor and faintness of our nature, we lazily rest there, and for the most
part go no further in our journeys therefore out of this ordinary
indisposition, Aquinas pronounces, that the inclination of our sensitive
nature is against the law of reason. And this is that which the Apostle Romans 7.
23.
calls the law of the flesh, and opposes against the law of the spirit.

Now although it be possible to sin and transgress against this sensitive
nature, which naturally and lawfully Tho. ibid.
is inclined upon bonum delectabile, by denying to it lawful refreshings, and
fomentations; yet I think this is not that law of nature which these abhorrers
of SELF-HOMICIDE complain to be violated by that Act. For so they might
as well accuse all discipline and austeritie, and affectation of Martyrdom,
which are as contrary to the Law of sensitive Nature.

SECT. IX.
And therefore, by law of nature, if they 1 As the law of Nature is Recta
Ratio, it is jus gentium. So Immolation of men and Idolatry, are not against
Nature.
will mean any thing, and speak to be understood, they must entend the law of
rational nature: which is that light which God has afforded us of his
eternal law; and which is usually called recta ratio. Now this law of nature
as it is only in man and in him directed upon Piety, Religion, Sociablenesse;
and such (for as it reaches to the preservation both of pecies and
individualls, there are lively prints of it in beasts) is with most authors
confounded and made the same with jus gentium. So Mor. Inst. (...). 1. l. 5.
cap. 1.
Azorius, and so Com. ad leg. Reg. prae.
Sylvius delivers [That the law of nature, as it concerns only reason is j^
gentium;] and therefore whatever is jus gentium that is, practiced (and
accepted in most, especially civil'st nations) is also law of nature, which De
Some. sign.
Artemidorus ex^mplifies, in these two, Deum colere, mulie^ibus vinci.

How then shall we ^ccuse Idolarry, or immolation of men to be sins against
nature? For (not to speak of the first, which like a de^uge overflowed the
whole world, and only Canaan, was a little Ark swimming upon it, delivered from
utter drowning, but yet not from sto^mes and and leakes, and dangerous
weather-beatings,) immolation of men was so ordinary, that Pol. Virg. de
Invent. r^r. l. 5. cap. 8.
[almost every nation, though not batba^ous, had received it.] the Middendorp.
de Acad. l. 6. ^x Io. Bormo.
D^uids of France made their divinations from sacrifices of men. Casar. Bell.
Gall. l. 6.
And in their wars they presaged also after the same fashion. And for our times
it appears, by the Spanish relations, Mat. Met. praef. ad Oscr. Hist.
that in only Hispaniola they sacrificed yearly 20000 children.

SECT. X. 1 A reason is the form, and so the Nature of man, every sin is
against Nature, yea, whatsoever agrees not exactly with Christian Religion.

However since this is received [ 12. q. 71. ar. 2. Con.
that the nature of every thing is the form by which it is constituted, and
that to do against it, is to do against nature] since also this form in man
is reason, and so to commit against reason is to sin against nature, what sin
can be exempt from that charge, that it is a sin against nature, since every
sin is against reason. And in this acceptance Epistola mult is ep^ft.
Lucidus takes the law of nature, when he says [God has written in our hearts
such a law of nature, as by that, we are saved in the coming of Christ.] And so
every act which concurres not exactly with our religion shall be sin against
nature. Which will appear evidently out of 31. 33.
Jeremies words, where God promises as a future blessing, that he will write
his laws in their hearts, which is the Christian law. So that the Christian
law, and the law of nature, (for that is the law written in hearts) must be all
one. Sin therefore against nature is not so enormous, but that that may stand
true, which Navar says Manual. ca. 23. nu. 50.
[that many laws both natural and divine do bind only ad veniale.] And so
(nor disputing at this time, whither it be against reasonal ways or no,) (for
reason and virtue differ no otherwise than a close 2. Virtue produced to act,
differs so from reason, as a medicine made and applied, from a box of druggs.
box of druggs, and an emplaister or medicine made from thence and applied to a
particular use and necessity; and in the box are not only aromatike simples,
but many poisons, which the nature of the disease, and the art of the
Administrer make wholesome.) This SELF-HOMICIDE is no more against the law of
nature, then any other sin, nor in any of the acceptations which we touched
before. And this is as much as I determined for this first Distinction.

Distinction II.
SECT. I.
THere is a lower and narrower acceptance of this law of nature (which could
not well 1. Sins against nature in a particular sense, are by Schoolm^n said
to be unnatural lusts; and this. But in Scriptures only the first is so
called.
be discerned but by this light, and fore-discoursing) against which law, this
sin, and a very few more, seem to be directly bent, and opposed. For Mor.
Instit. p. 1. l. 4. cap. 1.
Azorius says, [That there are sins peculiarly against nature, which are
contra naturalem usum hominis] which he exemplifies in unnatural lusts, and in
this. And of the former example 22. q. 154. ar. 11. Con.
Aquinas says, [That there are some kinds of lusts which are sins against
nature, both as they are generally vices, and as they are against the natural
order of the act of generation.] In the Scriptures also this sin of mis-using
the Sex, is called against nature, by Romans 1. 20.
S. Paul. And once (in the vulgar edition) in the Judge. 19. 24
old Testament. But (as I intimated once before) this sin against nature is
so much abhorred, not because the being against nature makes it so abominable,
but because the knowledge thereof is so domestique, so near, so inward to us,
that our conscience cannot slumber in it, nor dissemble it, as in most other
sins it 2. Of the example of the Levite in the Judges.
does. For, in that example of the Levite in the book of Judges, (if those
wicked men did seek him for that abominable use, which Antiq. l. 5. (...). 2.
Josephus says, was only for his wife; And when himself relates to the people
the history of his injury in the next chapter, he complains that they went
about to kill him to enjoy his wife, and of no other kind of injury;) though
the Host which had harbor'd him dissuade the men thus, [solum non operemini hoc
contra naturam] will any man say, that the offer which he made them to
extinguish their furious lust, to expose to them his own daughter, a virgin,
and the wife of his guest, (which Josephus increases by calling her a Levite
and his kins-woman,) was a less sin, then to have given way to their
violence, or less against nature, because that which they sought was contra
naturalem usum. Is not every voluntary pollution, in genere peccati, as much
against the law of nature, as this was, since it strayes and departs from the
way, and defeats the end of that faculty in us, which is generation? The
violating therefore of the law of nature, does in no acceptance aggravate the
sin. Neither does the Scripture call any other sin, then disorderly lust by
that name; S. Paul once appeals to the law of nature, 1 Cor. 11. 14.
when arguing about the covering of heads, of 3. S Paul's use of the phrase Law
of nature in long hair.
men or women at public prayer, he says, [Judge in your selves;] And [Doth
not nature teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame.] Not that
this was against that law of nature to which all men were bound, for it was not
always so. For, in most places, shavings and cuttings, and pullings, are by
the Batyriques and Epigrammatists of those times, reprehended for delicacy and
effeminatenesse. And the Romans till for rain corruption had envenomed them,
were ever called gloriously Intonsi; but because (says Calvine) [it was at
that time received as a custom throughout all Greece, to wear short hair, S.
Paul calls it natural.]

So Vegetius says [That from De re milit. l. 4. c. 39.
November to March the Seas are shut up, and intractable lege 4. Vegetius use
of that phrase.
naturae,] which now are tame and tractable enough, and this also lege naturae.
And that custom which S. Paul called natural in Greece, was not long natural
there. For the Bishops of Rome, when they made their Canons for Priests
shavings, Picrius de barbis Sacerdotum.
did it because they would have their Priests differ from the Priests of the
Greek Church. So that S. Paul mentioning the law of nature, argues not from the
weight and heinousness of the fault, as our adversaries use; but uses it as
the nearest and most familiar and easy way to lead them to a knowledge of
decency, and a departing 1. Selfe-preservation is not so of particular law of
nature, but that beasts naturally transgress it, whom it binds more then us;
and we, when the reason thereof ceases in us, may transgress it, and sometimes
must.
from scandalous singularity in those public meetings.

SECT. II.
And though Azorius (as I said) and many others, make this Selfe-homicide an
example of sin, against particular Law of Nature; yet it is only upon this
reason, that selfe-preservation is of Natural Law. But that Natural Law is so
general, that it extends to beasts more then to us, because they cannot
compare degrees of obligation and distinctions of duties and offices, as we
can. For we know that Tho. 12. q. 51. ar. 7. Con.
[some things are natural to the species, and other things to the particular
person] and that the latter may correct the first. And ^. Things natural to
the species, are not always so to the individuum
therefore when Fabricius Hist. Cicero, Ann. 30.
Cicero consulted the oracle at Delph^s, he had this answer, [Follow your own
nature.] And so certainly that place, Genesis 2. 18.
[It is not good for the man to be alone,] is meant there, because if he were
alone, Gods purpose of multiplying mankind had been frustrate. Yet though
this be ill for conservation of our species in general, yet it 3 Therefore
some may abandon the world.
may be very fit for some particular man, to abstain from all such
conversation of marriage or men, and retire to a sollitude. For some may need
that counsel of Homil. 36. Oper. imperf. in Matthew.
Chrysostom, [Depart from the high way, and transplant thy self in some
enclosed ground: for it is hard for a tree which stands by the way side, to
keep her fruit, till it be ripe.] Our safest assurance, that we be not mislead
with the ambiguity of the word Natural e Th. 12. q. 94. ar. 4.
Law, and the perplexed variety thereof in Authors, will be this, That [all the
precepts of Natural Law, result in these, Fly evil, seek good;] 4. First
principles in natural Law are obligatory, but not deductions from thence, and
the lower we descend, the weaker they are.
That is, do according to Reason.

For these, as they are indispensable by any authority, so they cannot be
abolished nor obscured, but that our hearts shall ever not only retain, but
acknowledge this Law. From these are deduced by consequence, other precepts
which are not necessary always; as Read deposit^. For though this seem to
follow of the first, Do according to reason, yet it is not always just. And
as Aquinas says, The lower you go toward particulars, the more you depart
from the necessity of being bound to it. So De privilegiis Juris. l. 1. c. 8.
Acacius illustrates it more clearly, [It is natural, and binds all always,
to know there is a God. From this is deduced by necessary consequence, that God
(if he be) must be worshipped; and after this, by likely consequence, that he
must be worshipped in this or this manner.] And so every Sect will a little
corruptly and adulterately call their discipline Natural Law, and enjoin a
necessary obedience to it. But Sylvius Comment. ad leg. reg. proefat. c. 1.
though our substance of nature, (which is best understood of the foundations
and principles, and first grounds of Natural Law,) may not be changed, yet
functio nat^ a, (which is the exercise and application thereof,) and deduction
from thence may, and must. The like danger is in deducing consequences from
this natural Law, of Selfe-preservation; which does not so rigorously, and
urgently, and illimitedly bind, but that by the Law of Nature it self, 5
Pellicans, and Bees; by S. (...), kill themselves.
things may, yea must neglect themselves for others; of which the Pelican is
an instance, or an emblem.

And Hea^. 5. cap. 1.
St. Ambrose Philosophying divinely in a contemplation of Bees, after he has
afforded them many other praises, says [That when they find themselves guilty
of having broken any of their Kings Laws, P^nitenti condemnatione se mul^tant,
ut immoriantur a^ulet sui vulnore.] Which magnanimity and justice, he compares
there with the Subjects of the Kings of Persia, who in like cases are their
own executioners. As this natural instinct in beasts, so rectified reason
belonging only to us, instructs us often to prefer public and necessary
persons, by exposing our selves to unevitable destruction.

No law is so primary and simple, but it foreimagines 6 The reason of almost
every Law is mutable.
a reason upon which it was founded: and scarce any reason is so constant, but
that circumstances alter it. In which case a private man is Emperor of
himself; for so B. Dorotheus Doctrina 12.
a devout man interprets those words, [Faciamus hominem ad i^ginom nostrum, id
est, sui juris.] And he whose conscience well tempred and dispassion'd, assures
him that the reason of selfe-preservation ceases in him, may also presume that
the law ceases too, and may do that then which otherwise were against that law.

And therefore if it be true that [it Windeck, ^anonum and legum consens. and
dissens. ca. 12.
belongs to the Bishop of Rome, to declare, interpret, limit, distinguish the
law of God,] as their Doctors teach, which is, to declare when the reason of
the Law 7 He that can declare when the reason ceases, may dispense with the Law.
ceases: it may be as true which this Author, and the 25. q. 1. su^ quid^.
Canons affirm, that he may dispense with that Law: for he does no more, then
any man might do of himself, if he could judge as infallibly. Let it be true
that no man may at any time do any thing against the law of nature, yet, Tho.
22. q. 88. ar. 10.
[As a dispensation works not thus, that I may by it disobey a law, but that
that law becomes to me no law, in 8. How dispensations work.
that case where the reason ceases;] So may any man be the Bishop and Magistrate
to himself, and dispense with his conscience, where it can appear that the
reason which is the soul and form of the law, is ceased. Because, Tho. 32. q.
89. ar. 9.
as in Oaths and Vows, so in the Law, the necessity of dispensations
proceeds from this, that a thing which universally considered in it self is
profitable and honest, by reason of some particular event, becomes either
dishonest or hurtful; neither of which, can fall within the reach, or under
the Commandment of any law; and in these exempt and privileged cases, Acacius
de privilegijs l. 1. ca. 3.
[the privilege is not contrajus universale, but contra universalitem juris.]
It does only succor a person, not wound, nor infirm a law. No more, then I
take from the virtue of light, or dignity of the Sun, if to escape the
scortching thereof, I allow my self the relief of a shadow. 9. As nothing can
annull the prerogative of Princes or Popes, though their own act seem to
provide against it; so no law does so destroy man's liberty, but that he
returns to it, when the reason of the law ceases.


And, as neither the watchfulness of Parliaments, nor the descents and
indulgences of Princes, which have consented to laws derogatory to themselves,
have been able to prejudice the Princes non obstantes, because prerogative is
incomprehensible, and over-flowes and transcends all law. And as those Canons
which boldly (and as some Schoolmen say) blasphemously say, Non licebit Papae,
diminish not his fullness of power, nor impeach his motus propriores, (as they
call them) nor his non obstante jure divino, because they are understood ever
to whisper some just reservation, sine justa causa, or rebus sic stantibus, so,
what law soever is cast upon the conscience or liberty of man, of which the
reason is mutable, is naturally conditioned with this, that it binds so long as
the reason lives.

Besides, Selfe-preservation, which we confess to be the foundation of
general natural Law, is 10. Selfe-preservation being but an appetition of
that which is good to us, is not violated by this act.
no other thing then a natural affection and appetition of good, whether true
or seeming. For certainly the desire of Martyrdom, though the body perish, is
a Selfe-preservation, because thereby, out of our election our best part is
advanced. For heaven which we gain so, is certainly good; Life, but probably
and possibly. For here it holds well which De resurrect.
Athenagoras says, [Earthly things and Heavenly differ so, as Veri-simile, and
Verum;] And this is the best description of felicity that I have found, That [
Heptapl. 10. Pici. l. 7. proem.
it is reditus uniuscujusque rei ad suum principium.] Now since this law of
Selfe-preservation is accomplished in attaining that which conduces to our
ends, and is good to us, (for Sylvius Com. ad leg. reg. praefat. l. 1.
libertv, which is a faculty of doing that which I would, is as much of the law
of nature as preservation is; yet if for reasons seeming good 11. Liberty,
which is naturally to be preserved, may be departed with.
to me, (as to preserve my life when I am justly taken prisoner, I will become
a slave; I may do it without violating the law of nature.) If I propose to my
self in this SELF-HOMICIDE a greater good, though I mistake it, I perceive not
wherein I transgress the general law of nature, which is an affection of
good, true, or seeming: and if that which I affect by death, be truly a
greater good, wherein is the other stricter law of nature, which is rectified
reason, violated?

SECT. III.
Another reason which prevails much with me and delivers it from being against
the Law of 1. That cannot be against Law of Nature, which men have ever
affected; if it be also, (as this is) against sensitive Nature, and so want the
allureme^ts of other sins.
nature, is this, that in all ages, in all places, upon all occasions, men of
all conditions, have affected it, and inclined to do it. And as De Subtle.
lib. 5.
Gardan says it, [Mettall is planta sepulta, and that a Mole is Animal
sepultum.] So man, as though he were Angelus sepultus, labors to be discharged
of his earthly Sepulcher, his body. And though this may be said of all other
sins, that men are propense to them, and yet for all that frequency, they are
against nature, that is rectifyed reason, yet if this sin were against
particular Law of nature, (as they must hold, which aggravate it by that
circumstance,) and that so it wrought to the destruction of our species, any
otherwise then intemperate lust, or surfer, or incurring penal Laws, and such
like do, it could not be so general; since being contrary to our sensitive
nature, it has not the advantage of pleasure and delight, to allure us
withal, which other sins have.

And when I frame to my self a Martyrologe of all which have perished by their
own means 2. There are not so many examples of all other virtues, as of this
one degree of Fortitude.
for Religion, Country, Fame, Love, Ease, Fear, Shame; I blush to see how
naked of followers all virtues are in respect of this fortitude; and that all
Histories afford not so many examples, either of cunning and subtle devises,
or of forcible and violent actions for the safeguard of life, as for destroying.

Petronius Arbiter who served Nero; a man of Petr. Arbiter.
pleasure, in the office of Master of his pleasures, upon the first frown went
home, and cut his Veins. So present and immediate a step was it to him, from
full pleasure to such a death.

How subtly and curiously Attilius Regulus Attil. Regulus.
destroyed himself? Woe being of such integrity, that he would never have lied
to save his life, lied to lose it; falsely pleading, that the Carthaginians had
given him poison, and that within few days he should dye, though he stayed at
Rome.

Yet Codrus forcing of his death, exceeded this, Codrus.
because in that base disguise he was likely to perish without fame.

Herennius the Sicilian, could endure to beat Herennius.
out his own brains against a post; and as though he had owed thanks to that
brain which had given him this devise of killing himself, would not leave
beating, till he could see and salute it.

Comas who had been a Captain of thieves, Comas.
when he came to the to ture of examination, scorning all foreign and
accessorie helps to dye, made his own breath, the instrument of his death, by
stopping and recluding it.

Annibal, because if he should be overtaken Annibal.
with extreme necessity, he would be beholden to none for life nor death,
dyed with poison which he always carried in a ring.

As Demosthenes did with poison carried in a Demosthenes.
pen.

Aristarchus when he saw that 72 years, nor Aristarthus.
the corrupt and malignant disease of being a severe Critique, could wear him
out, sterved himself then.

Homer which had written a thousand things, Homer.
which no man else understood, is said to have hanged himself, because he
understood not the Fishermens riddle.

Othryades who only survived of 300 Champions, Othryades.
appointed to end a quarrel between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, when now
the lives of all the 300 were in him, as though it had been a new victory to
kill them over again, killed himself.

Democles, whom a Greek Tyrant would have Democles.
forced, to show that he could suffer any other heat, scalded himself to death.

P^rtia, Cato's daughter, and Catulus Luctatius P^rtia. Luctati^.
sought new conclusions, and as Quintilian calls them, [Nova Sacramenta
pereundi,] and dyed by Declam. 17.
swallowing burning coals.

Poor Terence because he lost his 108 translated Terence.
Comedies, drowned himself.

And the Poet Labienus, because his Satyricall Labienus.
Books were burned by Edict, burnt himself too.

And Zeno, before whom scarce any is preferred, Zeno.
because he stumbled, and hurt his finger against the ground, interpreted that
as a Summons from the earth, and hanged himself, being then almost ^oo years
old. For which act, Diogenes Laertius proclaims him to have been [Mira
falicitate vir, qui incolumis, integer, sine Morbo excessit.]

To cure himself of a quartane, Portius Latro Por. Latro.
killed himself.

And Festus, Domicians Minion, only to hide Festus.
the deformity of a Ringworme in his face.

Hippionas the Poet rimed Bubalus the Painter Hippionas.
to death with his Iambiques.

Macer bore well enough his being called into question for great faults, but
hanged himself Macer.
when he heard that Cicero would plead against him, though the Roman
condemnations at that time inflicted not so deep punishments.

And so Cessius Licinius to escape Cicero's judgment, Licinius.
by choking himself with a napkin, had (as Tacitus calls it) precium
festinandi. You can Annal^ib. (...)
scarce immagine any person so happy, or miserable, so reposed or so vain, or
any occasion either of true loss, or of shamefastness, or frowardness, but
that there is some example of it.

Yet no man, to me seems to have made harder shift to die, then Charondas, who
first having Charondas.
made a new law, that it should be death to enter the Counsel Chamber armed,
not only offended that Law, but punished it presently by falling upon his
sword.

But the general hour of such death 3. Of the Roman Gladiators in great
persons, and great numbers
is abundantly expressed, in those swarms of the Roman Gladiatory Champions,
which, as L: 1. cap. 12. de Gladiator.
Lipsius collects, in some one month cost Europe 30000 men, and to which
exercise and profusion of life, till express Laws forbade it, Idem. l. 2.
cap. 3.
not only men of great birth, and place in the State, but also women coveted
to be admitted.

By Eleazars Oration recorded in De bell. Judai. l. 7. c. 28.
Josephus, we may see how small persuasions moved men to this. [Hee only told
them, that the 4 Small persuasions drew men to it.
Philosophers among the Indians did so. And that we and our children ^ere borne
to die, but neither borne to serve.]

And we may well collect, that in Caesar's time, in France, for one who dyed
naturally, there dyed 5 By the Soldurii in France it may be gathered, that more
dyed so, then naturally.
many by this devout violence. For Lib. 3. com. Bell. Gall.
he says there were some, whom he calls Devotos, and Clientes, ( Tholosa.
Synt. lib. 14. cap. 10. N. 14.
the latter Laws call them Soldurios) which enjoying many benefits, and
commodities, from men of higher rank, always when the Lord dyed, celebrated
his Funeral with their own. And Caesar adds, that in the memory of man, no
one was found that ever refused it.

Which devotion I have read some where continues yet in all the wives in the
Kingdom of 6. Wives in Bengala do so yet.
Bengala in the Indies.

And there not only such persons, as do it in 7. The Samanaei which were
Priests in the Indies used to do it.
testimony of an entire dependency, and of a gratitude, but the Porphyr. de
Abstin. antiq.
Samanaei, (which did not inherit Religion, and Priesthood, and wisdom, as
Levites did amongst the Jews, and the Gymnosophists amongst them, but were
admitted by election, upon notice taken of their sanctity) are said to have
studied ways how to dye, and especially then when they were in best state of
health. And yet Heurnius de philosoph. Barbar. l. 2. ca. 2.
these Priests whose care was to dye thus, did ever sum up, and abridge all
their precepts into this one, Let a pious death determine a good life. Such an
estimation had they of this manner of dying. Panegyr. Theodosio.
How pathetically Latinus Pacatus expresses the sweetness of dying when we
will; 8. Lat. Pacat. expresses this death pathetically.
[Others, says he, after the conquest, making a braver bargain with Destiny,
prevented uncertain death by certain; and the slaves escaped whipping by
strangling. For who ever feared, after there was no hope^ Or who would
therefore for bear to kill himself, that another might? Is another hand
easier then thine own? Or a private death fouler then a public? Or is it more
pain^ to fall upon thy sword, and to oppress the wound with thy body, and so
receive death at once, then to divide the torment, bend the knee, stretch out
the neck; perchance to more then one blow?] And then wondering why Maximus, who
had before murdered Gratia^, and was now suppressed by Theodosius, had not
enjoyed the common benefit of killing himself, he turns upon Gratian, and
says, [Thou Reverend Gratian, have chased thin^ Executioner, and would not
allow him leisure for so honest a death, least he should stain the sacred
Imperial robe with so i^pious blood, or that a Tyrants hand should perform
thy revenge, or thou be beholden to him for his own death.] And with like
passion speaks another Panegyrique to Constantine, who after a victory, took
their swords from the conquered, Ne quis incumberet dolori. By which language
one may see, how natural it was to those times, to affect such dispatch.

And in our age, Matal. Metel. praefat. in hist. Osorij.
when the Spaniards extended that Law, which was made only against the
Canibals, that they who would not accept Christian Religion, should incur
bondage; the Indians 9. How the Spaniards corrected this natural desire in the
Indians.
in infinite numbers escaped this by killing themselves; and never ceased, till
the Spaniards by some counterfeitings made them think, that they also would
kill themselves, and follow them with the same severity into the next life.

And thus much seeming to me sufficient, to defeat that argument which is
drawn from Selfepreservation, and to prove that it is not so of particular law
of Nature, but that it is often transgressed naturally, we will here end this
second Distinction.

Distinction III.
SECT. I.
AFter this when men by civ^litic and mutual use one of another, became more
thrifty of themselves, and sparing of their lives, this solemnity of killing
themselves at funerals wore out Sylvius Com. ad leg. reg. c. 24.
and vanished; yet leysurely, and by unsensible dimunitions. 1 After civility
and christianity quen ched this natural desire, in the place thereof, there
succeeded a thirst of Martyrdom.
[For first in show of it, the men wounded themselves, and the women scratched
and defaced their cheeks, and sacrificed so by that aspersion of blo^d. After
that, by their friends graves they made graves for themselves, and entered into
them alive, (as Nuns do when they renounce the world.) And after 2 How
leisurely the custom of killing at funerals wore out.
in show of this show, they only took some of the earth, and were it upon
their heads: and so for the public benefit were content to forfeit their
custom of dying]

And after Christianity, which besides the many 3 Moses delivered, and the
philosophers saw the state of the next life, but unperfectly.
advantages above all other Phylosophies, that it has made us clearly to
understand the state of the next life: which Moses and his followers (though
they understood it) disguised ever under earthly rewards, and punishments;
either because humane nature after the first fall, till the restituti on and
dignification thereof by Christ, was generally incapable of such mysteries, or,
because it was reserved to our blessed Savior to interpret and comment upon
his own Law, and that great successive Trinity of humane wisdom, Socrates,
Plato, and Aristotle, saw but glimmeringly and variously; as also for matters
of this life, the most Stoic and severe Sect that ever Cast bridle upon
mankind, I say, after Christianity had quenched those respects of fame, ease,
shame, and such, how quickly naturally man snatched and embraced a new way of
profusing his life by Martyrdom?

SECT. II.
For whilst the famous acts, or famous sufferings of the Jews, for defense
even of Ceremonies, 1 That this was for the most part insinuated into men by
Natural reasons, and much upon humane respects.
(many thousands of them being slain, only because they would not defend
themselves upon the Saboth;) And whilst the custom of that Nation ever
embrued in sacrifices of blood, and all, most of all other Nations devout and
carnest even in the immolation of men. And whilst the example of our blessed
Savior, who chose that way for our Redemption to sacrifice his life, and
profuse his blood, was now fresh in them, and governed all their affections, it
was not hard for their Doctors even by natural reasons, and by Stromat. l. 4.
examples to invite, or to cherish their propensnesse to Martyrdom.

Clement therefore when h^ handles this point, scarce presents to them any
other argument then 2 So proceeded Clement.
natural men were capable of, and such food, and such fuel, as would serve
the taste and fervor of such an one as were not curious above Nature. As, that
Death was not naturally evil: That Martyrdom was the beginning of another
life. That the Heathen endured greater pains for less reward. That a
Barbarous people immolated every year a principal Philosoper to Xamolxis an
Idol; and they upon whom the lot fell not, mourned for that. And with most
earnestness that Martyrdom is in our own power: which be arguments better
proportioned to Nature, then to Divinity; and therefore Clement presumed them
men inclined, or inclinable by nature to this affection.

Tertullians Reasons are somewhat more sublime; L. cont. Gnostic.
yet rather fine, and delightful, then sollid 3. So did Tertullian.
and weighty; As, That God knowing man would sin after Baptism, provided him,
Secunda solatia, lavacrum Sanguinis: That the death of Saints, which is said to
be precious in Gods sight, cannot be understood of the natural death common
to all: And that from the beginning in Abel righteousness was afflicted. And
these reasons were not such as would have entered any, in whom a natural
inclination had not set open the gates before.

Cyprian also takes the same way; and insists Lib. de exhort. Martyrii ad
fortunatum. So did Cyprian.
upon application of Prophecies of these two sorts; That they should be
despised in this world, and that they should be rewarded in the next.

To these were added external Honors,

Tertul. de Corona Milit.
Annual celebrating their Memories, and entitling their deaths, Natalitia; And
Damasc. and Platin.
that early instituting of the office of Notaries to regulate 4 External
Honors to Martyrs.
their passions, even i^ Clemens time; And Hadr. Junius in Eunapii vita
the proposing their Salita capita to be worshipped; which word (though
Eunapius speak it profanely) was not undeserved by the general 5 Monopoly
of Martyrdom
misuse of such devotion.

And Fevardentius l. 8. c. 13. Baron. Martyr. cap. 0.
after the Monopoly of appropriating Martyrdom, and establishing the benefit
thereof upon them only which held the integrity of faith, and were in the
unity of the Church; of which persuasion Augustine, and Hierom, and most of the
Ancients are cited to be; and then by continual increasing the dignity and
merit of it, as that Carbo. Cas. Cons. To. 2. pa. 2. c. 6.
ex opere operato, it purged actual sin, as Baptism did original; And De
poeuiten. Did. 1. Si qui aute^. Ex Aug. de poenitent.
that without Charity, and in Schism, though it merited not salvation, yet it
diminished the intensnesse of Damnation.

And by these they incited man's nature to it, 6 Gods punishments upon their
persecutors, encouraged men to Martyrdom.
which also might be a little corruptly warmed toward it, by seeing them ever
punished who afflicted them, for so Ad Scapulam.
Tertullian says, that [no City escaped punishment, which had shed Christian
blood.] 7. Extending privileges of Martyrs to many.


After this, they descended to admit more into their fellowship, and
communicate and extend these p^iviledges: for by such indulgence are Aug.
Epist. ad Hieron. 28. De Not. and Orig. Anim.
Herod's Infants Martyrs: So is John Baptist, though he dyed not for a matter of
Christian faith: So Aph^ris: Eman. Sa. verbo Martyr.
is he which suffers for any virtue, and he which dies in his mothers womb, if
she be a Martyr. Tho. 22 r q. 124. ar. 4. ad quart.
And so is he which being for Christian profession wounded deadly, recovers:
and he which being not deadly wounded, dies after of sickness contracted by
his own negligence, if that negligence amounted not to mortal sin.

So not only the sickly and infirm succeeding 8. Contrary reasons cheerished
this desire in them.
Ages, but even the purest-times did cherrish in men this desire of death, even
by contrary reasons; both which notwithstanding by change of circumstances, had
appearance of good. For as fire is made more intense, sometimes by sprinkling
water, sometimes by adding fuel. So when 9 Cyprian Libellatici. Compounders
with the State.
their teachers found any coolness or remissness in them, and an
inclination to flight, or composition with the State, then Serm^ de lapsis.
Cyprian noted such with the ignominy of Libellatici, because they had taken an
acquittance of the State, and says of them [Culpa minor sacrificatorum, sed
non innocens cons^entis.]

And then De suga. pr^positio, 2.
Terrullian equally infames flying away, and such marchandizing, when he
says, [Persecution must not be redeemed; for running 10 Ter^llian condemns
flying in persecution.
away is a buying of your peace for nothing, and a buying of your peace for
money is a running away.]

And then we shall find that even against the 11 Death became to be held
necessary to make one a Martyr.
nature of the word Martyr, it became the common opinion, that death was
requisite and necessary to make one a Martyr.

So in Hist. l. 5. 6. 2.
Eusebius, the Christians though afflicted, modestly refuse the name of
Martyrs, and profess that they have not deserved it, except they may be killed.

Contrary wise in other times when the disease 12. In times when they exceeded
in discreet exposing themselves, they taught that Martyrs might be without
dying.
of headlong dying at once, seemed both to wear out their numbers, and to lay
some scandal upon the cause, which wrought such a desire in men, which
understood not why they did it, but uninstructed, uncatechized, yea unbaptized,
(but that the charity of the Supervivers imputed to them Baptisma fluminis, as
they hope, or at least, Sanguinis, for that they saw) did only, as they saw
others do; Then I say (as Azor. Mor. Inst. p. 2. l. 5. cap. 7.
a Learned Writer of our time says, [That the Church abstaines from easy
Canonizing, Ne vilesceret Sanctit as] (which is not here Holiness, but
Saintship) least the dignity of Martyrdom should be aviled by such promiscuous
admittance to it, they were often contented to allow them the comfort of
Martydome without dying; which was but a returning to the natuturall sense of
the word.

So Ignatius styles himself in his Epistles, Martyr. Ad Polycarp.
Yea more then the rest he brought down the value thereof, and the dear
purchase, for he says Ad Smirnen.
[That as he which honors a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall have a
Prophets reward; So he shall have a Martyrs reward which honors [vinctum
Christi.] And so our most blessed Savior, proceeding in his merciful purpose
of increasing his Kingdom upon earth, yet permitting the Heathen Princes to
continue theirs as yet, the Christian Religion was dilated and oppressed; and
the professors thereof, so dejected and worn with confiscations and
imprisonments, thought that as in the Exed. 12. 7.
Passover from Egypt every door was sprinkled with blood; So Heaven had no
door from this world but by fires, crosses, and bloody persecutions: and
presuming Heaven to be at the next step, they would often stubbornly or
stupidly wink, and so make that one step.

God forbid any should be so malignant, so to mis-interpret me, as though I
thought not the blood of Martyrs to be the seed of the Church, or diminished
the dignity thereof; yet it becomes any ingenuity to confess, that those times
were affected with a disease of this natural desire of such a death; and that
to such may fruitfully be applied those words of the good B: Paulinus, Sever^.
cp. 2.
[Athleta non vincit statim, quia eruitur: nec ideo transnatant, quia
sespoliant.] Alas! we may fall and drown at the last stroke; for, to say le to
heaven it is not enough to cast away the burdenous superfluities which we have
long carried about us, but we must also take in a good frayte. It is not
lightness, but an even-reposed steadfastness, which carries us thither.

But De Contempt. mortis.
Cyprian was forced to find out an answer 13 Cyprian. profes. Men who offered
their lives before they were called.
to this lamentation, which he then found to be common to men on their death
beds, [Wee m^urne because with all our strength we had vowed our selves to
Martyrdom, of which we are thus deprived, by being prevented by natural
death.] And Baroni. Mar. 2. Ian. H.
for them who before they were called upon, offered themselves to Martyrdom,
he is feign to provide the glorious and satisfactory name of Professors.

From such an inordinate desire, too obedient 14 Enforcers of their own
Martyrdom.
to nature, proceeded the fury of some Christians Eusebius. Hist. l. 8. c. 9.
who when sentence was pronounced against others, standing by, cried out, We
also are Christians.

And that inexcusable forwardness of Germanus, Hict. l. 4. c. 14.
who drew the beast to him, and enforced 15 Examples of inordinate affecting of
Martyrdom. Germanus.
it to tear his body; And why did he this? Eusebius delivers his reason; That
he might be the sooner delivered out of this wicked and sinful life. Which
Hist. l. 4. c. 10.
acts Eusebius glorifies with this praise, [That they did them mente digna
Philosophis] So that it seems wisest men provoked this by their examples; As
Meir. and Iosep.
Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 7. c. 11.
at the burning of the temple at Jerusalem, Meirus and Josephus, though they
had way to the Romans, cast themselves into the fire. How passionately Ignati.
epist. ad Roman.
Ignatius solicites the Roman Christians not to interrupt his death. [I fear
says he, your charity will hurt me, and put me to begin my course again,
except you endeavor that it may be sacrificed now. I profess to all Churches;
quod voluntarius morior] 16 Ignatius solicitation for it.
And after, Blandiciis demulcere feras; entice and corrupt the Beasts to
devour me, and to be my sepulcher, fruar best is, Let me enjoy those beasts,
whom I wish much more cruel then they are; and if they will not attempt me, I
will provoke and draw them by force] And what was Ignatius reason for this,
being a man necessary to those Churches, and having allowable excuses of
avoiding it? [quia mihi utile mori est.] such an intemperance urged the woman
of Edissa, Nicephor. l. 11. c. 21.
when the Emperor Edissenae.
Valens had forbidden the Christians one temple, to which particular reasons of
devotion invited them, to enrage the Officers with this Contumely, when they
asked her, why thus squallid, and headlong she dregg'd her son through the
streets, I do it least when you have slain all the other Christians, I and my
son should come to late to partake that benefit. And such a disorderly heat
possessed that Speculum vinc. To. 4. l. 11. c. 40.
old wretched man, which passing by after the execution of a whole legion of
6666, by iterated decimation, under Maximianus, although he were answered that
they dyed, not only for resisting the Roman Religion, but the State, for all
that, wished that he might have the happiness to be with them, and so extorted a
Martyrdom. For that age was grown so hungry and ravenous of it, that many
were baptized only because they would be burnt, and children taught to vex
and provoke Executioners, that they might be thrown into the fire.

And this assuredness that men in a full persuasion 17 Laws forbidding more
executions made to despite Christians.
of doing well would naturally run to this, made Bod. Demon. l. 4. c. 3. ex
Tertulli.
the proconsul in Africa proclaim, Is there any more Christians which desire
to die, and when a whole multit^de by gen^rall voice discovered themselves, he
bid them [Goe hang and drown your selves and ease the Magistrate.] And this
natural disposi^ion, Alc. 72. Az.
afforded Mahomet an arg^ment against the Jews, [if your Religion be so good,
why do you not die?] for our p^mitive Church was so enamo^ed of death, and so
satisfied with it, that to vex and torture them more, Ex Tert^l. Bod^. s^ra
the M^gistrate made laws to take from them the comfort of d^ing, and
increased their persecu^ion by c^asing it, for they gloried in their Numbers.

And as in other w^fares men m^ster an^ reckon 18 Glory in the numbers of
Martyrs.
how many they bring into the (...), their confidence of victory was in the
multitudes of t^em which were lost. So they adm^t into the Catalogue Herod's
^nfants, and the (...) Virgins. And Stecul. Vin. To. 4. l. 10 c. 88.
when 9000 Soldiers under Adrian by apparition of an Angel are said to have
embraced Christian Religion, and when ^he E^perour sent others to execute them,
1000 of those ex^cutioners joined to them and so the who^e 10000 were crucifi^d
Supra. so. 66.
And of an intirelegion massacred at once we spoke but now. And Baronius Barom.
Mart. 22. June.
speaks of 10000 cr^cified in Armenia, celebrate upon the 22th. of June:
whether diverse from the ^0000 under Adrian or no, I have not examined. Homil.
27. in Evangel.
Saint Gregory says, [Let God number our Martyrs, for to us they are more in
number then then the sands.] And Martyrolog. cap. 8.
Baronius says, That excepting the first of January, (which ye^ in the Rom^n
Martyrologe records as many, as most other days) there is no day which has
not 500 Martyrs; almost every one has 900, or 800.

SECT. III.
And when the Church increased abundantly under 1. That Heretics seeing the
dignity gained by Martyrdom, labored to avert them from it, but could not
correct this natural inclination.
all these (...) for, As in profane and secular wars, the greater the Triumphs
of a (...) are, the greater also are his Armies, because the^ more and more
co^cur to his splendour, and to prat^ipate his fortu^es; So in this spiritual
warfare, the greater the triumphant Church was, the greate^ g^ew the Militant,
assisted both with the Example and (...) of the other. And when all these
treadings down did but harrow our Saviors field, and prepare and better it
for his Harvest, The bl^ud of the (...) (for though, a^ say still, very many
dyed out of a natural (...) of despis^g th^s (...), a great number had their
di^ect ma^ke upon the glory of God, and went to it awake) having, as a Lib. 4.
cap. 2.
N^cephorus says, almost strangled the Devil, he trye^ by his two greatest
Instr^ments, (when they are ^is) the Magistrate, and the Learned, 2. The Devil
labo^s the Magistrates to (...) their, desire of dying
to ave^t them from this inclination.

For, suggesting to the Magistrate that their forwardn^sse to dy^, gr^w only
from their faith in the Resurrection, he Specul. Vinc. To. a. cap. 102. lib. 10.
procured th^re bo dies to be burnt, and their ashes scattered into Rivers, to
frustrate and defeat that expectation; And he raised up subtle Heretics, to
infirm and darken the virtue and majestic of Martyrdom.

Of which the most pestilently cunning Basilides, foresuspecting that he
should not easily Basilides heref. Anno 13^.
remove that desire of dying, which Nature had bred, 3. Basilides denied Christ
to have been crucified, and that therefore they dyed madly.
and Custom confirmed in them, tried to remove that which had root only in
their Religion, as being yet of tenderer growth, and more removable then
natural impressions. Therefore he offered not to impugn their exposing
themselves to death in all cases, but only said, Alfon. Castr. verb. Martyr.
ex Philast.
that it was madness to dye for Christ, since he, by whose example they did
it, was not crucified, but Simon who bore the Cross.

Another Prateolus l. 5. ex Niceph.
Heretic, called Helchesar, perceiving that it was too hasty to condemn the
act of Martyrdom even for Christ, thought 4. Helchesar that outward profession
of Religion was not needful.
only to slacken their desire to it, by teaching, that in time of Persecution,
so we kept our heart at Anchor safe, we were not bound to testify our
Religion by any outward act, much less by dying.

Which Doctrine the Gnostici also taught, but 5. That also the Gnostici taught,
and why they prevailed not.
prevailed little, both because the contrary was rooted in Nature, and because
they accompanied this doctrine, with many others, foul and odious even to
sense; and because they were resisted by Tertullian, a man mighty, both in his
general abilities, and in his particular and professed earnestness to
magnify Martyrdom: And against these he writ his Scorpiacum.

SECT. IIII.
This way giving no advantage to Heretics, 1. That Hetiques failing herein,
took natural ways, of overtaking the Orthodox in Numbers of Martyrs.
they let loose the bridle of their own nature too, and apprehended any
occasion of dying as forwardly as the Orthodoxall Christians. And because the
other prescribed against them, and were before hand with them in number, to
redeem time and overtake them, they constituted new occasions of Martyrdom.

Alf. Castr. ver. Martyrium
Petilian against whom St. Aug: writ, taught, 2. Petilian new way of Martyrdom.
that whosoever killed himself as a Magistrate, to punish a sin committed
before, was a Martyr.

And they who are by Saint Augustine, and others, called Circumcelliones, and
Circuitores, (because 3. Another new way of the Circumcelliones and Circuitores.
(I think) as their Master, they went about to devour) would entreat,
persuade, enforce others to kill them, and frustrated after all those
provocations, would do it themselves, and by their survivors be celebrated
for Martyrs. These were of the To. 2. Ep. 50.
Donatists, of whom Saint Augustine says, To kill themselves out of respect of
Martyrdom, was Ludus Quotidianus Other Heretics also, whose errors were not
about Martyrdom, hastened to it. So the 4. The Cataphrgyae exceed in Number.
Prateolus.
Cataphrygae, who erroniously baptizing the dead, Ordaining Women, Annulling
second Marriges, and erring in such points, Baron. Martyr. C. 10.
could soon boast of their number of Martyrs; perchance because Tertullian
being then on their part, they found him, as he was wheresoever hec me, a hot
encourager of men to Martyrdom. It is complained in Hist. l. 5. c. 15
Euse^ius, that Heretics seeing their arguments confuted, fled ^ow to their
number of Martyrs, in wh^cn they pretended to exceed the others. And from their
numbers of Martyrs, Baron. Martyrol. ca. 10. Ex Epiph. Haer. 80
the Euphenita called themselves Martyrians. And thereupon Schul^ingius, To. 3.
ca. 177. 10. Euphemitae therefore called Martyrians
Baro^us says, [Amongst the heath^n, perchance you may hear, and the e^fina
one Emped^cles, which will burn himself, but amongst the Donat^sts, Hominum
examina.]

SECT. V.
So that the authority gained by their forwardness 1. Hereupon Councels took
it into their care to distinguish true Martyrs, from those who dyed for
natural and humane respects. a Conc. Laodic. Can. 33.
to equal the number of true Martyrs, was so great, and began so far to
perplex the world, that some Councels foreseeing, that if both sides did it
equally, it would all be imp^ted to humane respects, began to take it into
their care to provide against it. And th^reupon Council exhibites an express
Canon. That no Christian leaving true Martyrs, should go to false, ^uia alteni
a D^o. And Conc. Carth. 1. C. 2.
another corrects the other H^esie of diminishing the reputation of Martyrs
thus, Martyr^m dignitatem nemo profanus infamet.

SECT. VI.
Thus when the true Spirit of God drew many, 1 Therefore later Authors do
somewhat remit the Dignity of Martyrdom.
the spirit of Contention many, and other natural infirmities more, to expose
themselves easily to death, it may well be thought, that from thence the
Au^hors of these lat^er Ages; have somewhat remitted the intensn^sse of
Martyrdom, and mingled more all^yes, or rather more m^tall, and not made it of
so great valu^ alone, as those earnest times did: for since 2^. q. 124. ar. 3.
Saint ^homas said, [That though Martyrdom be a work of greatest perfection,
yet it is not of it self, but as it is wrought by charity, and expresses that]

Vasquis De Adoratione l. 1. N. 42.
(...) Cord^bensis for saying that it is any worship of God: ^or [it is not
says he, a Sacrifice nor work of Religion, but of fortitude, which is but a
moral virtue] Therefore it is now Navar. Man. c. 1. Nu. 40.
taught, [that it is a mortal sin to provoke another to inflict Martyrdom.]
And Carbo. Cas. Cons. To. p. 2. c. 6.
a Martyr, (though (...) purge much) is bound to cleanse himself by everv one
of the Deg^ees of penance, for says Ca^bo, [it is not Sacramentum, but opus
(...).] So they seem tender and (...) by addition of (...) inc^ements, to
cherish or further that (...) of dying, to which by reason of our (...), and
this worlds encumbrances, our nature is too propense 2 The Jesuits still
profess an enormous love to such death.
and inclined.

Only the Jesuits boast of their hunting out of Martyrdom in the new worlds,
and of their rage till they find it. Clarus Bonarsicus Amphitheat. Hono. l. 1.
(...). 4.
He which has brought them all upon one Scene, says that [Altonsus Castro at
his execution in the Molucca, was so overjoyed that he forgot his modesty:
[Rapimus Martyrium, says he, spontanea irruptione,] And [one would think that
it were a disease in us,] [Which we do, least the rest of our life should be
Meritis sterile, and gloria vacuum] [we bargain and contract with our
profession, upon that Condition, that we may prodigere animas in hostili
ferro;] [And we possess no more, then such small matters as only serve to cut
off our life.] So that, if this desire of dying be not agreeable to the nature
of man, but against it, yet it seems that it is not against the nature of a
Jesuit. And so we end this Distinction, which we purposed only for the
consideration of this desire of Martyrdom, which swallowed up all the other
inducements, which, before Christianity contracted them, tickled and inflamed
mankind.

Distinction IIII.
SECT. I. 1 Laws and customs of well policed estates having admitted it, it
is not likely to be against law of Nature.

THere remains only for the fourth and last Distinction of this first part,
our reason by which this SELF-HOMICIDE seems to me to escape the breach of any
Law of Nature, which is, that both express literal Laws, and mute Law,
custom, has authorized it, not only by suffering, and connivency, but by
appointing it.

And it has the countenance not only of 2 True and Idaeated commonwealths
have allowed it.
many flourishing and well policed states, but also of Imaginary
Commonwealths, which cunning Authors have Idaeated, and in which such enormous
faults are not like to be admitted. Amongst the Athenians condemned men were At
benians.
their own executioners by poison. And amongst the Romans often by
bloodlettings. And it is Romans.
recorded of many places, that all the Sexagenarii, Depontum.
were by the laws of wise States, precipitated from a bridge. Of which, if
Hierogliph. l. 17.
Pierius his conjecture be true, that this report was occasioned by a custom
in Rome, by which men of that age were not admitted to surffage; And because
the way to the Senate was per pontem, they which for age were not permitted to
come thither, Ceans.
were called Depontani, yet it is more certain, that Aelianus. l. 3. cap. 26.
amongst the Ceans unprofitable old men poisoned themselves; which they did
crown with garlands, as triumphers over humane misery. And the Diod. Sicul. l.
2. bib. Aethiopians.
Ethiopians loved death so well, that their greatest Malefactors being
condemned to banishment, escaped it Ordinarily by killing themselves. Dig. l.
48. tit. 3. leg. final.
The civil law, where it appoints no punishment to the delinquent in this 3
Civil law and all others, presume it, in condemned men.
case, neither in his estate nor memory, punishes a keeper, if his prisoner
kill himself; out of a prejudice, that if means may be afforded them, they
will all do so.

And do not we see it to be the custom of all Nations now, to manacle and
disarme condemned men, out of a fore-assurance that else they would escape
death by death? Vtop. l. 2. c. de servis.
Sir Thomas Moore (a man of the most tender and delicate conscience, that the
world saw since Saint Augustine 4 In Vtopia authorized.
) not likely to write any thing in jest mischieuously interpretable, says,
That in Vtopia, the Priests and Magistrates did use to exhort men afflicted
with incurable diseases, to kill themselves, and that they were obeyed as the
interpreters of Gods will; But that they who killed themselves without giving
an account of their reasons to them, were cast out unburied. And De leg. 9.
Plato who is usually cited against this 5 And by Plato in certain cases.
opinion, disputes in it, in no severer ^ashion, nor more peremptory then thus,
[What shall we say of him, which kills his nearest and most dear friend? which
deprives himself of life, and of the purpose of destiny? And not urged by any
Sentence, or Heavy Misfortune, nor extreme shame, but out of a cowardlinesse,
and weakness of a fearful mind, does unjustly kill himself? What Purgatory,
and what burial by law b^longs to him, God himself knows. But let his
friends inquire of the Interpretors of the law, and do as they shall direct.]
You see nothing is delivered by him against it, but modestly, limitedly, and
perplexedly.

And this is all which I will say of the first 6 Conclusion of the first part.
member of that definition of sin which I undertook, which is, transgressing
of the Law of Nature. Wherein I make account that I have sufficiently delivered
and rescued this Selfe-homicide, from any such violating of the Law, as may
aggravate the fact, or make it heinous.

Second Part.
Distinction I. Of the Law of Reason.
SECT. I.
THat part of the Definition of sin, which we received for the second place,
is, 1. That the law of reason, is, conclusions drawn from primary reason by
discourse.
That it be against the Law of Reason; where, if we should accept Reason for
Recta Ratio, (especially primarily, and originally,) it would be the same as
Law of Nature. Therefore I rather choose to admit such an acceptance thereof,
as may bring most doubts into disputation, and so into clearenesse.

Reason therefore in this place shall signify conclusions drawn and deduced
from the primary Reason, by our discourse and ratiocination: And so sin
against reason, is sin against such arguments and conclusions as may by good
consequence be de^ived from primary and original Reason, which is light of
nature.

This primary reason therefore, against which 2. How much strength, Reasons
deduced have.
none can plead lycense, law, custom, or pardon, has in us a sovereign, and
masculine force; and by it, through our Discourse, which does the motherly
office of shaping them, and bringing them forth and up, it produces conclusions
and resolutions.

SECT. II.
And as in earthly Kingdoms, the Kings children, 1. Of this sort of Reasons,
general laws have the greatest authority.
and theirs, and their race, as far as we may reasonably presume any tincture
of blood, have many privileges and respects due to them, which yet were
forfeited if there appeared any bastardy or interruption of lawful descent
from that root; And though these respects and obsequiousness, belong to them
as they are propagated from that root, and as some sparks of that Sovereignty
glimmer in them, yet their Servants and Officers take them where they find
them, and consider them only as Dukes, or Lords, and possessors of
patrimoniall estates, but every man's heart and allegiance is directed and
fastened upon the Prince, and perchance a step or two lower, with a present and
immed ate relation to the father, and what they have from him. So when from
those true propositions, which are the eldest children and issue of our light
of Nature, and of our discourse, conclusions are produced, those conclusions
also have now the Nature of propositions, and beget more; and to all these
there belongs an assent and submission on our parts, if none by the way have
been corrupted and bastarded by fallacy. And though (as in the other case) men
of a weak disposition, or lazey, or flattering, look no farther into any of
these propositions, then from whose mouth it proceeds, or what authority it
has now, not from whence it was produced, yet upon the heir apparent, which
is, every necessary consequence from natural light, every man's resolution is
determined, and arrested by it, and submitted to it. And though humane laws,
by which Kingdoms are policed, be not so very near to this Crown of certain
Truth, and first light, (for if they were necessary consequences from that law
of nature, they could not be contrary in diverse places and times, as we see
laws to be) yet I do justly esteem them nearer, and to have more of that
blood royal in them, then the resolutions of particular men, or of Schools.

Both because it is of the essence of all humane 2. For that is of there
essence that they agree with law of Nature.
law, that it agrees with nature, (I mean for the obligation in interiori
fore, without which a law has no more strength, then an usurper, whom they
which obey, watch an opportunity to dispossess.)

And because Assemblies of Parliaments, and 3. And there is better testimony of
their producing, then of private men's opinions
Councels, and Courts, are to be presumed more diligent for the delivery and
obstetrication of those children of natural law, and better witness that no
false nor supposititious issue be adm^tted, then any one man can be. For Dig.
l. 1. tit. 3. le. 1. lex est.
the law is therefore well called Communis Reip. sponsio, because that word
signifies as well, that, to which they have all betrothed themselves, as, the
security and stipulation which the State gives for every man's direction and
assurance in all his civil actions. Since therefore we have in the first part
thoroughly examined, whether this Self homicide be always of necessity
against the law of nature, it deserves the first consideration in this second
part, to inquire how far humane Laws have determined against it, before we
descend to the arguments of particular Authors, of whatsoever reverence or
authority.

SECT. III.
And because in this disquisition, that law has 1. Of laws, the Imperial law
ought first to be considered.
most force and value, which is most general, and there is no law so general,
that it deserves the name of Jus gentium; or if there be, Dig. l. 1. T. 1. le.
9. omnes.
it will be the same, (as we said before) as Rocta Ratio, and so not differ
from the law of Nature.

To my understanding, the Civil or Imperial law, having had once the largest
extent, and being 2 The reason of that law is not abolished, but our dependency
upon it.
not abandoned now, in the reason, and essence, and nature thereof, but only
least the accepting of it should testify some dependencie upon the Empire, we
owe the first place in this consideration to that Law.

This therefore which we call the Civil Law, 3 Why this is called civil Law.
(for, though properly the Municipall Law of every Nation be her Civil Law,
yet Romes Emperors esteeming the whole world to be one City, as her Bishops do
esteem it one Diocese, the Roman Law has won the name of Civil 4 Of the
vastnes of the books from whence it is concocted, and and of the extent thereof.
Law, being a Justinian. ep. ad Trebonian.
decoction and composition of all the Regal Laws, Dec^ees of the Senate,
Plebescites, Responsa Prudentum, and Edicts of Emperors, from 1400. years
before Justinian, to so long time after, as the Eastern Emperors made them
authentic; being of such largeness, as Justinian cpi. ad DD. de Jur. docend.
art.
Justinians part thereof consists of 150000. of those distinctions which he
calls verses, and is the sum and marrow of many millions, extracted from
2000. Volumes.

This Law which is so abundant, that Wind. Theolog. Iur.
almost all the points controverted between the Roman and the reformed
Churches, may be decided and appointed by it. This Law, I say, which both by 5
Nothing in this law against our case.
penalties, and Ana^hemaes, has wrought upon bodies, fortunes, and
consciences, has pronounced nothing against this Selfe-homicide, which we have
now in disputation.

It is true that of Adrian the Emperor, who was 6. Of the law of Adrian.
about 120. years after Christ, we find one Rescript, in the body of the Law,
[ Dig. lib. 48. tit. 19. le. 38. Si quis aliquid. Qui miles.
That if a Soldier do attempt to kill himself, and not effect it, except he
offered it upon impatience of grief, or sickness, or sorrow, or some other
cause, capite plectatur.] Which Rescript is repeated again in another Dig.
lib. 49. tit. 10. le. 6. Omne delictum.
Title, and there (though the other general clause, or some other cause, might
seem to have reached far enough,) are added especially for excusing causes,
[wearinesse of life, madness, or shame.] You see with what moderate gradations
this Law proceeded, which being (as it seems) to contend and wrestle with a
thing customary, and naturally affected, extends not at all to punish it when
it is done, as in many other crimes the Laws do, by confiscation, and by
condemning the memory of the delinquent, and ignobling his race.

Nor embraces it all manners of doing it; (yea scarce any, considering how
benignly, and favorably penal Laws are to be interpreted:) Nor overtakes it
all men, but only such as being of present use, as well much disadvantage
might grow to the Army, if suddenly any numbers of them should be suffered to
turn upon this natural and easy way of delivering themselves from painful
danger, as much damage to the State, if those men matriculated for Soldiers,
to whom there belonged by the laws, as many privileges and immunities under
the Roman Emperors, as ever did to the Clergy under their Roman Bishops,
after they had thus maym'd themselves, and defrauded the State of their
service, should by this inh^rent character of Souldiership, enjoy all those
advantages, which those Laws afforded them.

There is Dig. l. 48. tit. 21. le. 3. Qui rei.
one law more in the body of the Civil Law, which seems to reach farther,
because it binds not it self to any one condition of men; which is, [That if a
man already accused, or 7 Of the other law for guilty men.
taken in the manner, for any such crime, upon which his goods should be
forfeited upon conviction, kill himself before judgment, his goods shall be
forfeit;] else nor. For the Law adds her opinion of the fact. [Non facti
celeritas est obnoxia, sed conscientia metus] And proceeds, [Qui causam mortis
habet, habeat successorem.] So that that Law presumes there are just causes to
work such an effect. And upon the consideration of this Civil Law, I
determined to bestow this first Distinction.

Distinction II.
SECT. 1.
THat which they call the Canon Law is of larger extent then this; for it
reaches to bind 1 Of the Canon Law.
the Princes themselves, at least by their acceptance and submission to it.

And as the subject of it, is greater, being people 2 The largnes of the
subject, and object thereof.
and Prince; so is the object, being the next and eternal life. Yea it is so
vast and undetermined, as we know not in what books to seek the limits
thereof, nor by what rules to set the landmarks of her jurisdiction.

For, (for the book,) it is evident that the Primitive 3 Of Codex Canonum; or
the body of the llaw, in use in the primitive Church.
Church had Codicem Canonum, which was inserted into the body of the Roman
Law, and had no other subfistence, but as it was incorporated there. Thereupon
Did. 10. certum est.
Gelatius writes to Theodorus the Goth, King of Italy, to entreat him, that as
by his authority the Roman Law was observed in Civil matters, so it might be
still in Ecclesiastique. And after the expulsion of the Goths, Did. 10. vestr^.
Leo 4. entreated and obtained the same from Lotharius. From this Codex
Canonnm; the Emperors determined and decreed in many Ecclesiastique causes;
From this Codex the Councels after were governed in making their Canons: as we
may see particular Canons of this Book cited, the book being often called for
in the Councels, and being then ordinarily named, The body of the Canon Law.
This body consisted of the Canons of nine Councels authorized by the Emperors.

But for those immense additions grown to it 4 Of the Additions to this Codex.
since that time, of Bulls, and Decretall Letters of Popes, Decrees of
suspicious and partial and S^hismatick Councels, (for nothing is more properly
Schism, and Solutio continui, than a rent between the Civil and
Ecclesiastique State; which occasioned many of the later Councels,) the rags of
Fathers decerpted and decocted by Gratian, and the glosses of these made also
as authentic as the Text. I perceive not what title they have to be of the
body of the Canon Law, except where the Princes have incorporated and denizen'd
them.

But least to quarrel with their authority now, might seem in us a
subter-fuge and shift to decline them, as though they were heavy against us, in
this point which we have now in hand; we will accept them as they are
obtruded, and dissemble nothing, which in them seems to resist this opinion,
though in common entendment this law is likely to be severe against it, because
the 5 Canon law apter to condemn then Civil, and why.
civil laws content themselves ever with any excuse or color in favor of
the Delinquents, because when a fault is proved it punishes severely, but
Paleotus de nothis c. 19.
the Canon Laws which punish only medicinally, and for the souls health, are
apt to presume or believe a guiltiness, upon light evidence, because those
punishments ever work good effects, whether just or no.

SECT. II.
And first because heresy which is laesa Majestas Divina, of all crimes is the
principal object of 1 That this proposition is not heretical.
that Court, I say, that this proposition, is not by any thing extant in the
Canon law, (and therefore not at all) heretical, allowing to them their
largest definition of heresy; which is, Simancha Enchirid. Iud: tit. 24. nu. 2.
[Any thing which is against Catholic faith, that is Scriptures rightly
understood; Or the traditions and definitions of the Church, or general
Counsels lawfully 2 A large definition of heresy.
gathered, or definition of the sea Apostolic, or the common opinion of
Fathers, in a matter of faith.] The proposition may perchance seem to some so
ill qualified, as it may be male sonans, or temeraria, or perchance sapiens
heresis, for all these proceed from the indisposition and distempred taste of
the apprehendor, which must not always be idly flattred and pampred, but
invited to the search and discovery of truth, who else being the greatest
Prince in the world, should have no progress, but be straightned in a wretched
corner. First therefore, (to cast a glance upon every part of the definition of
heresy) whether it be against the Scriptures rightly understood or no will be
more properly and naturally examined, when we come to the last part, which is
of Divine law.

Next, there is no tradition nor definition of 3 No definition of the Church in
the point.
the Church in the point at all, much less as of a matter of faith, which is
the second limb of the definition. 4 Nor Canon


No decree of any general Council. No 5 Nor Bull.
rescript or Bull of any Pope. And for the common opinion of the Fathers
(besides that it can 6 Of the common opinion of Fathers, how it varies in times
and places.
be no safe rule, because Moral. Instit. to. 1. l. 2. c. 13.
as [Azorius notes, Controverters often say on both sides, this is the common
opinion; And certainly that is the common opinion in one Age which is not in
another; yea, in one Kingdom at the same time, which is not in another, though
both be Catholic: As in Germany and France, by the common opinion Latreia is
not due to the Cross, in Spain by the common opinion it is,] it cannot
appear, by the Canon law, that this is the common opinion of the Fathers; for
23. q. 5.
Gratian who only of the Compilers of the Canon 7 Gratian cites but two
fathers, one of which is of our side.
law touches the point, (as far as either my reading or search has spied
out) cites but two Fathers, Augustine, and Hierome. Whereof the latter is of
opinion, that there may be some cause to do it. But in the Canon law I find no
words, not only to lay the infamous name of heresy upon it, but that affects
it with the mark or style of sin, or condemns the fact, by inflicting any
punishment upon the offender.

I speak here of the Canon law, to which the 8 Of that part of the Canon Law,
to which Canonists will stand.
Canonist will stand: which are the Decretall letters, and all the
extravagants. For, of Gratians Decret. that learned and ingenious Bishop of
Tarracon, has taught us what we should think, when he says, [ Auto.
Augustine. l. de ^mendat. Gratian. l. 1. dial. 1. de titulo.
That he is scarce worth so much reprehension; who having nothing that is
profi^able or of use, except he borrows it, is admired of the ignorant, and
laughed at of the learned,] Idem dial. 4.
[who never saw the books of the Counsels, nor the works of the Fathers, 9 A
Cathol. Bishops censure of Gratians Decret.
nor the Registers of the Popes letters.] Idem dial. 3.
And whose compilation had not that confirmation from Eugenius 3, as is fasly
attributed to it.] Yet allthough Gratian have not so much authority, that by
his inserting an imperial law, or fragment of a Father, it should therefore be
canonized and grow into the body, and strength of the Canon law, (for then
though that law were abrogated again by the Emperor, it should still be alive
and bin^e by a stronger obligation in the Canon, which De libris juris Canon.
c. 2.
Alb. Gentilis proves to be against the common opinion.) yet by consent, thus
much is afforded him, that places cited by him, have as much authority in him,
as they had in the Author from whom he took them. And therefore when we come
to handle the Reasons of particular Authors, we will pretermit none whom
Gratian has cited, for that is their proper place.

SECT. III.
And in this Distinction where we handle the opinion of the Canon Law in the
point (not because 1 What any Councels have done in this point.
Gratian cites it, but because the Canons of all Councels are now usurped as
Canon Law) we will consider 23. q. 5. placuit.
a Canon of the Braccarense Council cited by him.

But first, (although he have it not) we will not conceal the Concll.
Antisidor. sub Greg. 1. An. 590.
Antisidorense Council, (which was before the other, under Gregor. 1. Anno
590.) For as the Civil Laws by limitation of persons and causes, gave some
restraint and correction to this natural desire of dying when we would, which
they did out of a duty to sinew and strengthen, as much as they were able, the
Doctrine of our blessed Savior, who having determined all bloody sacrifices;
enlightens us to another Doctrine, that to endure the miseries and afflictions
of this life, was wholesome, and advantageous to us; the Councels also
perceiving that this first ingraffed and inborne desire, needed all restraints,
contributed their help.

This Canon. 17.
Canon then has these words, [If any kill themselves, Istorum oblata non
recipiantur.] 3 The Council of Antisid. only refused their oblations
For it seems, that Preaching and Catechizing had wrastled, and fought with
their natural appetite, and tamed them to a perplexity whether it might be
done or no; and so thinking to make sure work, in an indiscreet devotion, they
gave oblations to the Church, to expiate the fault, if any were. These
oblations the Council forbids to be accepted, not decreeing any thing of the
point, as of matter of faith, but providing against an inconvenient practice.

Neither was it much obligatory, or considerable, 3 This was but a Diocesan
Council.
what it had decreed, being only Notae Binnij in Conc. Antis. To. 2. fo. 955.
a Diocesan Council, of one Bishop, and his Abbats, and whose Canons Binnius
presents, because (though some of them be out of use, of which this may be one)
yet they are (says he) some discoverers of Antiquity.

The other Council which 23. q. 5. placuit.
Gratian cites and besides which two I find none) has these 4 The Braccar
Council inflicts two punishments.
words, [For those that kill themselves, there shall be no commemoration at the
oblation, nor shall they be brought to burial with Psalms.] which intimates,
as the language of the Canon Law is, Caninam sepulturam.

But the 24. q. 2. Sane quid.
gloss upon this does evict from another Canon, that if the person were not
under 5 The first, not praying for them, is of them who did it when they were
excommunicate.
excommunication, it is not so; [For we may communicate with him dead, with
whom we may communicate living.] Which shows that his act of dying so, put him
not into worse state in this respect. This answers the first punishment
inflicted by that Canon. And for the second which is denial of Cristian
burial, it is very rigorous to conclude a heinousness of the fact, from that,
since the Decret. l. 5. tit. 13. de torneamentis.
true Canon Law denies that to men slain at Tilt, though it afford them, if
they be not presently dead, all the Sacraments applyable in that extreamitie,
as Penance, Eucharist, and Unction.

So that, though since it denies burial to men 6 The second, which is denial
of burial, is not always inflicted for offenses; as appears in an interdict
local.
whom they esteem in state and way of salvation, the Gloss here collects
reasonably, [That this punishment reaches not to the dead, but only to deter
the living;] referring to this purpose an 13. q. 2. anim.
Epistle of Gregory, saying, [So much as a sumptuous funeral profits a wicked
man, so much a base, or none at all hurts a godly.]

Lastly, that Li. 3. tit. 7. de sepulchris. Eos qui.
Clementine which reckons up many causes for which Christian burial is denied,
amongst which one is a local interdict, at what time the holiest man which
dies in that place cannot be buried, which sometimes extends to whole
Kingdoms, instructs us sufficiently, that one may be subject to that
punishment, if it be any in that Law) and yet not guilty of such a crime as
this is reputed to be.

And Sylv. ad leg. Reg. c. 11.
the Romans in their Religious Discipline, refused solemn burial, to any
which perished by lightnings, P. Manut. de leg. Romans
though they buried offenders in the town, as they did Vestals and Emperors;
because as their Dedication 7 Romans buried such offenders as had satisfied the
Law within the town, as Vestals, and Emperors.
to God had delivered the Nuns, and Soveraigntie the Emperors from bondage
of Law; so did Justice, to which they had made full satisfaction deliver
offenders punished. And since both Saint Hierome, and the Bracarense Council,
inflict the same punishments upon those Catechumeni, who although they had all
other preparations, and degrees of maturity in the Christian Faith, yet
departed out of this world without Baptism, as they do upon Self murderers,
and so made them equal in punishment, and consequently in guiltiness; I
think it will ill become the Doctrines of our times, and the Analogy thereof,
to pronounce so desperately of either of their damnations. Sert. Senen. lib. 6.
Annot. 7. p. 311.

And here we end our second Distinction of this second Part, which was
allotted for the examination of the Canon Law.

Distinction III.
SECT. I.
OF Arguments of this Nature, which are 1 Of the laws of particular Nations.
conclusions deduced out of reason and discourse, next to these general Laws
of the Empire, and of the Church, (which though it might seem for the
generality thereof, to have deserved the first place, we handled in the second
room, because the power thereof has been ever litigious and questionable,) I
may justly rank the Laws of particular states.

By our Law therefore, as it has not been 2 Of our law of Felo de se. Br act.
f. 150.
long in practice, (for (...)
Bracton seems not to know such a Law, when allowing an entire chapter to that
title, he only repeats the words in that Imperial Law, which I cited before,
and so admitts, (if he admit that Law, that exception, Sine justa causa) he
which kills himself is reputed felo de se; and whether he be chargeable with
any offense or no, he sorfeits his goods: which devolving to the Kings Almoner,
should on the Kings behalf be employed in pious and charitable uses.

And ^lowd. Com. Hales his case.
it is not only Homicide, but Murder, 3. That this is murder in our law; And
the reasons which entitle the King.
And yet the reasons alleged there, are but these, That the King h^h lost a
Subject, that his Peace is broken, and that it is of evil example.

Since therefore, to my understanding, it has 4 Our natural desire to such
dying, probably induced this law.
no foundation in Natural nor Imperial Law, nor receives much strength from
those reasons, but having b^ custom only put on the nature of law, as most of
our law has, I believe it was first induced amongst us, because we exceeded in
that natural desire of dying so. For it is not a better understanding of
nature, which has reduced us from it; But the wisdom of Lawmakers and
observers of things fit for the institution and conservation of states.

For in ancient Commonwealths, the numbers of slaves were infinite, as ever
both Bodin Rep. l. 1. c. 2. and l. 6. c. 1.
in 5 As in States abounding with slaves, the Lawmakers quenched this desire.
Rome and Athens, there were 10 slaves for one Citizen; and l. 33. c. 10.
Pliny says that in Augustus time, Isidorus had above 4000. And Scbast. Med.
de Venat. Pisca. et aucup. q. 41.
Vedius Pollio so many, that he always fed his fish in ponds with their blood;
and since servitude has worn out, yet the number of wretched men exceeds the
happy (for every labourer is miserable and beastlike in respect of the idle
abounding men;) It was therefore thought necessary by laws, and by opinion of
Religion, (as Aug. de Civi. Dei l. 4. c. 27.
Scaevola is alleged to have said, Expetit in Religione 6 Least it should draw
too fast; as Hunting and Usury are; and as wine by Mahom.
Givitates falli,) to take from these weary and macerated wretches, their
ordinary and open escape, and ease, voluntary death.

And therefore it seems to be so prohibited, as a Pruckinan. de Venat. Pisc.
and Aucup. c. 4.
Lawyer says, hunting and usery is [Ne inescarentur homines] and as Pompon. de
Incantat. c. 10.
Mahomet to withdraw his Nation from wine, brought them to a religious belief,
that in every grape there was a Devil.

As therefore amongst us a natural disease of 7 And as severe laws against
stealing
stealing, (for as all other, so this vice may as well abound in a Nation as in
a particular man, and B. Dorotheus doct. 11.
Dorotheus relates at large, the sickness of one of his friars, who could not
abstain from stealing, though he had no use of that which he stole) has draw
from a Binnius to. 3. par. 2. f. 1476. An. 1237.
Council holden at London under Hen 3. a Canon which excommunicates the
Harbourers of Thieves (quibus abundat Regio Angliae, and mentions no other
fault but this, and from the Custom, and Princes, and Parliaments severe Laws
against theft, then are justifiable by Nature, or the Jews Judicial Law, (for
our Law hangs a man for stealing in extreme necessity, when not only all 8
When a man is bound to steal.
things, to him, return to their first community, but he is bound in
conscience to steal, and were, in some opinions, (though others say he might
neglect this privilege) a Selfe-murderer if he stole not.

And 14. Did. 15. q. 3.
Scotus disputing against the Laws of 9 Scotus opinion of day thieves.
those Nations, which admit the death of a theife robbing by day, because Exodus
22. 3.
whoever kills such a theife, is expressly by Gods Law a murderer, ask where
have you read an exception of such a theife from the Law, Non occides, or where
have you seen a Bull fallen from Heaven to justify such executions? So it may
be, a natural declination in our people to such a manner of death, which
weakened the state, might occasion severer Laws, then the common ground of all
Laws seems well to bear.

And therefore, as when the Emperor had made a Law, to cut off a common abuse
of misdevout men, that no man might give any thing to the Clergy, no not by
Testament, Saint Hierome said, I lament and grieve, but not that such a Law is
made, but that our manners have deserved such a Law, so do I in contemplation
of these Laws mourn, that the infirmity and sickness of our Nation should
need such Medecines.

The like must be said of the like Law in the Earldome of Flaunders; If it be
true, Tholosa. Syn. l. 36. c. 22. nu. 13. ex Buteler. in summa rural.
That they allow confiscation of goods, in only five cases, whereof this is
one; and so it is rankt with Treason, Heresy, Sedition, and forsaking the Army
against the Turk, which be strong 10 Of such a law in Flaunders.
and urgent circumstances to reduce men from this desire.

SECT. II.
For wheresoever you find many and severe Laws against an offense it is not
safe from 1 Severe laws are arguments of the peoples inclination, not of the
heinousness of the fault.
thence to conclude an extreme enormity or heinousness in the fault, but a
propensnesse of that people, at that time, to that fault. Thereupon Epist. ad
Philip.
Ignatius and many others, even entire Counsels, were forced to pronounce,
that whosoever fasted upon Sundays were Murderers' of 2 Sunday fast extremly
condemned thereupon.
Christ.

So in France the Laws abound against Duells, to which they are headlongly
apr. 3 So Duells in France.


So are the resolutions of the Spanish Casuists, and the Bulls of the Popes,
iterated and 4 So Bull-baitings in Spain.
aggravated in that Nation, against there Bullbayting, to which they are so
enormously addicted, which yet of it self is no sin, as Navar Navar. Manu.
li. 15. nu. 18.
retracting his opinion after 70 years holds at last.

These severe laws therefore do no more aggravate a fault, then mild
punishments diminish 5 Gentle laws diminish not the nature of rape, nor
witchcraft.
it. And no man thinks Rape a small fault, though Solon punish it, if she be a
Virgin, and freeborn, with so much money as would amount to our five shillings:
and the Cap. 67.
Salique law punishes a witch, which is convict to have eaten a man,
pecuniarily, and la^ no high price. And therefore H^de his qui not. infam. l.
2.. 1. (...). 2.
Bartolus allows that in cases of public profit or detriment, the Judges may
extend an odious and burdenous law beyond the letter, and restrain a
favorable and beneficial 6 Public benefit is the rule of extending or
restraining all laws by Bartel.
law, within it, though this be against the Nature and common practice of both
these laws.

If therefore our, and the Flemish law be severe in punishing it, and that this
argument have 7 If other Nations concur in like laws, it shows their
inclination to be general.
the more strength, because more Nations concur in such laws, it may well
from hence be retorted, that every where men are inclinable to it: which
establishes much our opinion, considering that none of those laws, which
prescribe Civil restraints from doing it, can make it sin; and the act is
not much descredited, if it be but therefore evil, because it is so forbidden,
and binds the conscience no farther, but under the general precept of
obedience to the law, or to the forfeiture.

SECT. III.
It seems also by the practice of the Jews, 1 The custom of the Jews, and
the law of the Athenians evict nothing.
(for De bello Jud. l. 3. c. 13.
Josephus speaks of it, as of a thing in use) that they did not bury such as
killed themselves, till the Sun set. But though I know not upon what Law of
theirs they grounded this, and I find not by writers of either of their
Policies since their dispersion, (for though they have no Magistracy, but be
under the Laws of those places into which they are admi^ted, in all cases
except where they be exempted by privilege, yet they do also testify a
particular derestation of some sins by outward penances among themselves,
Buxdor. Syn. Iudais c. 34.
as in theft, they bind, and whip, and enjoyne to public confession, and in
Adultery the offender sits a day in Winter in freezing water, and in Summer
upon an Anthill, or amongst hives of Bees naked, though, I say, I find not by
Galatine, Sigontus, Buxdorfius, nor Molther, that this was or is in use amongst
them, yet because Josephus, though but Oratorily says it, we will accept it;
and believe that it was upon the reason common almost to all Nations, to
deter men from doing it, and not to punish it being done. And of like use,
that is, in terrorem, was also that Law of the Athenians, who cut off that hand
after death which perpetrated that fact; which Law Josephus remembers in the
same place.

SECT. IIII.
That reason which is grounded upon the Edict of Tarquinius Priscus, Pliny. li.
36. cap. 13.
who when this 1 The reason drawn from remedies against it, proves no more.
(...) of Death reigned amongst his men like a contagion, cured it by an
opprobrious hanging up their bodies, and exposing them to birds and beasts. And
A. Gellius li. 15. c. 10.
upon that way of reducing the Virgins of Mil^sium, who when they had a
want^nnesse of dying so, and did it for fashion, were by Decree dishonourably
exhibited as a spectacle to the people naked, prevails no farther then the
argument before, and proves only a watchful sol^citude in every State, by all
means to avert men from this natural love of ease, by which their strength in
numbers would have been very much empaired. And thus we determine this
Distinction.

Distinct. IV.
We will now descend to those reasons 1. Of reasons used by particular men,
being Divines.
which particular men have used for the detestation of this action. And first
we will pay our debt to Gratian, in considering the places cited by him, and
after, the other reasons of Divine Authors, if they be not grounded upon
places of Scriptures, which we repose for the last part, shall have there
ventilation in this Distinction.

SECT. I.
The 23. q. 5. Duplicet.
first place then, is in an Epistle of 1. Of S. Augustine and his Argument.
Saint Augustine to Donatus the Heretic; who having been apprehended by the
Catholics, fell from his Horse, and would have drowned himself: and after
complains of violence used toward him, in matter of Religion, wherein he
claims the freedom of Election, and conscience. Saint Augustine answers, we
have power to endeavor to ^ave thy soul against thy will, as it was lawful
to us, to save thy body so. If thou were constrained to do evil, yet thou
ought not to kill thy self. Consider whether in the Scriptures, thou find
any of the faithful that did so, when they suffered much from them, who would
have forced them to do things to their souls destruction.

To speak a little of Saint Augustine in general, because from him are
derived almost all the 2. Of St. Aug. comparatively with other Fathers.
reasons of others, he writing purposely thereof, from the 17 to the 27 Chapter
of his first book De Civitate Dei, I say, as the Confessaries of these times,
comparing Nav^ and Sotu^ two of the greatest Casuists, yield sometimes that 3.
Comparison of Navar and Sotus.
Navar, is the sounder and learneder, but Sotus more useful and applyable to
practique Divinity; So, though Saint Augustine for sharp insight, and
conclusive judgment, in exposition of places of Scripture, which he always
makes so liquid, and pervious, that he has scarce been equalled therein, by
any of all the Writers in the Church of God, except Calvin may have 4 Jesuists
often beholden to Calvin for expositions.
that honor, whom (where it concerns not points in Controversy,) I see the
Jesuits themselves often follow, though they dare not name him, have a high
degree and reverence due to him, yet in practique learning, and moral
Divinity, he was of so nice, and refined, and rigorous a conscience, (perchance
to redeem his former licenciousnesse, as it falls out often in such Convertits,
to be extremely zealous) that for our direction in actions of this life, Saint
Hierome, and some others, may be thought sometimes fitter to adhere unto, then
St. Augustine; Yet I say not this, as though we needed this medicament for
this place.

For I agree with Saint Augustine here, That 5. In this place we differ not
from St. Aug.
neither to avoid occasion of sin, nor for any other cause, wherein my self
am merely or principally interessed, I may do this act; which also serves
justly for answer to the same zealous Father in the other place, 22. q. 5. S^
non.
cited by Gratian; 6. Nor in the second.
for with him I confess, [That he which kills himself, is so much the more
guilty herein, as he was guiltless of that fact for which he killed
himself.]

Though, by the way, this may not pass so generally, but that it must admit
the exception, 7. That then may be Causa puniendi sinc culp^.
which the Reg. sur. 6.
Rule of Law upon which it is grounded, carries with it, [Nemo sine culpa
puniendus, nist subsit causa.] And so, as Saint Augustine, we, with as much
earnestness, say, [Hoc asserimus, hoc dicimus, hoc omnibus modis approbamus.
That neither to avoid temporal trouble, nor to remove from others occasion of
sin, nor to punish our own past sins nor to prevent future, nor in a
desire of the next life, (wherethese considerations are only, or principally)
it can be lawful for any man to kill himself.] But neither Saint Augustine
nor we deny, but that if there be cases, wherein the party is dis-interested,
and only or primarily the glory of God is respected and advanced, it may be
lawful.

So that, as Valens the Emperor, having surprised 8. As Valens missed
Theodosius; So did Augustine pretermit the right cause.
Jamblicus, when his divining cock had described three lette^s of his name who
should succeed, slew all whose names were Theodor^ Theodotes, or Theodulus,
but escaped Theodosius who fulfilled the Prophecy, So Saint Augustine has
condemned those causes which we defend not, but has omitted those wherein it
is justifiable.

In which case being hard to be discerned and distinguished (...) others
arising from humane 9 Of Cordubensis rule, how we must do in perplexities;
infirmity, it that rule which A^t. Cordub. de simonia q. 27. Editione. Hispani.
Antonius de Corduba, gives in cases of simony, be as he says it is, a good
guide in all perplexities, it will ease very much.

He says, because in the case of simony, many difficulties g^ow, because not
only by clear 10 How temporal reward may be taken for spiritual office.
and common judgments, temporal reward may be taken for spiritual offices,
by way of gift, stipend, wages, alms, sustenation, or fulfilling the law or
custom of that place, but also by some. Doctors, even by way of pr^ce, and
bargain, if not directly for the spiritual part thereof, yet for the labor
necessarily annexed to it, because every Curate cannot distinguish in these
cures, he bids him [ever do it, with an intention to do it so, as God knows
it may de done, and as wise men know and would teach that it might be done: For
thus says he, humbly remitting our selves to the learned, which are our
fathers instruction, what ever defect be in us, yet Saluamur in fide parentum.]
Hesychius vitae philosophorum.
And in this sort (e) Pindarus making an implicit prayer to God, that he would
give him that 11. Of Pindarus death praying for he knew not what.
which he knew to be best for him, died in that very petition.

Except therefore Vb^ supra.
Saint Augustine have that moderation in his resolution; That a better life
never receives a man after a death whereof 2 In our place we depart from St.
Aug. upon the same reason as the Jesuit Thyraeus does.
himself was guilty, we will be as bold with him, as Thyrae. Jesui. de
Daemoniacis c. 31. (...). 428.
one who is more obliged to him then we, who repeating Augustines opinion, That
the Devil could possess no body, except he entered into him by sin, rejects
the opinions, and says, The holy Father speaks not, of what must of necessity
be, but what for the most part uses to be.

SECT. II.
And in our case we ought (as I think rather to follow 23. q. 5. Non est,
Saint Hieromes temper, who in 1 The place out of S. Hi^rome cited by Gratian.
his exposicion upon Jonas, (which I wonder why Gratian cited being so far
from his end and advantage) says, [In persecution I may not kill my self,
absque eo, ubi cassitas periclitatur] where I am so ^arre from agreeing with
Gloss. in locum supra.
Gratian, that [Absque eo, is inclusivoly spoken, and amounts to this phrase,
no not though] as I think that good learned father, included in that word
Castitas, all purity of Religion and manners; for to a man so rectified death
comes ever, and every way seasonably and welcome. For [ Idiotae Contemplatio de
morte.
qualem mors invenit hominem, ita homo inveni^ mortem.]

SECT. III.
From this place of Saint Hierome, I believe, 1. Lavater confesses Aug. Hie^
Cry^ and Lactan^ to be of this opinion.
and some other, which perchance I have not rea^, and some other places in
others, of like charitable d^scent to this opinion. Lavater in 1 Samuel Ca^lti.
Lavater having made his profit of all Peter's Martyrs reasons almost against
this act, and adding some of his own, when they both handle the duties of
Saul, confesses that in this case of preserving Chastity, Augustine,
Chrysostom, and Lactant us, and Hierome departed from their opinion who
condemned this Act.

SECT. IIII.
Peter Martyr also presents one other reason, 1 Of P. Mar. reason Mors malum.
of which he seems glad, and well contented in it, which is, That we may not
hasten death, because Mors malum.

But it is not worthy of his gravity, especially so long after Stromat. l. 4.
Clemens Alex. had so thoroughly defeated that opinion. 2 Clement. has long
since destroyed that opinion.


But if it be Malum, it is but Malum poena. And that is an evil of which God
is Author, and is 3 Of Malum (...).
not that Aqui. 1. q. 48. ar. 6. C^n.
Malum quo mali suinus; neither does it always prove the patient to be evil,
(though God for all that be always just,) for himself said of the man borne
blind Jo. 9. 3.
[Neither he, nor his parents have sinned.]

And of that Malum poenae, which is esteemed the greatest in this life, of
temporal affictions, 4 Possessed men are not always so afflicted for sin.
because of the near danger of empairing our soul, which is to be possessed,
Thyraeus de Demon. c. 31.
Thyraeus, from Saint Hierome and Chrysostom says, that it is not always
inflicted for sin, but to manifest the glory of God.

And therefore the greatest evil which can be imagined, of this kind of
evil, which is [ Aqui. 1. q. 48. ar. 6. Con.
Damnation, has not so much Rationem mali, as the least sin that draws
Damnation.]

Death therefore is an act of Gods justice, and 5 Damnation has not so much
rationem mali as the least sin.
when he is pleased to inflict it, he may choose his Officer, and constitute my
self as well as any other.

And if it were of the worst sort o^ evil, ^et 6 If death were of the sorts of
evil, yet there may be good use of it.
as Aug. de. bono Conjug^.
Saint Augustine says that [in the Act of Marriage, there is Bonus usus mali,
id est concupiscentiae, quo malo male utuntur adulteri.] And as good Paulinus
praises Severus, that Paulin. Severo esist. 1.
[he having in Conjugio peccandi licentiam, departed not from his accustomed
austerity,] so may the same be said of death in some cases, as in Martyrdom.

For though Martyr urge farther, that death 7 How Paul calls Death Gods enemy.
is called 1 Cor. 15. 20.
Gods enemy, and is therefore evil, yea Marlorat. in bunc locum.
Musculus says upon that place, [It is often commended in Scriptures, because
toward the faithful God uses it to good ends, and makes it Cooperari ad
salutem.] And by what authority can they so assuredly pronounce that it falls
out never in our case? Besides this, death has lost much of her natural
malignity already, and is not now so ill, as at first she was naturally; for as
Calvin in hunc locum.
Calvin notes here, [she is already so destroyed, that she is not lethalis, but
molesta.] 8 Death since Christ is not so evil as before.


SECT. V.
One reason more Martyr offers of his own, 1 Of Martyrs reason, Vita donum.
which is, Vita Donum, life, because it is the gift of God may not be profused;
but when we have agreed to him, that it may not be unthriftily and prodigally
cast away, how will he conclude from thence, such an ingratitude, as that I
shall forfake Gods glory? and may in no case ponere animam? How will it follow
from I must not always, to I may never?

SECT. VI.
Lavater after many other urges this reason; 1 Of Lavaters reason of Judges.
That because Judges are established, therefore no man should take Dominion
over himself. 2 Where confession is not in use, there is no exterior Judge of
secret sin.


But in the Church of England, where auricular confession is not under precept,
nor much in practice, (for that we admit it not at all, or refuse it so, as the
Waldenses did, though Humfred. Iesui. pa. 2. ad Ratio. 3. Came.
a reverend man say it, is more then I knew) who is judge of sin against which
no civil law provides, or of which there is no evidence? May not I accuse and
condemn my self to my self, and inflict what penance I will for punishing
the past, and avoiding like occasion of sin?

Upon this reason depends that perplex^d 3 Of the Popes jurisdiction over
himself.
case, whether the Pope may not give himself a^olution from Acts and Vows,
and partake his own (...), although by the best opinion it is agr^ed, that to
do so is an act o^ jurisdiction, which by Lavaters rule, no man may (...) upon
himself.

C^d. l. 3. tit. 5. le. Generati.
The Imperial laws forbid i^ a generality 4 Of such jurisdiction in other
persons by civll laws.
any to be judge in his own^ cause, but all Expositors, except Sovereigns. And
in ordinary Judges, all agree with Bald. F le. 5. de. j^diciis.
Baldus [That in facto notorio if the dignity of the Judge be concerned, he is
the proper Judge of it. And he says that it belongs to the Praetor to judge,
whether such a cause belong to his judgment or no] Filesacus de Episc.
autorit. Ca. 1. (...). 17.
And with a Non obstante even upon Natural law, as the words of the privilege
are, Theodorius allowed Bishops to be Judges in their own cause. Dig. l. 1.
ti^. 7. le. 3. si Cons.
So [if a son which had not been Sui juris had been made ^onsul, (...) he
have emancipated himself, or authorized another to have adopted him.]

And besides the, it appears, that the Popes have exercised ju^sdiction upon
themselves, 5 Ioh. 22. elected himself Pope.
even before they were Popes, (for Uol^. 2. Genera. 44.
Ioha 22 having permission to chu^e o^e Pope, chose himself, which deed
Naucler relates and just^fies) by Canonical rules it is plain, that he may
exercise jurisdiction upon himself in an^ case where there is not a
distinction of persons enjoined Iure Divine, as in Baptism: which will not be
stretched to our case.

And certainly the reason of the Law, why none should be judge in his own
cause, is, because 6. Jurisdiction over our selves ^s denied us, because we are
presumed favorable to our selves; Not in cases hurtful to our selves.
every one is presumed favorable toward himself. And therefore if it be
dispensable in some cases beneficial to a man, much more may it be in cases of
inflicting punishment, in which none is im^gined to be over rigorous to
himself.

And if man were by nature as slavish, as the [ Heurnius de Philos. Barbar.
Esseni, by profession and rule, who had power of themselves in nothing, but
juvando and miserendo] I see not, but when this becomes an act of advantage to
our selves, we may have jurisdiction enough to do it.

And what is more evident to prove, that in some cases derogatory and
prejudicial to us, 7. Even in cases hurtful, we have such jurisdiction.
we have this right over our selves, then that every man may cedere suo jure,
And Non uti privilegio.

And Theod. a Nice. l. 3. c. 3. and 23.
it was by all condemned in Gregory, in the great Scisme, that after he had
promised to depart from the Papacy, by oath, in which was a clause, that he
should neither ask, 8. Gregory's oath in the great Scisme.
give, nor accept absolution from that oath, he induced his Mendicants to
preach, that it were deadly sin in him to de-relinquish the Church. So also
have many Kings departed from, their Government, and despoiled them of their
burden, at their pleasure. For, as Schlusselburgius. Catul. Here^ico, l. 13.
one says, of the whole Church, it may be said of every particular member; it
was ever in Political bondage, but not in Spiritual.

So that, if there be cases, wherein one may 9. When a man becomes to be sui
juris.
assuredly, or probaly, after just diligence used, conclude upon an
illumination of the Spirit of God, or upon a ceasing of the reason of the Law
at that time in him, that man is then Sui Iuris.

For though in cases where there is a proper 10. War is just between
Sovereign Kings, because they have no Judge.
Court, I am bound to it; yet, as Kings which are both Sovereigns, may
therefore justly decide a cause by War, because there can be no competent
Judge between them; So in secret cases between the Spirit of God, and my
conscience, of which there is not certainly constituted any exterious Judge, we
are our selves sufficient to do all the Offices; and then delivered from all
bondage, and restored to our natural liberty, we are in the same condition as
Accacius de privileg. juris. l. 1. cap. 7.
Princes are, who if in the rigor of words 11. Princes give not themselves
privileges, but declare that in that case they will exercise their inherent
privilege.
they may not properly be said to give themselves Privileges, have yet one
general inherent Privilege, and when they will, they may declare, that in that
particular case, they will not take a new, but exercise their old Privilege.

SECT. VII. Josephus Reason of Deposi tum.

And because De bell. Iud. l. 3. ca. 13.
Josephus has one reason which tastes of Divinity, we will consider it in this
place. He says, our Soul is, particula Dei, and deposed and committed in
trust to us, and we may not neglect on disharbour it, before he withdraw it.
But we are still upon a safe ground, That whenever I may justly depart with
this life, it is by a S^mmons from God; and it cannot then be imputed to any
corruption of my will: for, Regula juris 4.
Velle non creaitur, qui obsequitur Imperio. Yet I expect not ever a
particular: inspiration, or new commission, such as they are forced to purchase
for Sampson, and the rest; but that resident and inherent grace of God, by
which he excites us to works of morrall, or higher virtues.

And so, when it is so called for again, Arist. Probl. Sect. 29. q. 2.
it were a greater injustice in us to deny or withhold any thing, of which we
were Depositaries, 2. In these cases a depositarie cannot be accused De culpa,
if he be sine Dolo.
then if we were Debtors; yea, (not to depart) from Josephus. Allusion or
Metaphor of Depositum. If it were a fault to let go that of which I were
Depositary, before it were truly called 3. A secret received, Data fide, is in
Natura depositi.
for, yet in Consc^entia errante, I were excusable; for it Tholos. Syntag. l
23. ca. 3. Nu. 17.
is [Ex substantia depositi, ut deposit arius tantum de dolo teneatur non de
culpa.] Yea, when Soto de Teg. Secr. membr. 1. q. 1.
I have a secret from another, Data fide, I have this in all respects, in
Natura Depositi; and yet no man doubts, but that I may in many cases, depart
with this secret.

SECT. VIII.
There are many Metaphorical and Similitudinarie 1. Of similitudinary Reasons
in Authors not Divine.
Reasons, scattered amongst Authors, as in Cicero and Macrobius, made rather
for illustration, then for argument or answer; which I will not stand to gleane
amongst them, since they are almost all bound up in one sheafe, in De Bello
Judah. l. 3. ca. 14.
that Oration of Josephus. Or else will be fitly handled in those places of
Scripture, which make some such allusions.

SECT. IX.
Josephus then in that Oration has one Reason 1. Of his reason of Hoslis.
drawn from the custom of an Enemy. We esteem them enemies, who attempt our
lives, and shall we be enemies to our selves? But besides that, in this place,
Josephus speaks to save his own life, and may justly be thought to speak more
ex animo, and dispassioned, wherein the lib. 7. c. 28.
person of Eleazar he persuades to kill themselves, there is neither certain
truth in the Assertion, nor in the Consequence. For do we esteem God, or the
Magistrate our enemy, when by them death is inflicted? And do not Martyrs, in
whose death God is glorified, kiss the Executioners, and the Instruments of
their death? Nor is it unlawful, unnatural, or unexpedient for us, in many
ca^es, to be so much our own Enemies, as to deny our selves many things
agreeable to our sensitive nature, and to inflict upon our selves many things
repugnant to it, as was abundantly showed in the first part.

SECT. X.
In the same Oration he has another allusorie 1. Of his reason of Servus.
argument, [That a Servant which runs away, is to be punished by the Law,
though his Master be severe; much more if we run away from so indulgent a
Master, as God is to us.] But not to give strength or delight to this reason,
by affording it a long or diligent answer; we say, In our case the Servant
runs not from his Master, but to him, and at his call obeys his voice. Yet it
is as truly, as devoutly said. [The devil is overcome by resisting, but the
world, and the Bosquier. Conc. 7.
flesh by running away.] And the farther, the better.

SECT. XI.
His last, which is of any taste, is [That in a tempest, it were the part of an
idle and treacherous Of his reason of a Pilot.
Pylot, to sink the Ship.] But I say, if in a Tempest we must cast out the
most precious ware aboard, to save the lives of the Passengers, and the
Merchant who is damnified thereby, cannot impute this to any, nor remedy
himself, how much more may I, when I am weather beaten, and in danger of
betraying that precious soul which God has embarked in me, put off this
burdenous flesh, till his pleasure be that I shall resume it? For this is not
to sinck the ship but to retire it to safe Harbor, and assured Anchor. And
thus our fourth Distinction, which was to embrace the reasons proposed by
particular Authors, whether Divine or Profane, and as well Oblique and
Metaphorical, as Direct, shall here be determined.

Distinction V.
SECT. I.
ANother sort of Reasons is produced from 1. Of Aquin. two reasons, from
Justice and Charity.
grounds of Moral Virtues. Of which 22. q. 64. ar. 5.
S. Thomas proposes two, which we limit for this Distinction; for that of
Saint Augustine, That it is against Fortitude, has another room.) First then
Aquinas says, it is against justice, and against Charity.

And the first in two respects, both because he steals from the Universe, or
from that State, Of stealing away himself from the State.
to which his service is due, one person, and member of the body; and also,
because he usurpes upon the right of God. But the first of these may as well be
said of all who retyring themselves from functions in the Commonwealth,
defraud the State of their assistance, and attend only their own ends,
whether in this life, or the next.

For certainly to do even that, so intensly, 3. Monastique retiring is, in
genere rei, the same offense.
as we neglect ou^ office of Society is in genere rei, the same offense, as
this.

But as there are many which follow Aquinas herein; So Navar, and Sayr, and
others are 4. The better opinion, that herein is no sin against Justice.
upon better reason of opinion, that this can be no sin against Justice.

And for the second reason, This is not to usurp 5. I usurp not upon his
servant, but am his servant herein.
upon Gods Authority, or to deal with another's servant; if I become his
Servant, and his Delegate, and his Commissioner, in doing this, when he can be
no other way so much gloryfied. And though the passage from this life to the
next, be not generally left to our freewill, and no body be properly Lord of
his own life, yet Sayr. Thesau. Cas. Consc. l 7. ca. 9. Nu. 19.
[Though we have not Dominium, we have Usum, and it is lawful for us, to lose
that when we will]

Between which negative killing, and positive 6. Though we have not Dominium,
we have Vsum of this life, and we leave that when we will.
killing, how little and narrow a distance t^ere is, and how contiguous they
are, we shall see in another place.

If therefore the reason why we may not dye thus, be, because we are not Lords
of our own 7. The State is not Lord of our life, yet takes it away.
life, but only God, then the State cannot take away our life; for Sayr. l. 9.
c. 7. Nu. 2.
[That is no more Lord of our life, then we are,] that is, she cannot do it,
but in cases where she is Gods Officer.

And if in this case, there were any injury 8. If injury were herein done to
the State, then by a license from the State, it might be lawful.
done to the State, then certainly it were in the power of the State, to
license a man to do it, and he should upon such a license be excusable in
conscience. For this, in the State, were but Cedere in re suo, which any may
lawfully do.

And lastly, if the State were injured in this, 9. And the State might
recompense her damage upon the goods, or h^i. e
the State might lawfully recompense the damage, upon the heir and goods of
the Delinquent; which, except in those places, where express Laws allow it,
cannot be done.

Yet, I think, the better opinion, (to judge 10. In a man necess^y there may
be some injustice in this act.
by number of Authors) will be, That if that person be of necessary use to that
State, there are in it some degrees of injustice; but yet no more, then if a
General of much use, should retire into a Monastery. But if we may safely
take this resolution, That it is not against justice, we may ease our selves of
all that labor which must be spent upon the third part; for, since the
foundation of that will be principally the Commandment, Thou shall not kill;
If this killing be not against Justice, it is no breach of any part of the
Decalogue, and so no sin.

If any should think, that it may be an injustice to our selves, 22. q. 59.
ar. 4. ad 3^.
Aquinas in the same place cleares it. And if it were possible, for a 11. No
man can do injury to himself.
man to injure himself, which is not, yet this injury might be oftentimes such
an one, as Cicero says, his banishment was, [Non modo non propul sands, sed
emenda,] considering how much happiness might recompense it.

And whether it be against Charity or no, because 12. The question, whether it
be against Charity, (...)ted to the third part.
Charity is not properly a Moral virtue, nor of this place, because many of
those places of Scripture, which we must handle in the last part, are built
upon this ground of Charity, we will not examine, till we come thither. Here I
will only say, That though it be yet under D^putation and questionable,
whether this be against Charity, or no; this is certainly against Charity to
pronounce so desperately, as men use to do, against them who fall into it.

SECT. II.
Of such reasons derived from the rules of Moral virtue, Aristotle insinuates
two. For observing Of Aristotle's two reasons. Of Misery, and Pusilanimity.
that this kind of death caught men by two bai^s, Ease and Honor, Against
them who would die to avoid Misery, Arist. Eth. l. 3. c. 6.
He teaches Death to be the greatest misery which can fall upon us. Which (not
to examine how it can consist with the rest of his Doctrine) was to that
purpose, the most slipperie and insinuating persuasion.

And then, that Honor and Fame might draw none, Cap. 7.
he says, It is Cowardlinesse, and Dejection, and an argument of an
unsufferable and impatient mind. But of the first of these we have spoken
before, in answer to one of P. Martyrs reasons. And of the other we shall have
occasion to say in ugh, when we come to a place Infra fol. 249.
where Saint Augustine says the same thing, and so we may ease this
Distinction of that business.

Distinct. VI.
SECT. I.
HAving thus considered those Reasons, 1. Of Reasons to be made on the other
part.
which in the best Authors are to be found, and showed such Rules, as serve for
the true understanding of them, and of all others which spring from the same,
or like heads, before we determine this Second Part, which is of the law of
Reason; it shall be requisite that we also touch those Reasons, which on our
part are by others, and may be by us produced, by which this Selfe-homicide
may be delivered either a toto, or a tanto

But not to stop long upon that Law and practice 2. Of the Law of Rome, of
asking the S^nate leave to kill himself.
in the State of Rome, That any who had his causes allowed in the Senate, might
kill himself; upon which Decl^m. 4.
Quintilian frames a Case, That a Son who by Math maticians Predictions, was
first to kill many Enemies, and then his 3. Of the case in Quintilian.
Father; having in the wars performed the first part, makes petition to the
Senate, that before he come to perform the last part, he may be admitted to
kill himself, and argues it for the Son, by many reasons appliable to his
particular case, and to our maine question, I will hasten to our chief
strength.

SECT. II.
It may then give much light to this business, if we compare Desertion and
Destruction, and 1. Comparison of Desertion and Destruction.
consider where and wherein they differ. Certainly, in Almighty God, it is not
the same thing to forsake and to destroy, because he owes us nothing; and ever
in his forsakings there are degrees of Mercy, because he might then justly
destroy us, and may after at his good pleasure return again to us.

But between men who are mutual Debtors, and naturally bound to one another,
it is otherwise. 2. Of Omissions equal to Committings.
For a Magistrate, or Minister that abandons his charge, and neglects it,
destroies it. So says In admonitorio.
Agapetus the Deacon to Justinian the Emperor, Privati vitium est patrare,
principis omittere. Yea, a private man which hinders not a man's wrong, (when it
belongs to him to do it) offers it. Did. 86. pasce^.
[Fame morientem si non paveris, occidisti,] says Ambrose. And Tabula Paris.
censuraru^.
[That Clergy, man which hinders not a manslaughter, if he can, is thereby
irregular.] And he which to himself denies necessary things, or exposes
himself inordinatly to such dangers as men use not to escape, kills himself.
He that is as sure that this Medicine will recover him, as that this Poison
will destroy him, is as guilty if he forbear the Physic, as if he swallow
the Poison. For what is this less, then to attend the ruin of a house, or
inundation of a stream, or incursion of mad beasts? They which compare
Omissions, and Committings, require no more to make them equal, but that we
omit something which we could, and should do.

SECT. III.
First, therefore in all Laws, in such faults as 1. In great sins, the first
step imprints a guiltiness, yet many steps to Self-homicide are lawful.
are greatest, either in their own nature, or in an irremediablenesse when
they are done; all approaches, yea the very first step to them, has the same
guiltiness, and is under the same punishment, as the fault it self. As in
Treason and Heresy, the first consent is the absolute fault.

And Stanf. Plees de Cor^n. cap. Petie treason.
we have an example of a Woman b^rnt for petie T^eason, for compassing the
death of her husband, though it were not effected.

Homicide is one of those crying sins, and has ever been reckoned in
Atrocibus. For though the Elian. l. 8. cap. 10.
Athenians removed all Dracoes Laws by disuse, 2. Dra^s laws against Homicide
were retained.
for their extreme severity, yet they retained those against Homicide.

And this Homicide, Precepto 5. 3. Tolets five Homicides.
says Tolet, may be done five ways, by 1. Commandment, by 2. Advise, by 3.
Permission, by 4. H^lpe, or by the fact it self.

And in the first and worst Homicide committed 4. Four of th^se were to be
found in Adams first Homicide in Paradise.
in Paradise, in which were employed all the persons in the world, which were
able to (...) to evil, when though there was but one man, all the Millions
which have been and shall be, were massacred at once and himself too, as many
of these kinds of Homici^es were found, as was possible in so few persons. For
as Reuchlin. de verbo Mirisico. lib. 2. cap. 14.
one notes, [The Serpent counseled, the Woman helped, and Adam perpetrated,]
and we ^ay safely and reverently say) God permitted If then every one of these
be a kind of Homicide, no approach toward it can be lawful, if any be
lawful, that is not Homicide. Let us therefore consider how far, and in how
many of these ways Selfe-homicide may be allowable.

SECT. IIII.
First therefore, though it be the common received 1. Of Tolets first and
second way by Precept, and Advi^e, or option.
opinion, Bartol. le. Non solum. F. de injuriis,. Si mandato.
[Mandatorem, and Man^atarium eidem poenae subjici,] Yet by the way of Prec^pt,
we cannot properly work upon our selv^s, because in this act, the same party
must be agent, and patient, and instrument.

Nor very properly by the second way of advise; yet so near, we may come to
the nature of it, that after discourse we may advise^ly choose one part, an^
refuse the other, (for Reg. Jur. 3.
Cujus est velle, ejus est and nolle) and so we may w^sh to our 2. We may wish
Malum poenae to our selves, as the Eremite did to be possessed.
selves, that which is naturally evil, I mean, Malum poenae; as the Sulpit.
in vita Martini. Dialo. 1.
Eremite by earnest prayer obtained of God, that he might be possessed of the
Devil for certain months, because he found in himself an inclination to
pride and security.

Thus certainly in some cases, we may without 3. We may wish death for
weariness of this life.
sin wish Death; and that not only for enjoying the sight of God, (for so
Martialis ad Tholosanos.
says a holy man, Pro visione Dei, millies corpus nostrum morti dare optamus)
but even to be so delivered from the encumbrances of this life; for so it has
[rationem boni] Coment. in Sam. l. 1. c. vlt.
as Peter Martyr argues; and then, [ Heptap. Pici. l. 7. Proem.
Nove meliorem est Corruption p^imae habitudinis.]

This therefore we may wish; and yet it is 4. It is sin to wish that evil were
not so, that then we might wish it.
so far from being lawful to wish any thing which were evil; that [ Adrian.
quodlib. 10. ar. 2.
It is sin to wish, that any thing which is naturally evil, were not so,
that so we might then wish it, when it were discharged of that natural
illness.]

Death it self therefore is not evil, nor is it 5. What we may lawfully
with, we may lawfully further.
evil to wish it, is it evil to further that with more actual help, which
we may lawfully wish to be done?

These two extreme Religions, which seem to avile 6. Of wishing the Princes
death.
secular Magistr^cie, and subject Monarchs either to an O^dinarie, or else to a
Consistory, accept willingly this saying, Curse not the King, no not in thy
heart; That is, wish not ill to him. Nor have I observed that the Authors of
either distemper have in their Books allowed, that the Subject might wish the
death of the Prince, but in the same cases, where he might contribute his
actual help. For both Papists and Puritanes teaching that a lawful King may
become a tyrant, (which to my understanding cannot consist with the form and
right of an inheritable Monarchy.) Yet Saxavia de Imp. Author. Epistola.
one who pretends to go the middle way (and that is truly in this case, Via
Regia, says, [That as well we, as the Romanists esteem a King 7. In some
opinions, false Religion makes a Tirant.
of another Religion a Tyrant.] And [That it is impossible to make such a King,
but he must be a Tyrant, in the opinion of one side.]

And for his own opinion delivers [ Lib. 2. ca. 36.
That no man can be bound by oath of fidelity to the Pope, upon 8. Why an oath
of fidelity to the Pope binds no man.
this reason, because he is not indeed Vicarius Dei, as he presumed him, and
swore him to be.]

And conformably to this, Declaration and Protestation des Doctes de France.
Anno 1605.
that book whose title and scope is of the foundation of matter of State in
France, and (as it pretends in all Christendom) when after it has enraged
Subjects 9. Who is a Tyrant in these men's opinions.
against Tyrants, it comes to declare what a Tyrant is, exemplifies in the King
of Spain, and upon such reasons, as any Malignitie equal to that Author, may
cast upon what Prince it will.

And lastly, who ever shall well compare (l) Beccariaes book, with Bezaes, if
that other Beccar. cont. lib. De. jure Magistrate.
be Bezaes) though they differ Diametrally in many things, yet by their
collision and beating together, arise abundantly sparks of this pestilent
Doctrine, That as Tranquillity was, so now Religion is, the reason why we
admit Kings, and why they are none, when they neglect Religion; upon these
Doctrines, I say, it is inferred, Carbo. Cas. Conc. Summa Summarum. Tom. 3.
lib. 3. cap. 9.
[That it is lawful to wish the death of a Tyrant, or of a favourer of
Heretics, though he dye in mortal sin.] To wish therefore, and to do, are
naturally the same fault; and yet, though it be Sylvest. verb. Martyr.
[a sin to offer my self even to Martyrdom, only for weariness of life.]
Navar. Manual. Ca. 15. Nu. 11.
[Or to wish death simply for Impaciencie, Anger, Shame, Poverty, or
Misfortune;] yea to wish heaven merely for mine own happiness; yet
certainly Phil. 1. 23.
S. Paul had some allowable reasons, to desire to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ. And 10 How death may be wished by Calvine.
In 2 Cor. 5. 1 Marlorate.
Calvine by telling us upon what reason, and to what end he wished this,
instructs us how we may wish the same. He says, Paul desired not death, for
deaths sake, for that were against the sense of Nature, but he wished it, to be
with Christ.

Now, (besides that, by his leave,) we desire many things which are against the
sense of Nature, to grant that we may wish death to be in Supra.
heaven, (though Peter Martyr before alleged, be of the same persuasion) is a
larger scope, and somewhat more dangerous and slippery a grant, then we urge
toward, because herein only the interest and good of the party seem to be
considered; And yet (a) Emanuel Sa extends 9 Eman. Sa Aphor. Confess. ver.
Charitas.
it farther. [That we may wish sickness to one, for his correction; and death
for the good of the State; yea to our Enemy which is like to do us much 11
How we may with death to another for our own advantage.
harm for avoiding this our particular damage; and we may rejoice at his
death, even for that respect of our own d^livery] All which will hold as well,
if we be urged with like reasons, to wish it to our selves.

To conclude therefore this point, That it may become lawful to wish our own
death; 12 Ph. Nerius consented to the death of one who wished his own death.
I will only relate an History, which though it be but matter of fact (if it
be so much) yet it is of such a person, as his acts govern and persuade, with
very many, as far as Rules. Vita Phil. Ner. fol. 284.
In the life of Philip Nerius, who in our age instituted the last Religion
approved and established in the Church of Rome, we read, that he being
entreated (as he was ordinarily in like desperate cases,) to come to one Paulus
Maximus a youth of 14. who was then ready to expire his soul by sickness,
before he could perfect his Sacrifice, and the office which he had begun,
before the message came to him, the young man dyed. When he had been dead
about half an hour, Nerius came, and after he had used some loud
exclamations, the youth revived again, looked up, and talked in secret with
Nerius a quarter of an hour. The discourse ^nded, Nerius gave him his choice,
whether he would live, or dye; and when the boy wished death, he gave him leave
to die again. Now, though it were a greater miracle, then any in that book; if
any man should believe all that are in it, (for in it are attributed to Nerius,
stranger things then the Liber Conformi. Fran. and Christi.
book of Conformities imagined in Saint Francis (for I believe that Authuor
purposed only like Xenophon or Plato, or Sir Thomas Moore, to ideate and
form, then to write a credible History, though Sedulius Minor. advers. Alcor.
Francis.
Sedulius have defended it, with so much earnestness of late; yet thus much is
established out of this, whether Fable or History, that their opinion, who
authorized this book, is, that it was lawful in Maximus to wish his own death,
since a man of so much sanctity as Nerius, did approve and second, and
accomplish that opinion of his.

SECT. V.
The next species of Homicide in Tolets division, 1 Of Tolets 3. species. by
permission which is Mors Negativa.
is Permission; which when it is toward our selves, is by the Schoolmen
usually called Desertion, or Dereliction, and Mors negativa.

Of which I perceive not any kind to be more obnoxious, or indefensible then
that which is 2 Of standing mute at the Bar.
so common with our Delinquents, to stand mute at the Bar. And though Civil
Laws which are often enfo^ced to choose of two evils, the least, that is to
say, the least hurtful to civility and society, and must admit sometimes
particular mischief, rather then a^ general inconvenience, may excuse this;
yet, since out of the law of Conscience, which can in no case come to be so
entangled and perplexed, that it can be forced to ch^se any thing naturally
evil, no man has as yet, to my knowledge, impugned this custom of ours, it
seems to me, that as well our Church as our State, justifies this Desertion of
our selves: and this, for so low and worldly a respect, as the saving of our
temporal estate, or escaping the ignominy of another death.

But that we may the better discern the limits, 3 Three rules from Sotus,
Navar, and Mald. to guide us in these Desertions of our selves.
how far these Omissions, and Desertions, and Exposings of our selves, are
allowed us; first I must interpret one Soto. de teg. saeret. membr. 1. q. 3.
rule, [That charity begins with it self, to be understood only in
spiritual things.] For I may not do a sin, to save (in the language of
Schoolmen) the goods, or honor, or li^e, of the Pope; but for temporal
things I must prefer others before my self, if a public profit recompense my
private Damage. Nava. Manual.
I must also lay down another rule, [That as for my self, So for my neighbor
whom I am bound to love as my self,]. I may expose goods, to safeguard honor,
and honor, for life, and life for (...) profit. And to these I must join a
third rule, Sum. Maldo. q. 14. ar. 6.
[That no man is at any time enforced to exercise his privilege.] [For the
written Law every man is bound to kn^w, but Acacius de privilegiis l. 1. cap. 9.
pr^viledges and exemptions from that Law, he may be exc^sably ignorant of and
in such ignorance transgress them.] Hereupon i^ is sa^ely inferred, that though
every man have naturally this privilege, to resist force with force, and be
authorized by that, to lay violent hands, even upon the Popes life, as Gerson.
Gerson exemplifies, or upon the Emperors, as Acacius de privile. l. 1. c. 8.
Acacius, when either of them exceeds the limits of their Magistracy, (for then
the party becomes the Depu^y, and Lieutenant to Nature, which is a common and
equal Sovereign to them all.)

Yet I may wayve this benefit, if I will, and 4 I may suffer a thief to kill
me.
even by a thief, I may suffer my self to be killed, rather then kill him in
that mortal sin. Sayr Thesau. Cas. Cons. l. 7. cap. 9. nu. 17.
Which our Countryman Sayr, holds as the common opinion from S^tus, Navar,
Cajetan, and many others. And none, that I have seen excepts to it, in any
other person then a Soldier, or such as has the lives and dignities of others
so enwrapped in theirs, as they cannot give away themselves, but by betrayin^
others. And this Desertion seems to be of Natural reason, because it is to be
found in all laws; for even in the Alcor. Azoar. 52.
Alcorum we read [Vindicans non est reus, Patiens tamen optime facit.]

And our law, which if a man kill another in 5 Of se desendendo in our law.
his own necessary defense, punishes him with loss of goods, and delivers him
from death, not by acquitall, but by way of pardon, seems to me, to pronounce
plainly, that it is not lawful to defend my life by killing another; which is
farther, then any of the others went. And when I c^mpare our two laws, That if
I defend my se^fe I am punished, and the other before mentioned, That if I kill
my self I am punished in the same manner, and measure; they seem to me, to be
somewhat perplexed and captious.

And as I may depart from my natural privilege 6 I am not bound to escape
from prison if I can, nor to eat rather then starve.
of defending my self, so I may obtain from any extrinsique or accessory
help, which is casually, or by providence (if God reveal not his will
therein) presented unto me, Eman. Sa. Aphor. Conses. ver. Charitas.
[for a man condemned to death, is not bound in conscience to redeem his life
with money, though by the law of the place he might do it. And though Aquin.
22. q. 69. ar. 4. ad 2.
Saint Thomas say, [That he which is condemned to die, kills himself, if he
apprehend not, an opportunity to escape by flight, when it is presented, and
likewise if he refuse meat, when he is condemned to be famished,] yet the Sayr
Thesau. Cas. Cons. l. 7. cap. 9.
whole stream is against him, Sotus, Navar, Cajetan, and Sayr. And Navar adds,
that in these days (and yet now it is not so likely to be Symbolum Idolotricae
pravitatis) a man is bound rather to famish, then to eat meat offered to Idols.

And therefore they say; that Aquinas his opinion, That a man is bound to use
his privilege 7 For ends better then this life, we may neglect this.
for safeguard of his life, is only true then, when he does not wayve it, for
some end berter and worthier then our natural life; of which sort all
spiritual advantages are. So that in such cases they all agree, we may abandon
and forsake our selves.

And we may step farther yet in this Desertion; 8 I may give my life for
another.
for we may offer our selves for the good of our neighbor. For the temporal
life cannot be more precious then our soul; which, in rigor is murdered by
every sin consented unto. Yet Chris. Hom. 32. in Genes.
Chrysostom says, [No praise is enough to give Sara for consenting to ly, and
to submit herself to Adultery for salvation of her husbands life.] I know Aug.
l. 22. adver. faustum. cap. 33.
Saint Augustine is earnest against this.

But his earnestness is upon the matter of fact, 9 Chrisostomes opinion of
Sarahs ly, and Adultery. And St. Aug. of that wife who prostituted her self to
pay her husbands debt.
for he denies that either Abraham or Sara consented to any sin; But when he
Ca. 27. and primo: Deserm. Dom. in monte.
disputes De jare, whether Sara by Abraham's consent might expose her self, to
save his life, and is much troubled with the example of one which was prisoner,
for debt to the State, under Acindinus a Prefect, under Constantius, whose
wife being solicited by a rich man, who would give so much as would discharge
her husband, to possess her own night, by her husbands consent, earned his
liberty in that manner; at last he leaves it indifferent for any man to think
it lawful or unlawful in such a necessity, though indeed his own opinion
decline from it. Bonavent. 3. Did. 29. q. 3.
Bonaventure denies, that for the temporal good of another, I may offer
willinlgy my life. But he grounds it upon the same reason that Aug. de
mendacio. c. 6.
Augustine 10 That to give my life for another is not to prefer another, as
Bonaventure, and Aug. say, but to prefer virtue before. life.
does; That we may not love another more then our selves, which in this case we
seem to do.

But many of the Fathers, Hierome, Ambrose, and Lactantius, and many of the
School, as Aqui^ Fra. Victoria, Sotus, Bannes, and infinite are against him:
and answer Saint Augustine thus, That in that case, a man does not prefer his
friend before himself, but he prefers an Act of virtue, and of friendship, as
things of more spiritual Nature, before his own temporal life.

But that for the spiritual good of another, 11 For spiritual good is without
question.
a man should expose his own life, is an unresisted doctrine, and as Sayr
Thesau. Cas. Cons. l. 7. c. 9. nu. 17.
Sayr says, [It is sub praecepto,] So Eman Sa. Aphor. Converbo Charit.
a Curate is bound to baptize, and to anoint in the plague time. Yea, it is an
act of Virtue, though not of necessity, (as in the Curates case) Idem verbo Ho.
[To visit a sick man, in such a time, though you be a private man, and your
end be not spiritual comfort. 12 I may give another that without which I
cannot live.


And we may yet proceed farther, for we may lawfully dispossess our selves of
that, which was before afforded us, and without which we can have no hope to
sustain our lives. Aquin. 22. q. 32. ar. 6.
As in a persecution, a private man, having food left sufficient only to
sustain one man, may give it to a public person, and so perish. And only
Sotus denies, that in a shipwreck, if after we Sotus.
have both been in equal danger, I catch and possess my self of any thing
to sustain me, I 13 I may over-fast my self.
may give this to my Father, or to a Magistrate: against the strength of Navar,
Tolet, Fra. Victor. and many others.

The farthest, and uttermost degree of this Desertion, is inordinate and
indiscreete voluntary fasting, of which Saint Hierome, (as it is De Consecr.
Did. 5. Non Mediocriter
related into the Canons) says, [That by such an immoderate innocence, and
indiscreete singing of Psalms, and Offices, a man loses his dignity, and
incurres the note of madness,] And upon this place Navar ex Did. 5. de cons.
This in Saint Hieroms opinion is Selfhomicide.
Navar says, That Saint Hierome pronounces, an [Indiscreete fasting which
shortens the life, if the party perceive that it work that effect, though it
be without intention to shorten his life, and that he do it, to be the better
able to satisfy God, yet it is a Selfe-Homicide.] And Soto de tegsecret mem.
1. q. 3. ex Hieron
he adds in another place, speaking of the same purpose, [It makes no
difference whether thou be long in killing thy self, or do it at once]

And Cas. Collatione 2. c. 6.
so Cassianus says expressly, [That 15 Of the Friar whom Cassianus calls a
Selfe-Homicide for refusing bread from a thief, upon a vow. Of Christ's fast.
that Friar killed himself, which having vowed in his journey, to eat nothing
except Godgave him meat immediately, refused to eat, when thieves accustomed to
kill passengers by that place, came and presented him bread.] And yet, though
he says he killed himself, he imputes nothing to him but Indiscretion. And
therefore says Bosquier Cove. 17.
one, [Our Savior Christ exceeded not 40. days in his fast, Ne sui Homicida
videretur.] And he interprets that c Idem Cove. 18.
16 Of Philosophers inordinate fasts.
word, Porphir. de Abstiu. Anti.
Esuriit, [That then he perceived his body to languish and suffer detriment by
fasting] For, if he had not hungered till then, his fasting had had no virtue.
So that he gave over, when he found the state of his body impaired by fasting,
yet pursuing and imitating the superstition of the Philosophers, who taught
that Idem de occasionibus.
[Dum corpus augemus, mortaliores efficimar,] And that (e) [Per tenuitatem
assimilamur Deo,] How much the writers in the Roman Church suffer, and
obliquely adhort these inordinate Fasts, and other disciplines, appears by that
which I cited out of Clarus Bonarscius Supra.
before, and wheresoever they have occasion to speak thereof.

And in no one thing more, then that they 17 Of the devils threatening S.
Francis for fasting.
inculcate so often, [That it was the practice of the Devil, to appear to
Saint Francis, and cry out to him, that no man which kills himself with such
maceration, could be saved,] which Cap. de Austeritate.
Bonaventure relates in his life.

Whatsoever has been done by others, they 8 Examples of long fasts.
teach, we ought to exceed. And since Middendor. de Academiis fol. 298.
[The Monks in Prester John his Dominions, fast strictly fifty days, and
stand all that time to the chinne in water.] Since they find in Lilius Gyr.
Dialog. 17.
Abbas Vrsperg, a maid that fasted two year and a half after she had received
the body of our blessed Savior.

And an Eremit 22. years, without receiving 19 Reasons, effects, and
obligations, to rigorous fasts.
any thing, they say no fast can be too severe, which is undertaken to reduce
our body to a tamenesse. Yea, Sayr Tbesaur. Cas. Cons. l. 3. cap. 7. 11. 13.
[though that be already perfectly effected, yet a man is bound to the fasts
enjoined.] For Azor. Mor. Inst. pa. 1. l. 7. cap. 3^.
[Fasting, without charity, does wash away sin.] By this rigor of fasting,
they seem sure, that our Savior watched all those 40 days: because Bosqui.
Coue. 17.
[Qui dormit, prandet.] And as it is not likely that Moses slept in his 40
days conversation with God, so is it unlikely that Christ did less then he.
And so Saint Francis is extolled by them, for observing three Lents every year,
which Hier. Epist. ad Marcell.
Saint Hierome so much detests in the Montanists. And though their ends were
diverse, yet this shows, that to some ends, these enormous witherings of our
bodies are allowable. Upon which reason Mat. 3. 4.
John Baptists austerity is so much dignified; And Greg. Naz. Oration, de Cura
pauperum.
Saint Peter's feeding upon Lupins; And Clem. Alex. l. 2. Paedag. c 1.
Saint Matthewes living without flesh. And not only the Emperor Justinians
choice, Procop. Gaz. l. 1. de aedificiis Iustiniani.
[Who in an extreme sickness in Lent, would take nothing but herbs, and
salt, and water,] but also the Sayr. Thesau. Cas. Cons. l. 7. c. 9. N. 30.
Carthusian Rule, by which though it appear that flesh would save the Patients
life, he may not eat it. And by the Clem. Apostol. Constit. l. 4. cap. 7.
Apostolical constitutions, (which Turrianus extols so much, that by them he
confutes much of the Reformed Churches doctrine) [A man must fast to death,
rather then receive any meat, from an Excommunicate person.] And in another
Chapter, Ibid. cap. 9.
[If any thing be in a case of extreme necessity accepted from such a person,
it may be bestowed in full, that so their Alms may be burnt, and consumed to
ashes, but not in meat to nourish our selves withal.]

So, to determine this Section of Desertion, since 20 Corollary of this Section
of Desertion.
we may wayve our defense which Law gives, by putting our selves upon a Jurie;
and which Nature gives, to repel force with force, since I may without slying,
or eating when I have means, attend an Executioner, or Famine, since I may
offer my life, even for another temporal good, since I must do it for his
Spiritual, since I may give another my board in a Shipwreck, and so drown,
since I may hasten my arrival to heaven, by consuming penances, it is a
wayward and unnoble stubbornness in argument, to say still, I must not kill my
self, but I may let my self dye; since of Affirmations and Denyals, of
Omissions and Committings, of Enjoy^ing and Proh^bitory Commands, ever the one
implies and enwraps the other. And if the matter shall be resolved and
governed only by an outward act, and ever by that; if I forbear to swim in a
river and so perish, because there is no act, I shall not be guilty, and I
shall be guilty if I discharge a Pistol upon my self, which I knew not to be
charged, nor intended harm, because there is an act.

Of which latter opinion Mariana de Rege, l. x. cap. 7.
Mariana the Jesuit seems to be, as we shall have occasion to note, in the
next Member and species of Homitide, which is, Assistance.

SECT. VI.
But before we come to that, we must, though 1. Of another degree of Homicide,
by Mutilation, which is not in Tolets Division.
it be not, nor naturally could be delivered in Tolets Division; consider
another species of Homicide, which is Mutilation or Mayming.

For, though in Civil Courts, it be not subject to like penalty, yet if it
be accompanied with the same Malignitie, it is in conscience the same sin,
especially toward our selves; because it violates the same reason, which is,
that none may usurp upon the body over which he has no Dominion.

Upon which reason, it is also unlawful for us to 2 Of delivering ones self
into bondage.
deliver our selves into bondage; (which I mention here, because it arises
from the same ground, and I am loath to afford it a particular Section. Yet
Baron. Martirol, Junii 2.
holy Paulinus, a Confessor, and Bishop of Nola, then whom I find no man
celebrated with more fame of sanctity and integrity, to redeem a Widows
Son, delivered himself as a a slave to the Vandals, and was exported from
Italy to Afrique; and this, as I think, when he was necessary to that place,
being then there Bishop; for that was but five years before his death.

But to return to Mutilation, Tabula Paris. irregularit.
it is clear by the Canons, that toward irregularity, it works as much, and
amounts as far, to have maimed, as to have killed.

And Binius To. 2. pa. 2. fo. 1280.
in a Council at London, Anno 1075 3 By diverse Canons it is all one fault.
one Canon forbids a Clergy man, to be present at judgment of death, or of
Mutilation. And amongst the Can. Apost. Can. 21.
Apostles Canons this is one, [He that gelds himself cannot be a Clerk,
because he is an Homicide of himself, and an enemy to Gods creature. [ Stanf.
Plees del Coron.
And to geld, is to maime in our Law.]

So in the next Canon it is said, [ Canon. 23.
A Clerk which gelds himself must be deposed, Quia homicida sui.] Canon. 23.
And a Layman must for that fault be excommunicated three years, quia vitae
suae posuit insidias.] It was therefore esteemed equivalent to killing.

And Calv. in Mat. 19. 4. Marlorate.
Calvine, esteemed it so heinous, that he builds his Argument against Divorce
upon this ground, [God made them one Body, and it is in 4 Of Calvin's argument
against divorce, upon the ground of Mutilation.
no case lawful, for a man to tear his own body.] But if this be so lawful
as Divorces are lawful, certainly this peremptory sentence against it, must
admit some modification.

Without doubt, besides the examples of holy men who have done it, to disable
themselves 5 The example of Saint Mark to escape Priesthood.
from taking the burden of Priesthood, of which Hicr. Prolog. in Marcum.
Saint Mark the Evangelist was one, who to that end cut off his thombe. And
besides, that as our Savior said, Mat. 19. 12.
[Many should geld themselves for the Kingdom of heaven.] So Orat. vero Anto.
and commodo Philosophis.
Athenagoras, 50 years after Christ, says, [that many did practice it.] It is
doubted by none, [But Sayr These. Cas. Cons. l. 7. cap. 9.
that a man unjustly detained to a certain execution, may cut off that limb
by which he is tied, if he have no other way to escape: or being encompassed 6
In what cases it is clear that a man may mayme himself.
with dogs, he may cut off a hand, and cast it to them, to entertain them
while he escape.

SECT. VII.
The last species of Homicide, on this side; the 1 Of Tolets fourth way, by
actual helping
last act, is an actual helping and concurrence to it. And every step and
degree conducing purposely to that end, is as justly by Judges of Consciences,
called Homicide, as Ardoinus de venenis l. 8. c. 20 Ardonius reekons a Flea
amongst poisons because it would kill.
Ardoinus recknoning up all poisons, which have a natural malignity and
affection to destroy man's body, forbeares not a Flea, though it never kill,
because it endeavors it, and does all the hurt it can; and he is diligent in
assigning preservatives and restoratives against it.

And 2 Samuel 1. 16.
so to that Amalekite, which told David he helped Saul to die, when he found
him 2 David condemned the Amalekite, who said, he helped Saul to dye.
too weak to pierce himself, David pronounced judgment of death, for (says
he) thine own mouth has confessed, That thou have killed the Lords Anointed.

Certainly, Mariana de Rege. l. 1. c. 7.
Mariana the Jesuit, whom I named before) esteems this actual concurrence to
ones death, as heavy as the act it self; 3 Marianaes opinion, that a King
drinking poison, prepared and ministered by another, he being ignorant, is a
Selfe-homicide.
yea, as it seems, though the party be ignorant thereof. For, after he
concluded how an Heretical King may be poisoned, he is diligent in this
prescription, [That the King be not constrained to take the poison himself,
but that some other may administer it to him: And that therefore it be
prepared, and conveied in some other way then meat or drink, because else,
says he, either willingly or ignorantly he shall kill himself.] So that he
provides, that that King who must dye under the sins of Tyranny and Heresy,
must yet be defended from concurring to his own death, though ignorantly, as
though this were a greater sin.

Since therefore this hastening of our death by such an act, is the same, as the
entire Selfe-homicide, let us consider how far^e irreproved Custom, and
example, and Law does either allow or command it.

For that it is allowable, it seems to me some proof, [ Sotus de teg. Secret.
Memb. 1. q. (...)
That before any man accuses him, a Malefactor may go and declare his fault to
the Judge.]

Though amongst Italian relations, Sansovin. de Gover.
that in 4 A Malefactor unaccused, may accuse himself.
Sansovine concerning England have many marks and impressions of malice, yet of
that custom, which he falsely says to be observed here, [That men condemned
to be hanged are ever accompanied 5 Of Sansovinus relation of our customs at
Executions, and withdrawing the pillow in desperate cases.
to their Executions by all their kindred, who then hang at their feet, to
hasten their end; And that when a Patient is abandoned by the Physicians, his
nearest kinsman strangles him with a pillow.] Of this, I say, that Author had
thus much ground, that ordinarily at Executions, men, out of a Charity, as
they think, do so; and women which are desperate of sick persons recovery,
use to take the pillow from under them, and so give them leave to dye sooner.
Have they any more the Dominion over these bodies, then the person himself? Or
if a man were able to do these Offices to himself, might he not do it? Or
might he not with a safe conscience put so much waights in his pockets, as
should countervaile their stretchings? I speak but comparatively; might not he
do it as well as they?

For to my understanding such an act, either 6 Of breaking legs of men at
executions: And of breakinge the halter.
in Executioner or by-stander, is no way justifiable; for it is both an injury
to the party, whom a sudden pardon might redeem; and to the Justice, who has
appointed a painful death to deter others. John 19.
The breaking of legs in Crucified men, which was done to hasten death, was not
allowed but upon Petition. And the Law might be much defrauded, if such
violence might be used, where the breaking of the halter delivered the Prisoner
from death; as in some places it does; and Lucas depenna l. 1. c. de descr. et
occult. Johan. de Ant. Soliloq. 5. Optine. in D: leg. Imperium.
good opinions concur, that it is to do ever without doubt, whatsoever is
for ease, or escaping painful passage out of this life; in such cases, a man
may more allowably do by his own act, then a stranger may. For Law of Nature
enclines and excuses him, but they are by many Laws forbidden to hasten his
death; for they are no otherwise interessed in it, then as parts of the whole
body of the State, and so it concerns them, that Justice be executed. Yet we
see, this, and the other of withdrawing the pillowes, is ordinarily done, and
esteemed a pious office. The Athenian Executions were ever by the hand of the
offender, in judgments of poison.

And in Number: 5.
that law of Purgation assigned by God, to ease a man on whom the spirit of 7
Of the purgations assigned by Moses ^n cases of jealousy.
Jealousy was come, the Woman was to take the water of curses and bitterness,
which should make her infamous, and her belly swell, and her thighs to rot. And
those forms of Purgation, which were called Vulgares, lasted long, Of forms
of purgation called Vulgares.
even in the Church; For there is nothing extant against them, till 2. q. 5.
consuluisti.
Stephen the fifth, Anno 885.

And not only Tholos. Syn. l: 48: c: 15. n: 7.
Charles the great, in whom the Church acknowledged Piety enough, induced one
form severer then the rest, which was to walk upon 9 burning Harrows. But
Greg. Turo. Hist. Fraucor. l: 2: c: (...):
Britius a Bishop, being but callumniated by the people extrajudicially, to
have got his Laundresse 9 Charlemaine brought in a new purgation. And Britius a
B. another being acquitted before
with child, after his innocence had prevailed so far with God, that the
child of 30 days age, being adjured in the name of Christ, had acquitted him,
did not admit, but chose and extort a form of Purgation, to carry burning
coals upon his head. With us, Lamb. de legibus priscis Anglorum.
both the species of Ordalium lasted evidently till King John's time.

And though into that of boiling water men were forced to go, yet that was but
for the 10 With us bothkindes of Ordalium, by water, and fire lasted till K.
John's time.
meaner sort; but to carry the three pound weight of red hot Iron, which was
for the Purgation of the persons of better quality, was an act, as all the
former were, in which a man must of necessity do some thing actually
himself, and 11 In all these, and in battle the party himself assisted to his
pain.
be the Executioner of his own Judgment; which as long as these forms of
Purgation, and the other by Battle, were lawful, was lawful also to be done.

And in S. Dorothaus, who every where professes a love to that obedience, which
himself 12 Three examples of actual helpers to their own destruction in S.
Doroth.
calls indiscreet, you shall read many praises given to men, who did not
only forsake themselves, but actually further their destruction; though not
effectually; which makes no difference, if it be in dangers, which usually men
escape not. B: Doroth. doctrina 1. de Renunciatione.
He prayseth one Friar, who being by his Abbat commanded to return that night,
the waters being risen, committed himself to a raging torrent, in such an
obedience.

And another, who being bid by his Abbat, to go into the Town, where he
doubted he should fall into some tentation, by some spectacle, went but with
this protestation, That he hoped not in the protection of God, but in him who
sent him. But the most natural to our present purpose is this; Idem Doct: 7.
de accus. sili ipsius.
That a holy old man seeing his servant mistake poison for honey, and put it
into his broth, eat it nevertheless without chiding; and when the servant
perceived it, and exclaimed, Sir, I have killed you, answer, it is all one,
for if God would have had me eat honey, he would have directed thy hand to
honey.

Of the holiness of Joseph of Arimathaea, we have testimony enough;
Supplement: Chron. an. Chr. 3.
who being sent by the Apostles to preach the Gospel, amongst other
persecutions, was constrained to drink 13. Of ^oseph of Arimathaea his
drinkinge poison.
poison: in which there must of necessity be such an act, as we dispute of
now.

How much did Navar man. ca: 1. n. 28.
Baint Andrew contribute to his own Crucifying? How much Saint Laurence 14. Of
Saint Andrew and Saint Lawr.
to his broyling, when he called to the Tyrant, This side is enough, turn the
other, and then eat?] [ Controv. 3.
Magni quod faciunt, praecipiunt,] says, Quintillian. And these acts of men,
otherwise esteemed holy, may ever be good warrants and examples to us, when the
cause is not prejudged by any greater authority, as Scripture, or Counsels,
nor that very act accused by any Author.

But to stay no longer upon Examples, amongst Casuists I observe the greater
number to deny, 15. Casuists not clear whether a condemned man may do the last
act to his death.
that it is lawful for a man condemned, to do the last and immediate act
conducing to death, as the drinking of poison; But the acts some what more
removed, they agree he may do.

And even this act of drinking poison, Relect. de Homicid: n: 30: in refp. ad 8.
Fra: a Victoria defends, to be lawful. So that amongst them it is not clear,
but that a man may do it. Yea, in very many cases, it is not only lawful to
do as much, without any condemnation, but it is 16. But unto Curates and
Priests sometimes it is sub praecepto, even without condemnation.
necessary, and by their rules, sinful to omit it. For Curates must go to
infected houses, to minister the Sacraments. And Sayr Sum: Sacram. poenit: cap
32.
if a Priest enter a wood, where three wait to kill him, and one of them
repenting that purpose meet him; and by way of Confession sub Sigillo, discover
the fault, the Priest is bound to go forward to a certain death into a wood,
rather then by returning to let the others know, that he knew it by confession.
So peremptory is their Doctrine, how ever their practice be, against revealing
Confessions. And though perchance this seem a wanton case, framed upon
impossible concurrences, as De teg. Sec. memb. 3. q. 4.
Soto esteems of it, yet the reason may have use; That though
selfe-preservation be Divine Natural Law, and the seal of Confession but
Divine Positive Law, yet because circumstances are not alike, in this, a
public good shall be preferred before his private life. So that we may do
some Acts our selves, which conduces probably, yea certainly, as far as
humane knowledge can reach, to our destruction: which is the nearest step to
the last act of doing it entirely our selves.

SECT. VIII.
Of which last act, as we spoke whilst we considered the Law of Nature, and
must again 1. Of Tolets last Species of Homicide which is the act it self.
when we come to understand those places of Scripture, which seem to aim
toward it, so before we conclude this part, of the Law of Reason, we may
fitly present such deductions, comparisons, and consequences, as may justly
seem in reason, to annihilate or diminish this fault. Of which, because most
will be grounded, either upon the conscience of the Doer, 2. How far an
erring conscience may justify.
or upon the Churches opinion of the fact when it is done, we will only
consider how far an erring Conscience may justify any act, and then produce
some examples of persous guilty of this, and yet canonized by the Church, by
admission into the Martyrologe, and assigning them their Feasts, and Offices,
and Vigils, and like religious Celebrations. Therefore to make no use of Diog.
Laert. lib. 8.
Pythagorus example, who rather then he would offend his Philosophical
conscience, and either tread upon the Beans himself, or suffer 3 Pythagoras
conscience.
his Scholars to speak before their time, delivered up himself, and forty of
them to his Enemies sword. And to avoid the ambages and multiforme entangling
of Schoolmen; herein we will follow that which is delivered for the common
opinion; which is, Azor. Inst. Mor p. 1. l. 2. cap. 8.
that not only a conscience which errs justly probably and Bona side, that is,
after all Moral industry and diligence has been used, (yet I mean not
exquisite diligence, but such as is proportional to the person, and his
quality, and to the knowledge which that man is bound to have of that thing, at
that time) is bound to do according to that misinformation, and
mis-perswasion so contracted. But also, if it err negligently, or otherwise
viciously, and mala side, as long as that error remains and resides in it, a
man is bound not to do against his conscience.

In the first case, if one in his conscience think that he ought to lie, to
save an innocent, or that he ought to steal to save a famished man, he is a
Homicide if he lie not, or steal not.

And in the second case, though he be not bound to any Act, yet it is lawful
to him then, to omit any thing necessary otherwise. And this obligation which
our Conscience casts upon us, is of stronger hold, and of straighter band, then
the precept of any Superior, whether Law, or person; and is so much juris
naturalis, as it cannot be infringed nor altered, beneficio divinae
indulgentiae, to use their own words. Which Doctrine, as it is every where to
be gathered among the Casuists, so is it well collected and amassed, and and
argued, and confirmed, especially by Azorius. If then a man after convenient
and requisite diligence, despoiled of all humane affections, and self-interest,
and [Sancto bonaee impatientiae igne Epist. 3. Sever. lib. 1.
exardens,] as Paulinus speaks; do in his conscience believe that he is invited
by the Spirit of God to do such an act as Jonas, Abraham, and perchance
Sampson was, who can by these rules condemn this to be sin? And therefore I
doubt there was some haste and praecepitation in Cassia^. Collat. 2. cap. 5.
Cassianus his judgment, though otherwise, a very just esteemer and valuer of
works of devotion and obedience; who pronounces that that apparition of an
Angel, to Hero an Eremit, after 50 years so intense and earnest attending of
4 Of the apparition to Hero an Eremit by which he killed himself; out of
Cassianus.
Gods service, and religious negligence of himself, that he would scarce
intermit Easter day, from his strict fasting, and being now Nazarius constantio.
Victoriarum conscientia plenus, (as the Panegyrique says) was an illusion of
the Devil to make him destroy himself. Yet Hero being drawn out of the Well
into which he had cast himself, and living three days after, persisted in a
devout acknowledgement that it was the Spirit of God, which solicited him to
that, and dyed in so constant an assurance and alacrity, that Paphnutius the
Abbat, though at first in some suspense, did not number him inter Biathanatos,
which were persons reputed vitiously to have killed themselves.

Nor may it be necessarily concluded, that this 5 The Devil sometimes
sollicites to good.
act was therefore evil, if it appeared to be from the Devil. For Wier. l. 5.
c. 1^.
Wierus, tells us of a maid whom the Devil persuaded to go such a Pilgrimage,
and at such an Altar, to hear a Mass, for recovery of her health.

Certainly if as Vasq. de adorat. l. 3 disp. 1. cap. 5.
Vasquez holds, [it be not Idolatry to worship the Devil in an Apparition,
which I think to be God] it can be no offense to believe 6 By Vasquez it is
not Idolatry to worship God in the Devil.
him, after I have used all means to discern and distinguish: For not only
those Rules which are delivered ordinarily to know him by, are apparently
false, which are a difference 7 Rules to distinguish the spirits by marks are
false.
in his hands or feet, or some notable deformity by horns, or a tail, of
which Binsfeld. de confess. sagarum, f. 67. Menghi fustis Daemonum, cap. 8.
Binsfeldius seems confident of the first, and (h) Menghi of the second. But
that Rule that God always infuseth or commands good things, if it be
understood of that which is good, in the common and natural course is not
always safe, for it held not in Abraham, nor the Israelites case. 8 So is the
Rule, That good Angels always move to good ordinarily.
Therefore though Vasquez his first excuse, That such a worship is not
Idolatry, because by reason of our immediate relation to God, we never arrest
nor stop upon the Devil by the way, will do no good in our case of believing,
yet his other will, which he has in the same place, That 9. As in adoration,
so in this case, invincible ignorance may excuse.
there may be an invincible ignorance, and that in that any exterior act
whatsoever, proceeding from a sincere and pure intention of the mind, is an act
of true Religion. For safelier then the Inc. Constan
Panegyric could say to Constantine, [Suacuique Prudentia Deu^ est] may we say
of every man's conscience thus rectified. If therefore they will still turn in
their circle, and say, God concurs to no evil, we say nothing is so evil, but
that it becomes good, it God command it; and that this is not so naturally
evil, that it requires a special commission from God^; but as it becomes
good, if he commands it, so it becomes indifferent, if he remove the reasons
with which the precept against it was conditioned. If they Supra.
return to S. Augustins two reasons against Donatus, whereof the first was,
[we have authority to save thy body against thy will,] And the second, [None of
the faithful ever did this act] we are thereby hastened to the other
consideration, how they which have done it, have been esteemed of by the
Catholic Church. 10. Of Saint Aug. his first reason to Donatus, that we may
save one against his will.


But to speak a little in passing of Saint Augustines second reason, (for the
first has very little force, since though it may be lawful to preserve a man
willing to die, yet it is not always of merit, nor obligatory; And therefore
Ignatius ep: ad Romanos.
Ignatius does so earnestly dehort the Rom^ns from endeavoring to succor him.
And Ant. August. Episc. Tarrac: de leg. Roman. cap. 44.
Corona Civica which was given to any which had rescued a Citizen in the
wars, was not given though he produced witnesses of the fact, except the
person so rescued confessed that he received a benefit thereby;) why does S.
Augustine refer Donatus in that second reason, to examples. For 11. Of his
second of examples: and of his escape if Donatus had produced examples.
if Donatus had produced any (as out of credible and authentic History he
might very many, and out of Scriptures Canonick in De civitate Dei l. 18. cap.
38. et lib. 2. cont. Gaudent. cap. 23.
St. Augustines opinion, he might have alleged the example Eleazar, and of
Rasis,) Saint Augustine was ever provided for this retrait, That it was a
special inspiration, and not to be drawn into consequence or imitation.

Had it been a good Argument in Rome for 12 Divorce in Rome, and in Jurie long
without example.
500. years, that Divorce was not lawful, because A: Gellius l: 4. cap. 3.
no example was of it? Or almost for 2000. That a woman might not sue it
against her Husband, because Serarius de Rabbin. et Herodibus cap. 17.
till Herod's daughter there was no example of it? But now when the Church has
thus long persevered, in not only justifying but solemnizing many examples
hereof, 13. S. August. scholars in this point of examples, as stubborn as
Aristotle's, for the heavens inalterablnes, though the reason of both be ceased.
are not Saint Augustines Disciples guilty of the same pertinacy which is
imputed to Aristotle's followers, Kepplerus de Stella Serpent. cap. 23.
who defending the Heavens to be inalterable, because in so many ages nothing
had been observed to have been altered, his Scholars stubbornly maintain his
Proposition still, though by many experiences of new Stars, the reason which
moved Aristotle seems now to be utterly defeated?

Thus much being spoken by the way of Saint Augustine, and having purposely
sepos'd the examples recorded in the Scriptures, for our third part, we will
consider some Examples registered in the Ecclesiastic History.

The Church whose dignity and constancy it becomes well, that that Rule of her
own Law, be ever justly said of her self, Sextus Reg. Iur: quod semel.
[Quod s^mel placuit amplius displicere non potest] where new reasons do not
interpose, Baron. Martyrolog.
celebrates upon the 9. of February the Birth, (that is the death, of the
Virgin and Martyr Appollonia; who, after the persecutors had beat out her
teeth, and vexed her 14. Of the Martyr Apollonia.
with many other tortures, when she was presented to the fire, being inflamed
with a more burning fire of the Holy Ghost, broke from the Officers 15 Of
answers in her excuse.
hands, and leapt into the fire.

For this act of hers many Advocates rise up for her, and say, that either the
History is not certain, (yet the Authors are Beda, Usuardus, Ado, and (as
Barronius says) Latinorum caeteri) Or else, Sayr. Thesaur. Cas. Cons. l. 9. c.
7. number. 11.
says Sayr, you must answer that she was brought very near the fire, and as
good as thrown in: Or else that she was provoked to it by divine inspiration.
But, but that another divine inspiration, which is true Charity, moved the
beholders then to believe, and the Church ever since to acknowledge, that she
did therein a Noble and Christian act, to the special glory of God, this act
of hers, as well as any other, might have been calumniated to have been done,
out of weariness of life, or fear of relapse, or have to Heaven, or ambition
of Martyrdom.

The memory of Baron. Mart.
Pelagia, as of a virgin and Martyr, is celebrated the ninth of June. And 16.
Of the Martyr Pelagia.
though the History of this woman suffer some perplexity, and give occasion of
doubting the truth thereof, (for Ambrose says, That she and her 17. Though her
History be very uncertain the Church seems glad of occasion to celebrate so
noble a fact.
Mother drowned themselves; and Chrysostom that they slung themselves down
from a house top. And Baronius saw this knot to be so hard to unentangle, that
he says, [Quid ad hac dicamus, non habemus]) yet the Church, as I said,
celebrates the Act, as though it were glad to take any occasion, 18. Augustins
testimony of her.
of approving such a courage in such a cause, which was but preservation of
Chastity. [ August. de Civitate Dei l. 1. cap. 26.
Their Martyrdom says Saint Augustine was ever in the Catholic Church
frequented Veneratione Celeberrima.]

And De Virg. l. 3.
Saint Ambrose, when his sister Marcellina, consulted him directly upon the
point, 19 Ambrose meditation upon her.
what might be thought of them who kill themselves in such cases, (and then it
is agreed by all that the opinions of the Fathers are especially to be valued,
when they speak of a matter, not incidently or casually, but directly and
deliberately) answers thus, [We have an example of such a Martyrdom in
Pelagia] And then he presents her in this religious meditation, [Let us die, if
we may have leave, or if we be denied leave, yet let us die. God cannot be
offended with this, when we use it but for a remedy;] and our faith takes a way
all offense. Here is no difficulty: for who is willing to dye, and cannot,
since there are so many ways to death? I will not trust my hand least it
strike not home: nor my breast, least it withdraw it self: I will leave no
escape to my flesh, for we can dve with our own weapons, and without the
benefit of an Executioner.

And then having dressed her self as a Bride, and going to the water, Here,
says she, let us be baptized; this is the Baptism where sins are forgiven,
and where a kingdom is purchased: and this is the baptism after which none
sins. This water regenerates; this makes us virgins, this opens heaven,
defends the feeble, delivers from death, and makes us Martyrs. Only we pray to
God, that this water scatter us not, but reserve us to one funeral. Then
entered they as in a dance, hand in hand, where the torrent was deepest, and
most violent. 29. Eusebius his Oration imagind in the person of her mother.
And thus dyed, (as their mother upon the bank called them) [These Prelates of
virginity, Captains of Chastity, and companions in Martyrdom.]

And before Ambrose, we find Eusebius Eccles. Histor: l. 8. cap. 4.
Eusebius to have been of the same persuasion, who thus produces the Mother
encouraging them; [You know how I have brought you up, in the fear of God; and
shall your nakedness, which the public air has not ha^ leave to see, now be
prostituted in the Stews? Have not so little faith in God, as to fear death,
Despise not Chastity so much, as to live with shame; but with a pure and chaste
death condemn this world. And so, deluding their Keepers, as though they
withdrew for natural necessities, they drowned themselves.] All Authors of
that time are so profuse in the praise of this fact, that it is just to say
thereof, as Plin. paneg. Trajan.
Pliny says of Nervaes adopting Trajane, [It was impossible it should have
pleased all when it was done, except it had pleased all before it was done.]

For no Author, that I have lighted upon, diminished the glory of these and
such other, 21. S. August. first of any doubted their fact, and did seek
shifts to defend it which it needed not.
until Saint Augustine out of his most zealous and startling tenderness of
conscience, began to seek out some ways, how these Selfe-homicides might be
justified, because he doubted that this act naturally was not exempt from
taxation. And yet ever he brings himself to such perplexity, as either he
must defend it, and call in question, the authority of a general consonance of
all times and Authors, or retire to that poor and improbable defense, that it
was done by Divine instinct. Which can very hardly be admitted in this case,
where not their Religion but only their Chastity was solicited and attempted.

Nor can Saint Ambrose, or Eusebius be drawn to that opinion of especial
Divine instinct, because speaking ex animo, though in the mothers person, they
incite them to it with reasons from 22. S. August. example has drawn Pedraca
to the same shift, of special divine Instinct in a like case.
Morrall virtues.

Yet Saint Augustines example, (as it prevails very much, and very justly for
the most part) has drawn many others since to the like interpretation of the
like acts. For when the kingdom of Naples came to be divided between
Ferdinand the fifth, and Lewis the twelfth, the French Army being admitted into
Capua, upon condition to do no violence, amongst many outrages, a virgin not
able to escap the fury of a licentious Soldier, offered for ransom to lead
him to treasure: and so took advantage of a place in the wall, to fling her
self into the River. [Which act, Pedraca Cas. de consc. 5. praec. Hispanica
Editio.
says Pedraca, we must believe to be done by Divine inspiration, because God
loves chastity now as well as ever he did.] Which escape every side may find
easy, if being pressed 23. So says P. Martyr of the Midwiues and of Rahabs lie.
with reason they may say, as Peter Martyr does of the Egyptian Midwives, and
of Rahab, and such, In Jud 3.
[If they did lie, they did it, impulsu Dei.]

But as our custom hitherto has been, let us depart from Examples to Rules;
though concurrence of Examples, and either an express or interpretative
approbation of them, much more such a dignifying of them, as this, of the whole
Church, and of Catholic Authors approved by that Church, be equivalent to a
Rule. And to ease the Reader, and to continue my first resolution of not
descending into many particulars, I will only present one Rule, but so
pregnant, that from it many may be derived; by which, not only a man may, but
must do the whole and entire action of killing himself; which is, to preserve
the scale of Confession. For though Io: de Lap. Cas. Missales c. 6: art. 5.
the Rule in general be, [That 24. To preserve the seal of confession a man
may be bound to kill himself.
if a Spider fall into the Chalice, the Wine may be changed, because, Nihil
abominabile debet sumi occasion hujus Sacramenti.] And so Ibid.
it may, if the Priest after Consecration come to the knowledge that the Wine
is poisoned, [Ne calix vitae vertatur in mortem;] Yet Sotus de teg. secret.
memb: 3. q: 4.
if he know this by Confession, from his assistant, or any other, and cannot
by any diversion, nor disguise, escape the discovering, that this was confessed
to him, without drinking it, if it be poison, he m^st drink it.

But because men of more abundant reading, active discourse, and conclusive
judgment, will easily provide themselves of more Reasons and Examples, to this
purpose; it shall satisfy me, to have awakened them thus much, and showed them
a mark to direct their Meditations upon. And so I may proceed to the third
Part, which is of the Law of God.

The Third Part. OF THE LAW OF GOD.
Distinction I.
SECT. I.
THat light which issues from the Moon, 1 An induction to the handlinge of
these places of scripture.
does best represent and express that which in our selves we call the light of
Nature; for as that in the Moon is permanent and ever there, and yet it is
unequal, various, pale, and languishing, So is our light of Nature changeable.
For being at the first kindling at full, it wayned presently, and by
dedeparting further and further from God, declined by general sin, to almost
a total Eclipse: till God coming nearer to us first by the Law, and then by
Grace, enlightened and repaired it again, conveniently to his ends, for further
exercise of his Mercy and Justice. And then those Artificial Lights, which our
selves make for our use and service here, as Fires, Tapers, and such resemble
the light of Reason, as we have in our Second part accepted that Word. For
though the light of these Fires and Tapers be not so natural, as the Moon,
yet because they are more domestique, and obedient to us, we distinguish
particular objects better by them, then by the Moon; So by the Arguments, and
Deductions, and Conclusions, which our selves beget and produce, as being more
serviceable and under us, because they are our creatures; particular cases are
made more clear and evident to us; for these we can be bold withal, and put
them to any office, and examine, and prove their truth, or likeliehood, and
make them answer as long as we will ask; whereas the light of Nature, with a
solemn and supercilious Majesty, will speak but once, and give no Reason,
nor endure Examination.

But because of these two kinds of light, the first is to weak, and the other
false, (for only color is the object of sight, and we not trust candlelight
to discern Colors) we have therefore the Sun, which is the Fountain and
Treasure of all created light, for an Emblem of that third best light of our
understanding, which is the Word of God. Prove. 6.
Mandatum lucerna, and Lex lux,] says Solomon. But yet Plin: l. 2: cap 31.
as weak credulous men, think sometimes they see two or three Suns, when
they see none but M^teors, or other appearance, so are many t^ansported with
like facility or dazeling, that for some opinions which they maintain, they
think they have the light and authority of Scripture, when, God knows, truth,
which is the light of Scriptures, is Divine truly under them, and removed in
the farthest distance that can be. I^ any small place of Scripture,
mis-appeare to them to be of use for justifying any opinion of theirs; then
(as the Word of God has that precious nature of gold, that a little q^antity
thereof, by reason of a faithful tenacity and ductilenesse, will be brought to
cover 10000. times as much of any other Mertall,) they extend it so far, and
labor, and beat it, to such a thinness, as it is scarce any longer the Word
of God, only to give their other reasons a little tincture and color of gold,
though they have lost all the weight and estimation

But since the Scripture it self teaches, 2. Pet. 1: 20.
[That no Proph^cie in the Scripture, is of private interpretation,] the whole
Church may not be bound and concluded by the fancy of one, or of a few, who
being content to enslumber themselves in an opinion, and lazy prejudice, dream
arguments to establish, and authorize that.

A Artemidorus de some. Int^rp. l: 1. cap: 2.
professed interpreter of Dreams, tells us, [That no Dream of a privat^ man
may be interpreted to signify a public business,] This I say, because of
those places of (...), which are aledged for the Doctrine which we now examine,
scarce any one, (except the Precept, Thou shall not kill) is offered by any two
Authors. But to one, one place, to another, another seems directly to govern
in the point, and to me, (to allow Truth her natural and comely boldness) no
place, but that seems to look toward it.

And therefore in going over all those sentences, 2. Why I forbear to name
them who cite these places of Scripture.
which I have gathered from many Authors, and presenting convenient answers and
interpretations thereof, I will forbear the names of those Authors, who
produced them so impertinently, least I should seem to discover their
nakedness, or insimulat them even of prevarication.

If any Divine shall think the cause, or persons 3. If any oppose an answer
what I entreat of him.
injured herein, and esteem me so much worth the reducing to the other
opinion, as to apply an answer hereunto, with the same Charity which provoked
me, and which, I thank God ha^h accompanied me from the beginning, I beseech
him, to take thus much advantage from me and my instruction, that he will do
it without bitterness. He shall see the way the better, and show it the
better, and sail through it the better, if he raise no storms.

Such men, Mar^. 1. 17.
as they are [Fishers of men,] so may they also hunt us into their nets, for
our 4. Why Clergy men may fish, or hunt but not with dogs.
good. But there is perchance, some mystique interpretation belonging to that
Ex Did. 86. Esau.
Canon which allows Clergy men to hunt; for they may do it by Nets and
Snares, but not by Dogs; for clamor and bitings are forbidden them.

And I have been sorry to see, that even Beza 5. Of Beza's answer to Ochius
Polygamy.
himself, writing against an Adversary, and a cause equally and extremely
obnoxious, only by allowing too much fuel to his zeal, enraged against the
man, and neglecting, or but prescribing in the cause, has with less
thoroughnesse and satisfaction, then either became his learning and
watchfulness, or answered his use and custom, given an answer to Ochiu^ book
of Polygamy.

Distinction II.
SECT. I.
IN all the Judicial, in all the Ceremonial 1. No place offered out of
Judicial nor Ceremonial law.
Law delivered by Moses, who was the most particular in his Laws of any other,
there is no abomination, no mention of this Selfe-Homicide. He teaches what we
shall, and shall not, eat, and wear, and speak, and yet nothing against this.

SECT. II.
But the first place that I find offered against Of the place in Genesis 9. 5.
it is, in Genesis. [I will require your blood wherein your lives are, at the
hand of every beast will I requireit; and at the hand of man, even at the hand
of a man's brother will I require the life of man; who so sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed.]

And this place a very learned man of the 2. We are not bound to accept the
interpretations of the Rabbis.
Reformed Church, says, the Jews understand of Selfe-homicide. But shall we
put our selves under the Jews yoke, Buxdorfius Synag. Iudaica ex Rahbi Isaac
cap: 1. fol. 62.
[That if we find in the Rabbis, things contrary to Nature, we must dare to
accuse nothing but our own weakness, because their word is Gods Word, and if
they contradict one another, yet both are from God.]

Lyra in hunc locum.
Lyra who seldom departs from the Jews, in matters not controverted between
them, and us, touches upon no such exposition; yet he 3. Of Lyra and of Sa
his Hebraismes.
expounds it more then one way, and with liberty enough, and far straying.

And Ema. Sa Not: in univers: Script.
Emanuel Sa, who in his notes is more curious, and superstitious, in restoring
all the Hebraismes, and oftentimes their interpretations, then perchance that
Church would desire at his hands, offers at no other sense then the words
present. Nor ^an Self homicide fall within the commination and (...) of that
Law, for how can the Magistrate shed his blood, who has killed himself?

SECT. III.
The next is in De^eronomie: [I kill, and I give Of the place in Deuter. 33. 39.
life.] Our of which is concluded, that all authority of life and death is from
God, and none in our selves.

But shall we therefore dare to condemn utterly, all those states and
governments, where Fathers, 4. Jurisdiction of Parents, Husbands, Masters, and
Magistrates, must consist with this place.
Husbands, and Masters, had jurisdiction over Children, wives, and servants
lives? If we dare, yet how shall we defend any Magistracy, if this be so
strictly accepted? and if it admit exceptions, why may not our case be within
those?

Howsoever that this place is incongruously 5. This place must be interpreted,
as the other places of Scripture which have the same word, from which no
conclusion can be wrested against this fact.
brought, appears by the next words, [There is not any that can deliver from my
hand] or this being a Verse of that divine poem, which God himself made and
delivered Moses, as a stronger and more slippery insinuation and impression
into the Isr^lites hearts, then the language of any Law would make, expresses
only that the mercies and judgments of God, are safe and removed from any
humane hinderance, or interruption. So 1. Sam: 2. 6.
in another gratulatory Song made by Samuels mother, the same words are
repeated, [The Lord kills and makes alive,] and this because God had given
her a son, when she was past hope. That place also in Tobit Tob: 13. 2.
is fitly paraleld with this, [He leads to hell, and brings up, no^ is
there any that can avoid his hand.] And can these two places be detorted to
their purpose, That none but God may have jurisdiction over our temporal life?
Or Sap: 16. 13.
that place of the book of Wisdom, which is also ever joined, as of the same
signification with these, [for thou have the power of life, and death] which is
spoken of his miraculous curing by the Brazen Serpent. So that all these four
places have one respect and aim, and none of them look toward our question.

SECT. IIII.
In the order of the Divine books, the next place 1. Of the place of Job 7. 1.
is produced out of Job, [Militia est vita hominis super terram.] for, though
our translation give it thus, [Is there not an appointed time to man upon
earth?] yet the Latin Text is thus cited to this 2. Why they cite this place
In Latin.
purpose, by some not addicted to the Vulgat Edition, because it seems in
Latin better to afford an argument against Self homicide. For thereupon they
infer, that we may not depart at our own pleasure from the battle. But because
only the Metaphor and not the extending of it, nor inference upon it, is taken
out of the Scripture, it brings no strong obligation with it, nor deserves much
earnestness in the answer, yet to follow him a little in his Allusion, Digest.
li: 22. tit: 6. le: 9.
[A Soldier may by Law, be ignorant of the Law, and is not much accusable if
he transgress it.] And by L. 4. tit: 6. leg: 44.
another Law, (...) [o^ Soldier whose presence is necessary for the safeguard
of the Army, may be absent cau^ Reipub. 3. Of soldiers privileges of absence
by law.
and being absent, his absence shall be interpreted to be so.] And Supra.
even to those which killed themselves in the Army, we noted before in the
second part, That the laws were not severe, if they had any color of just
cause: So that this figurative argument profits then nothing, especially being
taken from this place where the scope of Job was 4 Jobs scope is, that as war
works to peace So here we only labor to Death.
to prove that our felicity and end upon which our actions are bent, is not in
this li^e, but as wars work to peace, so we labor here to death, to that
happiness which we shall have after. And therefore whosoever were author of that
letter which has Eusebius. l. 1. cap. 13.
Christ's name to Abgarus, does not make Christ say, that when he has done that
for which he was sent hither, he will come to him, and take his offer of halte
his Kingdom, but 5. Of Christ's letter to King Abgarus.
that when he has done, he will return to him which sent him: That is he will
die, so that if either side have advantage by this place of Job, we have it.

SECT. V.
And by the other place of Job much more, 1. Of the place Job 7. 15.
which is, [Therefore my soul chooses rather to be strangled, and to die,
then to be in my bones.] Hereuupon they infer, That if it might have been
lawful to die so, Job would have done it. But besides that the wretched
poverty and feebleness of this manner of Negative arguments, Job did it 2. Why
this was not lawful to Job.
not, therefore he might not do it, we may perceive by the whole frame of the
History, that God had chosen him for another use, and an example of extreme
patience. So that for any thing that appears in Jobs case, he might not
lawfully do it, because he could propose nothing but his own eas^. Yet Job
whose sanctity I think it facriledge to diminish, whether he were a person or
personate in their confession strayed thus far toward killing himself, as
to wish his death, and curse his birth; for his whole third Chapter 3 His words
seem to s^ew some steps toward a purpose of Selfehomicide.
is a bitter and malignant invective against it, and a violent wishing of his
own death.

Sex; Sen; Bibliot. S^nst. lib: 8. Here Is. 10.
Sextu^ Sexens^ gives an answer for him so literal, as it can admit or reach
to no sense, which 4: Sex: Sen^ and Gregory's exposition thereof.
is, [That cursing his birth day which then was past, he cursed nothing.]

And Greg. Mor: l: 4. cap. 6.
Saint Gregory gives an answer so mystical, as no s^nse can reach to it, which
is, [That there is a second bi^th into Sin in this world, and Job cursed his
entrance into that.] And so because these words might be readily taken for an
inordinate wishing of death; Gregory provides them also a mystical
interpretation, for the Latin reading it thus, [(...) (...) anima me^,] he
say, [This was Suspendium spi^ituale which was but an elevation of the mind;
as S. Paul said, Christ crucifixu^ sum cru^] But besides that Gal: 2.
this escape will not serve, when the Original word is considered, and that
the next verse is, Desperavi, (...) ultra vivam] in the twentieth verse, he
chides God by the name of [O thou preserver of man] as being angry that he
preserved him, [Being now a ^rthen to himself, and would not leave him alone,
whilst he might swallow his spittle.] And he ends that Chapter thus, [If th^n
se^kest me in the (...), I shall not be found.] This I say, only to show that
one whom none has exceeded in (...), may without any de^ortion of his words,
be argued to have step farr^ toward a purpose of killing himself. Who list to
give any other construction to his words shall not displease me, nor impair
the strength of our (...).

And though I confess, I have not read any to (...). Wherein I differ from the
Anabapt. who affirm that Job despaired.
expound these word^ of Job directly thus, and though. I know the opinion in
general of his despairing, be thus I much discredited, that it is held by the
(...), yet, besides that, it is not just ^or ingenuous, to condemn all that a
conde^nd man says, (for even a leprous man may have one 6. S. Hierome and the
Trent Council err in condemning all which a condemned man says.
hand clean to take and give withal. And S. Hier. is inexcusable, in that
point of his slippery zeal, in his behavior toward (...), y^a the Tr^
Council it self is obnoxious therein, for condemning Names of Authors, and
not Books. Besides this I say, the Anabaptists differ from me in their end and
purpose, for they impute despair to Job, only to infirm the Authority of the
book, which scismatically they labor to rent from the Canon of Scripture: But
I justly with the consent of all Christian Churches admitting it for such say
that Job might keep his sanctity and the Book his Dignity, and yet he might
have a purpose to kill himself.

For very many reverend Authors in the Reformed 7. Of them which impute
despair unto Christ.
Church, not rashly to be fors^en, have imputed to our most blessed Savior, as
near approaches to a more dangerous kind of despair, then we impute to Job,
without diminishing him, or his Scriptures.

SECT. VI.
I find also another place. of Job obtruded. [Skin for skin, and all that ever
I a (...) ^ath will 1. Of the place Job. 2. 4.
he give for life.] From which words they argue a Natural love in us to this
life.

Let it be true, (though the Devil say it, for the words are his) that our
sensitive Nature is too indulgent to this life, (though I fear I have offended
and furfetted you in the first Part with Examples of mere Natural and
Sensitive men, which have chosen death,) ye will that prove that our
Reasonable Nature may in no ^afe correct that enormity? This is as strong
against Gods outward calling us to him by sickness, or persecution, as against
any such inward motions.

SECT. VII.
As unproperly, and unprofitably to their ends and purpose, do they offer that
place of Ecclestasticus, 1. Of the place Eccl. 20. 16.
[Non est census supra censum falutis Corporis,] which I place here, though out
of Order, because of the affinity between this place, and the last, and that
one answer, is, at least, enough for them both. For, though this place may
prove that we naturally love this body, (yet it is not of the fafety of the
body, as it all 2. This place is not of safety, but of health.
men desired that the body might live, but it is of bodily health whilst it
does live,) yet it proves not, that we may in no case abandon it.

SECT. VIII.
The most proper, and direct, and strongest 1. Of the place Exodus 20.
place is the Commandment; for that is of Moral Law, [Thou shall not kill;]
and this place is cited by all to this purpose.

But I must have leave to depart from 23. q: 5. Si non licet.
S. Augustines opinion here, who thinks that this 2. S. August. thinks this law
to concern ones self more directly then another.
Commandment is more earnestly bent upon a man's self, then upon another;
because here is no addition, and in the other, there is, [Against thy
Neighbor,] or certainly, I am as much forbid by that Commandment to accuse
my self falsely, as my Neighbor, though only he be named. And by this I am
as much forbid to kill my neighbor as my self, though 3. This law has many
exceptions.
none be named. So, as it is within the circuit of the Command, it may also be
within the exceptions thereof. For though the words be general, Thou shall not
kill, we may kill beasts; Magistrates may kill men; and a private man in a just
war, may not only kill, contrary to the sound of this Commandment, but he
may kill his Father, contrary to another.

When two natural Laws contrary to one another occur, we are bound to that
which is (...). Laws of the first Table are stric^ioris vincull, then of the
lato^.
strictioris vin^li.

As all Laws concerning the Honor of God, and Faith, are in respect of the
second Table, which is directed upon our Neighbor by Charity. If therefore
there could be a necessity, that I must do an act of Idolatry, or kill, I
were bound to the later.

By which Rule If perchance a public exemplary 5. A case wherein it is
probable that a man must kill himself.
person, which had a just assurance that his example would govern the people,
should be forced by a Tyrant, to do an act of Idolatry, (although by
circumstances he might satisfy his own conscience, that he sinned not in
doing it.) and so scandalize and endanger them, if the matter were so carried
and disguised, that by no way he could let them know, that he did it by
constraint, but voluntarily, I say, perchance he were better kill himself.

It is a safe Rule, [ Acatius de privil. l. c. 3.
Jury Divino derogani non potest, nisi ipsa derogatio suri Divino conste^.] But
since it is not thought a violating of that Rule, [ Navr. Manu^l. cap. 15. n. 2.
To kill by public Authority or in a just War, or defense of his life, or
of another.] why may not our case be as safe and innocent?

If any importune me to show this Privilege, or exemption of this case from
the Commanment, I may with Supra.
Sotus retort it, and call for their privilege to kill a Day thief, or any
man in defense of another.

And as these Laws may be mediately and 6 As Laws against Daytheeves may be
deduced from the Law of God authorizing Princes, so may this from the
Commandment, of preferring Gods glory.
secondarily deduced from the conformity of other Laws, and from a general
Authority which God has afforded all Sovereigns, to provide as necessities
arise; So may our case be derived as well from that necessary obligation which
lies always upon us, of preferring Gods glory above all humane respects. So
that we cannot be put to show, or plead any exemption, but when such a case
arises, we say that that case never was within the reach of that Law. Which is
also true of all the other which we called exemptions before.

For, whatsoever might have been done before 7 Whatsoever might have been done
before the Law, this Law forbids not.
the Law, as this might, if it be neither against Nature, nor Justice, from
both which we make account that we have acquitted it,) upon that, this
Commandment never fell, not extended to it.

SECT. IX.
I have found also a place urged out of the Book of Wisdom, which is, [Seeke
not death in 1 Of the place Sap. 1. 12.
the error of your life.] Which being ever coupled with another place in
Deuteronomie, by collation of the two places it appears, That D^ut. 4. 24.
that which is forbidden there, is Idolatry, and by Death is meant the Second
Death, or the way to it.

And so this Distinction which was intended for the places cited from the Books
of the old Testament, shall here have an end; and to the next we allow those of
the New.

Distinct. III.
SECT. I.
OF which the first that I have observed is in Matthew when the Devil tempts
Christ 1. Of the place Matt. 4. 6.
thus, [If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down.] With all Expositors I
confess, this was a temptation to vain glory, and therefore most appliabl to
our case, where we make account, that we work somewhat to the service of God,
and advancement of his glory, when we allow this to be done; and it is a very
slippery passage, and a devout man were out of the nature of devotion, (...) to
err that way, then a worldly, but that the hand of God is extended to the
protection of such.

But directly this place will not shake, nor attempt our proposition, for
though Christ would 2. Christ, where it conduced to his own ends, did as much
as the Devil did tempt him to in this place.
not satisfy the Devil, nor discover himself, yet he did as much when it
conduced to his own ends, as the Devil tempted him to in this place, or the
other; both in changing the species and nature of water into Wine, and in
exposing himself to certain danger when he walked upon the waters. Christ
refused no difficulty, nor abstained from Miracles, when he knew he profited
the beholders; nor do I say, that in any other case, then when we are probably
and excusably assured, that it isto a good end, this may be lawful to us.

SECT. II.
The next place is in the Acts of the Apostles. [The keeper of the prison drew
out his Sword, and would 1. Of the place Acts 16. 17.
have killed himself, supposing the Prisoners had been gone; But Paulcryed,
Do thy self no harm, for we are all here.] To which I say, That by the same
Spirit by which Paul being in the inner Prison 2. S. Paul knew Gods purpose of
baptising the keeper.
in the dark, knew what the Keeper thought, and what he was about to do
without, he knew also Gods purpose to be glorified in the conversion of him
and his Family; and therefore did not only reclaim him from that purpose,
which was inordinate, and for his own sake, to escape punishment, (in which
yet we may observe how presently Man's nature inclines him to this remedy) but
also forbears to to make his benefit of this Miracle, and to escape away: and
so, though he rescue the Keeper, 3. Else says Calvin, he had frustrated Gods
way to give him an escape by the keepers death.
he betrays himself.

And therefore Calvin upon this place makes to himself this objection, [That
Paul seeing all his hope of escape to consist in the death of the Keeper,
neglected that way of liberty which God offered him, when he restnained the
Keeper from killing himself.] And he answers it only thus, [That he had a
conscience and insight into Gods purpose and decree herei^] For otherwise, if
he had not had that (which very few attain to have) it seems he ought to have
permitted the keeper to proceed, to facilitate thereby his way of escaping.

SECT. III.
Which also inferres some answer to another 1. Of the place Romans 3. 8.
place of Saint Paul, where he delivers and discharges himself, and his
fellow Apostles, of having taught this Doctrine, [That a man might do evil,
that good might come thereof.] And consequently it is well and by just
Collection pronounced that he forbids that Doctrine.

And we also humbly subscribe to that Rule, and accept it so, as Saint Paul
intends it; that 2. How Paul forbids evil to be done for good.
is, in things which Nature, and not Circumstance makes evi^l. And in these
also, when any such circumstance does make them evil, as another circumstance
to the contrary does not praeponderate and overruled this. This therefore we
must have liberty to enlighten with a larger discourse.

Of the evils which seem to us to be of punishment, of which kind Death is,
God 3. God always inflicteth Malum poenae by Instruments.
ever makes others his executioners; for the greatest of all, though it be
spiritual, which is Induration, is not so wrought by God himself immediately,
as his spiritual comforts are, but Occasionally, and by Desertion.

Sometimes in these God imployes his Angels, sometime the Magistrate, sometimes
our 4. Induration it self is sometime medicinal.
selves. Yet all which God does in this life by any of these, is but Physic:
for Aqui. 12. q. 79. ar. 4. con.
^n excaecation and induration is sent to further Salvation in some, and
inflicted medicinally. And these ministers and instruments of his, are our
Physicians, and we may not refuse any bitterness, no not that which is
naturally poison, being wholesomely corrected by them: For as in Hippocrat.
A^bor. l. 2. 38.
Cramps which are contortions of the Sinews, or in Tetars, which are rigors
and stiffenesses in the Muscles, we may procure to 5. We may correct in our
selves one disease by another.
ourselfe a fever to thaw them, or we may procure them in a burning fever, to
condense and attemper our blood again, so in all rebellions and disobediences
of our flesh, we may minister to our selves such corrections and remedies, as
the Magistrate might, if the fact were evident. But, because though for
prevention of evil, we may do all the offices of a Magistrate upon our
selves, in such secret cases, but whether we have that authority to do it
after or no, especially in Capital matters, is disputable, and at this time,
we need not affirm it precisely, I will examine the largeness of that power
no farther now.

But descend to that kind of evil, which 6. In things evil in such sense as
Paul takes them here, Popes daily do dispense.
must of necessity be understood in this place of Paul? which is, that we
account naturally evil. And even in that, the Bishops of Rome have exercised
their power, Did. 34. lector gloss.
to dispense with Bigamy, which is in their doctrine directly against Gods
Commandment, and therefore naturally evil. So did Bodin^ Demon. l. c5.
Nicholas the fifth, dispense with a Bishop in Germany, to consult with W^tches,
for recovery of his health; and it were easy to amasse many cases of like
boldness.

In like manner Windek de consens. et dissens. leg. et Can. ca. 11.
the Imperial Law tollerates Usury, Prescription, Mala fidei, and Deceit ad
Medium, and expressly allows Cod. tit. de malef. l. 4.. ^rum.
Witchcraft, to good purposes. [Conformably to which 7. So do the Civil Laws.
Law, Paracelsus says, It is all one whether God or the Devil cure, so the
Patient be well.]

And so the Paracel. l. de morb. ca l.
Canons have prescribed certain rules of doing evil, when we are overtaken
with perplexities, to choose the least, of which Did. 14. cap. Duo mala.
S Gregory gives a natural example, [That a man attempted upon a high wall,
and forced to Did. ead. cap. Nerui.
leap it, would take the lowest place of the wall.] And agreeably to all
these, the Nav. Man. c. 17. number. 263.
Casuist say, [That in extreme necessity, I si^ not if I 8 So do Canons.
induce a man to lend me money upon usury: And the reason is, because I incline
him to a less sin, which is usury, when else he should be a h^icide, by not
releiving me.] And in this fashion Bellar. de Amiss. great. and stat. peccat. l.
2, c. 3. ex H^. de vict and Tho.
God him self is said to work evil in us, because when our 9 So does God
occasion less sin to avoid greater.
heart is full of evil purposes, he governs and disposes us rather to this
then to that evil, wherein though all the vitiousnesse be ours, and evil, yet
the order is from God, and good. Yea, he does positively incline one to some
certain evil thus, That he does infuse into a man some good thoughts, by
which, he, out of his vitiousnesse takes occasion to think he were better do
some other sin then that which he intended. Since therefore all these laws
and practices concur in this, that we sometime do such evil, not only for
express and positive good, but to avoid greater evil, all which seems to be
against this doctrine of S. Paul.

And since, whatsoever any humane power 9. What any other may dispense withal
in us, in extremity we may dispense within our selves. Supra.
may dispense withal in us, we, in extreme necessity, in impossibility of
recourse to better counsel, in an erring conscience, and in many such cases,
may dispense with our selves, (for that Canon of duo mala, leaves it to our
natural reason, to judge, and value, and compare, and distinguish between
those two evils which shall concur.)

And since for all this, it is certain, that no such dispensation from
another, or from 10. Yet noe such dispensation changes the nature of things,
therefore that particular was never naturally evil.
my self, does so alter the nature of the thing, that it becomes thereby the
more or the less evil, to me there appears no other interpretation safe,
but this, That there is no external act naturally evil; and that
circumstances condition them, and give them their nature; as scandal makes an
indifferent thing heinous at that time, which, if some person go out of the
room, or wink, is not so.

The Law it self, which is given us as a 11. The Law it self is neither good
nor evil.
light, that we might not stumble, and by which we see, not what is evil
naturally (for that we see naturally, and that was so even, to us, before the
law declared it) but what would be evil (that is produce evil effects,) if
we did it at that time, and so circumstanced, is not absolutely 12. As Picus
notes comparing it to the firmament.
good, but in such measure, and in such respects, as that which it forbids is
evil. And therefore Heptapl. l. 7. proem.
Picus comparing the Law, to the firmament, (as Moses accepts the word) as he
observes, that the second day, when God made the firmament, he did not say,
that it was good, as he did of every other days work; and yet it was not evil,
(for then says Picus, it could not have received the sun, as if it had been
good, it had not needed it.) So he reprehends the Manichees, for saying that
the Law was evil, yet he sticks to that of Ezech. 20. 25.
Ezechiel, That it was not good. That evil therefore which by this place of S.
Paul is forbidden, is either Acts, of infidelity, 13. What evil Pa^l forbids;
and why.
which no dispensation can deliver from the reach of the Law, or else, such acts
as being by our nature, and reason, and approbation of nations reputed evil,
or declared by law or custom to be such, because of there ordinary evil
effects, do cast a guiltines upon the doer, ordinarily, and for the most part,
and ever except his case be exempt and privileged. This moved Chrysostom,
(whom I cited before) to think a^ly, and a consent to adulttery, not evil
Supra.
in Sarah: and this rectified S. Augustines squeamishnes so far, as to leave
us at liberty, to think what we would of that wifes act, which to pay her
husbands debt, let out her self one night. For if any of these things had been
once 14. Nothing which is once evil can ever recover of that
evil naturally, they could never recover of that sickness; but (as I
insinuated before) as those things which we call miracles, were written in the
history of Gods purpose, as exactly, and Supra.
were as certainly to come to pass, as the rising 15. Three acts were in God's
decree preserved from those stains which make things evil, so as miracles
were written in his book of nature, though not in our copy; and so, as our Lady
is said to be preserved from original sin.
and setting of the sun, and as naturally, in (...) compagine naturae, (for
there is no interlining in that book of God:) So in that his eternal Register
where he foresees all our acts, he has preserved and defended, from that
ordinary corruption of evil purpose, of inexcusable ignorance, of scandal,
and of such other inquinations of indifferent things, (as he is said to have
done our B. Lady from original sin in her inanimation,) Some of those acts
of ours, which to those who do^ not studiously distinguish circumstances, or
see not the doers conscience, and testimony of Gods spirit, may at the first
taste have some of the brachishnes of sin. Such was Exodus 1. 12.
Moses killing of the Egyptians; for which there appears no especial calling
from God. But because 16. Such was Moses killing the Egyptian.
this falls not often: S. Paul would not embolden us, to do any of those things
which are customarily reputed evil.

But if others be delighted with the more ordinary 17. If this place be taken
of all kind of evil, it must admit exception, as well as the Decalogu.
interpretation of this place, that it speaks of all that which we call sin,
I will not refute that interpretation, so they make not the Apostles rule,
(though in this place this be not given properly and exactly for a rule;) more
strickt than the moral praecepts of the Decalogue it self, in which, as in all
rules there are naturally included and incorporated some exceptions, which if
they allow in this, they are still at the beginning; for this case may fall
within those exceptions.

Otherwise, that the general application of 18. Otherwise the application
which Bellarm. and others make of it will be intolerable.
this rule, is not proper, as by infinite other places, so it appears evidently
by that in De eul. sanct. l. 4. cap. 7.
Bellarmine, where he says, that by reason of this rule, a man may not with
neglecting a poor neighbor, adorn a church; Yet there are a great many
cases, wherein we may neglect this poor neighbor; and therefore that is not
naturally evil. And certainly whosoever is delighted with such arguments, and
such an application of this text, would not only have objected this rule to
Lot, when he offered his Daughters, (for there it might have color) but would
have joined with Judas, when the woman anointed Christ; and have told her, that
allthough the office which she did were good, yet the wast which she made
first, was evil, and against this rule.

SECT. IIII.
The same Apostle does in diverse other places Of the places 2 Cor. 6. 16. 1
Cor. (...). 16. and 6. 16.
use this phrase, That we are the Temples of the Holy Ghost; And from thence is
argued, that it is an unlawful Sacrilege to demolish or to deface those
Temples. But we are so the Temples of God, as we are his Images; that is, by
his residing in our hearts.

And who may doubt, but that the blessed 19 The dead are still his Temples, and
Images. Silvius Com: ad leges.
Souls of the departed, are still his Temples, and Images: Even amongst
heathens, those Temples which were consecrated to their gods, might in cases of
public good or harm, be demolished, and yet the ground remain sacred.

And in the two first places, is one^ a Dehortation 20 Heathens temples might
be demolished, yet the soil remain sacred.
from polluting our hearts, which are Gods Temples, with Idolatry, o^ other
sin. In the other place he calls our material body, the temple: and he
makes it to us an argument that we should fly from fornication, because
therein we trespass against our own body. And so here arises a double
argument, that we may not do injury to our own body, neither as it is ours,
nor as it is Gods.

In the first of these then, he says, [A Fornicator 21 Paul's reason is in
Cases where we avile our selves: here we advance our selves.
sins against, his body;] for as he said two verses before, [Hee makes
himself one body with an Harlot,] and so he diminishes the dignity of his
own person. But is it so, in our Case? When he withdrawes and purges it from
all corruptions, and delivers it from all the inquinations, and venime, and
malign Machinations of his, and Gods adversaries, and prepares it by Gods
insinuation and concurrence, to that glory, which without death, cannot be
attained.

Is it a less dignity, that himself be the Priest of God, and that himself
be the Sacrifice of God, then that he be the Temple? But 22 That our body is
not our own, how it is to be understood here in Paul.
says Paul, [ Verse. 19.
Your body is the Temple of God, and you are not your own.] But says Calvine
here, you are not so your own, that you may live at your own will, or abuse
your body with pollutions and uncleanness. Our body is so much ^r own, as we
may use it to Gods glory, a^ it is so little our own, as when he is pleased
to have in, we do well in resigning it to him, by what Officer soever he
accept it, whether by Angel, Sickness, Persecutron, Magistrate, or our
selves. Only be careful of this last lesson, in which he amasses and
gathers all his former Doctrine, [ Verse. 20.
Glorifte God in your body, and in your spirit, for they are his.]

SECT. V.
The place of the Ephesians has some assinity Of the place Ephesians. 4. 15. 16
with this; which is, [But let us follow (...) (...) in love, and in all things
grow up into him, which is the head, that is Christ, till we are all met
together, unto a perfect man.] By which we receive the honor to be one body
with Christ our head; which is Cap. 5. v. (...).
after more expressly declared. [We are Members of his body, of his flesh, and
of his bone.] And therefore, they say, that to withdraw our selves, which are
limbs of him, is not only homicide of our selves, who cannot live without
him, but a Paricide toward him, who is our common Father.

But as in Fencing, Passion lays a man as open, as unskilfulnesse, and a
troubled desire to hitt, makes one not only miss, but receive a wound; so out
of an inordinate fervor, to strike home, he which alleges this place,
overreacheth to his own danger; for only this is taught herein, that all our
growth and vegetation: flows from our head, Christ. And that he has chosen to
himself for the perfection of his body, limbs proportional thereunto, and
that, as a soul through all the body, so this care must live, and dwell in
every part, that it be ever ready to do his proper function, and also to
succor those other parts, for whose relief or sustentation it is framed, and
planted in the body. So that herein there is no litterall construction to be
admitted, as though the body of Christ could be imperfited, by the removing of
any man. For, as from a tree, some leaves pass their natural course and
season, and fall again being withered by age, and some fruits are gathered
unripe, and some ripe, and some branches which in a storm fall off, are
carried to the fire; So in this body of Christ, the Church, (I mean that which
is visible) all these are also fulfilled and performed, and yet the body
suffers no maims, much less the head any detriment.

This place therefore is so far from giving 2 This place gives arguments to
all which spare not themselves for relief of others.
encouragement to any particular man to be careful of his own well being, as
the Expositors (of what persuasion soever in controverted points) accept from
hence an argument, that for the establishing, and sustentation of the whole
body, a man is bound to depart with all respects to himself, and give his life
to strengthen them which are weak.

And this place, as a common Conduit head has affoorded justification for
Martyrdomes, for pestilent visitations, and for all those Desertions of our
selves, and of our natural right of preserving our selves, which we had
occasion to insist upon before.

SECT. VI.
As therefore that construction does well consist 1. Of the place Epb. 5.
with those words, so does it also with the words in the next Chapter, [No man
ever hated his own flesh, but nourished it, etc.] Of which Hate, because we
are to speak when we come to Christ's Commandment of Hating our life, we will
here only say, with Marlor. in hunc locum.
Marlorate upon this place, [He hates not his flesh, who hates the desires
thereof, and would subject it to the Spirit: no more then a Goldsmith hates
that gold, which he 2. How Marlor. expounds this hate.
casts into a furnace to purify, and reduce to a better fashion.] And, because
out of the Armory of Scripture I have not found that they take any better
weapons, nor any more, we may here end this Distinction.

Distinction IV.
SECT. 1.
IN the next our business is, to try of what 1. Of places of scriptures on the
other part.
force and proof their arms are against their adversaries forces. Of which we
shall oppose two sorts; The first natural and assured Subjects, which are,
Reasons arising naturally from places of Scripture, and these, in this
distinction; The other, Examples, as Auxiliaries. For though 2. We may, but our
adversaries may not make use of examples. to which the answer of Martyr and
Lavater is weak.
we rely not upon them, yet we have this advantage in that kind, that our
adversaries can make no use, nor profit of Examples. And therefore that answer
which both Peter Martyr, and Lavater from him make, that we must not live by
examples, and that if examples proved any thing they had the stronger side,
(that is, there have been more men which have not killed themselves, then
which have,) may well seem from p^rem pro^inesse, and laziness, and
impossibillity of better defense, to have too much allay, to be current. To
prepare us therefore to a right understanding, and application 3. The Nature,
degrees, and effects of Charity.
of these places of scripture, we must arrest awhile upon the nature, and
degrees, and effects of charity; the mother, and form of all virtue; which
shall not only lead us to heaven, (for faith opens us the door) but shall
continue with us when we are there, when both Faith, and Hope, are spent and
useless.

We shall no where find a better pourtrait of charity, then that which S.
Augustine has 4. S. August. pourtraite of her.
drawn: she loves not that which should not be loved; she neglects not that
which should be loved; she bestows not more love upon that, which deserves
less; nor does she equally love more and less worthiness; nor upon equal
worthiness, bestow more and less love. De natura et gratia cap. ult.
To this charity the same blessed and happy Father, proportions this growth.
[Inchoated, increased, grown great, and perfected, and this last 5. Of her
highest perfection, beyond that which P. Lombard obsorved out of Aug.
is, says he; when in respect of it, we contemn this life] And yet he
acknowledges a higher charity then this. For Lomb. l. 3. Did. 3.
P. Lombard allowing charity this growth, [beginning, proficient, perfect,
more, and most perfect.] he cites I^ epist. ^tract. 5.
S. Augustine who calls [that perfect charity to be ready to die for another.]
But when he comes to that, then which none can be greater, he says then, the
Apostle came to Phil. 1. 23
cupto dissolvi.

For as [ Serarius triheresi. l. 1. ca. 8.
one may love God, with all his heart, and yet he may grow in that, and love
God more with all his heart, for Deuteronomy. 6. 5.
the first was commanded in the Law, and yet Mat. 5.
counsel of perfection was given to him, who said that he had fullfilled the
first commandment,] 6. He who loves God with all his heart, may love him more
So as S. Augustine found a degree above that charity, which made a man paratum
ponere which is cupere, so there is a degree above that, which is to do it.

This is that virtue, by which Aqui. 22. q. 124. ar. 3.
Martyrdom, which is not such of it self, becomes an act of highest perfection.

And this is that virtue, which Aqui. 22. q. 136. ar. 3.
assures any suffering which proceeds from it to be infallibly accompanied
with the grace of God. 7. Any suffering in charity has Infalibly the grace of
God. By Aquin.
Upon assurednes therefore, and testimony of a rectified conscience, that we
have a charitable purpose, let us consider how far we may adventure upon
authority of Scripture in this matter which we have in hand.

SECT. 11.
First therefore by the frame and working of 1. Of the place 1 Cor. 13. 4.
Saint Paul's argument to the Corinthians, [Though I give my body that I be
burned, and have not love, it (...) nothing.] These two things appear
evidently.

First, That in a general notion and common 2. By this in common reputation,
that was a degree of perfection to dye so. And charity made it acceptable.
reputation, it was esteemed a high degree of perfection to dye so, and
therefore not against the Law of Nature. And secondly, by this exception,
(without Charity) it appears, that with Charity it might well and profitably
be done.

For the first, if any think that the Apostle 3. Paul speaks of a thing which
might lawfully be done, for such are all his gradations in this argument.
here takes example of an impossible thing, as when it is said, [If an Angel
from heaven teach other doctrine,] he will, I think, correct himself, if he
consider the former verses, and the Apostles progress in his argument; wherein
to dignifie Charity, the most that he can, he undervalues all other gifts,
which were there ambitiously affected.

For Eloquence he says, it is nothing to have 4. Tongues of Angels in what
sense in this place.
all Languages, no not of Angels; which is not put literally, for they have
none; but to express a high degree of Eloquence, as Calvine says here. Or, as
Lyra says, by language of Angels is meant, the desire of communicating our
conceptions to one another. And then he adds, That knowledge of Mysteries and
Prophecies, is also nothing; which was also much affected. And for Miraculous
Faith, it is also Calvin.
nothing. 5. Speech in the Ass, understanding of mysteries in Judas,
miraculous faith make not the possessor the better.


For the first of these gifts, does not make a man better; for Balams Ass
could speak, and was still an Ass. And the second Judas had, and the
Pharisees. And the third is so small a matter, that as much as a grain of
Musterseed is enough to remove mountains. All these therefore were faisable
things, and were sometimes done. So also, after he had passed through the gifts
of knowledge, and gifts of utterance, he presents the gifts of working in the
same manner; and therefore, as he says, If I feed the poor with all my goods,
(which he presents as a harder thing then either of the other, (for in the
other God gives me, but here I give other) yet possible to be done.) So he
presents the last, If I give my body, as the hardest of all, and yet, as all
the rest, sometimes to be done.

That which I observed secondly to arise from 6 How I differ from the Donatists
arguing from this place, that in charity selfhomicide was always lawful.
this argument, was, That with Charity such a death might be acc^ptable. And
though I know the Donatists are said to have made this use of these words, yet,
because the intent and end conditions every action, and infuses the poison, or
the nourishment which they which follow suck from thence, and we know that the
Donatists rigorously and tyrannously racked and detorted thus much from this
place, That they might present themselves to others promiscuously to be
killed, and if that were denied to them, they might kill themselves, and them
who refused it.

Yet, I say, I doubt not but thus much may naturally be collected from hence,
that by this 7 To give my Body, is more then to let it be taken.
word, If I give my body, is insinuated somewhat more then a prompt and willing
yielding of it, when I am enforced to it, by the persecuting Magistrate.

And that these words will justify the fact of Metaph. in Niceph. Martyr.
the Martyr Nicephorus, being then in perfect Charity. Whose case was, That
having had 8 How Nicephorus the martyr, gave his body in Sapritius his room,
who recanted.
some enmity with Sapritius, who was brought to the place where he was to
receive the bloody crown of Martyredome, he fell down to Sapritius, and
begged from him then, a pardon of all former bitternesses. But Sapritius elated
with the glory of Martyredome, refused him; but was presently punished; for his
faith coold, and he recanted, and lived. And Nicephorus standing by, stepped
into his room, and cried, I am also a Christian, and so provoked the
Magistrate to execute him; least from the faintness of Sapritius, the cause
might have received a wound, or a scorn. And this I take to be Giving of his
body.

Of which, as there may be such necessity for 9 There may be a case that a man
bound to give his body, cannot do it otherwise then by selse-homicide.
confirming of weaker Christians, that a man may be bound to do it, as in this
case, is very probable. So there may be cases in men very exemplary, and in
the cunning and subtle carriage of the Pesecutor, as one can no other way give
his body for testimony of Gods truth, to which he may then be bound, but by
doing it himself.

SECT. III.
As therefore Naturally and Customarily men thought it good to dye so, and that
such a death 1 Of the places Joh. 10. 11. and Joh. 15. 13.
with charity was acceptable, so is it generally said by Christ, [That the good
Shepherd does give his life for his sheep.] Which is a justifying and
approbation of our inclination thereunto. For to say, The good do it, is to
say, They which do it are good.

And as we are all sheep of one fold, so in many 2 I need not purge my self,
when another crime is imputed to me.
cases, we are all shepherds of one another, and owe one another this duty, of
giving our temporal lives, for another spiritual advantage; yea, for his
temporal. For Sot. de teg. Secret. Memb. 1. q. 3.
that I may abstain from purging my self, when another crime is imputed to
me, is grounded upon such another Job. 15. 13.
Text as this, where it is said, The greatest love, is to bestow his life for
his friend. In which, and all of this kind, we must remember, that we are
commanded to do it so, as Christ did it; and how Christ gave his body, we
shall have another place to consider.

SECT. IV.
Hereupon because Saint Peter's zeal so forward, 1 Of the place Ioh. 13. 37.
and carried him so high, that he would dye for the Shepherd; for so he says,
[I will lay down my life, for thy sake.] And this, as all Expositors say, was
merely and purely out of 2 Peter's readiness was natural. Paul's deliberate.
natural affection, without examination of his own strength to perform it;
but presently and roundly Nature carried him to that promise. And upon a more
deliberate and orderly resolution, Saint Paul witnesses of himself such a
willingness to dye for his brethren, [I will be 2 Cor. 12. 15.
gladly bes^ed for your s^es.]

SECT. V.
A Christian nature rests not in knowing 1 Of the place Ioh. 10. 15.
thus much, That we may do it, That Charity makes it good, That the good do
it, and that we must always promise, that is, incline to do it, and do
something toward it, but will have the perfect fullness of doing it in the
resolution and doctrine, and example of our blessed Savior, who says, de
facto, [I lay down my life for my sheep.] And says M^lus, he 2 Why Christ
says this in the present time.
uses the present word, because he was ready to do it: and as Act. 15. 26.
Paul and (...), men yet alive; are said to have laid down their lives for
Christ.] But I rather think, (because exposing to danger, is not properly
called a dying,) that Christ said this now, because his Passion was begun; for
all his conversations here were degrees of exinanition.

To express the abund^ and overflowing 3 Of the abundant charity of Christ.
charity of our Savior, all words are defective; for if we could express all
which he did, that came not near to that which he would do, if need were. It
is observed by De Suidone. pa. 1. Notae in Ca. 11.
one, I (confess, too credulous an Author, but yet one that administers good
and wholesome incitements to Devotion,) That Christ going to Emaus spoke of his
Passion so slightly, as though 4 Of his speech going to Emaus.
he had in three days forgot all that he had suffered for us.

And that Christ in an apparition to Saint 5 Of his Apparition to Saint Charles.
Charles, says, that he would be content to die again, if need were.

Yea, to Revel. Brig. l. 1. ca. 59.
Saint Brigit he said, [That for any one soul he would suffer as much in every
limme, as he had suffered for all the world in his whole body.] 6 Of the
Revelation to St. Brigit.


And Suidon. p. 1. Not. in Ca. 16.
this is noted for an extreme high degree of Charity, out of Ans^lme, that his
B. Mother said, [Rather then he should not have been 7 Of his Mothers Charitiy.
Crucified, she would have done it with her own hands.

And certainly his charity was not inferior 8 That none could take away his
foul.
to hers; He did as much as any could be willing to do. And therefore, as
himself said, [No man can take away my soule] And [I have 9 His own will the
only cause of his dying so soon. by St. Aug.
power to lay it down;] So without doubt, no man did take it away, nor was
there any other then his own will, the cause of his dying at that time; 10 And
by Aquin. because he had all his strength.
many Martyrs having hanged upon Crosses many days alive: And the thieves were
yet alive; And therefore Mar. 15.
Pilate wondered to hear that Christ was dead. [His Soul, says De T^nit. l.
1: cap. 13.
S^ Aug. did not leave his body constrained, but because he would, and when he
would, and how he would.] Of which 2. q. 47. ar. 1. ad 2.
S. Thomas produces this symptom, That he had yet his bodies nature in her
full strength, because at the last moment he was able to cry with a loud voice.
And Mat. 27. 50.
Marlorate 11. And by Marl. because he bowed his head, and it fell not, as ours
in death.
gathers it upon this, that whereas our heads decline after our death by the
slacknesse of the sinews and muscles, Christ did first of himself bow down his
head, and then give up the ghost. So, though it be truly said Luc. 18. 33.
[After they have scourged him, they will put him to death,] yet it is said so,
because How it is true that the Jews put him to death.
maliciously and purposely to kill him they inflicted those pains upon him;
which would in 13. Of Aquin. and Syluesters opinion of him.
time have killed him, but yet nothing which they had done occasioned his death
so soon.

And therefore 2. q. 47. ar. 1. Con.
S. Thomas, a man neither of unholy thoughts, nor of bold or irreligious or
scandalous phrase or elocution, (yet I adventure not so far in his behalf as
Verbo matrimonium.
Sylvester 14. Christ was so the cause of his death, as he is of his wetting,
which might, and does not shut the window, in rain by Aqui.
does, [that it is impossible that he should have spoken any thing against
faith or good manners,] forbeares not to say, [That Christ was ^so much the
cause of his death, as he is of his wetting, which might and would not shut the
window, when the rain beats in.]

This actual emission of his soul, which is 15. Who imitated Christ in this
actual emission of the soul.
death, and which was his own act, and before his natural time, Aquin. supr.
Ioh. cap, 21.
(which his best beloved Apostle could imitate, who also died when he would,
and went into his grave, and there gave up the Ghost, and buried himself,
which is reported but of very (n) few others, and by no l Sophro. prat. spir.
cap. 90. dephter. Anco. Et Surius To. 1. feb. de Sever. Raven.
very credible Authors,) we find thus celebrated, (o) That that is a brave
death, which is accepted unconstrained; and that it is an Heroique Act of
Fortitude, if a man when an urgent m Sind. Not. inc. 21. ad 6.
occasion is presented, expose himself to a certain and assured death, as he
did.

And it is there said, that Christ did so, as 16. Upon what reasons this
fashion of dying in Christ is called Heroique, and by like epithites.
Saul did, who thought it foul, and dishonorable to dye by the hand of an
Enemy. And that Apollonia, and others who prevented the fury of Executioners,
and cast themselves into the fire, did therein immitate this act of our
Savior, of giving up his soul, before he was 17. Christ is said to have done
herein as Saul and Apol. and such.
constrained to do it. So that if the act of our blessed Savior, in whom there
was no more required for death, but that he should will that his soul should
go out, were the same as Saul's, and these Martyrs actual furtherance, which
could not dye without that, then we are taught that all those places, of
Giving up our bodies to death, and of Laying down the soul, signify more
then a yielding to death when it comes.

SECT. VI.
And to my understanding there is a further 1 Of the places John 12. 25. and
Luc. 14. 26.
degree of alacrity, and propensenesse to such a death, expressed in that
phrase of John, [Hee that hates his life in this world, shall keep it unto
life eternal. And in that of Luke, [Except he hate his own life, he cannot be
my Disciple.] Such a lothnesse to live is that which is spoken of in the
Hebrews, Heb. 11. 35.
[Some were racked, and would not be delivered, that they might receive a
better Resurrection.]

This place In Ioh. 12. 25.
Calvine interprets of a readiness to dye, and expresses it elegantly, To
carry our life in our hands, offering it to God for 2. Jesuits apply
particularly this hate.
a Sacrifice. And this Reg. Jesuit. Constit. spirit. 8.
the Jesuits in their rule extend thus far, [Let every one think that this
was said directly to him, Hate thy life.]

And they who in the other place, accept this 3. If the other place, noe man
hates his own flesh, be against homicide; This must be for it.
phrase, No man hates his own flesh, to yield an argument against
Selfe-homicide in any case, must also allow that the same hate being commanded
here, authorizes that act in some case.

And Saint Augustine apprehending the strength 4. S. August. denies that this
place justifies the Donatists. but not in all cases.
of this place, denies that by the authority of it, the Donatists can justify
their Selfe-homicide when they list to dye, but yet in these cases which are
exempt from his rules, this place may encourage a man not to neglect the honor
of God, only upon this reason, that no body else will take his life.

SECT. VII.
And therefore the holy ghost proceeds more 1. Of the place 1. John 3. 16.
directly in the first Epistle of Saint John, and shows us a necessary duty,
[Because he laid (...) his life for us, therefore we ought to lay down our
lives for our brethren.] All these places work us to a true understanding of
charity, and to a contempt of this life, in respect of it.

And as these inform us how ready we must 2. All these places direct us to do
it, as Christ did it, unconstraind.
be, So all those places which direct us by the example of Christ, to do it as
he did, show, that in cases when our lives must be given, we need not ever
attend extrinsique force of others, but as he did in perfect charity, so we in
such degrees of it, as this life, and our nature are capable of, must die by our
own will, rather then his glory be neglected, whenever, Phil. 1. 20.
as Paul says, Christ may be magnified in our bodies, or the spiritual good
of such another as we are bound to advance, does importune it.

SECT. VIII.
To which readiness of dying for his brethren, 1. Of the place Phil 1. 23.
Saint Paul had so accustomed himself, and made it his nature, that but for his
general resolution of doing that ever which should promove their happiness, he
could scarce have obtained of himself leave to live. For, at first he says, he
knew not 2 Of S. Paul's gradations to this wish; and his correcting of it.
which to wish, life or, death; (and therefore generally without some
circumstance incline or avert us, they are equal to our nature.) Then after
much perplexity, he was resolved, and desired to be loose, and to be with
Christ; (therefore a holy man may wish it.) But yet he corrected that again,
because says he, [To abide in the flesh, is more needful for you.] And
therefore charity must be the rule of our wishes, and actions in this point.

SECT. IX.
There is another place to the Galatians, which 1 Of the place Gal. 4. 15.
though it reach not to death, yet it proves that holy men may be ready to
express their loves to another, by violence to themselves. For he says, [If
it had been possible, you would have plucked 2. This was more then vitam
profundere by Calvin.
out your own eyes, and given me:]. And Calvin says, [this was more then vitam
profundere.] And this readiness Saint Paul reprehends not in them.

SECT. X.
But of the highest degrees of compassionate 1 Of the place Romans 9. 3.
charity for others, is that of the Apostle, in contemplation of the Jews
dereliction. [I would wish my self to be separated from Christ, for my
brethren.

The bitterness of which Anathema, himself teaches us to understand, when in 1
Cor. 16. 22.
another place, he wishes the same, [To those which love 2. That this Anathema
was damnation.
not Jesus Christ. And this fearful wish which charity excused in him, was
utter damnation, as all Expositors say.

And though I believe with Cal^in^, that at this time, in a zealous fury he
remembered not 3. That he considered not his election at that time.
deliberately his own election, and therefore cannot in that respect, be said
to have resisted the will of God, yet it remains, as an argument to us, That
Charity will recompense, and justify many excesses, which seem unnatural,
and irregular, and enormous transportations.

SECT. XI.
As in this Apostle of the Gentiles, so in the 1 Of the place Exodus (...). 3
Lawgiver of the Jews, the like compassion wrought the like effect; and more.
For Moses ^sted not in wishing, but face to face argued with God, [If thou
pardon them, thy mercy shall 2. That this imprecation was not only to be
blotted out of the history of the scriptures.
appear, but if then will not, I pray thee blot my name (...) of the book
which thou have written]

I know, that many out of a reasonable Collection, that it became Moses to be
reposed, and dispassioned, and of ordinare affection in his conversation with
God, are of op^on, that he 3. It was stranger that Christ should admit such a
slip downward as to wish an escape from death, then that Moses should have such
an exaltation upward as to save his nation by pe^ing. Yet both without
inordinatenes.
strayed no further in this wish, and imprecation, then to be content that his
name should be blotted out of the Scriptures, and so to lose the honor of
being known to posterity for a remarkable instrument of Gods power and mercy.

But, since a natural infirmity could work so much upon Christ, in whom there
may be suspected no inordinatenesse of affections, as to divert him a little,
and make him slip a faint wish of escaping the Cup; why might not a brave and
noble zeal, exalt Moses so much, as to desire to restore such a Nation to the
love of God, by his own destruction.

For, as certainly the first of these was without sin, so the other might
be, out of an habitual assuredness of his salvation, as Pont. Paul. ad Amand.
Epist. 2.
Paulinus says, to Amandus, [Thou may be bold in thy prayers to God for
me, to say, forgive him, or blot out me, for thou can not be blottedout;
Instum delere non potest Iustitia.] And thus retaining 4. How by Paulinus a
just man may safely say to God, Dele me,
ever in our minds, that our example is Christ, and that he dyed not
constrained, it shall suffice to have learned by these places, that in Charity
men may dye so, and have done, and ought to do. The last thing which remains
yet, is to consider the Examples reported in the Scriptures: which cannot
possess us long, because a few Rules will include many examples; and those few
rules which are applyable to these Histories, have been often iterated already;
and, for other Rules, which may enlighten and govern us in all occurrences,
for many Reasons I respite to a maturer deliberation and discourse.

Distinct. V.
SECT. I.
AS when I entered into the examination of 1. Of examples in Scriptures.
places of Scriptures, it seemed to me to have some weight, that in all the
Judicial and Ceremonial Law, there was no abomination of Selfe-homicide.

So does it, That in relating the Histories of 2. The phrase of Scriptures,
never imputes this act to any as a sin, when it relates the history.
them who killed themselves, the phrase of Scripture never diminishes them by
any aspersion or or imputation for that fact, if they were otherwise virtuous,
nor aggravates thereby their former wickedness, if they were wicked.

Formy part, I am content to submit my self to that Rule, which is delivered
from Schultet. Medul. patr. page 1. in l. 4. Irenaei.
Iraeneus, [That those things which the Scripture does not reprehend, 3.
Irenaeus forbids us to accuse where God does not.
but simply lay down, it becomes not us to accuse; nor to make our selves more
diligent then God; but if any thing seem to us irregular, our endeavor 4.
Bezas answer to Ochius reason, that some Patriarchs lived in polygamy reaches
not our case.
must be, to search out the Type, and signification thereof.]

Neither shall I, for all this, be in danger of Beza de polyg. fo. 7.
Bezaes answer to that Argument of Ochius, That though some of the Patriarchs
lived unreprehended in Polygamie, it concluded nothing, because (says Beza)
The silence of Scripture in Genesis 29.
Jacobs Incest, and in Genesis 19.
Lots, and in 2 Samuel 9. 2.
David's unjust judgment; For Siba does not deliver them from guiltiness and
transgression therein.

For our case differs from all others, both because 5 For it is not evident,
that this is sin, by any other place of the Law; which was in all his cases.
And here many examples concur.
this act is not from any place of the Law evicted to be sin. And because
here is a concurrence of Examples, of this fact without any reprehension: So
that that answer is so far short from reaching us, that it reached not home
to that argument of Ochius against which it was opposed. And if in debating
these Examples, it be found, that some very reverend Authors, have concluded
impenitence, and consequently utter desertion on Gods part, and so eternal
perishing; the circumstances as they appeared to him then, may have made his
judgment just: but for any other thereupon to apply that case to others, will
not be safe. For Acacius de privileg. l. 1. c. 3
[Though a Judge may in causa versanti interpret the Law, that Interpretation
makes not Law.]

SECT. II.
As therefore in the former Distinctions we 1 Of Acts which were not fully
^murders, but approaches.
spoke of some approaches to the act of selfkilling, so will we in this pause
a very little upon two such steps. 1 Reg. 20. 35
The first shall be of the prophet in the book of Kings, [who bad a stranger
strike him, and because he would not, pronounced a heavy judgment upon him,
which was presently excecuted. And then he importuned another to do it, who
did it thoroughly, for he wounded him with the stroke.] This was, to common
understanding 2 Of the Prophet who punished him who would not strike him.
an unnatural thing, that so holy a man should make such means to have his
body violated, and so it seems the first apprehended it, however it pleased God
to enlighten the second. This I produce not as though the prophet inclind to it
of his own disposition, for it is expressly in the text, that God commanded
him to do it.

But because this is the only place in all the 3 That when God invites men to
such violence, he says so plainly. And therefore such particular invitations
may not be presumed, where they are not expressed.
scriptures, where those which offer, or desirously admit violence to their
own bodies, are said to have done it, by the express motion of God, I collect
from it, that it is not without some boldness, if others affirm without
authority of the text, that the death of Samson and others, had the same
foundation, when it appears by this, that God when he would have it understood
so, is pleased to deliver it plainly and expressly.

SECT. III.
The next before we come to those who entirely 1 Of Io^as.
killed themselves, is Io^as, who by often wishing his own death, and moving
the ma^ers to cast him out into the sea, made many steps toward the very act.
I know that it is every where said, that those words, 1. 12.
[Take me^, and cast me into the Sea,] proceeded from a prophetique spirit; And
Proem. in Com. in Iona,
St. Hierome says [that in this prophetique spirit, he foresaw that the
Ninivites would repent, and so his preaching would be discredited.] But if this
be so, must he not also in the same Prophetique Spirit see, that their
repentance must be occasioned by his going thither and preaching there? And if
this persuading to his destruction, being now innocent in their understanding;
for they prayed, [Lay not innocent Verse. 14.
blood upon us.] were from Divine motion, shall we dare to impute also to like
motions and spirit, his angry importuning of death? [Take I beseech thee, my
life from me, for it is better for me, to dye then to live.] And after he
wished 43.
from his heart to dye, and said, [I do well to be 9.
angry unto the death.]

Lyra prolog. in Iona.
St. Hierome calls him Sanctum Ionam; and when Lyra observes that he had not
done so, to any of the other Prophets, he concludes, that this 2 Why Saint
Hier. calls only Jonas, of all the Prophets, Holy.
testimony needed most in Jonas, who by his many reluctations against Gods
will, might else fall into some suspicion of eternal perishing. Which since we
must be f^r from fearing in so eminent and exemplary a type of Christ, and yet
have no ground to admit any such particular impulsion of Gods Spirit, as
Hierome and Lyra pronounce him holy, for all these reluctations; so may we
esteem him advised, and ordinate, and rectified, for all these approches,
which in wishing and consenting he made to his own death.

SECT. IV.
Of those which in the Scriptures are registered 1. Of Samson Judge. 16.
to have killed themselves, Samson is the first. A man so exemplar, that not
only the times before him had him in Prophecy, Pererius in Genesis 49. 16.
(for of him it is said,) [Dan shall judge his people,] and the times after him
more consummately in Christ, of whom he was a Figure, but even in his own time,
other nations may seem to have had some Type, or Copy of him, in Hercules.

His fact of selfe-killing is celebrated by the Church to everlasting memory,
as the act of a 2 The church celebrates him as a Martyr.
Martyr; and as very many others in their Homilies and expositions.

So that renowned Paul. Sever. Epist. 4.
Paulinus says, [God send me the death of Sampson, and Sampsons blindness,
that I may live to God, and look to 3 Paulinus wishes such a death.
God.]

And this general applause and concurrence in the praise of the fact, has
made many think, 4 They which deny that he meant to kill himself, are cofuted
by the text.
or at least write, that he purposed not to kill himself: being loath either
to depart from their opinion who extol him, or to admit any thing which may
countenance that manner of dying. Of which persuasion Fran. de Vict. in relect.
de Hom. Greg. Valent. tom. 3. disp. 5. q. 8. p. 1.
two very learned men labor to seem to be.

But, besides that such an exposing of himself to unevitable danger, is the
same fault as Selfe-homicide, when there is any fault in it, the very Text is
against them; for Samson dyed with these words in his mouth, Jud. 16. 30.
[Let me lose my life with the philistims.]

And though sometimes these Authors add, 5 They which say he did not intend
his own death principally say the same as we. Supra.
That he intended not his own death principally, but accidentally (as Calvine
also says, that Saint Paul did not desire death for deaths sake, but to be
with Christ,) this can remove no man from our side, for we say the same, that
this may be done only, when the honor of God may be promoved by that way,
and no other.

Therefore to justify this fact in Samson, 6 That Saint Aug. his answer to
this fact, that it was by special instinct, has no ground in the history.
Aug. de civit. Dei cap. 12.
Saint Augustine equally zealous of Samsons honor, and his own conscience,
builds still upon his old foundation, [That this was by the special
inspiration from God.] Which, because it appears not in the History, nor lies
in proof, may with the same easiness be refused, as it is presented.

To give strength to this opinion of Augustine, Sayr Thesau. Cas. Conse. l. 7.
cap. 9. Nu. 9.
our Countreyman Sayr presents one reason preceding the fact, and Pedr. pr. 5.
Hisp.
Pedraca the Spaniard, another subsequent.

The first is that he prepared himself to it by Prayer. But in this prayer,
you may observe 7 Of Says reasons in confirmation of August. that Samson prayed.
much humanity, and weakness and selferespect. [O Lord, says he, I beseech
thee, Strenghthen me at this time only, that I may be ave^d of the Philistims
for my two eyes.

The second reason is, that because he effected 8. Of Pedr. his reason, that
it was against the work of God, because it was done as it was desired.
that which he desired, it is to be presumed, that God restored him his
strength to that end, which he asked it. But, besides that in the text it
appears, that v. 22.
his hair before that time, was begun to be grown out again, and so his
strength somewhat renewed; does this prove any impulsion, and incitement, and
prevention of the holy Ghost, to that particular act, or rather only an
habitual accompanying and awaking him, to such actions by which God might be
honored and glorified, whenever any occasion should be presented?

When therefore he felt his strength in part 9 That he had as much reason, and
authority to kill himself as to kill the Philistims, and that it was only the
glory of God.
refreshed, and had by Prayer entreated the perfecting thereof, seeing they
took continual occasion from his dejection to ^orne and reproach his God,
burning with an equal fervor to revenge their double fault, and to remove the
wretched occasion thereof, he had Fra. Georg. probl. 438.
as a very subtle Author says, the same reason to kill himself, which he
had to kill them, and the same authority, and the same privilege, and
safeguard from sin.

And he dyed, as the same man says, with 10. Samson in this manner of dying
was a type of Christ.
the same zeal as Christ, unconstrained; for Perer. in Genesis 49. 16.
In this manner of dying, as much as in any thing else, he was a Type of Christ.

SECT. V.
The next example is Saul. And whether he did 1 Of Saul 1 Samuel ult.
perfect and consummat the act of killing himself, or the Amalekite contribute
his help, it makes no 2. Whether the Amalekite did help to kill Saul.
difference to our purpose; But that the latter was true, may well enough
consist with the relation of the history in the 1. Sam. ult.
first place, and it appears to be the more likely and probable out of the 2.
Sam. 1.
second: And by Antiq. l. 7. cap. 15
Josephus it is absolutely so delivered; And the Hist. Schol.
scholastique history says also, that Saul was too weak to force the sword
through his body.

Two things use to be disputed of Saul. Whether he were saved or no; And
whether 3. Whether Saul be saved or no.
if he perished, it was for impenitence testified or presumed by this act of
his. The Jews are generally indulgent to him: And the Christians generally
severe upon this reason, that it is said of him, 1 Cro. 10. 13.
[Saul dyed for his transgressions against the Lord, and his word, and asking
counsel of a witch.] But this does not necessarily conclude an impenitence,
or a second death. For the Jews say, That believing the sentence of Samuel in
the apparitions, and accepting that decree as from God, he repented his formet
life, and then presented and delivered up himself and his sons, conformably
to the revealed will of God, there in the field to be sacrificed to him:
understanding Samuells words you shall be with me, to be spoken, not generally
of the state of the dead, but of the state of the just, because both Samuel
himself was so, and so was Jonathan, whose condition in this promise of being
with Samuel, was the same as his Fathers. And therefore says Lyra, [all Jews
and some Christians agree, that least by his reproach dishonor might redound
upon God, a good and Zealous man may kill himself, as Samson did, and the
Virgins.] And he adds, [If other reasons were not sufficient to excuse Lyra.
Saul, this also might justly be applied to him, that he did it by divine
instinct.]

Out of which I observe these two things, that he presumes there are other
reasons sufficient 4. In what cases the Jews. and Lyra confess that a man may
kill himself.
in some cases, whether they were in Saul's case or no. And then the reason upon
which Lyra^ presumes he dyed well, [because the contrary is not declared in
Scriptures, nor determined by 5. Lyra's reasons why Saul is to be presumed to
have dyed well.
the Church.] And Saul has a good testimony of sanctity in this act, from
Notae in Sindou. c. 21. Nu. 6.
Mallonius, [That as Christ died when he would, so did Saul, thinking it
dishonorable to dye by the hand of his, and Gods enemies.] That argument which
Burgensis 6. Burgensis reason to the contrary, that if Saul were excusable, the
Amalckite was so to.
brings to the contrary, suffers more force and violence in being brought
in, then it gives strength to his opinion. It is, [That if the fact were
justifiable in Saul, it had been so too in the Amalekite, if his profession to
David were true, That he had killed Saul, and consequently David unjust in that
execution.] But, besides that, that Amalekite had no conscience, nor inward
knowledge of Saul's just reasons, nor other warrant but his commandment, which
might, and was to him likely to proceed from Saul's infirmities, it might well
appear to David, by his coming to tell him the news, that he had humane
respects in doing it, and a purpose only to deserve well of David. And when
both Judge and prisoner are innocent, often times the Executioner may be a
Murderer.

And such humane respects of weariness and 7. Of Saul's Armor-bearer
despair, and shame, and fear, and fidelity to his Master, and amazement, and
such, stand in the way between Saul's Armor-bearer and all excuses, to our
understandings. For though the phrase of Scripture impute nothing to him for
that fact of killing himself, yet I have found none that offer any particular
excuse in his defense.

SECT. VI.
Neither do I find any thing to excuse Achitophels 1. Of Achitophel. 2 Samuel
15.
death; though (as I said of the other) the History do not accuse that
particular fact. The Text calls his counsel good, and it seems verse. 14.
he was not transported with passion, because he 2 He set his house in order,
And he was buried.
set his house in order; And he was buried in his Fathers grave, when Absalou
slain by another hand was cast into a pit.

But if it were upon a mere dispute of his own disgrace, or fear of ill
success, or upon any self respect, without proposing Gods glory, and he
repented not, he perished.

SECT. VII.
Of Judas, the most sinful instrument of the 1 Of Judas. Mat. 27. 5. Act. 1.
18.
most merciful Work, the common, (though not general) opinion is, that he
killed himself; but whether by hanging, or no, is more controverted.

For from the words in the Act. 1. 18.
Acts, [That he threw himself down headlong, and burst asunder, and his
bowels gushed out.] Euthym. in Com. in Matt.
Euthymius thinks, That he was rescued whilst he hanged, and carried away, and
that after that he killed himself by throwing himself headlong.

And Brent. in Act. 1. 18.
Brentius leaves that indifferent to us, to think what we will thereof. But it
seems by Oecum. ^n Collect. Act. Apost.
Oecumenius, that he did not only overlive this hanging, but that he grew to so
enormous a bigness, and burden to himself, that he was not able to withdraw
himself out of a Coaches way, but had his guts crushed out so; 2. He dyed not
by hanging himself, in the opinion of Euthymius, (...) Oecum. Papias S. John's
disciple. and Theoph.
which he receives from Papias the Disciple to Saint John, whose times cannot
be thought ignorant, or incurious of Judas History.

And it is there said further, that by others it was said, that being swollen to
that vastness, and corrupted with vermin, he laid himself down upon his
field, and there his guts broke out. And this Theophilact in Mat. 7.
Theophilact follows.

And it falls out very often, that some one 3. By what means many places of
scriptures have been otherwise accepted, then they intend.
Father, of strong reputation and authority in his time, does snatch and
swallow some probable interpretation of Scripture: and then digesting it into
his Homilies, and applying it in dehortations, and encouragements, as the
occasions and diseases of his Auditory, or his age require, and imagining
thereupon delightful and figurative insinuations, and setting it to the
Music of his style, (as every man which is accustomed to these Meditations,
shall often find in himself such a spiritual wantonness, and devout
straying into such delicacies,) that sense which was but probable, grows
necessary, and those who succeed, had rather enjoy his wit, then vex their
own; as often times we are loath to change or leave off a counterfeit stone,
by reason of the well setting thereof.

By this means, I think, it became so generally to be believed, that the
fruit which Eve eat, was an Apple; And that Lots wife was turned to a pillar of
Salt; And that Absalon was hanged by the hair of the head; And that Iephthe
killed his Daughter; And many other such, which grew current, not from an
evidence in the Text, but because such an acceptance, was most useful, and
applyable. Of this number, Judas case might be.

But if it were not, that act of killing himself, 4 Judas not accused of this
in the story, nor in the two prophetical Psalms of him.
is not added to his faults in any place of Scriptures; no not in those Psalm.
69. ct 109.
two Psalms of particular accusations, and bitter imprecations against him, as
they are ordinarily taken to be Prophetically purposed and directed.

And even of this man, whose sin, if any 5 Origens opinion of his repentance.
can exceed mercy, was such, Origin durst hope, not out of his erroneous
compassion, and sinful charity, by which he thinks that even the Devil
shall be saved, but out of Judas repentance. He says, Ex not. Em. Sa in Mat.
27.
[The Devil led him to the sin, and then induced him to that sorrowfulness
which swallowed him.] But speaking of his repentance, he says, [ Aquin. catena
aurea.
Those words, when Judas saw that he was condemned, belong to Judas himself,
for Christ was not then condemned. And upon this conscience and consideration,
began his repentance. [For, it may be, says Origin, that Satan which had
entered into him, staid with him till Christ was betrayed, and then left him,
and thereupon repentance followed.] And perchance, says he, he went to
prevent, and go before his Master, who was to dye, and so to meet him with his
naked soul, that he might gain Mercy by his confession and prayers.] 6.
Calvin acknowledges all degrees of repentance which the Roman Church
requires, to salvation, to have been in Judas.


And Iu Mat. 27. 4.
Calvine, (though his purpose be, to enervate and maime, (or at least, declare
it to be so defective,) that repentance which is admitted for sufficient in the
Roman Church, says that [In Judas there was perfect contrition of heart,
Confession of the mouth, and satisfaction for the money.]

But 23. q. 5. Tu dixisti. glos.
Petilian, against whom Saint Augustine writes, proceeded further in
justification of Judas last act, then any. For he said, [That in suffering
death when he repented, and so was a Confessor, 7 Petilianus his opinion of
his Martyrdom.
he became a Martyr.] Which opinion being pronounced singularly and
undefensibly; Ibid. Si non licet.
Saint Augustine answers as choleriquely, [Laqueum talibus reliquit.] Yet Saint
Augustine himself confesses, that an innocent man, should more have sinned in
such an act, then Judas did, because in his execution there were some degrees
of justice.

But of his actual impenitence I purposed (...). Judas act had some degrees of
justice by S. Aug.
not to speak, nor of his repentance, but only to observe to you, that this
last fact is not imputed to him, nor repentance said to be precluded thereby.

SECT. VIII.
For the Passive action of Eleazar, none denies, but that that endangering of
himself, 1. Of Eleazar Macab. 1. 6. 46. Jos. Aut. 12. 15.
was an act of Virtue: yet it was a forsaking and exposing himself to certain
Destruction.

For every Elephant had thirty two men upon him: and was guarded with one
thousand 2. All confess that an act of virtue.
Foot, and five hundred Horse: And this which he slew, was in his opinion, the
Kings 3. The destruction was certain.
Elephant, and therefore the better provided.

Howsoever he might hope to escape before the very act of killing the
Elephant, by 4. He did as much to his own death as Samson.
creeping under it, was a direct killing of himself, as expressly as Samson
pulling down the house.

And the reasons of this action, are rendered in the Text to have been, To
deliver his people, 5 The reasons of his act in the text,
and to get a perpetual name.

And this fact does Saint Ambrose extol by many glorious circumstances; As
[That he 6. S. Ambrose his extolling thereof.
flung away his Target, which might have sheltred him, That despising death, he
forced into the midst of the Army, and Inclusus ruin^, magis quam oppressus,
suo est sepultus Triumpho; And that by death he begot peace, as the heir of
his valor.]

And as very many Schoolmen have intended and exercised their wits in the
praise of this action, So Cajet. in 16. Iud.
Cajetan gives such a reason thereof, as is applyable to very many
Selfe-homicides. [That to expose our selves to certain 7. Cajetanus his reason
for Eleazer's justification, appliable to very many other cases of Selfhomicide.
death, if our first end be not our own death, but common good, it is lawful.
For, says he, Our actions which be Morally good or bad, must be judged to
be such, by the first reason which moves them; not by any accident, or
concomitance, accompanying, or succeding them, though necessarily.] And this
resolution of Cajetan, will include many Cases, and instances, which are
headlongly by intemperate censures condemned.

SECT. IX.
The fall of Rasis, which is the last Example, 1. Rasis Mat. 2. 14.
is thus reported. [Hee was besieged and fired; willing to dye manfully, and
escape repr^, 2. His reasons in the text.
unworthy of his House, he fell upon his Sword; for haste, he mist his
stroke, and threw himself from the Castle wall; yet rose up again, and ran
to a high Rock, took out his own bowels, and threw them among the people,
calling upon the Lord of life and spirit, and so died.]

Which Act the Text accuses not; nor does St. Aquin. 22. q. 64. ar. 5.
Thomas accuse it of any thing else, but that it was Cowardlinesse. Which also
Aristotel^ Ethic. l. 3. c. 7.
Aristotle imputes to this manner of dying, as we said Supra fo. 130
before. 3. Whether it be pusillanimity, as Aqui. August. and Aristot. says.


But either he spoke at that time, serviceably and advantagiously to the point
which he had then in hand; or else he spoke, ut plurimum, because for the
most part infirmities provoke men to this act.

For August. de civit. Dei l. 1. c. 22.
S. Augustine who argues as earnestly as Aristotle, that this is not greatness
of mind, confesses yet, that in Cleombrotus it was: who only upon reading
Plato his Phoedo, killed himself; for, says Augustine: [When no calamity
urged him, no crime, either true or imputed, nothing 4. S. Aug. confesses that
to have been greatness of mind, in Cleombrotus.
but greatness of mind moved him, to apprehend death, and to break the sweet
bands of this life.] And though he add, [That it was done rather Magne then
Been;] yet by this, that which we seek now is in Confession, that sometimes
there is in this act, Greatness and Courage. Which upon the same reason which
moved Aristotle, and all the rest, which is, to quench in men their natural
love to it, he is loath to afford in too many cases.

For he c. 23.
says [That, except Lucrece, it is not easy to find any example worth the
prescribing, 5. How much great examples govern.
or imitating, but Cato: Not because he only did it, but because being
reputed learned and honest, men might justly think, that that was well done,
and might well be done again, which he did.] Yet for all this, he is loath
to ler Catoes act pass with so much approbation, For he adds, [That yet many
of his learned friends thought it a weakness to let him dye so.] And this he
does because when men have before them the precedent of a brave example, they
contend no further, then what he did, not why.

For it is truly said, Vell. Paterc. de morte Grac.
Examples do not stop, nor consist in the Degree where they begun, but
grow, and no man thinks that unworthy for him, which profits another.] Yet,
Saint Augustine though upon this reason loath to give glory to many examples,
allows all greatness and praise to Regulus, Supra
of whom we spoke before: though, to my understanding there are in it many
impressions of falsehood, and of ostentation, from all which Cat^es history is
delivered.

And, to end this point, whether it be alwais pusillanimity, Laertius says
Diog. Laer. l. 6.
[That in Antisthenes the philosopher, videbatur firm mollius, 6. That it was
reputed cowardlines in Antistbenes extremely sick not to kill himself.
that lying extreme sick, and Diogenes asking him, if he lacked a friend,
(meaning to kill him,) and offering him also his dagger, to do it himself,
the Philosopher said he desired an end of pain, but not of life.]

As therefore this fact of Rasis, may have proceeded from greatness, So is it
by Lyra excused 7. Upon what reasons Lyra excuses this and like actions.
from all sin, by reasons applyable to many other. For he says, [Either to
escape torment, by which probably a man might be seduced to Idolatry, or take
away occasion of making them reproach God in him, a man may kill himself; For,
says he, Both these cases, Ordi^ntur in Deum.]

And this Relect. de homicid. resp. ad ult. argum.
Francis a Victoria allows as the more probable opinion.] And Sotus l. 2. de
just. q. 3. ar. 8.
Sotus, and Valeu. to. 3. disp. 5. q. 8.
Valentia, follow Thomas his opinion herein; And Burgensis condemns it upon
this presumption, That he could not do this for love of the common good,
because this could not redeem his people, being already 8 Burgensis reasons
confesses he might have had just causes.
captive. So that his accusing him helps us thus much, that if by his death
he could have redeemed them, he might lawfully have done it.

Conclusion.
ANd this is as far as I allowed my discourse to progesse in this way:
forbidding 1. Why I refraind discourse of destiny herein.
it earnestly all dark and dangerous Secessions and divertings into points of
our Freewill, and of Gods Destiny: though allowing many ordinary contingencies,
to be under our Election, it may yet seem reasonable, that our maine periods,
of Birth, of Death, and of chief alterations in this life be more immediately
wrought upon by Gods determination. It is usefully said, and appliable to good
purpose (though Alcor. A20. 65.
by a wicked man, and with intention to cross Moses,) [That man was made of
shadow, and the Devil of fire.] For as shadow is not darkness, but grosser
light, so is man's understanding in those mysteries, not blind but clouded. And
as fire does not always give light 2. Man made of shadow and the devil of fire
by the Alcoran.
(for that is accidental, and it must have ai^e to work upon,) but it burns
naturally, so that desire of knowledge which the Devil kindles in us, (as he
does as willingly bring bellows to inflame a heart curious of knowledge, as he
does more ashes to stupifie and bury deeper, a slumbering understanding) does
not always give 3. Our adversaries reasons contradict one another.
us light, but it always burns us, and imprints upon our judgment stigmaticall
marks, and at last seares up our conscience.

If then reasons which differ from me, and my reasons be otherwise equal, yet
theirs have this disadvantage, that they fight with themselves and suffer a
Civil War of contradiction. For many of their reasons incline us to a love
of this life, and a ho^or of death, and yet they say often, that we are too
much addicted to that naturally. But it is well noted by Alcuin. Ep. 23.
Al^s, (and I think from Saint A^stine) [That 4 No praecept given to love our
selves.
though there be four things which we must love, yet there is no precept
given upon any more then two, God and our neighbor. So that the other which
concern our selves, may be pretermitted in some occasions.

But because of the benefits of death, enough has been occasionally
intersertted before, having 5 Encouragements to contempt of death
presented Cypr. Sermon. de mortalitate.
Cyprians encouragement to it, who out of a contemplation that the whole frame
of the world decayed and languished, cries to us, [Nutant parietes, The walls
and the roof shake, and would not thou go out? Thou art tired in a
pilgrimage, and would thou not go home?] I will end with applying Gratiar.
act. de cons.
Ausonius thanks to the Emperor, to death, which deserves it better, [Thou
providest that thy benefits, and the good which thou bring shall not be
transitory; and that the ills from which thou deliverest us, shall never
return.] Since therefore because death has a little bitterness, but
medicinal, and a little allay, but to make it of more use, they would utterly
recline and avert our nature from it, (as Chyrurgia mag. de ulcer.
Paracelsus says, of that foul contagious disease which then had invaded
mankind in a few places, and since overflown in all, that for punishment of
general licentiousnes, God first inflicted that disease, and when the disease
would not reduce us, he sent a second worse affliction, which was ignorant, and
torturing Physicians.

So I may say of this case, that in punishment of Adams sin, God cast upon us
an infectious death, and since has sent us a worse plague of men, which
accompany it with so much horror and affrightment, that it can scarce be made
wholesome and agreeable to us. That which Aphor. l. 2. 38.
Hippocrates admitted in cases of much profit, and small danger, they teach
with too much liberty, [That worse meat may be given to a patient, so it be
pleasanter, and worse drink, so it be more acceptable.] But though I thought it
therefore needful, to oppose this ^efensative, as well to reencourage 6. Why I
abstain from particular directions.
men to a just contempt of this life, and to restore them to their nature,
which is a desire of supreme happiness in the next life by the loss of this,
as also to rectify, and wash again their fame, who religiously assuring
themselves that in some cases, when we were destitute of other means, we
might be to our selves the stewards of Gods benefits, and the Ministers of his
merciful Justice, had yet, being, Ennodius ad Celul.
as Ennodius says) Innocent within themselves, incurred damnum opinionis, yet
(as I said before) I abstained purposely from extending this discourse to
particular 7. Laws forbid ordinary men to cure by extraordiry means, yet the
Kings of England, and France, and Spain cure so.
rules, or instances, both because I dare not profess my self a Master in so
curious a science, and because the limits are obscure, and steepy, and
slippery, and narrow, and every error deadly, except where a competent
diligence being fore-used, a mistaking in our conscience may provide an excuse.

As to cure diseases by touch, or by charm, (both which one Paracelsus
Chyrurg. Mag. tract. 2. cap. 8. et de trans. cap. 10.
excellent Chirurgian, and one Pet. Pomp. de incant. c. 4.
excellent philosopher, are of opinion may be done, because what virtue soever
the heavens infuse into anycreature, man, who is Al, is capable of, and being
borne when that virtue is, may receive a like impression, or may give it to a
word, or character made at that instant, if he can understand the time) though
these, I say be forbidden by diverse Laws, out of a Just prejudice that vulgar
owners of such a virtue, would mis-imploy, it, yet none mislikes that the Kings
of England and France, should cure one sickness by such means, nor Cassanaeus
catal. glo. mun. par. 5. consider. 1.
that the Kings of Spain, should dispossess Daemoniaque persons so, because
Kings are justly presumed to use all their power to the glory, of God; So is it
fit, that this privilege of which we speak should be contracted and restrained.

For, that is certainly true of this, which Cassian. l. 17 cap. 17. ad 25. As
Hier. Orig. Chrysostom. and Cassianus are excusd for following Plato in the
toleration of a ly, because the church had not then pronounced, so may it be in
this.
Cassianus says of a ly, [That it has the nature of Ellebore, wholesome in
desperate diseases, but otherwise poison.] though I dare not aver with him,
[That we are in desperate diseases, whenever we are in ingenti ^ucro, aut
damno, et in humilitate, ad evitandam gloriam.] Howsoeveri i^ Cassianus mistake
that, and we this, yet Observat. in Cassian. in fine l. fo. 740.
as he, and Origin, and Chrysostom, and Hierome, are excused for following
Platoes opinion, that a ly might have the nature of medicine, and be admitted
in many cases, because in their time the church had not declared herself in
that point, nor pronounced that a ly was naturally ill, by the same reason am I
excusable in this Paradox. Against the reasons whereof, and against charity, if
prejudice, or contempt of my weakness, or mis-devotion have so precluded any,
that they have not been pleased to taste and digest them, I must leave them to
their drowsines still, and bid them enjoy the favor of that indulgent
Physician, Cornelius Celsus sent. 15.
Qui non concoxit, dormiat.

FINIS.
20. Sept. 1644.
Imprimatur

IO: RUSH WORTH.


