A MISCELLANIA OF MORAL, THEOLOGICAL, AND PHILOSOPHICAL SENTANCES; Worthy
observation.

Printed for John Sweeting, at the Angel in Popes-head-alley, 1650.

To the Right Honorable Henry, Earl of Dover, etc.
Right Honorable Lord,
IF the life of man were only intended but to eat, drink, complement, and
sleep; it might agree with that Epitaph of Heliogabalus, Ede, bibe, lude, post
mortem nulla voluptas, and so become mere Animal. But since The Almighty and
high disposer of this his Clocke-like frame of the Macrocosme, whereto his
blessed will is the weight and Cause of Motion, has given to humanes, Reason,
as the key to wind up the small portative watch of our own Microcosme, whereby
we are apt still to turn the wheels of our Cogitations upon th'objects
present themselves; be you pleased then (Noble Lord) that what I so here have
done, I present to your Honor, beseeching your pardon therein if too bold;
for, if you question why to you? I being a stranger, I humbly answer, though
a stranger to your Honorable Person, yet not to the Fame of the worthy, love
you bear to good Arts and Artists; which I know by many friends to your
virtuous and Noble inclination. If therefore you please to deigne the vacancie
of your more serious affairs, to the view of these my short enterviewes, I
refer them to your censure; and recreation, resting

Your Honors Devoted Servant, John Done.

To the Reader.
Upon an unranckt regiment, it is no matter where you begin to look: neither
upon these my Miscellanies, the first acknowledged thrust out issue of my
brain.

Here are of all sorts, Moral, Philosophical, Theological, as amongst men
diverse Complexions, Affections, Postures, etc.

Some have dressed the like im Meetres, and curious laying of words together; but
I only affect a full sense of meaning, not the trim; as many of our Pamphlet
trickers attire the Bartholmew babies of their conceits, and the dress is
all. Rhyme, I hold a Child's Drum in a wise man's brain, and begets Poets (as
Dr. Thomas Campion says) like a hot Summer does Flies.

I neither care for Momus, nor Zoylous, they may find their humors here
Critiz'd.

My fantasy begat these upon object, and I fixed them in this paper field, and
so they are yours as they were mine. They are not obscure, if you read, and
then consider; and if you will not the last, breathe not the first.

They are humble Teachers, if you be not too proud a Learner, says

I Done.

POLYDORON: OR A Mescellania of Moral, Philosophical, and Theological
Sentences.
MAn is like a City.

His skin the walls.

His eyes and ears the Factors and Merchants.

His hands the trades men.

His legs the porters.

His mouth the gate.

His teeth the portculize.

His appetite the Cater.

His stomach the Kitchen.

His digestion the Cook.

His expulsion the Scavenger

His soul the Church.

His reason the Preacher.

His fortitude the Soldiers.

His words the Shot.

His understanding the Governor.

His senses the Officers.

His brain the State-house.

His heart the Cittadell or Castle.

Though a man has no apparent or eminent virtue, yet if he dye rich, his
heirs will find good parts about him.

Our life is like an houreglasse, and the sand worldly riches, which runs
with us but the time of our continuance here, and then is turned up by another.

All our life is but a Childing or bearing for the other world.

Historical Poetry, is a spruce dressing of Sense.

Love Poetry, a loose Courtizane of the wit.

Satyricall Poetry, like a pair of snuffers snibbing^ filth in others, but
retayning it in it self.

Physical Poetry, a perspective, to see remote things by.

A man studious in Science, is often poor outward, because his purchase is all
inward.

A man made of mere complement, is like the shavings of horn made into
flowers.

He that thinks proudly of himself for speaking in a learned or foreign
language, is like him that thinks himself rich, and fine, because in another
man's ground or clothes.

Grammar should not be so much studied for it self, as for the Arts founded
in it; yet many think them very learned if they can speak Greek and Latin,
and the vulgar hold them so; when language to a wiseman, is but as a dish to
serve up the sense.

He that meddles with false Arts, works in the shop of shame, and his
journey man is repentance.

In all professions, it is ignorance that strives for admiration.

The last thing a wiseman leaves, is to love himself.

The reason that virtue is in less credit than riches in the vulgar esteem,
is, few know no other coin, most desire no other stamp.

Lend not thy money to wine drinking and gaming; for the one causes
forgetfulness, the other repentance.

It is a perfect mind Fortune has no place in.

The hereditary diseases of the soul, are sorrow, love, anger; the
accidental, covetousness, pride, envy.

The best Physician to a sick soul is prayer.

He does not truly love, that loves the body more than the mind.

Truth needs not many words, but a false tale a large preamble.

Good is that fear that hinders us from shameful acts, and makes a man
circumspect.

As the shadow follows the body going to the Sunward, so does glory virtue
going to Christward.

He is nearest to the Divine nature, whom reason, not anger moves.

We need not go far to seek a Temple to pray in, for our selves are either
a foul or clean one; but an Egyptian Temple should be cleansed first by
repentance.

Hard accidents darkens a weak mind, but an Heroical soul then shines
brightest.

The wheel or vicissitude of earthly motions turns still: happy is he whose
mind is not perturbated beyond his reason, that is, whose brains or
affections are not turned from good actions thereby.

He that strives to shake care from his life, is like one that knawes his
flesh from his bones.

If there be no true comfort in this life but in God, how blind is he that
gropes for it in these lower things?

Since experience approves earthly things to be the worship of this world:
may it not be justly said the world worshippes the golden Calfe still?

He that strives to show his wisdom, is like him that whiffles an Ensign,
delightful only to children and fools; but to do good by that one knows
good, is carrying the colors quietly.

There is a fashion in speaking and writing as in clothes; but it is easily
perceived where a fool overlaceth it.

He that lets loose his anger upon every occasion, is like him that lets go
his hawke upon every bait.

Roaring and drinking is the horse-way to hell, whoring and cheating the
footway; but swearing and blaspheming follows Corah, Dathan, and Abiron.

There are many use the word; God damn me, superflously, if they repent not.

He that can make his passions stand about him bare, is a true master of his
underhoushold:

Passions are the over-set of humors; they sink him that too constantly
bears up with them.

He that depends upon others, lets himself out ot farm.

The best countenance of truth, is to be what we seem.

To seem what we are not, is player-like.

It is a passible virtue to speak well, a praisable to do well; the one
resembles the shadow, the other the body: but wisely to hold ones peace makes a
due Zenith.

The censure of others, troubles not a well planted mind.

To contend with fools, is to be in the same parallel.

The blessing of God keeps company with vertuons actions; but that Gods
blessing many Rich-men brag of, is but eight in the hundred or worse.

He who lives poorly in rich havings, is like him that is a cold in a furred
gown, the cause only inward.

An understanding soul in a gross body, is like a good leg in a winter boot;
but a foolish spirit in a well featured body, is like a misshapen spindle
shanke, in a bombasted stocking.

It is a rank courteosie, when a man is forced to thank for his own again.

He that thinks too well of many, for the most part, betrays himself to the
borrower.

He that loves all alike, loves none well; and he that hates and suspects all,
loves himself too much.

What thou judiciously hold lawdable in others, seek to make real in thy
self.

Those who praise others thereby to be commended themselves, resemble horses
when they knibble one another.

A palpable flatterer is like a horstealer, that strokes the horse with
sweete-gloves, and Whose end is to get up, and ride him out of his pasture.

Craft reqvires more wit, than plain honesty does: which makes knaves so
nimble and officious.

A liar without memory is like one has lost his purse to a reckonning.

A young unthrifty heir that is green inward, black outward, is like a
morning dream, wakes and finds all gone.

He that oversets his confidence upon false projects, is like him that hands
a loose haulser, falls over-bord.

He that delights in doing brave evil, as they call Swaggering, etc. is like
him that swears vildly in some learned language.

The first and last thing we should do upon sleep, is to pray to, and praise
God.

If the wine be good, be thou the more wary; for if thou drinkest drunk, thou
defacest the Image of God in thee, (that is) thy reason.

He that drinks drunk, Cudgels his own brain.

To Swagger in drink, is to put a horrid Visour upon an il-favored face.

There is no cause why any man should be proud, be they Lords, Knights,
Gentlemen etc. For if they consider themselves truly, they are but Millers,
Cooks, and Dungmen; Millers in grinding their Meal, Cooks in decocting it,
Dungmen by carrying and expulsing excrements.

He may well claim a boat-sons place in Barkleyes Ship of fools, that
befooles himself; and he then blows the whistle, when he proclaymes his
vain confidence.

The difference betwixt Fortitude, and desperate dareing, it is between the
Sun and common Fire, the one produces much good, the other consumes and
destroys what is put into it, and at last goes out it self.

A Gamester that depends his means on the hazard, is like the weather about
Michaelmasse, now fair, then foul; but in the adversity of loss, he is
winters foul way to a lender.

It is impossible thrivers by play should still prosper; for their best is
loss waste of time, their thrift, undoing of others.

Ordinary play is an ungodly exercize, for it is the whetsstone of anger, the
father of Blasphemous oaths, the murderer of many men's estates; and the box
an Iron-fac't bold pickpocket.

An honest playn-meaning man amongst Cheators, is like one that sleeps on an
Ant-hill.

A noted coward is like a Dog running through a Town with a bottle at his
tail.

Esteem of thy self but justly as thou art, and no more; for the world will
doubt thee in that, and strive to make thee less.

It is a running plague to a horse, when a hasty ass rides him.

You lame the nimble diligence of a Tavern, when you come on the score.

He who offers any thing to sale, diminishes the estimation thereof.

If you will put a false friend on the Test, offer to borrow money of him, and
he will like lead and copper fly away; but his Silver shall still remain his
own, on the coppell of excuses.

A borrower is the veriest subject in a Kingdom, if without a pawn, a mere
slave to censure.

He that goes into a bawdihouse, puts one foot amongst thieves, the other
amongst murderers.

A crafty fellow is somewayes proffitable to a wise man, viz. makes him wary.

Drunkenesse loses a man's reputation, as a bad gamester does his money, both
commonly either laughing, or quarrelling.

He that is drunk finds always something in his way, because his fantasy is
full of figures.

He that is a true judge of himself, acquits him from the censure of others.

Chymicall philosophers say, Facilius est, construere, quam destruere: But
fools have experience to the contrary.

There is a sport in recounting witty jeasts, which who so over-stretcheth,
becomes Buffone to the Auditory.

He that shows store of money amongst needy persons, whets a borrower to cut
his courteosies purse, or a thief to steal it.

Feigned excuses in a friend, are like false dice with a gamester.

He that still talks for his own ends, should be worn by his Auditors, as
women wear fringe (or lace about the tail piece.)

Drinking frindship, is but drunken kindness.

That is an idle tale that neither profits the teller; nor hearer: but a
pernicious one, that benefits the teller, and hurts the hearer.

He that over-feeds his senses, does like him that feasts his enemies.

He that has good business to do, and wants means to effect it, is like a
ship ryding upon her Anchor in the wast of victuals.

It is vanity to put more confidence upon this life, than on a wind at Sea:
but it is wisdom to have tackling ready for all changes.

Fools are like the Sea waves, flying from the breath of good counsel.

We are apt to conceit of our selves, far beyond the worlds esteem, and to
find repentance too late, with his servant had I wist.

That poverty is justly contemptible, which is purchassed by following vice;
but that not sha^efully, gotten by acquiring virtuous sense.

Who give themselves to be the companions of vice, in the end become the slaves
of it.

When thou find thy self apt to frailty, make the passion of our Lord Jesus
Christ thy Looking glass.

It is wisdom to be stayed by the advice of many wise man; rather than to run
with thy fantasy in the field of opinion.

Things out of the common course of trade, need have an extraordinary
investigator.

He that gives himself to ebriety, becomes the servant of letcherie, and at
last is attended on with poverty. Meditation of holiness is as glowing
Cinders, but hearty prayer a flame reaching heaven, or Elias his fiery Chariot.

If every one would mend but one, we should have the golden age again.

Auxilliarie Soldiers may be compared to gamesters, the Cheefetaines the
Setters, the common Soldiers the Moneys, which for honor, or gain, the
Captaihes will hazard.

A poor man standing up on terms of Gentility, is like one clothed in
silken rags.

Gentility in the best definition, is but ancient riches; but where the Kings
favor gives Title, Office authority, or virtue ornament, to them rightly
belongs respect.

Suppose all thy auditors thy enemies, when thou dispraysestary.

There was great difference between the Stoickes and Epicures, and likewise
betwixt the Sadduces and Pharisees. viz. Whether austerity or the full use of
plenty was the way of man's life. The Epicures and Sadduces held Post mortem
nulla voluptas, the Stoickes and Pharisees that by voluptillity here, we lost
the future joys of the other life. I would leave the judgment to my Masters
the Sorbonists, but that I read of many of the Jews Prophets, and best men in
all nations, as S. John the Baptist, and above all our Savior Jesus Christ,
who both could and did choose and take the best course; for he says, He that
is curious to please himself, is less careful to please God; but he that is
curious to please God, does little care to please himself: but the
Peripatetique or indifferent man says, they were choice and exemplar persons,
but the vulgar may take the free use of things with moderation. I could hold
well therewith, but that our Savior says, Blessed are they that mourn,
hunger, weep, etc. for they shall be comforted; These sayings were practiced
by the ancient Hermits, but are abused in these sensual times; for surely
there be not two heavens for them; make one here, with all mundane delights
and deserve nothing of the other, which they scarce reckon of. I can laugh at
Chaucers wife of Bathe, that would be content to eat brown bread in heaven
for a little tolleration of her will, here in earth.

Why should a man think himself better than an other (unless he be an
Epicure and Saducee) because he has the benefits of some earthly goods
connexed to the cherishing of his frail and earthly body? when the Devil
offered our Savior all the earth to worship him.

We see God as it were through a Cloud or Veyle, for all the world is but his
Curtain.

Names were first questionless given for distinction, faculty,
consanguinitie, desert, quality: for Smith, Tailor, Ioyner, Sadler, etc. were
doubtless of the trades; Johnson, Robinson, Williamson, of the blood;
Sackville, Saville, names of honorable desert; Armestrong, Shakespeare, of high
quality: and Turde, Porredge, Drinkall, ridiculous in condition: but the best
appellation (in my judgment) that can be, is good man, good wife; but pride
has almost brought it in contempt, for a City woman told her neighbor, none
was good but God, and therefore she would be called Mistress.

It is worth the noting how about the suburbs and confines of a great and
populous City, the Victuallers and houses of recreation, lie at advantage to
catch the City Flies humming about their Trapps: and how the Citizens hang out
their shop-Cobwebbes, to catch the Country Flies; so Spider turning fly, and
fly Spider.

The expression of our inward good conceits has two reasons, one is to
benefit others thereby, the other still to remember our selves therewith.

A wise man's thoughts walks within him, but a fools without him.

Wisdom is foolishnes to them understand it not, as playing on Instruments,
fencing and wrestling; his blood having lost the vigor.

Amongst fools and worldlings there is nothing so valuable as wealth, whereof
they neither have, nor can enjoy (without Surfeyt) more than a single part,
rightly considered; and some by their miserable penury scarce that.

He is of a poor and superficial judgment that esteems the dress of
words, more than the substance or matter.

I have seen and noted some, that being followed with too much wine, would
become humorous; but fools are always so.

Nothing now pays scores for estimation amongst the vulgar sort, as wealth
does.

It is an exceeding misery to a free mind to be depended upon an all
undertaking man that is a break-word or promiser, unless he will turn parasyde
which is worst of all.

The dress of words is but as the dress of women to a wise man; for be the
fleeve of what fashion soever, yet the arm is still the same.

It is folly for any to write of that he discovers not plainly; for it draws
his reader to think, he understands not what he writes, because all men
prefer their own judgments.

Absurdittie has but two partakers or foolish friends, viz. Ignorance, and
opinion.

If a Stoicke should see us whiffe, Tobacco, drink healths (as the phrase is)
play the merry Greeks still etc. He would fall with Cato, to question and
read, whether the Soul were immortal or no?

In my judgment, the Clergy should not follow the Layetie in idle fashions of
Clothes, as the broad Hatt, ruffled Boots and Stockings, etc. But the Layetie
ought to follow the Clergy in good life and manners.

I could more willingly hear and read the learned Controversies of these
times, if the great Scholars on both sides, were not so envious to one another;
But where envy dwells, charity has no Chamber to logde quietly in.

Observe regularly the speech of man, and there is nothing almost spoken but by
figure; as one says, this is my hand, for his hand writing: this is my deed,
when it is but his consent thereto.

The best observation in changing Religion, is to observe your self in your
new course, viz. does this make you pray more? love goodness better? contemn
mundane delights and vain things more? be more charitable, love God and his
goodness more fervently, respect his Priests and Prophets, and husbandmen more
lovingly? Then have you changed well; but the contrary is fearful.

I find many times I overset my self by supposing too much, and well of
others; but seldom deceaved by thinking too little and ill, for they in their
actions (for the most part) approve it.

Put no more trust upon mortal man, neither streatch him further in thy hopes,
than to his own ends, for he is a frail Creature, and to trust unto, but a
rotten reed; whom the upper Spirits know to be every minute Changeable, and
uncertain in himself, almost even to himself: and the lower find him often
so in his actions, if his profits be not therein thoroughly interessed.

We have by instinct a veneration of Natures operatitions in somethings, but
to a wise man Idem is Idem.

Of all manner of People I hate the paradoxion babbling wit shewers; and those
place, good and better, in the rank of one esteem.

He is a fool that offers to give the paring again, if one will give him an
Apple; but he an Ass worthy to eat thistles; that takes it: for I hold (be
it spoken with reverence to holy writ) Esau was a notable hangman, that sold
his birthright for a mess of pottage.

Blame not men because they are variable and humourous; for we by nature are
so, and as the humor predominating gouerners, and encounters occasion, so we
seem to our selves or others. If otherwise better, the let us acknowledge with
Socrates, Philosophy and God his goodness and grace makes us so, but a man
drowned in the Lethargy of his vice often makes himself so, by lanching or
wading too deeply into the sensual and tickling pleasures of the flesh.

Teach me thy knowledge in this or that thing says one, you thereby loose not
your own share, your fire will warm us both etc. but who shall pay me for
spoiling my Clothes in fetching of the wood, says the fire maker; or feed my
hungry stomach and radical moisture spent thereby? Had mere thanks! Magner
fedd his henns with mere thanks, and they laid no eggs. O unconscionable
coveteousnessel O blind self louel nothing is a man's own truly, that he
comes not by duly.

The world accounts him a gentleman that can live of his reuennewes without
doing any thing: but he is the true gentleman, that does the brauest and best
actions.

The Ocoult Philosophers in their books do tell there is such a thing that you
may have, but tell not plainly how to come by it. For how ever ignorants,
covetous and idle persons prate; If so sovereign a knowledge were to be
purchased, by the buying and reading of a twelvepenie book, the course of man
would be in confusion; wherefore one says Deus Celauit Apollo ne mundus
devastaretur. And old English proverb, viz. I stout and thou stout, who shall
carry the dirt out? The children of this Art understand the Language of the
parents; only, to the rest they speak in obscure riddles: for as cocks the
birds of the Sunno crow and are only answered by other cocks, so in this
divine mystery the intelligent must be a bird of the Sun also.

In all thy merrie-makings and feastings, take heed of embracing Crapulae.

Be still most wary and suspicious of thy self and actions; but to consider
the various conditions of Man, is a judgment necessary in these times of
liberty.

Laughter is the hickock of a foolish spleen, but he notes himself judicious,
or stupid, that changes not his countenance upon his own talk.

A Puritan seeks reputation more by words then by deeds, and supposes more
of God's hearing then his seeing.

Storm not too much when thou art standred by some evil and envious tongue,
but think how the Sun curtaind with clouds, yet in time stripps: and
dissipates the congealed vapors, and getts the victory, and brings those
veyles into thinness, and so to nothing, but air; so Magna est veritas and
praevalet.

It it an Arcanum almost, to knows Men's dispositions, by nothing their
affections in diet: for the melancholy and earthly, loves to feed on gross and
great substances, hunts with slow hounds, the ill digesting hare; The
Flegmaticke on broaths, eats butter, cheese, roots, cabbage, pornpions,
mellons, cucumbers; drinks whay and four shillings Canarie. The ayerie,
clymes at dainty fowls, delights in hunting the roe bucke, fowling, fishing
and hawking, and esteems more of the sport then the prey. The fiery and high
constitution cares rather for that is spiritual then corporal, drinks wine
largely, loves hot spices: and as Natura Natura gaudet, so he to cherish his
fire, loves the Quintessence and heat of things, as the Pigeon (a hot bird)
loves salt, and so did Alexander the Great wine; the spirit whereof, was food
to his fiery spirit: and not (as many will mistake,) his delight was in
ebriety, for Nature many times makes (tacitly) our appetites servants to her
ends. To this may be objected; Then all your alehouse knights, and domineering
drunkards, are his kinsme; Answer, No, they are led to guzzell by their ebrious
voluptibility, not by their natural inclynation: Witness the weakness of
their spirits, when with a small charge they go reeling and stumbling in the
streets, a vice most punishable for misusing Gods good gifts, and defacing his
Image in themselves. viz. reason. So the sedulus glutton and the goutie
letcher, not provoked by the surcharge of the third concoction; unable, except
only to groap, talk bawdely and so obsceanly, etc. is very reprehensible, as
Rebels in nature, and mutiners against order.

It is a pusillanimous and mere womannish weakness of the judgment to
dissesteeme any excellent thing offered, for the poverty of the offerer.

A resolved greatness of the mind stands firm against the event of a
doubtful cause.

A drunkards love is as brittle as glass metal: for a slipp, or fall of a
word, breaks it in cutting pieces.

Make thy self sure of nothing without the power of thy action, (that is not
wholly in thy hands) for inter Poculum et labra, chance is a dicer.

when I consider maturely how life in these lower things is disposed and
retaken by the Almighty Creator and ordainer of all things; I find in the most
centrall and Terrestrial, (that is) the metalline bodies their life is
termined, shut, and imprisoned within themselves; in the vegetable, that they
have their spring, station, and dissolution. And then their life is breathed up
into the common air, the instrument from whence it came, insused by the Sun,
Moon, and Stars etc. In the Animal, that they eat, drink, steep, move,
and dye; and their lives are given up into the general spirit of the world;
But in mankind, that he has a reasonable soul, and according to his desert,
is adjudged by him that infused it. O then, how precizely ought we to consider
our courses here!

If there were not a hope for us in the goodness of God, the better sort of
Men which are most afflicted in this life, were more wretched then either
vegetable or Animal creatures.

The prosperity, and sensual felicity of this life, is but Animal happiness.

Few men attain true wisdom here in this world; that have not seen Fortunes
both faces, that is, adversity before a rich estate.

Riches is a muffler, and makes many in this life, play at blind-man buffe with
their souls.

The mind that looks too vehemently upon the goods of this world, makes its
thoughts a slave; yet we ought not to let pass an honest necessary care, or
due occasion.

Those Arts wherein young men most excel by their agilitie, should not be an
old man's practice or election; for it fits age to excel in wisdom and
judgment, not in delights and pastimes, but as a moderate hearer and beholder.

The earth even to our comprehension is but a point or centrall prick in
regard of the universe, a molehill in Gods sight, and we thereon Ants, to whom
he has given a spark, drop, or portion of reason, thereby to discern his
Almighty greatness, and praise his holy name; The rest are but as creeping
vermin in his sight; the difference is, of us he will take a severe account,
as of those to whom he has given that Talent of understanding, how we have
disposed of it.

When I consider the great, good, and general providence of the Almighty, who
has opened his hand of abundance, and thrown down his goodness upon the
earth, for every man by his endeavor to obtain; some I see flourish and wallow
in all fullness and plenty; others by labor gain a mediocrity: many are
poor, indigent, and miserable; and which is note-able, none fully content, as
if they all had too short measure; then in my thoughts I say; O you full and
rich in these earthly blessings, have you Quayles and Manna, and yet do you
murmr? You that labor, do you not see you are well and happy? for man is
borne to labor, as the bird to fly, the fish to swim, the horse and ox to
bear and draw. And you poor and indigent, consider how your poverty comes, or
by your sloth, or love of idleness or vice; blame not then the bounteous
goodness of God. And to you lame, blind, deformed, and diseased, repine not,
O do not; for the punishment falls justly upon you, if you do well and wisely
weigh it, viz. either for your parents, or your own sins; for God is
goodness it self, and cannot join with evil.

A forced conceit is like a press't Soldier, who for the most part serves not
so well as a voluntary.

Most men being arived into years, by experience see many of their youths
actions appear in fools habits.

To be rid of many knawing thoughts, it is not amiss to imitate old Raynard
the Fox, that by standing in the water by degrees, drove all the fleas nipt his
pelt, into the lock of wool he had in his mouth, and then left it in the
river; so when thou art oppressed with biting worldly cogitations, take some good
book or holy meditation, and therein drown all thy worldlings.

He that is over careful; shows distrust in Gods providence; and he that is
too careless, shows an idle mind.

It is not well spoken to say, I will do this or that, because thou can do
nothing of thy self, neither art master of one minute of thy time: but better
to say, by Gods leave and permission I will, etc. which if thou utterest not,
yet at least think.

To truly Sabbathize is not only to keep reverently to God his service the
seventh day or Sunday, but every minute to retire thy thoughts from these
worldly occasions to him-wards: as to consider thy fraylty, his Almightinesse;
thy poverty in all good actions, his bounty in all good blessings, etc. And
this is true Sabbathizing.

In God his Speculum all men are alike, only those who truly and heartily love
and serve him, are taller and fairer then the rest. But in man his glass,
there are many differences in estates, and the respects between the one and
the other, is in outward things, as bodily feature, strength, riches and having
power and princelike authority etc. But these poor Mundaine accounts
terminate, in themselves as smoke into air: for the best and most perdurable,
last here but in breath.

Choler falling into passion and rage, is like the seething over of a pot.

To speak or name all vices in one diction or word, is to say ingratitude.

I protest my experience is yet short in true knowledge of a crafty companion,
for he has so bred himself up in base and customarie courses of subtlety,
that the Jack will turn the spit round of his own ends, to which he will
make my credulity but the fire.

If we would conceive that the wrong and mischief we do to others had
impetration so with God's justice, to still afflict us by Apparition or Genius,
it would deter a good mind from offering any, and give cause of fear to a
bad.

Although the causes of men's intentions pass for the most part under the
common and ordained providence of God, yet in the best achivements, and things,
I perceive we are stopped, unless the particular blessing admit us to it; the
means is prayer and good life.

be not too familiar with thy servants, nor with people of base condition; for
then thou shall find the proverb true: familiarity breeds contempt; but a
generous spirit is thereby most flexible.

All Alchymists can do well, till they come to doing.

Some praise nothing but what is their own, and they give few others cause to
do that deservedly.

when I incline my attention to music, I listen to the sweetness of Cadence,
Choice of Choardes, etc. when to words or discourse, then I hearken after
sense; for a tale that is senseless or dull is like a plaine-fac't woman with
a flat nose, or one that is like the Ace of Clubs.

Leave not thine own accustomed fashion (if good) to follow the guize, fashion
or habit in manners of another; for what sitts comely in another is
questionable whether, it will do so in thee. Every man wears his own natural
best, and limitation is ever short.

Religion is the fairest flower grows in the garden of the Soul.

To flatter a friend is to play false in the game of friendship: to neglect thy
once honest beloved acquaintance, is to throw the Cards in the fire.

He that breaks his word and promise with men, is like him that receives cutts
and wounds in his skin, the greater the deeper, and are seldom cured without
skarres of suspicion; but he that esteems not his promise and protected word,
loses a joint or member in his credit and estimation.

He that makes vows to forbear this or that, terminatly; shows no great
strength of government and rydes behind himself.

Women for the most part rather desire to lie with men, then Scholars.

Experience every day more and more scrapes away an understanding man's
confidence in others words and promises.

In consideration is the devils hawkes-hood, whereby he carries careless men
quietly into perdition without ever bayting at the Inn of repentance.

He that puts confidence in uncertain men, is as one that goes upon the Ice.

He that reveals the secrets of occult Philosophy, resembles boys, that tells
tales our of school; and some Philosophers have seemed to promise their
readers so, but they play the crafty wagges with mere litterallists.

In a young man the sword in an old man the word young men hold the sword should
give satisfaction for wrongs; but Gods wor^ reckons further and otherwise.

When thou wrongest another, think justice humane, or divine, has thee on the
score.

To suppress anger in thy self, is to conquer with Hercules one of the
Furies; but to tame all passions in thee, is to lead Cerberus in chains.

To strongly and patiently endure worldly afflictions, and crosses, is with
Atlas to bear the world on thy shoulders.

Who does confidently love and trust in God and his goodness, may with Charles
the fifth write Non plus vltra.

Mars his concubinarie lying with Venus in Ovid, signifies iron changed into
copper; Vulcan's finding them, and discovering their false play; is the fire,
and trial; for iron is not transmuted, as some suppose, but the coppresse or
vitrioll, corporated into a metalline form by the power of Mars or iron, his
lustful and fiery sulphur. The Gods laughing, is Truth discerning the
Alchymist mistake; for the like is betwixt Mercury and Saturn.

Actaeon pursued by his hounds will suffer diverse expositions: for it may
aenigmatize a lover chased and devoured by his thoughts: but more properly, one
given (as the phrase is) to good fellowship, and whose followers devoures his
estate, The history of Phaeton, Jason, etc. have golden expositions also; but
the Pedagogues teach the children all they can, as the old crows put the
worms into the young ones mouths: (As says Erasmus,) without tasting them,
themselves.

It is blame and shame enough, to plainly deny, an unconsiderate, and
unconscionable demander, his requests.

Give a drunkard that has learned to reele of the tapspinning Mearmaide, and a
devil bomm-eRuffian, the wall, in any case; for the one needs it, the other
in right should have wall on all sides of him, viz. Newgate.

He that rowzeth up a fierce wrath against women and scolds, is like him that
draws his sword upon offensive schoole-boyes.

No man can say of himself he is good, if he enters into due consideration of
what he knows by his desires: but he may justly say and boldly affirm, Man
was good, if he looks into the unspotted purity, and suffering of our
Savior Jesus Christ and reckon his good thereby.

That man may have some hope of himself, that sees Penetration, compunction;
with sorrow and shame, standing within him, with dejected countenances, and
frown upon his sins; but he that has no consideration therein, is in a
desperate case.

A man rich and highly favored is like a Sun Dial regarded so long as his
prosperity shines on him; but poor, no more looked on than the Dial is, the
Sun being in a Cloud; so by man he is regarded, as regarded: but by the Sun
of Heaven, as his heart is, so he is respected, be his estate poor or rich.

I have heard many seafareing men pray for diverse winds, as their way was
bound, North, South, East, West, which Lucian in his dialogues laughs at,
husbandmen for rain, and at the same time travelers for fair wether, so in
all a confusion. As if the Sun, Wind and Rain were to be fitted to the
measure of our sensual occasions; so does self-love blind most men, when
indeed the Sun, Wind, and Rain, are God his Creatures, not ours, but by
sufferance of his goodness, and however it blows, shines, or raines, we
ought to be content and thankful, (not grutch at: Heaven with Mistress minkes
riding to Ware) but reverence so great creatures, however to our ends contrary.

To desire of another any thing without valuable consideration is foolish
self-love and childish craving.

It is honorable to aid honest investigation; for though not suddenly
obtained, yet the intent was noble, but if found; profitable, and with every
one praysable. When we wink at a friends faults, our judgment turns like
vinegar, the spiritual part inward, and is last distilled, in a worthy minds
accusation or wonds.

A drunkard is a mad man for the tirne, but a mad man is always drunk.

When we meditate or act good things, we only live; but when we eat,
drink, spend time vainly, and sleep, we are dying.

Stage Plays, and pleasures, are but wakeing dreams.

All things are ordained to praise God, the Metalline stands brightly fixed for
his glory, the vegetable springs up, and spreads his flowers and fruits as in
sacrifice; the Animalls suffer; and labor, and therein show us our duty; And
we were worse then them all, if we do neglect withal humiliation to still
laud, and thank his bounteous goodness; to whom he has only given a
reasonable and discoursive soul.

The more we show our understanding with humility and prayer unto God; the
better he loves us; the more we show our wit to Critical man, the more he
disesteemes us.

Judgment pearceth into the cause, and streatcheth with th'extension of a
thing: Conceit has taken but a superficial eye and a small circulation.

Art thou crossed and unhappie in thy worldly dedesires and works? why, think
with thy self art thou better then thy Captain and Master Jesus Christ? was
not he crossed even to the suffering a most bitter death upon the cross,
despised etc. And as his great grandsiere ( David) by the mothers side, was
thrown out of the world as a broken potshard. Hold thy self then up in God,
who is not only the Creator but preserver of all his works: and if thou be
one of his, thou need not fear but that thou art in the eye of his
providence. And examine thy self closly if thine own courses are not the
cause of thy affliction; a hundred witnesses to one thou will find it so.

It discovers an earthly soul, where the discourse is most of morceaux friands
(as the French call dainty dishes) for we should eat to live, not live to
eat.

A large complement ushers a close craft; an honest meaning, gives due respects.

It is easy to make men believe they are better than they be: but you may
flatter some women beyond the knowledge of themselves.

An ungrateful nature has great cause to fear necessity, for it is but just
he be the most despised wretch may be: if he relapse in his best, his
thoughts bestinke his memory.

Make no secret contracts or close business with a weak braynd man, for
lookers on will judge thee crafty by his weakness, how sincerely soever thou
dealest.

It is a misery in a free spirit to depend on others, so unstable are most men
in these times; wherefore with Paracelsus, Ne sit alterius qui suus esse potest.

The best answer to an ignorant denier of principles, is silence, and to an
obstreperous arrogant, a cudgel or laughter.

Alchymie is the knowledge of things hidden in nature, the revelation thereof
the gift of God.

It is worth a large smile to observe how in things darkely discovered, every
one through self love thinks themselves cunning.

See thou that the world runs not on thy side, give over the world then,
and go upon Gods side, (that is) despise the desires of it, which is but
cherishment of this frail and fading body: but if thou changest then to God
his side, thou shall at last find a perpetual way of bliss, when thy soul
is got free of his prison.

It is worth the observing in a knowing man, to see how one unknowing Alchymist
presumes upon the ignorance of his brother.

To condemn good and Authentic Authors, to uphold a self loved argument or
opinion, shows a reprobate ignorance.

Keep not company with him is servant to his servants, and they servants to
vice, baseness, and ignorance.

You can hardly find a rich Gentle weak unthrift, but his house is lyned with
Queanes and Knaves diggon.

Show no inward excellency to an ignorant, for he is apt to contemn that
where of he is incapable.

The science of hidden Philosophy may be true, but most of the Artists the
world knows false.

A mettall-monging Alchimist is but a hors-keeper to a coyner, however he
curries his tromperie; but if he rides on the jade himself, his journey by odds
reaches to the Gallows, if imprisonment Inn him not by the way.

Humane understanding follows high science slowly, but fools and women quest
with Quando.

He cannot justly be deemed dishonest that puts supposition to the proof,
though with charge: but he that knows a thing to be false, and for wicked
gain leads others to repentance therein, is a knave.

A bold fool has great advantage in quiet over a sober wiseman; for the fool
accounts an earthquake but the earth's Morice-dance, Thunder the Clouds
Colique, the wars a may game, fighting at sharp a sport, till he be beaten
to better respects.

Take him for one of the unworthies, that cannot endure the praise of another.

In abstruse things, arguments are endless; obedience is better than Sacrifice.

Base sloathfull minds never think themselves satisfied for small panes.

The word, good fellow as it is now senced by the vulgan, imports a drunkard in
a man, a light huswife in a woman.

In our youth the senses bore the dominion, but in our age the understanding
should.

It is a poor backbiting stinking shift, to caluminate authentic
Authorities, and Authors; but plain Roguerie to decurte or mispoint their
writings.

Aproud man of all others should not be penurious, for it engenders his hatred,
and due contempt.

Study, read, practice, and do what can be to obtain knowledge; yet you
shall find an Ignorant will contemn all, rather then lose the opinion of
himself.

I am many times forced by the laws of hospitality to endure the hearing of
goodmen calumniated, but I bear it the easier because the servants of vice do
it.

In argument strive not too violently with an Obstinate; for as stairs mounts
us to a chamber, so must you graduate him.

An unlearned disputant, is troublesome company, but if angered very evil
society 'and a sponge for defamatory intelligence.

Books are the best companions can be; for they keep their passions inward;
and you need not be troubled with them longer then you list or will.

A good book should be read three times; first, to set his method; secondly,
his matter; thirdly, to gather his instruction.

Another oppinion of thee, concerns thee not so much as thine of thy self; in
which thou should not be partial.

I never took a quick answerer, to have a great understanding, for small
things are sooner contracted then great.

We have three things to do in this world, though some say but two: viz. to
avoid evil, to do good, and things necessary or indifferent.

See thou thy poverty and improsperitie makes enemies of thy former thought
friends? Faint not therefore, for they were but outward friends not in ward,
and are like dogs that follow the meat not the men.

A prejudicate conce^ works like Yeast in a weak judgment.

Never trouble your self with another immagination or what he speaks o^
thee in secret: for it is no^ worth thy understanding unless he durst speak
it openly.

He that backbites other let him take care he wear clean linen himself,
and keep no company with women and dogs.

Point not at an others spots with foul fingers.

When I behold a man bravely accoutred, a Lacedaemonian even to the shoulders,
I think of Adams nakedness, and smile to see how For-like the world esteems
us, more for the case then the carkase.

Passions are of diverse natures, and choler the most unruly and untunable to
all gentle society; which if you can command, you are master of the captain.

Disprayse, by a fool, Queen, or Knave, may stick like burs for the time, but
they pearce no further then the outside of the stookings, and garments; and are
rather an honest man's comendation.

There Is secret poison to the soul, lurking in the bottom of great bowls of
wine.

Men for the most part shake hands with sobriety in the third cup of wine;
women in the second; children in the first. Bacchus and Venus are near
friends; yet will Bacchus break Venus her glass when he is much drunk.

A coniurer without learning, shows his devil is but an ass, or the spirit
he works by, an ignorant slave.

Drunkenesse is the gate to all vice, or a pair of spectacles to see the
Devil and his works by.

Life cannot dye; that which we vulgarly call death, is but dissolution of
parts.

God his fire is life, which may be removed; but cannot be extinguished.

That pleasure which is modest, moderate, and permanent, is most to be
desired, and highest to be found.

A robust breeding makes a rough spirit, and condition; and is apter to anger,
then reformation.

There Is no telling a bred Seaman his errors aboordship, or a drunkard he is
so, when he is so.

A voluptuous man will be master of his word, that is, he will rather command
it then it shall force him; but a just man is a servant to his promise.

They are the proud indeed, who overpasse the bounds of their calling and
parts, to challendge respect of others.

Our Appetites are Danaus daughters, and our bodies their Tubbs.

Good objects stay and help the wandering of our minds: hence the Historical
use of pictures and holy Images are not unprofitable, though Devotion sometimes
overshoots the mark.

The cleanest of our clay houses have many durty corners, which like Sluts we
love not to look upon till we are chidden by affliction.

Men in Ancient time fought to prefer virtue and virtuous men; now
silkewormes doung has gotten the upper place.

A Fly with a candle does as a Fool with a fray, and money.

A Poet has advantage of a true Historian, for he can fashion men as they
should be with invention only; the other ought to report them truly, as he
finds them in many records.

Vain boasting of knowledge shows emptiness therein, or vain glory thereof.

He that steepes his Jest in his own laughter, is like him that swallows his
spettle, but uncomely.

Ancient Heralds did denote the quality of deserts pretily and properly, when
they gave the field Sables to gownmen; a field Gules, to deserving Soldiers;
Argent and Or to men favored in Courts of great Princes; etc. But now they
sell monsters, and cruel beasts to one another.

Few men wear in their coat Armours, Lambs, Doves, and such harmless
creatures, but ravenous, devouring and horrible beasts and birds; which denotes
that Pride is cruel, and this invention is a child be got by war.

A Serjant at law, will endure the discharge of a great piece as stoutly, as
the proudest soldier of us all.

Sleep of the body is the Image of its death, and dreaming shows the soul is
neither at home, or needs sleep.

A translator of books, is but as one that deals another bread to all about
him.

A translator and an Anagrammatist are both in a narrow room or entry, cannot
bestirre their wits if they deal truly.

Vulgar and mean witted people that meddle with the affairs of mighty;
Potentates, resemble clownes and russettings in a Stage Play, when they presume
to sit in the play kings seat.

A students wife precizely fine and fair, denotes her husband has often trouble
in his studies.

The Mother knows best whether the child be like the father or no?

Lustful people resemble those sharp-stomack't gluttons, that take delight to
often whet their knives, and so wear them for the Bellies sake, to the back.

A fool that tells some dull saltlesse jest to hold company with wit crackers;
is like Aesops ass, that imitated the fauning dog.

It is music of the spears to hear a wise and learned man discourse; but a
trouble to the ear, and a burden to the mind, to hear an ignorant fool
prattle.

He that has valiantly approved himself in his youth is excused for
answering swearing brabling darers in his age; and he that has written well,
is excused for speaking much.

In our childhood we were fools; in our manhood we are servants of care, and
in our age Porters to diseases.

Reprehend not thy friend too plainly unless thou know him wise, else thou
shall find it unseasonable at all times.

An opticke multiplying Glass is like a traveling young gallants thoughts, or
a vulgar Alchimists hopes, both great through perspective.

He that strives to agrandize himself above his place, shall find envye lie
lurking a th'wart his way, and in Court it lies smiling too.

Soldiers and Saylors should be the Godliest men of all other professions,
because so often exposed to danger; and the saylor is reasonable at sea, and
cannot abide whistling, but at Land, they are both Vpzeefreeze.

Why should any be immoderately covetous, or unfittingly penurious, who has
neither Child nor a lease of his life?

You may more offend a Pedagogues disposition by breaking. Priscians head, then
by wounding Reasons side with nonsense.

Lawiers because they are in the ships poope, near the stirrage of the State,
think their places before the Martialists: but soldiers know their precedence,
for they are in the force-castle; the difference is, the lawiers have often
apparitions of good Angels, when the soldiers many times are paid with cracked
crowns.

Suppose our Thunder and lightning to be one of the fairest days in Hell, but
the burning of Sodom and Gomorath, their ordinary weather.

He that strives to live beyond his means and place, puts a burden upon his
lives back.

An usurer that lives upon eight in the hundred is like a pike that feeds and
lives by devouring the smaller fish: but the difference is, when Death brings
him to the dresser, he butters himself.

There is no presumption from the Center of the beggar, to the circular of the
promoted rich; if graduated by virtue, and worthy deserts; for virtue was the
first promoter.

There are 3. sorts of honest men, viz. your exchangeman for the bearing up of
his credit; your cautionarie, for fear of laws; but your true honest man is
he, that is so for it self.

Nature works by her ordained quallitie on quantity; your University
Physician, on form by prescript; but an empirike lays about him like a Fencer.

Libelling is but an itching of the wit, but if he be taken scratching, he
smarts more for it then his reader profitts thereby.

A libeller of great Princes errors, is like on throws the snuff of a candle
amongst a heap of people; which a wise and moderate man, treades out.

When thou find vanity bear too much dominion in thy humors, think on thy
Death, judgment, Heaven and Hell.

The over lavish talk of a thick-witted fool, is like the roasting of a fatt
goose; much folly drops into the dripping-pan of others ears.

It is no wisdom to refuse the fruits of August, for the flowers of May; that
is; to give Benefits for fair words.

Vituperate no man, to cover thine own defects.

A striving affected quickness, denores a giddie and unstable condition.

It is not material what men say: but what Reason speaks in men.

Esteem not so much what the society be you keep, as what the company is.
For company is the clothes of your habit.

Prejudicate that most common laws esteem all quallities excepting his own
and ready money, as he speaks French.

To deem a Man by his actions and deeds, is the certain and unfailable way of
judging.

He is not out of the estate of grace, who chides himself for errors, but he
who is carried by vice like a straw on a stream inconsiderately.

The rust of usury many times frets in the Childrens fortunes.

There is nothing proclaymes a man's wisdom more, then the government of his
passions: for fools through the spectacles of fury, see repentance in the red
letters of their shame.

It is the Natural of most ignoble spirits to judge and censure others in the
worse part; but noble Sr P. S. said evil speaking of others comes of the evil
we have in our selves.

Evil men delight to make others so, but a good man is apten to amend his own
defects then to accuse others.

Seek to remove thy crosses by fervent prayer to God, and withal do honestly
what thou may; for the Arms of heaven, says one, are our endeavors: make
the husbandman thy example.

A man grown shameless in his talk is like a bagg full of Eeeles and snakes;
if opened, who knows what comes out first?

A Musician or a Poet overcurious to give his fantasies compositions, is as a
gardener that denies leaves and smelling flowers: for matters of delight and
recreation are but so in comparison of the fruits and seeds of necessary arts
and sciences.

Mariadge in the budd of making, is like the month of April, but May and the
heat of Summer over, and familiarity worn to September, things appear naked
and as they are, and sometimes have cold greefes.

When I hear people in comaparison of disgrace with one another, as, I am as
good or better then he or she, etc. I deem such words proceeds from the
want of true judgment, wisdom and goodness, and that they both may mend.

Where private opinion is sole judge of ambiguous texts, there unity is no
household guest, either in Philosophy, Alchimie, natural Physics etc.

Little young birds and women are very different in sufferance; for much
handling kills the one, and makes the other wanton.

Actions are others books, where we read by their thoughts, and accordingly
judge.

It is the periphrasis of a fool when he has spoken (as he thinks) well,
to ask the hearers if be not so?

Slight loves are sullied with small distastes, but a well grounded
affection, is like a strong how, hardly broken unless extremely ouer-drawne.

Music in young men has fingers, but in aged men only ears.

Many are better guarded then regarded: but a criminal shall have faulty
spy-faults enough going to prison.

Novelties with a wife man are but as dust, brusht or blown off by
examination; but stick in a fools mind as the dirt of Paris in an Englishmans
clothes.

A lowed raenting Speaker that engrosseth all the talk may well be called the
Drum of the Company, and a woman of the same quality the Fife.

It is a laudable quality to keep touch, as they call holding promise: but
when it is against the keepers profit and to do good, Honorable.

He is not maliciously to be blamed that would pay his debts but cannot: but
he that may and will not, should be placed in the singing schools of the
Counters to learn better to keep time.

It is no matter to call or prove a suspicious fool a fool, for in time
he will make himself so known.

If an Illiterate mechanique will force his poor wisdom upon the company: the
best course for understanders is to let him wear himself out of his own
suite of tale.

Soldiers in these peaceful and vicious times of most other professions, stand
clear of one vice, viz. usury.

Of all the letters in the Crossrow a, w. is the worst and ill pronounced, for
it is a dissemblers, and a knaves epitheton.

As a Gentleman's comely audacity, came by his good breeding and generous
inclination: so a base fellows argancy came first by the tolleration of his
malapert sauciriesse.

A wife, and truly learned man, needs not care how fools and base upstarts
expounds him.

How can fools take learning in good part, or embrace learned men, being
bound about the eyes of judgment with the swaddling clouts of Ignorance?

Most men how faulty so ever, love not reprehension, though without envy it
intends their good; but a wise man embraces admonition, and loves the good
counsel giver.

It is taken for a disgrace to call the mean cittisens now goodman, or good
wife etc. but if they had cause for it, they need not be so offended therewith.

Hope bears up the heavy hearted poor man, as bladders and cork an
unskillfull Swimmer.

Fly that house as a plaguie one, where suspicion is master, and Calumny and
slander vicious servants: for the world will Judge thee desperate of thy credit
else, or that thou have none.

Prevent that an evil Conditioned man wrong thee not; for we ought not to
desire or rejoice in any ones punishment, either in this life, or that to come.

All words and actions penetrate not deeply (force excepted) where good
opinion is stopped up by prevaricated ill conceit.

The three notes of a selfe-lover, are over dandling his Children, over
suffering his servants, over chearishing his beard and hair.

It is easy to add to things found, but difficult to invent.

There is such a thing questionless as the vulgar Chymicks, or Philosophers
mimicks, uncertainly seek after: for error denotes a verity.

I can resemble some of our Gingling gallants, to Bartholmein fair in London,
viz. the brute more then the substance, consisting of rattles, drums, and
such Childish toys, at the best, fine pictures and ginger-bread speeches.

The understanding of our vulgar Chymicks is like Whittington with his Catt and
bells; for although they prove not as he did Lord-Mayors in their art, yet
they all can sindg the Catt.

An Alchymist has the reputation of a common liar, for though he should tell
true, yet he should not be believed.

There is an old saying (Jack would be a gentleman if he could speak french)
by which most of our attorneyes are but halfeway yet, for they scarce half do
it all.

I would have a translator to give the names according to the same Language:
for so might an intelligent reader know the Country man spoken of.

No man can truly say he is better then another, because he is rich, strong,
fair, nimble etc. only he may add the letter, r. more then others may: But
where Casualtie and sickness etc can deprive men of all these qualities, none
excels another but in good and virtuous actions, or in suppressing
insurrectious passions, therein he may justly claim a due superiority.

A man too full of suspicion does either accuse his own inward disposition, or
these times very plainly.

That good is cleanely done which stands free from our own particular
interresses.

A prating Drunken busy headed fool, is like a Brewers Cart upon the stones,
makes the most noise when his vessels be emptiest.

A man that hides and flatters himself in his subtlety, does but deceive
himself, for his actions and desires will at last bewray him: yea and betray
him to derision, and contempt.

A broaker endures to be cast in the same mould the usurer is formed in,
though his stuff be not so good or current; and it is high eloquence can make
either of them fit for heaven; yet their selfe-loves would also make it their
interrest.

That man is a good proficient in true wisdom, that esteems of the pleasant
enticements of this world, truly as they be (that is) fadeing shadows, and
like a Stage Play, a mere waking dream.

He that can make agreement amongst Elements, may make peace in himself and
health in others.

A humane body in its variation and surcrease, may be similized to the nature
of the 7. planetts; viz, milkie enfancie to Luna, the prattling School age to
Mercury, the juvenall flowring May time to Venus; the flourishing and
resplendent middle age to Sol; the virile and dareing manhood to Mars; the
better tempered and advized governing to Jupiter; the highest soul flying, and
decrepit body moueing, to Saturn.

Desperate foredoers of themselves denote that they turned their backs upon God
his goodness, and their faces from his mercy.

It is a wreched estate that supports it self by lying and forgeries.

A Painter and a Poet should have a great Fantasy, a Lawier a strong memory,
but a Philospher and a Divine, a deep judgment.

To swagger and roar, is to play the little Devil in this world; to letcher
is like the spider that spinns a webb out of his own bowels; to swill and
drink in excess, is to turn trype-wife and wash gutts.

He that glories to go away with a great deal of drink, shall be
incomparably excelld, by a brewers horse.

God has given us out of his free bounty, and for mere thanks, all things
for enough; but not any thing for too much.

Who would depend any reckoning upon the breath of man or woman, when one and
the same thing, shall have such variation in Epithetes, as what a friend calls
bounteous liberallitie, an enemy calls lavish prodigality; so frugalitie
penury; valor, foolehardinesse; boldness, rashness; audacitie, arrogance;
warynesse, craft; learning, bookishnesse; and also the women call one another
beauty snowt fair.

Thou can not esteem cheaper of thy self and parts then a detracting
disposition will.

Poverty is shamefully worn by a slothful man or an Ignorant person, but by
a deserving and good spirit, it is the witness of the worlds unworthiness, or
the badg of his misfortune.

The Philosophers say Anima, Media Natura, is the Actor of the greatest
Philosophical secrets; the Italians hold the middle place the most honorable
way. The Ancients called Temperance the golden mean; keep thee there, it
matters not for others censure.

He is ill servanted that hears his maid before he sees her, and smells his
man before he eyes him.

To truly judge of a woman, is to suppose her Masculine, and so weigh her
conditions, as breeding, state etc. for we all befoole our Judgments with
thinking too much of her invisibilities.

A busy headed tradesman stock't, has a hive of bees in his pate; but turned
broker; or Serjant varlet, a nest of waspes in his scull, and his mace is the
sting.

It was properly similizd of him that said, passions in a fool were like
ordinance broke loose in a storm at sea; for they ruin themselves commonly
without great help; and a choleric and undisswasable man approues it.

Some Trades man made Scavenger, strokes up his stockeings, carefully; picks
motes from his clothes; discourses of reformation; then made Constable,
extraordinarily cherishes his beard, and getts a humme of state; but being
Churchwarden, acknowledges himself to be one of the worshipful, and picks
quarrels with any glazier in the parish.

We are slaves to the elements, and feign to give the fire food before he
will warm us or cuit our meat; entreat the air with voice and instruments
before he will speak us music: bear and embrace the water ere he will
cleanse or quench our thirst; manure the earth ere he will bring us sustenance:
and they to God are but his Serving Creatures; for the fire is his
Chamberlain, the air his musician, the water his basin, the Earth his
footestoole,

All things obey their ordinance in Nature but Man, and he seduced by his will
and vain Appetites many times turns rebel. But when he returns and becomes
true subject, the Cittisens of Heaven rejoice.

The honest informers I know are books; for they crave nothing but unclasping
and turning over.

Wise Sir Thomas Moore laughed a man should think himself better then his
neighbor, because the cloth of his gown was a finer thread: and Democritus I
think would break his spleen, if he lived now to hear a man should be
wiser then his neighbor by five hundred pounds.

A Goosquill scribe to some fat Saducae, or storvling wrangling Pharisae,
thinks himself more knowing and wise then Albumazer the Heavens notary that
sommond the revolutions; but and you unty the string of this barmie youths
pride, he will blot out his cork, and spend all his wit in frothy scoffs.

The black dog of Newgate I think is but the Genius of envy at Court, of
subtilltie in the City, and of knaverie in the Country, and shakes his loose
hairs in most houses once a year, but is not visible but by effect to sense.

That which a man has attained unto through the diligence and industry of
honest endeavors, is shot free from care of others heart knawing envye: Yet it
is wisdom to be wary of their malice.

It matters not what the person is that speaks, or acts to good purpose: but
what the matter, deed, and speech is.

When a fellow braggs of his swift and far riding in a day etc. I inwardly
praise the horse; and when I see an Heir proud of his ancesters leavings, I
likewise commend the purchassers if they well achieved it.

Most folk are more care full to preserve their clothes from dust and spotts,
then their souls from guilt, and bodies from surfeits.

Poverty is not amiss to a mind not rich in government; but a true wiseman
esteems not worldly wealth to be right riches.

All earthly and corporal contentments do but rank us amongst our fellow
Antes: for the whole terrestrial globe is but as an Ant-hill to God, and we
the pissmires.

War is a horrible Monster; which were better drowned when borne; (as the
ancient Laws of some Countries was to hide natures defects) then bred up and
cherisht by ambitious Princes as it is, to vex the world with roaring.

War the child of injury is prodigal beyond ordination: it is pride in a
soldiers mouth, offense in a civil ear; a Tygar and furious beast when
assaylant, a goodly man when defendant; a monster to heaven, a comaedie to
evil spirits, a tragedy to the good Angels, where men are verbs Active and
passive, and the slain death's windfalls.

Noble Persons should resemble stars in the Firmament, the higher they are,
the less in pride they should seem.

To praise and disprayse one person upon every fleight occasion is like writing
and rubbing out in a Tablebooke.

To be over curious in trifles, is like a Tobacco seller, that discourses the
witness of the ash, rising in the pipe etc.

We ought not to be proud of that another true disprayse, can blemish or
tread out.

Words are vagabonds where the persuaded has an ill opinion of the perswader.

Prosperity, Court, Law, the City and a playhouse, have all the quallitie or
gift to teach folks to be shameless.

So speak of all men, and to all men, as they would all be thy enemies and
shame thee to their power; for men are various, and by nature affect the left
hand in censure of others: it is not what thy wit and understanding is, that
God respects (for, he gave it thee as thy Talent) but what thou do with
it, for of that, he means to take account.

The principal cause as the Spa^iard thinks, the Duch man fell from the Roman
Church, was that they denied the Cup to the Laietie.

Conceive that an other man's intention (Covered however) is most part for his
own ends, and affects therein most his own good, however he will seem to be
thine.

Contradiction is the ruin and death of a lie.

Take no part with people affected to the disprayse of others, for thou know
not thy turn amongst them; but avoid them, and the subject whereon they work
in thine own condition.

A common weal resembles a Ship, the King the master, the Counselors and
officers, the pylot and mariners; the ordinary subjects the passengers,
good-lawes the compass, afaire wind and sea room God his blessing, and years
of plenty.

Those wretches which fore-doe themselves for worldly afflictions and troubles,
are like the flownders that leap out of the drying pan into the fire: The
greevous difference is, the one is momentary and terminate, but the other
everlasting; to similize it more nearer, let us conceave a man bitt with fleas
in his bed, who should therefore throw himself for ease into a cauldron of
scalding oil, or amongst a tubb of Snakes.

Youth, health, and Riches makes a well furnished Palace of this world: but
age, sickness and poverty, a prison of this life: but a good mind expects
delivery with patience.

A Student is with his thoughts, as an Artificer with his fingers.

A flatterer is fodder to a fool.

Where the reason is subjected and forced to follow the will, the actions run
in a Kind of madness.

God saw it was not good for man to live alone, and therefore made him a
helper, viz. woman: Wherefore in consequence a woman ought not only to be a
companion, but also a helper.

Covetousness, sensuallitie, and opinion, are the three Devils stirs most
men to motion.

Care not for men's thoughts of thy works, if thy operations be good; for
their cogitations and thoughts are not thy works; but thy works is the good
thou should be constant in.

As Conjurers when they call up evil spirits, provide before for the safety
of their persons: so if by course of argument thou art forced to contradict the
evil spirit of any man, be sure of thine own safety too; for many are no
better then evil spiritts, and kinds of Devils.

It is a care every man ought heedfully to look unto, what company he keeps:
for evil, base, and ignorant company, are like copper, which if thou mix thy
self with, it will alaye thy reputation, as gold and silver is alayed
therewith, by the goldsmiths.

In thy Election and choice, let not thy affection shame thy judgment; but so
choose that thy Judgment may be commended in thy election.

The railing mouth of an envious villain against the good, is the divell's
baggpipes.

Answer arguments with reason; if reason will not be heard or approved, then
answer them with silence.

Remember always that practice or action takes more deep impression with men
then precept or discourse; which Diogenes well knew when he tombled his tubb.

Our desires begetts our cares, and our courses our fortunes, or the accidents
befalls us meeting with others in the same passages; which we wrongfully
attribute to destiny, for all things with us, comes from our selves, or by our
selves; I mean mundanely: therefore when thou hear a man complain of
fortune, consider his courses, with himself and others.

The Philosophers stone is like the northwest passage, locked up in strechio
D'avies, but not so cold in seeking.

Things profferd and easy to come by, diminish themselves in reputation and
price: for how full of pangs and dotage is a wayling lover, for it may be some
brown bessie? But let a beauty fall a weeping, overpressed with the sick
passion; she favors in our thoughts, something Turnbull.

A man poor, yet rich in knowledge; undertaking to work some excellerie in
this helpelesse age, is like a Merchant that intends some rich Sea voyage,
without a Bark, Victuals, or Men.

The wiser fort of humane judgments, do not accept form for matter, but
matter for form: otherwise our Sophisters would be taken for wise men, who
are yet but Prentises therein.

A constant and wise considering Spirit, gives only place to men's humors,
not to variation in truth.

A bold talking braggart, is like the torrent running from a Mill, troubles the
ear and eye fruitlessly, with what he has done and seen; but angle him of
his knowledge, and you may perhaps catch a Gudgeon.

The true correction of an ill tongued man or woman, is to bid them speak as
they have found, and known, and not more, or less; and forfit for untruths.

He that converseth amongst ill tongued people, is like him that walks amongst
thorns, and to contend with them is to tread on Snakes and Adders.

Conversation with earthly Company and terrestrial things, is but groueling
upon this surface of our great Molehill the earth: but when we in our ayerie
discourses lift our selves higher, let us take heed we put not our mouths too
peremptorily into heaven.

Natur's Instruments wherewith she so wisely and wonderfully works in the
Universe as we see, are the Sun, Moon and Stars Influencies, motions,
upon, in and with the Elements and seeds; But God omnipotent works his will by
his unspeakable power and word, by Angels, Nature, and all things; to whom be
all praise.

It is no more injustice in almighty God to kill and destroy evil men, then
in one makes glasses, and disliking his workmanship therein, breaks them into
the furnace again.

When extremes oppress thee, consider wisely thy courses, and search well
into thy self and actions, if thou be not the cause of them thy self, and
through the perverseness of thine own will, before thou blamest Fortune, or
that we call Destiny; the one a word or figment, the other a course of
occasion, or chance.

Cast the eye of thy imagination as a stranger upon thy outward actions,
course, and behavior amongst people; and thou may find that thy self-love
has covered many things they secretly blame in thee; and which thou ought
tacitly to amend, and discern in thy self.

See thou thy store small and means weak? be content then with small
things; thank God for that thou have, despair not of enough, and do thy
endeavor honestly, and say, Deus providebit.

When thou art tempted by that sensual or substill Spirit (thy will) to eat
of the forbidden fruit (that is) to commit any evil act, either fleshly or
mentally, pray to God, seeing thy weakness or nakedness, and cast thee down
at the foot of his mercy seat, laying hold upon the merits of his Son our
Savior and mediator Jesus Christ, and say with the Psalmist, If thou O great
God should look on all that is done amiss, who can endure thy Justice? O
consider that we are but dust, and seeing there is mercy and compassion with
thee, pardon my frayleties, and keep me from presumptuous sinning, and suffer
me not to be led into temptation, but deliver me from all evils.

We pass our time here with great care of our present being and the
conversation thereof; but God be merciful, for the most part of men, little
look to the future; which is perdurable. O let us note and remember what the
wise man says, viz. As the tree falls so it lies.

Go not to a covetous man with any request too soon in the morning, for his
covetousness is up before himself and he before thee; but stay till the
afternoon, then he will be drunk upon some borrowers purse.

Music breathd by a gentleman, is a juell or earing in others hearing: in a
beggar or fiddler, it is a wallet in the eyes of others thoughts.

We need not go any further then the consideration of our selves (who are by
Moses in Genesis said to be Gods Image) to prove or as it were see, the
Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity; for is not Deus pater anima Mundi?
is not Filius men's aut velle Dei patris? and is not spiritus Sanctus operatio
and gratia Dei? and deus ipse in potentia and actu. Compare then our bodies to
the great world, our bodies and flesh shall turn to dust or earth, so shall
the world to his pristine Chaos; our souls shall endure for ever; God is
eternal; our minds affects this or that, God the Son came down, was
incarnate, showed and taught his Fathers will miraculously, suffered,
descended, rose again; and ascended into his first place. The mind of man
circuits, but still it returns the mind, conclusively; as the Soul and mind
setts the spirit to organize in the body to act; so the Holy spirit proceeds
from the Father and Son, in the motion of the universe; to effect and act his
mind and will. Wherefore with Anaxagoras all things are in all things, Anima,
Men's, spiritus, One in that all, who is three in parts or persons; who moves
this all, making all things obey and serve this one God, as his instruments or
organons: wherefore Plato said well, Caput eius est Coelum, oculus eius Sol;
lula and stellae; venture mare, pedes terra, etc.

Thick fire was the medium between God and Moses in the bush; So the
unspotted flesh, though elementall, of the Sacred virgin; the interpose betwixt
the Deietie of Christ and us.

For Ethnicks, Atheists, Turks, Jews etc. making question why an Eternal
should have a Son? answer is, God's power and word took flesh of the Sacred
virgin, to satisfy his justice by the order of his mercy; and since it was
for man, he served it in the same livery; which no Angel, or creature, could
do, no more then the hatchet can work alone.

He gave Moses laws in Tables of stone, which Moses brake in anger of the
Israelites Idolatry: but he gave us precepts in our own similitude, which
was darkened likewise by our Savior his death on the Cross, but renewed by his
resurrection, as the other by Moses remounting.

If there were 100000000 millions of people on the earth's surface, more then
there is; every one having a burning glass, yet all might use it to effect by
one Sun; In which there are excellent, cogitations to be meditated.

The glory of the Almighty shines in all good things, as his relucent creature
the Sun, spreades his beams in the universe: but when it pleased him to
contract himself to his word, then as a burning glass; gathers the rays of
the worlds Sun: so he kindled a fire on Syon hill, and a bright flame in the
womb of the blessed Virgin, which the proud malice of the Jews striving to
extinguish, made this Gods Son our souls lumination shine the brighter.

Whenever thou see the Moon go into a Cloud, think of the glorious
ascension of our Savior, and how he is in the Sacrament or Communion.

God is one in himself, but as he appears to the world and us, is three,
viz. God the Creator, and our Father; God the Son, as he wore our humanity,
suffered, and redeemed us: God the holy Ghost, as he instructs, governs,
and Consolateth us. Yet all is one God, to whom be all praise.

The exceeding difference betwixt us and our Savior Jesus Christ, is very
apparent in our disposition; for we are bent to the Humanity, and he bent it
to him.

When we contemplate in the fervor of Prayer to find an Idea of the
all-Creator, the utmost we arive unto is a light, which our limited thoughts
cannot so expound, as belongs to his ubiquitie: and so we are set up as with a
period. Therefore O wonderful bounty and goodness of God, that has sent
down his Son, and clothed him in the shape of our humanity, whereby he is
our speculum, and through whom we see Gods mercy, power, love etc.

The word Godly or Godlike, and it is Econtra, has great signification,
denoting some virtuous action, or contemplation, or the contrary to the
contrary.

The whole universe is but as a bowl in the hand of the Almighty; but no
magnitude can contain him that made space and place.

As the luminous carboncle of the Firmament, whose presence makes the Day joy,
and the Night mourn his absence, is the guide unto our bodies in this world:
So the incomprehensible glorious Sun of Heaven is the presence of our day in
God, and our guide to his presence.

All the works of God are essential and concreate; not as man looking on his
face in a glass, a vanishing shadow: for God from all eternity could not but
know himself, and looking upon himself, doubled the beams of his glorious
essence, and begat his similitude or (quatenus nobis) his Son, the divine love
of which resemblance, produced the holy Ghost or Spirit, three individual
persons, in one Godhead to whom be praise, honor, and glory, in one thanks.

Let God his study, be the cheifest place; in thy Souls house.

The highest orb for our station, is the earth, the lowest orb to God's
vision is the earth, what he has done above is for us to look upon, and
admire, not to examine: but what he has by his Commandments, and his Sons
precepts, directed us to do, and believe, we ought carefully to look unto,
(that is) by our Savior his words thus in brief: Love God above all things,
and thy Neighbor as thy self.

God is a sphere whose Center is every where, whose circumference is no where:
A light which through too much claritie becomes invisible, a greatness
containing all magnitude, a power governing all potencie, and a goodness
inexplicable.

To believe things fall only under our senses comprehension, requires no
reward, for reason pays it: but things beyond our reach and verified by two
double Testimonies, engrosseth our bliss of faith in heavenly Characters.

The miracles of our Savior being so supernatural, showed the stony Jews,
had been Gorgonized, before his coming.

All sacred words and divine figures, denote unto us, what we ought to know,
and known to hold inviolably and strongly.

The Humillitie of our Savior, is th'exaltation of our hope to salvation; the
foot of which Ladder was his humanity, the top his deity; the Angels going
up and down, figures of his Passion, Death, resurrection, and ascension;
Jacob's sleeping our let hangie in sin.

God who contains all glorious forms within him, cannot be comprehended in
any figure by man: therefore he sent his Son in man's own figure, to be
the readilier cogitated by man.

The Ancient Ethnique world, were ever too apt and busy, in Deifying men; if
they were but a little taller in their deserts then the ordinary pitch of
others, as in Saturn, Jupiter, Hercules etc. And this was but a trick of that
evil and malignant intelligent spirit, that aped in them before hand, what he
knew would really follow in our Savior Christ Jesus; thereby thinking to stopp
his reputation with such community.

By our pronenesse to evil and penetrative sorrow after the fact; it declares
that our Nature is depraved from the first purity we were placed in; for
goodness cannot produce evil.

Doubtless the conversation of some intelligent evil and depraved spirit
through envy instigated, enticed and contaminated man's Soul; which was the
fruit forbidden, or that Tree of knowledge in good and evil; even as coyture
with an unclean woman contaminates the body of a man.

It has been questionable in my thoughts, why that displaced and dejected
spirit should so greedely seek after man's ruin: I can cogitate no further,
then that his nature being depraved, his burden of torments great, his
despair of release desperate and greevous; his envy therefore is strong upon
those are in way to obtain his place, whom he seeks to hinder and ensnare in
the nets of their own sensuallities, which he knows and see's by their
proceedings and life.

Paradise was created and the man in it, of pure and incorruptible Elements,
and the corruptible World for all other things; but by man's breach of Gods
Commandments, the purity being taken away, man became Companion with the
other Creatures, and by feeding on those Corruptible things, by little and
little was so thrust out of Paradise; that is, out of Incorruptibilitie or tree
of life, into Corruptibilitie, and death.

As by ill inclined will man fell, and was depraved: so by God his good
inclined will, man may rise and be saved.

God could easiler perform the power of his will by his own Essence, then by
any under or subordinate power: and because no man can see him and live (he
appearing in his pure Essentialitie) he therefore Clowded himself under the
flesh of the Holy Virgin.

I have noted many careful to stop the wast of fire, and but careless in
the wast of their time, the ravenous consumer of the most precious Jewel viz
Salvation.

Man's Soul is a spark of the pure Fire circuits God his Seat, struck into
the Tinder of the flesh by the will of the great Creator, and life disposer;
which if here contaminated by variation, and sensuality, cannot approach to
his purity till purged; but obaying God his will, and acting to their power
the precepts given by his Son, it becomes a glorious Essence, and shall
resuscitate and illustrate the body into the same spiritual substance.

When I hear in some great City, many Clocks strike near together, I then
judge the hours are near true telling: so when I see, read and hear the
unity of many ancient and modern judgments agree in Conformity, I deem
their exposition and declaration to be next the truth in all science.

The best manner of means for us to know our own souls, and immateriall
matter whereof it was made, is to come near unto God by fasting, prayer,
humillitie, good deeds: and for that which is his seat and circuites his
glorious Majesty, is of the same substance; and if worldlings knew their
Ignorance, they would not be so bold with their folly.

God his seat (as says a Philosopher) is in the purest of pure and invisible
Fire, which he by his gracious free Spirit only has distributed to man in his
first infusion of life, whereby man is Microcosmos, (with reverence be it
spoken to the Deity) and as in the Threads of a Spiders web the Spider being
centrall, the least touch in circumference gives notion, so all the actions of
man are by infinite ways, perceptible unto God, and he nearer unto us, then
we to ourselves.

I conceive Heaven to be repleatly filled with all spiritual delights, as the
best and most excellent music, composed with a Homonimall Congruence of well
chosen Chordes, and ayerie with the precedents tones.

The end whereto we were Created was to serve, love and honor God, who does
by blessed souls still increase his kingdom, in lieu of those delapsed Angels
once fell. Seek to be one of those Citizens by good and holy life.

When thou prayest to God, conceive thou speak to the whole Trinity, when
by addition of Father, then to thy Creator; when to the Son, then to thy
Redeemer; when to the holy Ghost, then to thy Sanctifier: So thank thy
Creator, through thy Savior by thy Sanctifier, and so in all thou thankest
God, for all.

Prayer is a speaking to God, in which let us regard what it were for a poor
distressed worthless person, to come before the presence of some great Prince
or Potentate of a Kingdom; and so stretch or enlarge thy conceit, how then
before the king of all Potentates Celestial and Terrestrial, what a
reverence and awful respect ought to be used? No fashion or words can
express it, but an humble heart, and mind, void of all earthly cogitations,
is the best oblation, if done with all sincerity.

Pictures of sancteous histories are but notes of divine actions in humane
characters.

He that does not believe the Credo or Symbolum Apostolorum, has little to
do with the Paternoster.

The Paternoster denotes he is our Father by Christ: qui es in Coelis, that
is, above all things in place, power and glory.

Sanctificetur nomen tuum, the duty of our acknowledgement and due thanks to
his goodness.

Aedveniat regnum tuum, that all things and we are in and under his regiment,
and so desire to be.

Fiat voluntas tua, that we (as we ought) do lay down all our affections and
interrests under his will and dispose.

Sicut in Coelo and in Terra, that we may be as obedient to his heasts and
Commandments here, as his heavenly host high blessed is there.

The rest are all plain particular petitions for our private good.

The ancient use of praying on both knees, signifies, in my judgment that we
should offer up all our actions and strength to God; for a man in so kneeling
disableth himself of the possture to act, is unpassible, and as fixed to that
he came from, and to which he must return: The lifting up of the hands,
denotes he is before a dreadful judge, craves mercy, shows the chief
actors of evil and wrongs, and the receivers of many benefits; But the
standing up when the Creed is pronounced, denotes, we should be ready to
justify, stand too, and maintain those Canons of our Faith against all
Turks, Jews, and Infidells.

There is a Circle drawn about the list of man's liberty, and by God
prescribed; out of which if any exorbitantly go, they fall into the Devils
lash, who haunts there as the whippe of God his just justice, whereby we see
many punished in this life, and by straying out of the fold, fall into the
wolfes jaws.

The stars and second causes predominate but upon and in our earthly part and
humors, for the Soul of man was inspired by God, and he is above all:
therefore accidents are but as stumbling blocks, which wise men sees, and
stepps over, but fools (as says Solomon) go in the dark: And the Kingly
Prophet David prayed saying, Set up thy self above the heavens, and thy glory
O God above all the earth, and so (in my opinion) Sapiens dominabitur Astris.

We many times idly blame Fortune, a mere imagination or Idea, when our
own follies and improvidence, is the real cause of disasters. For suppose a
tyle falls on the head, and hurts: Why fortune therefore! you might have kept
at home; but you must by necessity go that way! blame the necessity then.
Fortune is a figment to express chance by, unto which we are all subject.

When storms, inundations, Thunders and Lightnings, Earthquakes, Circuit us,
we then aptly confess our selves under Creatures, and that with terror and
miserable fear; but by forgetfullnesse we again clime above Ela; nay further
into Gods closset, to his foresight, and predestination.

The Chaos of all things, may be compared unto the flint and iron; the striker
God, the lint or tinder, corporal substance, the sparks, life, or soul.

In speaking to God by prayer, although thou can not give the reverence is
due; yet give what thou owe and can duly: Let thy breath first laud him in
his goodness; secondly, crave mercy for thy offenses; thirdly, give him
thanks for thy received benefits; fourthly, humbly crave the preservation of
thy estate here, and life of bliss to come.

It is not the mouth or lip-labor God respects so much, as the heart or mind
in an intelligent orator; yet the resurrection of the body denotes that our
prayers should not be merely mental, but conjoined with corporal action:
for shall we not with Saint Paul hope to see God even with the same eyes? Lift
them up toward Syon hill then, bend the knees, reach up the hands, offer the
calves of the lips, make all thy powers power forth the praise of him that
made thee.

Mere worldlings in Judgment, are blind in censuring divine mysteries; for
did not Festus and the learned Athenians deem Saint Paul's preaching
foolishness? but an over stupid devotion ladeth out of the lighter of the
fantasy more into the Arc of the Church then she should carry; but Sectaries
would throw the Churches treasure over board.

All our life here is but an entertayning of vanities; what good does capps
and reuerences really any man? The satisfaction of appetits, is but the
uncouering of our wants; heaping of Riches, but as ill servants, that will
run to others from us, and lagge behind us: nothing here permanent or true
happiness; let us therefore be careful to purchasse by prayer and good
deeds, treasure for heaven, that we may have wherewith to satisfy our
reckoning there with the great Host, who has forgiven us one score already;
and therefore let us not presume too much on the next.

When I consider the weakness of our humane nature, I wonder mankind can be
proud, for we cannot subsist a little time without the props of meat and
drink, sleep, rest, etc. which the Angels, and spirits need not nor use: but
when I cogitate our frayltie and vanity, I breath with the Prophet David,
Lord, what is man that thou should be mindful of him!

The best use of dreams is to cogitate that as by fulness or coldness of
the stomach, Crudities causes fearful apparitions to the wakeing and
working fantasy; and as good and temperate heat, digestion and humors, cause
pleasant and delightful passages; yet all but shadows and vanish like
darkness from the Sun, when we rise; So when the soul is freed from this
terrestreietie, which clowdeth the judgment and reason; then the evil works
committed essentially, casts the soul most really amongst those are indeed
evil, not in apparition, but deformed Devils indeed: And the good and
virtuous deeds amongst the blessed pleasures of holy spirits and Angels.
Wherefore let us take heed we go not to the bed of our grave with a stomach
overcharged with Sins.

It much matters not, what Religion a fool or a knave is of, for their babbling
is but vain prating, and the tree is best known by the fruit.

Dis the god of Money now laughs out right, because his wares are in more
esteem amongst fools, then virtue, and Stultorum plena sunt omnia.

The Almighty God, is the Soul of the universe, and the rays of his
splendor, is the quintessence in every thing, be it Mineral, vegetable, or
Animal; therefore in whatsoever genus or region an investigating Philosopher
would grow intelligent, in that let him seek the quintessence, which is his
Moon; or else he labors in vain, and gathers leaves in steed of
fruits and seeds, for no man can truly meliorate any thing beyond his
natural perfection, but by multiplying his quintessentiall part.

Quintessence is not as Spageriques mistake it, separation of pure from impure,
but must be taken from both the thin and thick, the spiritual and
corporal. It is within all things non secundum locum et parts; sed secundum
virtutem et actionem naturalem.

What is it to me, what is in the Sun, Moon, Stars, whether they are
worlds or whatsoever Containing; when there is a law set down for me, viz. to
serve their Creator and mine, on this earth; whereto I am fixed, by that upper
ordinance who made them and all. But what I can lawfully find here, he has
given me leave thereby, to praise him, and help my self.

What thou speak. i. e. cogitates, within thy self, know God only hears,
that sees without the eye, hears without the ear, and made thee both
interiourly and exteriourly; But what thou do outward either by action or
words, spirits and men both good and badde, see and judge of. Cave.

Not by eating, drinking, or sleeping does the soul live, etc. but those
additions helps her to sustain the bodies ponder and grossnesse.

When thou tellest another any thing, think he is thy enemy present in his
rotation of thought, or may be so futurely.

Man blessed by God, with a good understanding may be compared to those
feathered Fowls, who lose their plumage in molting time: so may man his grace
in the heat of sensualities, and yet by repentance recover; but he that is
swallowed up by vice is as the Foul taken, killed, and plumed by Cook ruffian
the Devil.

God is the Spirit of Spirits, the Lord of Lords; King of Kings; to be
worshipped in Spirit and truth; Angels, Spirits, Potestares, Powers, Sun,
Moon, Stars, Firmament, Fire, Air, Waters, Earth: the faculties of his
hand; and the universe his Instruments; Man his Spirit is a spark of that
flame, a drop of that Sea, a moate in that sun, his soul with her powers,
are his Spirits faculties, his body is the organon.

God made man and the whole, world to his glory, praise, and use; yet without
his needing them, as we do need, viz. garments, houses, etc.

God is within all things, but not included, without all things, but not
excluded.

There are some of opinion that each man has a double Genious, a good Angel
and a bad, as they please to term them; which I hold no other but the Animal
spirit and the intellectual; The Animal desires the bodies contentment, the
intellectual the souls: if the Animal has the domination, the man is given
to mundane lights which perish with the life: if the intellectual has the
predominance, the soul rejoices in spiritual pleasure, and affects things
good, and eternal. Every man's conversation for the most part shows who
carries the bridle of the will, how, and when.

Those that work on Natures terminations, resemble them who swallow the nut,
shell and all, for the kernels sake: for no man can further reach the
determinate ordination of God in his handmaide Natures house, then by
exuberation of the seeds; for, as says the Philosopher, Species in Speciem
non transmutation nisi reducantur ad primam materiam, and that ordinately
digested, does in Philosophy work beyond Natures Creatures we see; wherefore
let no man despise, or condemn that he knows not.

God almighty, being the fountain of all wisdom, as we call excellent
Sapiens, cannot be without the poor riveret of reason, which he has given to
man.

As our Savior suffered the afflictions of humane nature, as hunger, thirst,
sorrow, fear, anger, weeping, abstinence, pains etc. So ought we in soul
and life to imitate him to our powers, viz. to abstain from Ebrietie, to avoid
vain mirth, and to greeve for our sins, to be valiant in his defense, to
be meek and humble, to mortify our carnal affections and to endure
afflictions patiently.

He that will duly weigh and consider the great and intolerable sufferings of
our Savior, par le menu as the French Phrase is; viz. his blows, whippings,
scourgings, the contumelies of the deryding and rejoicing of his tormenters,
his grief for the lamenting of his friends, his burden of the cross, his
stretching, nayling, drinking vinegar and galle, his raylling spectators, etc.
And withal consider his patience therein, and lamblike endurance, not opening
his mouth to a murmur, but in prayer, and that even for them were his grievous
afflicters: and then poyze thy ability to these endurances, and thou must by
force confess him not only God but thy wonderful good God, thy exceeding
pitiful redeemer; and stand confounded in thy weakness, saying, Glory and
immortal thanks be to the Lamb, that so took away the heavy burden of
our sins.

God his justice is much to be feared, for as he is the fountain of all
wisdom and our loving creator and father, yet to show his detestation to
wilful finners, like a wise schoolmaster he did not much afflict Adam and
his seed, so long as they stood but poor and weak man; but when his justice,
mercy, word, and promise, took flesh and clothed it self in our durty
garments, then God to punish man and Adams fault showed forth the length of the
Arm of his Justice in our meek and suffering inocent Savior; then did his
anger burn, nay flame, against disobedience, and that so extremely, tha^ had
he not been God also, that bear the burden thereof, flesh nor humane
spirit, could have endured the thousand part of the torments he suffered;
which patiently borne and suffered, his justice was satisfied, and man
restored, and directed by a new law, which we are all bound to keep heedfully;
and to take heed of rebellion here eafter.

When I observe a cruel Carter yerke and slash but a poor over-toyld Jade, or
a hasty fool spur him to the guts, I cogitate then, if our godless dainty
gallants were but so pythagorized, how they would wish they had lived better.

Have thou a great estate, and a great spark of Promethian fire; a larger
capacity, a quicker wit, a more solid judgment, a more penetrating
understanding, than many others? art thou not deceived by thy self love? etc.
then remember our Lords parrable of the Tallents, to whom much is given, of him
much is required.

It is not the bare letter of sacred Scriptures men vary so much in, as the
sense; therefore to sail safely in such an immense and profound Sea of
mysteries, where the gusts of self conceit will be puffing, it is wise
warynesse to weigh up the Anchor of faith, and set sail of Christian passage,
by the direction of the wisest and best experienced Masters and Pilots, who
have made happy voyage before us; and such are the Ancient Fathers.

As the Jews used our Savior, so do Sectaries the Scriptures; first they see
and wonder, then question and traduce; then turn them up and down, at last
torture and crucify them.

Reporters of disputations in these latter times, resemble such Painters that
make all the figures and houses according to their Country form and fashion;
but a true relater should give every syllable his due by report, however he
affect.

There is no Creature but loves themselves most, and others to themselves, else
look for no love in this lower world.

As addition and too apt Credulity are motives to superstition, so diminution
and incredulity, is the way to Atheism: keep therefore right in the
apostolic path of faith.

He may according to holy Athanasius Creed, be well held a Christian and
Catholic, that hold's and believes the Trinity in unity, and the Unity in
Trinity: that is our main, and all other Circumstances should not (in may
opinion) make Christians shed the others blood, if the Devil were not too
busy in the envious hearts of placeholders; for we ought not to do evil
that good may come thereof.

In all thou do intend, make God still thy chief material and end.

This life is worn away as a winter day, which to the happy worldlings, seems
fair and pleasant; but is short and variable: to the good and godly (if
afflicted) it is foul, and windy; but the night of death brings them rest,
and a home in heaven; when the wicked then lie without doors.

God is the Father of eternity; men and Angels Sons of Aevum, all other
Creatures subjects of Time.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 34. line 4. for his, read to a. p. 99. l. 13. for but, r. both. p. 102.
l. 1. for russettings, r. rustings. p. 136. l. 15. for honest, r. honestest. p.
147 l. 1. leave out but p. 153. l. 1. for excellery. r, excellency.


