DOLEFVLL NEVVES FROM EDINBOROUGH IN SCOTLAND*

Being Sent to England in several Letters, showing in what danger the City
was, upon the 28. of November, being a general Fast proclaimed there.

ALSO, Sad News from New Castle, being a true Relation how the Major thereof
going to visit the Coale-pits, accompanied by the Aldermen, was by a Dag
wounded, and one of the Aldermen in a Pit drowned.

With Lamentable and Mournful News from Ireland, in the County of Monnoham,
of what cruelty was used to a Lady, and how a Minister was hanged by the Rebels.

^ikewise, the Entertainment of the Earl of Tyrone, by the Rebels, being a
true Relation how Dublin was besieged, by him the treacherous Earl of Tyrone:
but beaten back by the Lord MOORS Cempanies.

Printed for William Field. 1641*

LETTERS FROM Edinborough.
Upon the 25. day of November. ^^41. there was a great and solemn Fast: insomuch
that those who did abhor to keep it. were to suffer the penalty of
Excommunication.

The Churches were well filled, and the best Teachers which were to be had
preached upon that day: to the comfort and stirring up of those which were the
Audience to Piety, and true Religion.

But as it has bin commonly known, that when the best things are in
agitation, then are the wicked most enflamed to work mischief. So it proved
then, as shall now appear: for at that present time* when most devotion was
used, then did a company of Frenchmen raise a most horrid commotion.

In the Market place of Edinborough, where Commonly Farmers leave their corn
which they do not sell upon one Market day for the next market, there did
these Traitors gather themselves together, and about ten of the clock before
noone they resolved all together to fire those chambers, where in all manner of
corn and provision was left, that thereby the place might come to the more need
and want: and consequently, that a dearth might presently ensue.

Fire they did set unto those places of the market, which would soonest take,
which did flame out after an extraordinary manner. Then did these Frenchmen
go crying up and down, Fire, fire, to the great amazement of all those which
were gathered together at Kirk: but God which will not suffer treachery to lie
hid, revealed their damnable intents, thus.

There were certain strangers traveling that way, which did see them when
they were about their hellish enterprises: and as they were crying, fire, fire,
they did lay hold on them, and as the multitude came to quench the flaming
market, they wondered why those Frenchmen were laid hold on.

Then did the strangers relate unto them the whole matter, how that whatsoever
was there done, was acted by the treacherous Frenchmen, who were presently
committed to the custody of Officers: and being examined they answered, that
had their purpose taken full effect, it had bin the best deed which in many
years had been done in Edinborough, they said the people being Heretics,
would have had a good fire to warm them by, after that their rites had bin
celebrated.

The Frenchmen which were about the number of twelve, are at this time in the
Castle of Edinborough, and wait for their judgment, which will be, according as
all traitors merit, a rope to hang them, and good sharp knives to quarter them.

That part of the Market pla^e, which did so violently flame, was by hooks
pulled down: much Corn there was burnt, but the greater part was saved.

From New Castle the 28. day of November, 1641.
THE Major of New Castle with the Aldermen his Brethren rid to visit on
horsbacke the Colepits, as their Office is to do every quartrer of year, where
by the way he was shot with a Dag into the arm, which caused him to fall off
his horse, and with the fall bruised his body more, and does at this time lie
very weak, scarce any hope being of life.

He being sent home in a Coach, the Aldermen continued riding: but at length
there did fall four of them in a pit, which was not to be perceived before
they did fall: but being in, one of them was drowned, and the other three in
great danger of losing their lives, to the great grief of the whole Town: but
those which were the plotters of so great villainy, are not to be found; yet
some are taken upon suspicion, but there is no certainty whither they be the
men*

Cruelty used in the County of Monnoham upon a Lady
THe Rebels coming into the aforenamed County, came unto the hose of a
religious and upright Protestant, which was a Lady, and brought with them an
impudent queen, who came into the Ladies house, which did descend of a noble
house, and told her that she must presently change apparel with her, or else
she should surely be put to death: the good Lady to save her life, parted with
her garments, and put on those of the Rebels, and so went away to the City of
Dublin, where she was enterteined kindly.

Of a worthy Divine which was hanged by the Rebels.
IN the same County came the Rebels to the house of a religious Minister: and
because he would not yield to their Religion, they haled him out of his house,
and in a most cruel manner hanged him; although for his dear wife, and tender
babes sake, he did entreat them to spare his life: yet had they no remorse,
but carried him to the house of Sir Philip Moneale, and there hanged him upon a
Pine Tree.

From Dublin the 29. of October, 1641.
THe Rebels had news in some parts of Ireland, that the Earl of Tyrone was
come from Spain, and arrived at Montoham. Wherefore they gathered themselves
together at Annera, and took counsel how they might congratulate the love of
the renowned Earl of Tyrone (as they termed him.) It was agreed upon by that
Arch-rebell Sir Hugh Oneale, that he should be entertained by them all,
according as their riches would permit them.

Which they did, and being in Annera the Earl of Tyrone counseled them
speedily to be siege Dublin, which two days after they did, and stopped the
passage of the water there. But notwithstanding the Protestants did beat them
back; and took the Earl of Tyrone prisoner: but it was the Rebels chance
also to take the good Lord Moore, wherefore one was released for the other.

After that the rebels departed into the woods and were (as the Protestaats
thought) surrounded and compassed about, but they knowing of the woods got the
better; then the rebels issued out of unknown places, and unawares gave the
Protestants a great overthrow: until the Companies of the Lord Moore marched
up, then they were put to flight.

FINIS.

