Domestic Devotions FOR THE USE OF FAMILIES AND OF PARTICULAR PERSONS.
Whereunto are prefixed Some earnest PERSWASIVES to Prayer and Devotion.

1 Timothy 2. 8. I will therefore that men pray every where lifting up holy hands.

Tertul. De Jejun. Semper and ubique and omni tempore Orandum.

Cypr. ad Donat. Sit tibi vel Oration assidua vel Lectio: Nunc tu cum Deo
loquere, nunc Deus tecum.

London, Printed by J. Playford for William Shrowsbery at the Bible in
Duke-Lane, 1683.

THE PREFACE.
THAT there is a supreme invisible Being the Creator and Governor of the
World, is a grand Truth to which we yield our common assent from the evidence
of natural reason, as well as the revelation of holy Scripture. None but a fool
will call it into question in his thoughts; and he must be an impudent
profligate wretch that dares deny it with Psalm. 14. ^.
his lips.

Now when we say there is a God, we do with the same breath acknowledge he is
to be honored and worshipped by us; for the very notion of a Deity does imply
an undeniable title to our greatest service. His nature is transcendently
excellent and glorious and therefore the highest acts of veneration are due to
him; this reason of divine Worship is urged by the Psalmist; who thus
bespeaking the Angels (as the Text is understood by St. Paul) Worship him all
ye Gods, subjoyns immediately after, For thou Lord art high above all the
earth, thou art exalted far above all Gods, Psalm. 79. 7. And Heb. 1. 6.
the same is assigned by a great Divine in Gentile Theology, The nature of God
(says he) may justly challenge the worship of men, because of his superlative
Excellence, Blessedness, Eternity; for whatever excells has on that account a
veneration due to it.

And Epicurus himself though he disclaimed all others, yet admitted, Cic. lib.
1. De Not. Deor.
The singular excellence of the divine Nature, for a solid ground of religious
worship. Sen. de Benef. lib. 4. cap. 19.


Moreover as God is founder of the World, and more especially as Author of our
own being, he does justly challenge our humblest adoration, this is likewise
given in Scripture as a ground of religious service, as Psalm. 100. 2, 3. Where
the Inhabitants of the earth are called upon to serve God with gladness, and
come before his presence with Songs of Praise, on this consideration, that The
Lord he is God, it is he that has made us and not we our selves. And this
glorious Fabric of the World is also proposed by Tully as an argument for
Divine Worship in these words, That there is an excellent and eternal Being,
and such (...) and the order of heavenly (...) do compel us to acknowledge.
Lib. 2. de. Not. Deor.


Again it is most just and congruous that God should be adored by us, as he is
the Sovereign Lord and Supreme Governor over us and the whole Universe; by
whose providence we are sustained, and both our persons and all that we have or
can desire at his free dispose; there is a great honor belongs to earthly
Rulers, because of that high Station and Dignity wherein they are placed; but
to him by whom these do reign as his substitutes, who is the blessed and only
Potentate the King of Kings and Lords of Lords, the greatest honor must needs
be due, and the highest veneration possible as is that of religious Worship;
and this reason of adoration is also alleged by the Psalmist for having said,
The Lord he is a great God and a great King above all Gods, he thence takes
occasion of stirring up himself and others to Come and Worship, to fall Psalm.
95. 3.
down and kneel before him; and it is urged by God himself, when reproving his
people for their neglects in his Worship. For I am a great King says the Lord
of Mal. 1. 14.
Hosts. To this belongs that of the Moralist, when he says, It Is the first
honor of God to believe that he is, and the next to ascribe to him his
Majesty, to ascribe his Goodness, without which there can be no Majesty at all;
to be sensible that he does preside over the Sen. Epist. 95.
World, that he governs all things by his power, that he has the care of
Mankind.

But we need not stay long in representing the reasonableness of that about
which mankind have been always satisfied, and as it were determined to it by
mere instinct; it being a plain dictate of the Law of nature that God is to be
worshipped, and usually reckoned among those first Principles which neither
require proof nor admit any doubt; and therefore Aristotle though an heathen
has excepted it out of the number of disputable Problems, adding, that whoever
should call the same into question, was (...) lib. 57 cap. 11.
not to be dealt with by Arguments but Punishments.

So intimate is Religion to the Soul of Man, that some of the Learned have
thought it to be of his very Essence, and that it is the primary difference
(rather than reason) by which we are distinguished from Brutes; for there seem
to be some imperfect discoveries of reason in the actings of other living
Creatures; insomuch as that several Philosophers, both Ancient and Modern, have
not doubted to affirm, that they are in a lower degree truly rational. But,
Amongst all kinds of living Lib. 1. de Leg.
Creatures (says Tully) that are in the World there is none, but Man that has
any Notion of a Deity. In this surely we may be positive, that Religion if not
our Essence, yet is a property issuing from it by a kind of necessary
emanation; whence it has come to pass, that scarce any thing can be named in
which Mankind have in all times and places been so unanimous, as the Belief and
Worship of a God. And the barbarous people, which being dark in ignorance could
not discern the true God, yet rather than want an Object of their worship (...)
that did them good; and (...) down to the Host of Heaven, to Men like
themselves, yea to Birds, four-footed Romans 1. 23.
Beasts and creeping things.

But to us Christians the dayspring from on high has risen, and we are
happily guided to the right and sole object of religious Service by the holy
Scriptures. Whereunto St. Peter wills 2 Pet. 1. 19.
us to take heed as to a light shining in a dark place; and as this Written
Revelation, does bring to our notice the eternal and only true God whom we are
to worship: so it does render us on many accounts the more obliged to do it.
For the Word of God does discover to us the infinite and adorable perfections
of his Divine Nature; as also our own dependence on him, both in respect of his
Creation and Providence: it does contain his express Commands that we should
serve him, together with prescriptions as to the manner of performance; and
moreover we have there many and great, encouragements to the Duty; especially
that of an eternal and glorious (...) in the (...) life. (...) Childhood know
(...) Scriptures, shall however neglect the worship of God; it will be an
impiety void of all excuse; and for such it will be more intolerable at the
last day than for rude Scythians and Americans.

It might in reason indeed be thought unnecessary, that Persons bred up in the
Church of Christ, especially in such a part of it as ours, where the Bible is
vulgarly known, and practical Religion so clearly taught; should be called upon
to pay their tribute of service to the Almighty. But however we may unhappily
observe, how innate depravity and the immorality of men's lives do alienate them
from God and his Worship, there are too many every where who live by Sense more
than by Faith or Reason. And because God is not present to their outward sight,
as were the Idols of the Heathen, he is also absent from their thoughts: and
they are not apprehensive it is of any great concern to them that they attend
upon him in the Duties of his Service.

But the more easy and common impiety in this kind is the neglect of those
Devotions which should be in private Families, and in the retirements of
particular persons apart. For securing the public Worship of God the National
Government has been very Zealous, there being penal Laws for bringing men to
it; and they find themselves obliged to frequent the Ordinances of our
Religion, not only by the fear of God, but also by that of the Magistrate, who
bears not the sword in vain. And for the solemn service of God in Parochial
Assemblies it is abundantly provided in our Liturgy: wherein are pious forms for
all public occasions, composed at first by the renowned Reformers of this
Church and Kingdom, Men who hazarded their lives (and some of them lost them
too) for the Name of the Lord Jesus, and in defense of his Truth and Gospel. To
these great Worthies, the Souls of this Nation are more endebted under God than
words can express: and their Memories as well as their Reformation should be
for ever precious to us.

But though the public exercise of Religion be so well cared for, yet there
are not the like furtherances of private Devotion; by the commands of God
indeed, and by all the reasons of Divine Worship, Domestic Piety is no less
required than that of the Temple. But yet it is not enforced by any humane
Laws; nor has the Church thought fit to recommend any Forms of Devotion either
for Closet or Family; that the Prayers in our Liturgy are not prescribed with
respect to private Houses, so as to be obliging there, is declared by Dr.
Hammond, and he does not only approve of other Forms to be used in Families,
but also that it may be in Visitation of the sick, though there be an Office in
the book of Common Prayer for that occasion. And it has been thought by some,
having as high an esteem for the Liturgy as others, that considering the
general temper of men, it would much abate their veneration of the public
service, and make them more slack; and regardless in their attendance at the
Church, if the Devotions there were no other than what they have every day in
their own Houses. But whether so (...) no doubt, that (...) which enjoin
religious Duties, together with the Sanction of Penalties annexed to them, do
only respect the public places of Worship. So that elsewhere men are left to
the alone obligations of Religion and their own Conscience. And it is the less
to be wondered that this so considerable a part of Christian Piety is no more
practiced. The neglects of holy Duties in Families may be too well known: and
those others more private may be also presumed without any breach of charity.

But it is much to be lamented that any instructed in the Discipline of the
Gospel should think it enough to Worship the glorious God their Creator one day
in the Week, and content themselves with so much only of Religion, as the Laws
of their Country do force from them.

Now if we enquire how this may come to pass; beside the sinful corruption of
men and their aversation thereupon from the exercises of Piety; it may be
thought generally to proceed either from this, that they do not sufficiently
know, or at least are so stupid as not to consider their Obligation in
Conscience to the Duties they thus omit, and how much their own interest is
concerned in the due performance of them: or else in some it may doubtless be
from a want of assistance to their Devotion, while destitute of suitable
composed Prayers in which they should address themselves to God.

Both which probable causes of so great irreligion the Author was willing to
remove. The former of them by his following Perswasives: and the atter by some
composures for Domestic Devotion thereunto subjoined. In the Perswasives he
has not undertaken any exact discourse concerning Devotion as to the nature of
it, it is several parts and the manner of due performance; much less to
entertain the Reader with an elaborate flourish of words; but his design is
only to enforce the Practice of this great Duty by a Summary of Arguments which
seemed most material: and to do it with such plainess, as might render them
more apt to convince and affect those of meanest capacity.

And the Prayers here offered by him to the use of well disposed Christians are
but a few; being only for ordinary occasions, excepting those in case of
Sickness. In all of them he he has chosen still to take in what he thought
pertinent and necessary rather than boast his own invention in an affected
variety.

Hoping his good intention herein will atone for any lesser failings that may
occur to the Critical, he does send them abroad with this one short Prayer
more; that by the Divine blessing they may prove really useful to the
furtherance and help of Christian Devotion, and for promoting the service and
honor of the Great God, of whom and to whom are all things. Amen.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. l. 16. read Subsisteret. P. 11. Marg. r. Just. Mart. P. 34. l. 27. put
VI. for 6. P. 40. l. 9. r. by God. P. 43. l. 25. r. effected. P. 47. l. 3. r.
does. P. 73. l. 26. r. there the. P. 85. l. 16. r. much the. P. 88. marg. r
Ascet. P. 93. l. 7. r. do thou. P. 94. l. 24. r. and hasty. P. 104. l. 17. dele
thy. P. 107. l. 15. r. thee my. P. 108. l. 6. r. employing. P. 133 l. 14. r.
atone. P. 139. l. 12. dele happy. P. 136. l. 6. r. pity. P. 198. l. 3. r. or
any. l. 23. r. adapt. P. 169. l. 9. dele all. l. 25 r. intention. P. 205. l.
28, 29. r. supposed. P. 206. l. 26. dele not. P. 208. l. 7. r. corners. P. 229.
l. 28. r has. P. 251. l. 10. r. in my.

A PERSUASIVE TO PRAYER.

A PERSUASIVE TO PRAYER.
PRayer is a Duty of Religious Worship, wherein we own God for the Supreme
Being and Lord of the World, and yield him Honor and Adoration as such;
wherein we acknowledge our dependence on him, we submit our selves to him,
imploring his gracious favor, and the communications of his goodness. This
does belong to Natural Religion, being taught us by our inbred Reason; and is a
necessary consequent from the belief of a God. Whence the practice of it has
been universal, and the most degenerate of Mankind have used to invoke some
Deity or other. We read how the Priests of Baal did call upon him from morning
to evening 1 Kings 18. 29.
; and the Mariners in Jonah's Tempest cried every one unto his God Jon. 1. 5.
. We may also observe from our Savior, that the Heathen had their Prayers, in
which they used vain Repetitions, and did think to be heard for their much
speaking Mat. 6. 7.
. It does appear from their own Writers, how zealous they were in their
Idolatrous Devotions; that they had every where their Temples, Priests, and
stated times of Worship: And 'twas a received custom among them in every
business of moment they were to undertake, Initium a precationibus capere Plin.
Paneg. Traj.
, to begin with Prayer.

In the Church of God Prayer has been always esteemed the principal part of
Religion. We read in the Old Testament, how it was in constant use with those
who professed the true God. In his Temple at Jerusalem were offered up daily
Sacrifices Exodus 29. 38, 39.
, which were still accompanied with Prayer Ecclus. 50. 15, 16, 20, 21.
, by which they were recommended to the Divine Acceptance, and the Worship
rendered complete. And they had there a Liturgick Service, consisting of
Prayers and Praises. Of such the devout Psalms of David are made up; and it is
with reason believed, that some of these were a considerable part of that
Service; which is probable from the Titles of them, as of Psalm. 88. and 92. and
those others which are inscribed to the Praecentor or Chief Musician. It is
mentioned when one Psalm of this sweet singer of Israel was first delivered by
him for public use 1 Chror. 16. 7.
; and we read, that in the time of Hezekiah the Priests and Levites did praise
the Lord in the words of David 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.
. Beside the more solemn Service of the Temple, the Jews did likewise every day
celebrate their Devotions in the Synagogues, which were throughout the Country.
And for daily use, they were furnished with certain set Prayers, eighteen in
number, compendiously made, that they might be the more easily remembered D.
Lightf. Hor. Heb. in Mat. cap. 6.
. And it is affirmed by Grotius, Lightfoot, and other Learned Men, that the
Petitions of the Lord's Prayer are for substance the same with these of the
Jews, and abstracted from them. So careful were their Rabbi's or Doctors to
promote Devotion in their Scholars, that beside the ordinary Prayers, they were
wont to recommend to them some others of their own composing i. And thus did
John the Baptist, of whom we find in the Gospel, that he taught his Disciples
to pray Luke 11. 1.
.

The usual times of Prayer observed by the Jews, were no less than three every
day, the third, the sixth, and the ninth hour. And it has been a Tradition
among them, that the third was instituted by Abraham, the sixth by Isaac, and
the ninth by Jacob Drus. in cap. 3. Act. Apost.
. To these hours we must refer the Devotions of David and Daniel, when we read,
they were performed by them three times a day Psalm. 53. 10. Dan. 6. 10.
. It was from a regard to Prayer, especially that their Phylacteries were so
much valued by them, and therefore named Tephillim or Precatoria, being scrolls
of Parchment (whereon were written some parts of the Pentateuch) fastened on
their foreheads and the wrists of their hands; and by these they intended to be
put in mind of their duty to God: Also by having them on at the time of
praying, they thought they did serve him in a manner the more holy and
acceptable. From their high opinion of Prayer and its great importance,
proceeded that proverbial saying among them, Sine stationibus non subsistere
Mundus; without standing Prayers the World would not stand: For by Statio, or
rather the Hebrew word answering to it, they used to fignifie Prayer, it being
one of the seven names by which they call it, from the posture in which it was
by them performed; for the Jews (unless at the times of mourning or
extraordinary humiliation) did commonly pray standing, as several places of
Scripture do plainly show Neh. 9. 5. Mat. 6. 5. Mark 11. 25. Luke 18. 11.
, and therefore that Text, Genesis 18. 22. which by us like as in other versions,
is rendered, Abraham stood before the Lord, is in the Chaldee Paraphrase
Abraham prayed before the Lord; and from the Jews the same might descend to the
Christians: For that they did anciently pray standing, does appear out of
Justine Martyr, St. Cyprian, and others. The former-nam'd relating the manner
of their pious Exercise on the Lord's day, says, After these things we stand
up all together, and pour out our Prayers: And in the latter it is, Quando
stamus ad orationem, etc. When we stand at Prayer, most dear Brethren, we ought
to be watchful, and to attend our Prayers with our whole heart Just. Mar. Apol.
2. Cypr. de Orat. dom.
. Though it must be said, there is this other account too, why Christians used
that posture, namely, that they intended it as symbolical of our Savior's
Resurrection; and a visible token of their stedstast belief of it; which they
knew to be the supporting Article of their Religion. It is therefore called by
St. Austin, Signum resurrectionis Aug. Ep. 119. c. 15.
; and that it was so, may be collected from the special times in which this
Ceremony was observed, which were every Lord's day, being the day of the week
on which Christ rose from the Dead; and from Easter, the solemn Festival of the
Resurrection, on every day 'till Whitsontide Tertul. lib. de cor. mil. cap. 3.
August. Ep. 119. c. 17.
. We do account it wickedness (says Tertullian) to fast on the Lord's day, or
to pray kneeling: And we enjoy the same freedom from Easter Day 'till
Pentecost. That standing at Prayer should be generally observed at the times
now mentioned, the Fathers of the great Nicene Council thought fit to enjoin in
their 20th Canon.

This minds us to add farther, how the Duty we are upon has been more
eminently exemplified since the times of the Gospel, in the practice of Christ
himself, of his Apostles, and of those who professed the Religion by them
taught in the first Ages of Christianity. That our Savior prayed often, and
sometimes very long, we are informed by the Evangelists. and St. John has
transmitted to us one complete Prayer of his which he used together with his
Disciples a little before he was betrayed John 17.
. Of the Apostles we read, that being met soon after their Lord's ascension,
they all continued with one accord in Prayer and Supplication. Act. 1. 14.
Likewise when they were to fill up their number, by choosing one into the room
of Judas Act. 1. 24.
; and when being assembled at another time, the Holy Ghost fell on them Act. 2.
1.
: Again, when they were together for the Election of the seven Act. 6. 6.
. Thus auspiciously did these wise Master Builders of the Christian Church lay
the foundation of their great Work in the humble duty of Prayer.

The Christians living in the succeeding times of Heathen Persecution, were not
ashamed nor afraid to worship their God and Savior, when it was most despised
and frowned upon by the then ruling Powers; and they had Zeal enough to keep up
their Religious Meetings, though they did thereby run the greatest hazard of
their Estates, Liberty, and Life it self. They came together to one place to
pray, having one common Prayer, and with one mind Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes.
. When any new Converts were to be admitted into the Church, the great Lesson
was, They were taught to fast and pray, to call upon God for remission of Sins,
the whole Congregation also fasting and praying. Then were they brought to a
certain place where Water was, etc. and after they had been baptized, They were
brought to the place of the Congregation, whither the Brethren were assembled
to make their common Prayers to God, both for themselves and the baptized Jus
^^r. Apol. 2.
. Looking up to Heaven (says Tertullian) we pray with hands wide open, because
they are innocent; bare-headed, because we are not ashamed; without a Monitor,
because our Prayers are from the heart Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
. And again, We meet in an Assembly or Congregation, that we may besiege God
with our Prayers as with an Army, such violence is pleasing to him Ib. c. 2. 9
. When the Persecutions were so hot and furious, that they were not permitted
to assemble openly, they did then betake themselves to subterraneous Vaults, to
Fields and desert places, and would rather want their sleep, than the
opportunities of their Devotion; for they had their Coetus antelucani, Tertul.
de Coron. Mil.
Assemblies before day, their Nocturnae Convocationes, Idem ad Vxor. lib. 2.
Congregations in the night time. And as 'twas reported by one of their
Persecutors, who had made strict enquiry into their way of living, They did use
to meet together at appointed times before day, and sing Hymns to the honor of
Christ, as God Plin. l. 10. Epist. 97.
.

Moreover their frequency in this holy Exercise is very memorable; for beside
the morning and evening, they had every day three other times of Devotion,
which (being the same as before to the Jews) were at the third, the sixth, and
ninth hour; or according to our division of the day, at nine in the morning, at
noon, and at three in the afternoon. Their regard to these hours is supposed to
be in imitation of the holy Apostles, which is the account given of it by some
of the Fathers Tertul. lib. de Jejun. c. 10. Cypr. de orat. dom. Hieron. in
Dan. c. 6. Basil. in Ascetic.
; for it was the third hour when they were all with one accord in one place,
Act. 2. 1. 15. at the sixth Peter went up upon the Housetop to pray, Act. 10.
9. and it was the ninth hour (by St. Luke called the hour of Prayer) when Peter
and John went into the Temple, Act. 3. 1. There is no doubt but the Apostles
did herein comply with the custom of the Jews, (as they did in other cases to
avoid offense, and the better to gain them over to the Faith) and from their
example it got the rather into the practice of other Christians, though without
any real obligation on the Conscience; for no hour of the day is in it self
more acceptable to God than another, nor is any preferred in the Apostolical
Writings, but it is commanded indifferently that we pray at all times Ephesians. 2. 18.
. And this much Tertullian has declared, when speaking of these hours, he does
interpose, that the observance of them should be Salva indifferentia Tertul. de
Jejun. c. 10.
, with this caution or reserve, that it be not thought any necessary duty: And
he subjoyns a good reason, when he reckons it in the number of those things,
Quae carent Scripturae authoritate, That have nothing from Scripture obliging
us to them. Wherefore we may not vindicate that extravagant honor given to
certain Canonical hours (as they are called) both of day and night, or the
peremptory imposition of them (as if they had some peculiar holiness in them,
or were prescribed by a divine Command) which afterward obtained, when
Superstition had prevailed in the Church.

Nor would we lead the pious Christian near the Confines of the Messalians,
otherwise called Euchitae, an Enthusiastic sort of Heretics, who
misunderstanding some Texts of Scripture, had the vanity to think, that their
whole time was to be spent in Prayer. Whence they cast off all worldly
Employments, persuading others to do the like; and did moreover reject the holy
Sacraments, and other duties of Religion, as accounting Prayer alone sufficient
to Salvation Theod. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 11. Aug. Haeres. 57.
.

But however, the devout practice of the ancient Christians, as before
mentioned, should teach us to be assiduous and frequent in this holy Exercise.
And though we cannot charge the Conscience with a religious regard to any
particular hours, because God himself has not done it; yet from the reasons of
the Duty it self, and from the Scripture Precepts that enjoin its frequency, we
must in the general declare it a sinful omission in any Christian, if he do not
ordinarily twice every day at least worship God in Prayer; beside other times
of doing the same when usual opportunities, or any special occasion shall call
him to it.

In the Jewish Church, the morning and evening Sacrifice were appointed by God
himself Exodus 29. 38, 39.
, and hereby (says Calvin) they were taught to begin and end the day with the
invocation and worship of God Calv. in cap. 3. Act. Apost.
. Likewise the burning of Incense on the golden Altar was ordered to be at the
same times Exodus 30. 7, 8.
. And surely these are also the fittest seasons for the Spiritual Oblations of
our Christian Worship. For since our whole time is made up of night and day, it
seems very meet and expedient whether we respect God or our selves, that at the
beginning and end of these we should present our Religious Service and Prayers
to him, in whom we still live and move, and have our being.

The morning is a fit time wherein to worship and praise God, by whom we have
been preserved and refreshed the night foregoing; as also for desiring the
guidance and protection of his Grace and Providence, and his Blessings both on
our selves and our undertakings the day following. St. Cyprian does exhort
Christians to pray in the morning, that the resurrection of Christ, which was
at that time, may be then celebrated by them Cypr. de erat. Dom.
.

The evening is a time no less convenient, wherein to return our Adoration and
Thanksgiving for the mercies of the day past, to humble our selves for the Sins
therein committed; as likewise wherein to beg a comfortable sleep and security
from all the perils of darkness in the night ensuing. And the same holy Martyr
does recommend evening Prayer, that so the Sun and Light of this World being
withdrawn from us, we may then desire the Spiritual Light, and the coming of
Christ, whom he calls the true Sun Ibid.
.

We may also add, that at these periods of our time we are most at liberty from
worldly business, and therefore the better disposed for Religious Duty: For in
the morning we are not as yet engaged in the employments of the day, and when
even is come, they are commonly over and laid aside. So that our Devotion as
thus timed, is like to be performed in a manner more pleasing to God, and
without hindrance to us in respect of ordinary affairs. And that we may be
persuaded to the daily practice of this so great and necessary Duty, we now
proceed to allege some Arguments, which if duly considered will not fail of
success.

I. We are obliged to it by God's command, who has always required, that men
should in this way of humble address honor him and seek his goodness. It was
imposed on the Jews, when they were bid To worship the Lord Deuteronomy. 26. 10.
, and to serve him Deuteronomy. 6. 13. 10. 20.
; and that Prayer was hereby enjoined, we have the authority of a great Jewish
Doctor. It is an affirmative Precept (says Maimonides) that men pray to God
every day, for it is said, Ye shall serve the Lord your God Apud Lud. Cappel.
in c. 3. Act. Apost.
. Likewise God calls for the same from all people; Look unto me and be ye
saved, all ye ends of the earth. Isa. 45. 22. And the punishment of their
neglect herein is expressed by Jeremiah; Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen
that know thee not, and upon the Families that call not upon thy name. Jer. 10.
25. But in the Gospel Prayer is more often and earnestly commanded. Our Savior
enjoined his Disciples to watch and pray Mar. 13. 33.
, to watch and pray always Luke 21. 36.
. He teaches them, that men ought always to pray, and not to faint Luke 18. 1.
. And for our direction and assistance in it, he has pleased to prescribe us a
form composed by himself. In the Apostolical Writings the same duty is very
much urged. We are exhorted to betake our selves to God in Prayer on all
occasions. In every thing by prayer and supplication let your Requests be made
known unto God. Phil. 4. 6. To call upon him in every place wherever we happen
to be. I will therefore that men pray every where. 1. Tim. 2. 8. To be constant
and unwearied in the same, for we must continue in Prayer Col. 4. 2.
, and pray without ceasing 1 These. 5. 17.
. We must pray always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit, and watch
thereunto with all perseverance Ephesians. 6. 18.
.

Now Almighty God having thus clearly and so often declared his Royal will and
command, there is no room for debate, whether we are to conform to it or no?
His just authority over us is so great, that we cannot but own our selves
obliged to obey in cases most difficult and troublesome. And how then can we be
excused, should we refuse to do it where the duty required is both easy in it
self, and also that on which our own interest does very much depend? For

II. It Is no small enforcement of this Divine Command, that Prayer is also
declared in Scripture as a condition on our part, by which we become capable of
receiving those good things whereof we stand in need. Though God be infinitely
good in himself, and delights in being so to others; yet we cannot think he
will force his Blessings on such as care not to beg them at his hands: No, we
often read it is quite otherwise; for when God gives good things, it is to them
that ask him Mat. 7. 11.
. To such only our Savior has given assurance, that they shall receive Luke
11. 10. John 16. 24.
. And he himself would not engage to effect any kindness for his Disciples by
his own intercession, unless they should also petition for it. If (says he) ye
shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it John 14. 14.
. When God is said to be nigh unto his people, it is but In all things that they
call upon him for Deuteronomy. 4. 7.
; and if they seek him, then he will be found 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.
. Nor shall they find him neither, unless they seek him with all their heart
Deuteronomy. 4. 29. Jer. 29. 13.
. If he promise to deliver in the time of trouble, he requires to be first
called upon Psalm. 50. 15.
. If he deliver the Righteous, it is after they cry unto him Psalm. 34. 17.
. That God does suspend his giving forth his mercies to men, on their Prayers
for them, is clearly expressed in that of St. James, where he assigns their not
praying for a cause or reason of their not receiving; Ye have not, because ye
ask not Jam. 4. 2.
. And this holy Duty is so indispensable in order to our obtaining the favors
of Heaven, that though God pass his word, and make an express promise of
bestowing any particular Mercies, yet there is no actual performance until he
be sought unto for the same. Of this we find an instance in the Prophet, by
whom God had in absolute terms declared of many and good things he purposed to
do for his people Israel, and had confirmed their belief thereof with this, I
the Lord have spoken it, I will do it. However after all it is subjoined, I
will yet for this be inquired of by the house of Israel Ezech. 36. 37.
. So that plainly Prayer is still one condition on which the promises of God
are made, and his beneficence to be expected by us. If we fail in it, there is
little reason to hope he will bestow his benefits, or send us any relief in our
time of need.

III. The duty does appear highly reasonable and expedient from the
consideration of God, who is the object of our Prayer; as that he is infinitely
perfect and glorious, the Creator of us and the whole World, and Governor of
all things both in Heaven and Earth, our great Lawgiver and most just Judge,
who will reward or punish according to our actions: That he can save or destroy
us, make us miserable or happy Jam. 4. 12.
: That he is the Author of all good, and having all things at his dispose, can
do for us whatever we can need or desire. I say, considering the Almighty in
all these several respects, we cannot but be satisfied, that he is to be
honored and worshipped by us, and does highly deserve our service and
adoration: That we are greatly concerned to humble our selves at his Footstool,
imploring his mercy, to submit our persons to him, and placing our whole trust
in his power and goodness, to beg at his hands a supply of all our wants.

IV. This holy performance will be thought very congruous and necessary on a
due consideration of our selves, for we are Beings entirely dependent on God,
we have been created by him, and it is by his power and providence that we daily
subsist. Whatever good things we enjoy, whatever do administer to our life,
either as to the necessities or conveniences thereof, they are all his
Creatures, and by him provided for our use and benefit. We are weak and frail,
exposed to dangers of all kinds in every place, and every hour of our life; nor
have we foresight or power enough of our own to secure our selves. Moreover we
are guilty Sinners before God, and so have forfeited his kindness, and made our
selves obnoxious to his wrath and severity. There are in us corrupt
inclinations to sin. We are still encompassed with Temptations, and the Devil
is our malicious and subtle Adversary. So that if left to our selves, we
cannot hope to be holy in this life, nor happy in the next. Now when we thus
reflect, it is easy to understand how much we are obliged to honor and worship
the Divine Majesty, and to render to him our daily thanks and praise for all
that we are or have; how much it does behove us to desire his constant care and
protection, recommending our selves to his watchful Providence. We may quickly
apprehend of what importance it is, that with humiliation and hearty repentance
we beg the pardon of our sins, lest we fall under condemnation and eternal
punishment; and that we earnestly crave the assistance of Divine Grace, whereby
we may be able to overcome sin, and all spiritual enemies, and may be kept by
the power of God through faith unto salvation.

V. There is in Prayer it self enough to make it desirable and much valued by
us.

1. It is highly honorable; for what greater honor then to be taken into an
immediate attendance about the Almighty, and to have converse with the supreme
Monarch of the world, the great King of Kings and Lord of Lords? in respect of
whom the Potentates on Earth, are of an account infinitely meaner then the
vilest Beggar, if compared to them. And what an high privilege is it that poor
mortals made up of Clay, can be admitted to the Throne of this Glorious
Majesty, there to present their Petitions, and to have his ear on all
occasions? Holy David was so apprehensive what an advancement it was to wait on
God in his Worship, that though he were a King, he esteemed the meanest Office
in the Temple well worth his ambition, and would be content to be a Door keeper
in Gods house Psalm. 84. 10.
, rather then live in a state of distance and alienation from him. The famous
Constantine, first Christian Emperor, thought it much for his honor to be
openly represented as in the posture of one at Prayer. And therefore gave order
that his own Effigies in the the Impresses of the public Coin should be so
fashioned. As it was also over the Gates of his Palace in several places Eusebius.
Vit. Constable. lib. 4. c. 15.
. Certainly whosoever has understanding enough to know God and himself, and to
compare the one with the other, will see abundant reason for saying as the
pious Father, that he cannot but admire and wonder at the great love of God
toward man, for vouchsafing him so high an Honor as familiarly to speak unto
himself by Prayers Chrysostom. de Orand. Deum lib. 1.
.

2. It is a duty so material and comprehensive, that it does in a manner take
in the Whole of our Religion; our piety to God is largely contained in it,
since by Prayer we acknowledge and honor him as our Creator and Lord, offering
up our Souls and Bodies to his service. We profess our subjection, and rely
upon him for all the good we desire. We do hereby give particular honor to his
Divine Attributes, to his Omni-presence, and infinite Knowledge, in that we
suppose him near at hand, to take notice and hear our Petitions, wheresoever we
are: to his Holiness and Justice, by lamenting our sins, and deprecating his
deserved punishments. To his Mercy and Goodness, while we beg forgiveness, and
all the Blessings we stand in need of. To his Power and Sovereignty, in that we
think him able to do for us in all the things we request of him, and do commit
our selves to his Care and Providence. We ascribe to him the Glory of all the
great and good things he has done for us and all Mankind, by our praise and
thanksgiving. Likewise we do herein perform our duty with respect to Christ as
our blessed Redeemer, in that renouncing all our own Righteousness, we plead
his alone merits for our pardon and acceptance, and present all our
supplications in his name, and through his intercession.

There is moreover in Prayer, an happy concurrence of our Christian Graces, and
a fruitful exercise of them. Of Faith, for whosoever comes unto God, believes
that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him Heb. 11. 6. Romans
10. 14.
. He is persuaded of his power and readiness to help, and does confide in the
truth of his word and promises. Of Repentance, in our humble confession of sin,
our professed sorrow for what we have done amiss, and our petition for Grace to
amend our lives. Of Hope, for it is by it we are encouraged to pray, and have a
comfortable expectation of receiving the good things we pray for, and our
charity shows it self while we pray for others as well as our selves: and do
profess to forgive men their trespasses against us, as we desire God to forgive
ours; And it belongs to our holy obedience, that we implore the divine
assistance and Gods holy Spirit for enabling us tomortify sin, and to lead a
sober, righteous, and Godly life.

And because the substance of Religion is thus comprised in Prayer, hence it is
sometimes used to signify a man's duty to God in general, as when it is said,
Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved Joel 2. 32. Act. 2.
21. Romans 10. 13.
, and in St. Paul's account to be they, who call upon the name of Christ, and to
be Christians, are one and the same 1 Cor. 1. 2.
. There being so much of piety and holiness in this one duty, therefore it is
that God is so pleased with it, for the Prayer of the righteous is his delight
Prove. 15. 8.
. And we may observe, that when he had erected a Temple for his honor among
the Jews, though Sacrifices and other religious Offices were performed in it,
yet he was pleased to give it a name, with respect to Prayer, as the most
eminent part of his service: My house shall be called an house of Prayer for
all people Isa. 56. 7.
.

3. Prayer is an excellent remedy to which we may have recourse in all the ills
of our life; and it is a means proper and suitable whatever our condition or
distress may be: when encompassed with dangers or overwhelmed with grief,
persecuted by men, or tempted by Satan: When under disappointment, losses, or
want: When distempered in body, or diseased in mind; I say, in these and other
like cases we may by Prayer betake our selves to God, who has a Salve for
every Sore, who does know how to deliver and is able to do it. When the
righteous do Cry unto him he hears them and delivers them out of all their
troubles Psalm. 34. 17.
.

He will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble, and they
who know his name will trust in him Psalm. 9. 9, 10.
. The name of the Lord is a strong Tower, the righteous runs into it and is
safe Prove. 18. 10.
: And therefore we are directed in Scripture to the use of Prayer when we are
in any distress, Call upon me in the day of trouble, Psalm. 50. 15. Is any man
among you afflicted? Let him pray, Jam. 5. 13. And it is prescribed in the
Verse following as the best receipt for a sick man, that the Elders of the City
be sent for to pray over him.

4. This exercise of Devotion is exceeding pleasant and delightsom. It was so
to David, and therefore he said, O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of
hosts? My Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord Psalm. 84.
1, 2.
. And it is the welcome which God does promise to them who shall come to his
worship, that he will make them joyful in his house of prayer Isa 56. 7.
. It must be confessed that this holy duty is not so pleasing to all persons:
there being some to whom the service of God is an irksom drudgery, and they
quickly say, What a weariness is it M. l. 1. 13.
? But the minds of such men are earthly and sensual, whence it is they savor
nothing that is spiritual; and while they continue no better disposed, the
entertainments of Heaven it self would not relish to them. To other whose souls
are purified, and by the practices of Religion wrought into an heavenly and
devout temper, the Worship of God is not a burden but pleasure, and they can
experimentally say with the Psalmist, One day in thy Courts is better than a
thousand; for it must needs delight any man of a right understanding to wait on
the great Lord and Governor of the World, to be employed in the service of his
Creator, which is the very end of his being, the chief business of his life,
and that which will be sure to turn to a good account: it cannot choose but be a
great comfort and satisfaction to disburden our breasts, and make our wants
known to one who is so well able to relieve; and it may well afford delight and
contentment to be exercised in adoring and praising God, since it is the work
and happiness of the blessed Angels and Saints above.

5. The Duty of Prayer is greatly beneficial, and if performed aright is a
plentiful reward to it self, for our God is not like the Idols of the Heathen
which have ears and hear not Psalm. 115. 6.
: But it is his property that he hears Prayer Psa. 65. 2.
, and when he hears he shows mercy and gives forth his benefits. By the
constant exercise of Devotion men hold an intercourse and holy commerce with
Heaven, and may thence enrich themselves with returns of blessings for all
their needs; they do engage him for their friend: Who is the giver of every
good and perfect gift Jam 1. 1. 17.
. By this Key of Prayer they open to themselves the rich treasury of his
goodness; for it is prevalence with Almighty God is exceeding great, we are
assured by the Apostle that the effectual fervent prayer of the righteous man
avails much Jam. 5. 16.
. There is an authority attributed to it by which it sways with God; so in
these words by the Prophet, Ask me of things to come, and concerning the works
of mine hands command you me, Isa. 45. 11. and it is elsewhere intimated as if
it did lay a kind of force on Heaven, and overpower the hands of Omnipotence,
as when God speaks thus to Moses: Let me alone that mine anger may wax hot
against them, that I may consume them Exodus 32. 10.
; and though God were so incensed and disposed to take vengeance, yet on the
earnest intercession of that good man the people were spared. These expressions
must be understood indeed after the manner of men, but however they do really
import the great interest and efficacy of Prayer. Which how it comes to be a
duty of so great success and advantage as it is, we may better understand when

6. We shall consider the particular encouragements we have for addressing
ourselves to God in this holy duty, as

1. That he is so able to help us in all things that we call upon him for,
being the Lord Almighty who does whatsoever he pleases in the heaven above, in
the earth and waters beneath Psalm. 135. 6.
. To whom all things are possible Mat. 19. 26.
; And he can do for us exceeding abundantly above what we can ask or think Ephesians.
3. 20.
. Wherefore he is a sure refuge, and let our case seem never so difficult or
desperate, we may animate our devotion with that of the Angel to Sarah: Is
there any thing too hard for the Lord Genesis 18. 34.
? and from hence we may also learn how much safer it is to seek unto God and
rely on him, then to place our confidence in any worldly succors, which by
daily experience are found insufficient, and do especially fail us in our
greatest concerns and when we most stand in need.

2. The God to whom we pray has a Goodness equal to his Power, and is kindly
disposed to show mercy and do good; the Scripture assures us that he is
gracious and full of Compassion Psalm. 111. ^ 4.
. He is good, ready to forgive, plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon
him Psalm. 86. 5.
Like as a father pittieth his Children, so the Lord pittieth them that fear
him Psalm. 103. 13.
. He does exercise loving kindness Jer. 9. 24.
, and delights in mercy Mic. 7. 18.
. The Lord indeed is good unto all, and his tender mercies are over all his
works, but he has a more especial kindness for the Sons of men who bear his
own Image; and having given us so excellent a being we may not doubt but that
he does affectionately tender the good and welfare thereof, and will therefore
be ready to relieve our necessities, and bestow good things on us if we seek
unto him; he bears toward us the relation of a Father, and he has a
readiness to do us good agreeable thereunto; yea his paternal kindness may much
more be confided in, than that of earthly parents, who are but sinful men and
may fail their own Children, or at least mistake as to the things wherein they
intend them good; but if they however know how to give good gifts unto their
Children, how much more shall our father which is in heaven give good things to
them that ask him Mat. 7. 11.
? Which is our Saviors argument when exhorting his Hearers to the Duty of
Prayero.

3. We are encouraged to pray by those many and plain promises in which he has
engaged to incline his ear, and reach forth his hand when men present their
requests; for it is declared in his word that He is nigh unto all them that call
upon him, to fulfill their desire, to hear their cry and save them Psa. 147.
18, 19.
. When two or three are gathered together in his name he is in the midst of
them Mat. 18. 20.
. If we call upon him in the day of trouble he will deliver Psalm. 50. 15.
. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and will not despise their prayer
Psa. 102. 17.
. Ask and it shall be given, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you Mat. 7 7.
. Yea so very forward is God to grant the requests of those who seek to him,
that as soon as they first set themselves to pray, and before their Petitions
are gone out of their mouths he does send a gracious answer, as does appear
from that promise of his by the Prophet, And it shall come to pass that before
they call I will answer, and while they are yet speaking I will hear Isa. 65.
24.
.

Now these things are said on purpose to incite our devotion, by letting us
know that if we attend on Gods service 'twill not be labor lost, and that he
has not said to the seed of Jacob, seek ye my face in vain Isa. 45. 19.
. So that from the divine promises we may be certain, that if we endeavor to
please God in our life and actions 1 John 3. 22.
, and our Petitions be agreeable to his Will 1 John 5. 14.
, if they be presented in a due manner Jam. 4. 3.
, and the things desired be such as would be for our real good and advantage
Mat. 7. 11.
, we shall be heard and answered; for in all our supplications we must still
remember to beg with submission to the wisdom and good pleasure of God, who
knows how to give good things better than we do to ask him; and we are to mind
the example of our Savior, who when praying in a case of greatest extremity
did say, Nevertheless not my will but thine be done Luc. 22. 42.
.

4. We may consider the good success that Prayer formerly has had. For there
are infinite examples in which it may be seen how the devout supplicant has
been Victorious like Jacob in his wrestling with God Genesis 32. 28.
. As a Prince he has had power with him and has prevailed. I cried unto the
Lord (says David) with my voice, even unto God with my voice and he gave ear
unto me Psalm. 77. 1.
: And again, I sought the Lord and he heard me, he delivered me from my fears
Psalm. 34. 4, and 8.
: From which his own experience he does bespeak others to make the like trial:
O taste: and see that the Lord is good, blessed is the man that trusts in him.
Jonah on his calling upon God was delivered safe out of the depth of the Sea, I
cried (says he) by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord and he heard me,
out of the belly of hell cried I and thou heardst my voice Jon. 2. 2.
. And there are many other Instances of a wonderful efficacy from the Prayer of
holy men. It has conquered whole armies, so did that of Moses in the battle
with Amalek Exodus 17. 11, and 13.
, and that of Hezekiah when in danger from the Host of the Assyrians 2 Kirgs
19, 19, 35.
. It has shut up and opened the Clouds of Heaven, as when Elias prayed in the
days of Ahab 1 Kin. 17. 1.
. Prayer has reprieved life even after a sentence of Death pronounced of God
himself, as in the case of Hezekiah 2 Kin. 20. 5.
. Yea, which is more than all, it has restored the dead to life again; for on
the supplication of Elias the Widows Son rivived 1 Kin. 17. 22.
: And so did Dorcas upon the Prayer of Peter Act. 9. 40.
. Now while we hear how successful Prayer has been to others, it should with
good reason encourage us to practice the same duty: And therefore St. James
when exhorting to it does mention how the Prophet already named, though a man
of like passions with others, yet obtained by his prayer that it should not
rain for three years and an half; and when he prayed again, the Heavens gave
rain to refresh the earth Jam. 5. 17, 18.
. Which brings to our thoughts another Instance not unlike: It is, that when
Antoninus and his Army being encompassed by their Enemies in a place where
there was want of water were ready to perish for thirst, the Christian Soldiers
then among them having with fervent Prayer called upon the name of Christ, and
desired Rain, there soon after fell such plentiful showers as answered their
necessity; nor were their lives only preserved, but also a glorious Victory
obtained by them, all which was attested by that Emperor himself in his own
letter to the Senate of Rome; the Copy whereof is inserted by Justin Martyr in
an Apology of his for the Christians Justin Mart. Apol. 2.
; and we cannot imagine he should have the confidence to allege it openly, so
near the time of the supposed fact, were it not a real thing. The renowned
Constantine had happily experimented by the success of his Arms against his and
the Churches enemies, how great efficacy there was in the Prayers of
Christians; and therefore not thinking himself or his Empire could remain safe
without the supplications of good men, he gave charge to those of his Clergy
that they should intercede for him in their devotions Eusebius. de vit. Constable.
lib. 4. cap. 14.
: likewise, that his military forces might be still victorious, he enjoined his
Soldiers to be exercised in Prayer, and prescribed a suitable Form wherein
they were thus to invoke the Giver of all Victory. We acknowledge thee the only
God, we confess thee to be the King, we call upon thee as our helper: by thee
we have obtained Victories, and have overcome our enemies; we do acknowledge
that from thee we have our present happiness, and from thee we hope for that
which is future; we are therefore thy supplyants, and do beg of thee that thou
would long preserve Constantine our Emperor in health and victory, together
with his religious offspring Ibid. cap. 20.
.

It Is related of the Athenians, that having been worsted by the Lacedaemonians
in several Battles, and much wondering at their repeated Misfortune, especially
for that they knew they exceeded all the other Grecians in the Veneration of
their Temples and Images, in the number of their Sacrifices, and the many
Pompous Solemnities of their Religion; whereas the Lacedaemonians did appear
more sparing in the Sacrifices, and in all the Ceremonies of their Worship;
they did therefore resolve to send and consult Jupiter Ammon, what the cause
might be, and to their enquiry received this answer from the Oracle, that the
Prayers of the Lacedaemonians were more pleasing to the Gods than the sacred
Rites of all Greece beside Plat. Alceb. 2.
: Which does serve to let us know that those of the Gentile Religion would have
it believed, that devout Prayer was of much greater success in procuring the
favors of Heaven, then any other part of Worship; and surely to any that does
consult our own Oracles of holy Scripture it does well appear, that the People
of God have affected far more and greater things by their Prayers, then ever by
Sacrifices or Oblations how many and sumptuous soever.

5. Although of our selves we know not how to pray as we ought, nor are we able
to serve God in any acceptable manner; yet we have this encouragement, that he
who requires the duty is ready to enable us for it; for according to his
ancient promise he does pour out his spirit of prayer and supplication Zech.
12. 10.
, to dispose the minds of his servants for praying to him as he will approve
and accept; and by him we have access unto the Father Ephesians. 2. 18.
. This holy Spirit as he does by his preventing influence excite men to pray,
begetting in them pious thoughts and devout affections: so he does also direct
and assist them as to the matter of their Petitions. For herein is the great
difficulty of Prayer, that men are so apt to err in the things they pray for,
as when their requests are in themselves displeasing to God; such was the
uncharitable one of James and John, when they would have fire from Heaven to
consume the Samaritans Luc. 9. 54.
; and that other of so great ambition presented by the Mother of Zebedee's
Children for her two Sons, that one of them might sit on the right hand, the
other on the left of Christ in his Kingdom Mat. 20 21.
: or when the things asked, though they seem desirable, yet are such as would
prove really hurtful if granted; as if a man should wish for such a Promotion,
or so great an Estate, not thinking what mischief they may occasion to him:
this the Satyrist could understand, Nos animi impulsu caecaque cupi dine ducti,
conjugium petimus, partumque Vxoris; at illis notum qui pueri qualisque futura
sit Vxor. A man in the heat of blind love prays that he may obtain such a
Woman to be his Wife, but God only knows what a shrew she will be; or else he
begs to have Children, but knows not how untoward they will prove. We may also
err while deprecating evils which yet have a tendency to our greater good; as
did St. Paul, who be sought the Lord thrice that the Messenger of Satan, by
which he was buffetted, might depart from him; but was not granted, because it
was for preserving his humility after the abundance of Revelation 2 Cor. 12. 7,
8, 9.
. That we pray aright it is requisite that our Petitions be no other than what
may have their due subordination to God's glory and our own Salvation; to this
there is need of great Holiness as well as Skill; and it was the reason of that
saying of St. Austine, Vere novit recte vivere, qui recte novit orare.
Whosoever knows how to pray as he ought, does know indeed how to live so
August. in Psalm. 3.
. Now the Holy Ghost (whereof all are partakers that really belong to Christ
Romans 8. 9.
) does guide the minds and affections of pious Christians, and help them to
avoid in great measure such errors in Prayer, though very incident to the best
of men; of this the holy Apostle is very plain: Likewise the Spirit also
helps our Infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as we ought,
but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us Romans 8. 26.
: and in the next Verse, He makes intercession for the Saints according to the
will of God, his interceding according to the Will of God is, in that he does
assist them in preferring such Petitions as are pleasing to him; in this sense
he is our Paraclete or Advocate and do plead our Cause within us while enabling
us to do it, as Christ is our Advocate without us by his Mediatory Intercession
in Heaven.

And on this does depend the good success of our Prayers; for God cannot but be
ready to grant such requests as himself has suggested to us, according to that
of the Psalmist: Thou will prepare their heart and cause thine ear to hear
Psalm. 10. 17.
. Praevenis eos ut petant quae tibi grata sunt, and precibus eorum aurem tuam
facilem praebes, so Vatablus does explain the Text; and hitherto does belong
that of St. John, This is the confidence we have in him, that if we ask any
thing according to his will he hears us 1 John 5. 14.
.

Moreover this blessed Spirit is ready to assist us as to the manner of
performance, that it may be with humility, faith, fervency, and that we beg not
temporal good things with more earnestness than spiritual, nor desire the
benefits of Heaven for ill purposes, as did those whom St. James does thus
rebuke: Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it
upon your lusts Jam. 4. 3.
.

Likewise it is through the same Spirit that we come to God as our loving
Father, for he bears witness with our Spirit that we are the Children of God
Romans 8. 16.
: And he is the Spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba father Gal. 4. 16.
: Whence we are emboldened to beg the blessing of God with the freedom of
Children, and may promise our selves to be kindly received when we address to
him.

6. Lastly, whereas by reason of sin neither our Persons nor our Prayers could
be acceptable to God, nor could we hope to prevail with him on our own account,
this obstacle and discouragement is also happily removed; for we have a
Mediator between God and us, the man Christ Jesus 1 Timothy 2. 5.
: who being the Son of God, and of greatest Interest with him, has so
effectually interposed as to obtain audience for us, and that our Petitions
shall not be in vain; by his atonement and satisfaction he has expiated our
sins, appeased the Wrath of God, and reconciled us to him: so that we may now
approach by that new and living way which Christ has consecrated for us Heb.
10. 20.
. In whom also we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of him
Ephesians. 3. 12.
. And though our devotions be accompanied with sinful infirmities, and we have
reason to pray that our very prayers may be forgiven us, yet while coming with
faith and sincerity we may assure our selves that our service shall not be
rejected; for as did Aaron the high Priest for the Jews, so much more Christ
(of whom he was a type) does for us Christians bear the iniquity of our holy
things Exodus 28. 38.
: and the defects of our oblations are done away by means of his perfect
sacrifice, who offered himself a Lamb without spot or blemish 1 Pet. 1. 19.
: It is therefore said that we being an holy Priesthood, do offer to God what
is acceptable to him by Jesus Christ 1 Pet. 2. 5.
. Likewise we are allowed to use our Savior's name, and to plead his merits
when we present our requests. And he has undertaken it shall well succeed:
Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name I will do it Joh. 14. 13, 14.
: and again, hitherto ye have asked nothing in my name, ask and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full Joh. 16. 24.
: for our prayers have this further advantage by the mediation of Christ, that
he does himself recommend them in Heaven by his intercession: having entered
into the Holy of Holies that he might there carry on his Work of Mediator, and
save to the utmost all that come to the Father through him, seeing he ever
lives to make intercession for them Heb. 7. 25.
; he is the great Master of Requests in the Court of Heaven, nor is there any
other beside him, our Advocate with the Father 1 John 2. 1.
: and because he is Jesus Christ the righteous, as it follows in that Text, he
does therefore solicit for us with good success; while pleading the merits of
his own righteousness in our behalf: and by this he does cause our prayers to
be well received. For he is that Angel of the Covenant, represented to St.
John, who having a golden Censer does offer up in it the prayers of the Saints,
together with his own incense Rev. 8. 3.
, that they may become a sweet smelling savor. Wherefore though unworthy and
obnoxious in our selves, yet if interested in Christ, we may draw nigh to God
with full assurance of faith Heb. 10. 22.
: and having so compassionate an high Priest in Heaven, who does intercede for
us, let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy and
find grace to help in time of need Heb. 14. 15, 16.
.

The duty to which we are excited is with respect to God highly just and
reasonable, as to us most becoming and beneficial, and in it self little
burdensome or difficult, the devotion required from us Christians being free
from the great trouble and cost of the Jewish worship, we are excused from
their Oblations, Sacrifices, and other numerous Rites: nor are we obliged to
tedious journeys, as they who were bound at set times to wait on God from all
parts of the Country in his Temple at Jerusalem Exodus 23. 17. Deuteronomy. 16. 16. 2 Chronicles. 8. 13.
. The service expected from us, is that we present our selves a living
sacrifice Romans 12. 1.
; and offer up to him devout Prayers and Thanksgivings which are our spiritual
sacrifice 1 Pet. 2. 5.
, and holy incense Rev. 8. 3.
: prayers and giving of thanks (says Justin Martyr) I do affirm to be the only
sacrifices that are perfect and acceptable to God Dial. cum Tryph.
: and to these it does refer when it is said in Malachy that the Name of the
Lord should be great among the Gentiles, and they should offer incense to him
and a pure offering Mal. 1. 11.
; by which is meant the sincere prayer of pious Christians, Sacrificium mundum,
scilicet, simplex oration de conscientia pura, so Tertullian understands that
place Adv. Marc. l. 4. cap. 1.
; and more fully elsewhere. Nomini meo offertur and sacrificium mundum,
gloriae, scilicet, relatio, and benedictio, and laus, and hymni Ibid. l. 3.
cap. 21.
; by our declaring the Glory of God, by our thanksgiving, our praise and
singing of Psalms, we offer up that pure offering which was foretold; and to
the same purpose another ancient Father when describing the piety of a
Christian (...) (...), prayers and praises are his sacrifices Clem. Alex.
Strom. 7.
.

And these oblations of the Gospel, beside that they are without charge and
expense, have this other ease too, that they may be presented in any place
whatever. In every place, says that Text of the Prophet Mal. 1. 11.
, and we are to pray every where, lifting up holy hands, without doubting of
acceptance, as it is prescribed by the Apostle 1 Timothy 2. 8.
; for to us now, since Christ by his coming has made the whole earth alike
holy, every place is an Oratory August. de Temp. Sermon. 129.
.

Since therefore prayer does on so many accounts recommend it self to us, and
God who can be no gainer by it is yet pleased to be so urgent with us, both by
invitations and commands that we seek unto him: since he has given us such
great encouragements to it, and we may obtain his favor and blessing at so
cheap a rate as the bare asking; if we have any understanding or sense of
things, his great goodness herein cannot choose but oblige us to a cheerful and
devout service of him: and our natural love to our selves should easily prevail
upon us to make our daily applications; and on all occasions of this mortal
life, humbly to represent our wants and desires to him, who is so willing as
well as able to do us good.

A PERSUASIVE TO Family Devotion.

A PERSUASIVE TO FAMILY DEVOTION.
IT was an excellent resolution of Joshua: As for me and my house we will serve
the Lord Josh. 24. 15.
: which that great General solemnly declared to all the Tribes of Israel:
letting them know, that whether they would (as he had exhorted them) serve the
Lord or no, and although all of them should forsake his Worship, or bestow the
honor due to him on false Gods, yet for his part he had fully purposed that he
would adhere to Jehovah, the only true God, and honor him with his religious
service: nor would he only do it himself, but also take care that his own house
or family, and all belonging to it should do the same: and it is a laudable
instance of like piety in the good King David, when he says, I will walk in my
house with a perfect heart Psa. 101. 2.
: professing thereby his serious intention, as a domestic Governor to
discharge his duty to God with all sincerity and exactness in the discipline
and good order of his Household; in which it must be chiefly impli'd he would
take great care that Religion might be there had in due regard, and God be
faithfully honored by himself and by all about him.

These examples of Domestic piety in two such eminent persons, may well
challenge the esteem and imitation of all who are Heads and Masters of
Families: and as many as are in that relation are to be put in mind, that if
they would be indeed religious, if they will serve the Lord, and do it with a
perfect heart, it is not enough that it be done by themselves only, but moreover
they are to see to it that the Duties of Religion be performed by all under
their charge. There are indeed many offices of Christian Oeconomicks to which
the Governors of Families are obliged; as to make necessary provision for
those of the Household, to give them a good example of sobriety and all virtue,
and to discharge their particular obligations to their several Relatives, as
they are Husbands, Fathers, and Masters; but the principal Duty, and of
greatest consequence is, that they take care to have family Devotion exercised
in their houses, by daily prayer and reading the holy Scriptures; this is that
which God does especially require of them, and wherein the good and welfare
both of themselves and those living with them is most of all concerned; and
beside the general considerations moving hereunto taken from the adorable
nature of God, from our dependence on him, and the great importance of piety in
order to happiness: There are some others which do more particularly respect
domestic Governors and their Families. As,

I. The honor and service of God, for which we were all born, ought carefully
to be promoted by every good Christian; for God made us for himself Prove. 16. 4.
: and we are commanded in whatever we do to seek his glory 1 Cor. 10. 31.
; it therefore behooves us to improve all advantages for this great end, and
since the Governors of Families as such are in a capacity for setting up the
worship of God, and have power over those who live under their Roof for causing
this holy exercise to be attended by them, not to do it, must needs be reckoned
a most heinous omission. If a Christian Magistrate should make no provision for
having the Duties of Religion publicly celebrated by his Subjects in all Parts
of his Dominion, 'twould be judged a very scandalous neglect: and it might
justly be doubted, whether he were really what he professed to be. Now if the
Prince be thus obliged to use his power for the service of God and Religion,
how can we judge otherwise of lesser Governors? and how shall it be thought
that Masters of Families have any true Principles toward God, or any regard to
his honor while they take no care to have his worship performed within their
private jurisdiction? If I be a Father (says God) where is my honor? If I be
a Master where is my fear Mal. 1. 6.
? It cannot be thought that men believe they have a Father in Heaven while they
care not to give evidence of their dutiful observance and veneration of him,
and are not at all concerned that reverential regard be paid him by others: nor
can we suppose they really own any severe Master above, while they are not
afraid to neglect his service and the promotion of his honor, which is the
work he has imposed on them, and that for which they were sent into the World.
Wherefore domestic Governors, as they would be thought to have understanding
enough to know whence they are, and for what they were made; as they would
avoid the most disgraceful and odious censure of being reckoned atheistical,
are highly concerned both for attesting the reality of their Faith and
Religion, and for answering the great design of their being, to employ the
authority they have in their own houses for Gods glory, in ordering the duties
of Religion to be there piously observed by all belonging to them.

II. They may also consider it is most just and reasonable that some portions
of that time which God has given them, should be allotted to himself and his
service, as well as all the rest to their own occasions; and that he from whom
they hold their Lives and Estates should daily be owned and honored by their
adoration and thanksgiving; as they expect from their Servants that they
execute their commands, and labor in the work they set them about from the
beginning of the day to the end thereof, so they must not think it much if the
great Master of us all who is in heaven Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 4. 1.
, have some share of their service each Morning and Evening. God has been
pleased to take great care that the Governors of Families shall receive the
duty and observance of all about them, by giving strict charge that their Wives
be subject Col. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 1.
, their Children obedient Ephesians. 6. 1, 2. Col. 3. 20.
, and that their Servants fulfill their commands with fear, singleness of
heart, and good will Ephesians. 6. 5, 6, 7. Col. 3. 22. 1 Pet. 2. 18.
: and therefore it is but reason and ingenuity that they make like return to
God, by using their authority and best endeavor that the same members of their
Families pay their just honor and service to him, and this they cannot better
do, then by obliging them to the acts of his worship and the daily exercises of
devotion.

But against those Christians in whose Families the worship of God is
neglected, the Heathen may one day rise up in judgment; for their Religion
(such as it was) they did not confine to their Temples abroad, but paid
moreover a devout regard at home to the Lares and Penates, which were their
Household Gods, and therefore usually called dii familiares, and by Tertullian
dii domestici Tertul. Apol. c. 13.
: who does more than once reflect on the superstitious honor given them, as
does also St. Hierom in the words following: And there was no place which was
not polluted with filthy Idolatry, insomuch as behind their doors they placed
Idols, which they called domestic Lares Hieron. in Esa. c. 57.
. To these were carefully performed the Rites of their vain Worship; they
offered to them Wine, Frankincense, Flowers, and the first Fruits of their
Ground Not. Com. l. 4 etc. 2, 4.
; and how solemn they were in the service of them is intimated by that of the
Poet; Quinquaginta intus familae quibus ordine longo Cura penum struere, and
flammis adolere Penates Virg. Aeneid. lib. 1.
, no less than fifty servants in one house were employed about oblations to the
household Gods. And all this for that they were accounted by them, as Tectorum
domuumque custodes Arnob. lib. 3.
, the Guardians of their houses and dwellings; whence they had the name of
Praestites, Quod praestant oculis omnia tuta suis, because by their watchful
care they did perform or effect that all things belonging to the house should
be in safety; or rather because they were (...), as Presidents, having the
oversight of places; we find by one of their Writers that they thought their
very life and the state both of their body and soul, did depend on the care of
the Gods they thus honored Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 4.
.

Such was the domestic Piety of these deluded Votaries to their fictitious
Deities, on a fond imagination they had of their being benefited by them. How
shameful then is it if Christian Governors of houses show not their zealous
care, for having as much devotion exercised toward the living and true God? who
is really and indeed the watchful Keeper of their habitations Psalm. 121. 3, 4,
5, 6.
, he on whom their life and being do truly depend, and without whose kind
Providence neither themselves nor their Families can be safe or prosperous. And
this leads us to add,

III. That this great duty of Family-Devotion if conscionably performed, will
not fail to procure to them the favor of Almighty God, and draw down his
blessings on themselves, their families, and all appertaining to them: it will
be the most likely means for making them prosperous in their Affairs,
Vocations, and Estates. When Micah had taken a Levite into his house to
Minister there in sacred offices, he then concludes that the Lord would do him
good Judge. 17. 12.
; and had his worship been true he might well expect it. The wise man tells us,
It Is the blessing of God that makes rich Prove. 17, 12.
; and when men are careful to serve the Almighty, they may hope (according to
his own promise) to be Blessed in the City and in the Field, in the fruit of
their Body and of their Ground, in the increase of their Cattle, in their
Basket and Store, in their coming in and going out Deuteronomy. 28. 3, 4, 5, 6.
: likewise the royal Psalmist is very particular in reckoning up the domestic
blessings, which shall be to the man that fears the Lord and walks in his
ways Psalm. 128.
; he does promise to him that he shall receive the fruit of his labor, and
happily enjoy the same: For thou shall eat the labor of thine hands, happy
shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee; that he shall be blessed in Wife
and Children. Thy Wife shall be a fruitful Vine in the sides of thy house, and
thy Children like Olive Plants about thy Table; that he shall prolong his life
to a good old age, so as to see his offspring to the third Generation, and
have withal the comfort of peaceable and happy days; Yea, thou shall see thy
Children's Children, and peace upon Israel; and his Son Solomon who had been
very Studious in making observations, does also affirm, that the houses of good
men, where God is feared and served, are usually replenished with riches: In
the house of the righteous is much treasure Prove. 15. 6.
.

The Gospel indeed is not so frequent in making temporal proposals for engaging
men to be religious, but does insist on spiritual and future rewards; and yet
there also Piety is entitled to worldly blessings: For our Savior has given
assurance that to such as discharge their duty in pursuit of things Heavenly
and Spiritual, those others of present use shall be superadded Mat. 6. 33.
. Likewise St. Paul does affirm that godliness has the promise of the life
that now, is as well as of that which is to come 1 Timothy 4. 8.
; the original word there used in it is primary and more proper signification,
does denote the worship of God.

But the Scripture is very severe in the Commination of Temporal Evils, against
the contemners of God and Religion; as Deuteronomy. 28. from the 15 Verse to the end
of that Chapter; they are there threatened with Curses, in their Persons, and
their Children, in their Cattle, and the Fruit of their Land: that the Heaven
shall be to them as Brass, and the Earth as Iron. And by the Prophet it is
denounced against them who neglect their religious addresses to God, that they
shall be unfortunate; For the Pastors are become brutish, they have not sought
the Lord, therefore they shall not prosper, and all their flocks shall be
scattered, Jer. 10. 21. Nor can men expect to have their Families raised as
long as they mind not to have Religion and the Duties thereof practiced in
them: For except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it,
'twill be in vain to rise up early, to sit up late, and eat the bread of
carefulness Psa. 127. 1, 2.
.

Though some despisers of God and his worship may perhaps get themselves
riches, yet either they shall not abide, but be as money put into a bag with
holes, as it is expressed in Haggai Hagg 1. 6.
: or at least, there shall be no real content in the possession of them; for
temporal enjoyments are then only blessings indeed, and truly good to us when
sanctified by the Word and Prayer 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
. Wherefore if Masters of Families would consult their own Prosperity as to the
things of this Life, if they would be happy in what they have and successful in
what they undertake, they must needs account it expedient and of great
consequence to them, that God be piously served in their Families, and his
favor implored, by their constant Prayers.

IV. It Is very desirable and of much concern to them, that those belonging to
their Domestic government, should be truly good and virtuous; for then they
will have delight and contentment in the love and fidelity of their Wives, in
the dutifulness and good carriage of their Children; and 'twill be for their
satisfaction and advantage to have diligent and trusty Servants; likewise the
Reputation and good Credit of a Family, is advanced and kept up by the sober
and regular Lives of those who are Members of it; but when they are such as
want good and pious Principles, rude Disorders, and Scandals are wont to happen
which occasion infamy and disesteem. And when Irreligion prevails (beside that
it does pull down the Curses of God) it has a natural causality for ruining
the Family where it is; for it usually draws after it Idleness, Excess, and all
the chargeable Vices; but the danger is greatest and the Event most fatal, when
through neglect of holy duties in any household, the Children grow up in vanity
and dissoluteness, become averse to all business and industry for advancing
their Fortunes in the World: and falling into extravagant Follies they often
waste the Patrimony left to them, and the Families which had long flourished in
riches and honor, are hereby reduced to meanness and contempt; so that while
Parents take no heed to have their Children trained up in Piety, they run a
very great hazard of losing all their provident care and labor in getting or
increasing their Estates; but if they would have them and the rest of their
Family to be such as they ought to be, and thereby prevent all those ill
consequences which they may otherwise expect, the most proper and effectual
means will be, to keep up the practice of Devotion in their houses, by reading
the holy Scriptures and performing the great Duty of Prayer from day to day.

V. The public Interest of Religion and the good of the whole Nation does very
much depend on the pious Government of Families; for of these lesser Societies,
the greater one of the Commonwealth is made up, and the same persons are
Members of both; and therefore if Masters of Families would exercise a
religious Discipline, and thereby promote holiness and sobriety in their
respective houses, it might then happily follow that the Kingdom would be
generally good, as when every one does make clean before his own door the whole
City is thereby cleans'd, most certain it is that nothing can be so dangerous
to any State, and repugnant to all the ends of Government as the prevalence of
Impiety and Vice, nor is there any thing that does more contribute to the
growth of these then a neglect of Religion in private Families; to this must be
ascribed in great measure, all the wicked disorders of the present Age: for we
cannot think that Profaneness, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Thefts, Robberies, and
other enormities would so abound as they do, if persons were religiously bred
up and the people every where accustomed to pious performances in the houses
where they live; wherefore to the Laws of the Magistrate, and the Preaching of
the Minister, the good care of the Householder must also be added, that Religion
may thrive and the Kingdom become truly happy; as Christianity had its Original
in private houses (for the Primitive Teachers did first propagate the Gospel
and administer the Ordinances thereof Act. 2. 42. 5. 42. 10. 48. 16. 15, 33.
20. 20.
) so on the Piety of Families it does still depend for it is continuance and
preservation.

VI. As private Families are so many little Societies in the whole Civil State,
so in a Spiritual sense they are such with respect to the National Church, and
we find in Scripture that each house the Members whereof did agree in the true
Faith and Worship, was accounted for a Church and is often so called, as the
house of Priscilla and Aquila Romans 16. 5. 1 Cor. 16. 19.
, The house of Nymphas Col. 4. 15.
, and Philemon Philem. 2.
. Now as the Christian Prince, because he is Head of the Commonwealth has
also the Power and Charge over the whole Church included in it, so with some
proportion the Domestic governor beside the authority over his Household in
Secular concerns, has also in some sort a Spiritual rule as it is a kind of
Church: and it therefore belongs to him to maintain the honor and worship of
God within his lesser Dominion. In the more ancient times of the Jewish Church,
the Heads of Families had a sacerdotal power to offer Sacrifice, and officiate
in the Divine Worship for themselves and those belonging to them. We read how
careful the holy Patriarchs were to provide themselves Altars wherever they had
their abode, by building convenient places, as Chapels wherein together with
their Families, they did offer both Sacrifices and Prayers unto God; thus Noah,
Genesis 8. 29. Abraham, Genesis 12. 7, 8. and Chap. 13. 18. Isaac, Genesis 26. 25. and
Jacob, Gen 33. 20. and Chap. 25. 7. and that these Edifices were for Prayer as
well as Sacrifice does appear from Genesis 12. 8. Where it is said, And there he
builded an Altar unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord; this
right of domestic Ministry from the Father of each Family, did after his
decease descend to his first born; which (say the Jews) made Jacob (being a
pious good man) so ambitious of the Birthright Genesis 25. 31.
: and because Esau did undervalue this sacred privilege by selling it at so
vile a rate, he is justly censured by St. Paul as a profane person Heb. 12. 16.
.

When by the modern Jews at this day the Passover is Celebrated in their
houses, the Pater-Familias or Master of the Family is instead of a Priest; for
the Shoulder of Lamb or Kid, the unleavened Cakes, the Herbs, etc. being ready
and set before them, he begins the Feast with a Prayer of Consecration, and at
several times afterward while that solemnity is a carrying on, he bespeaketh
God for himself and the rest of his Family there present, in forms of
thanksgiving; also at the end thereof he puts up another Prayer Buxt. Synag.
Jud. cap. 13.
. Now that ancient pre-eminence lately mentioned and the duty impli'd in it,
does in some sense still remain even to us Christians; and no Master of a
Family among us how great soever must think it any diminution, but rather an
honor and privilege personally to minister in offering up spiritual Sacrifice
to the great God; for the Master of a Family does after a sort, and in his
measure perform the duty of an Ecclesiastic or Bishop in his house August. In
Joan. tract. 51.
: and surely he is bound to officiate himself, or at least to take care that it
be done by some other, and all persons of Quality who take Chaplains into their
Families, may do well to consider (which many have not done) of what
consequence it is that they be really pious and devout, for how else can they
expect that the Prayers they present for them shall be acceptable to God? since
he has declared that the Sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to him
Prove. 15. 8. Joh. 9. 31.
, and that it is much the more so because such an one cannot but bring it with
a wicked mind Prove. 21. 27.
; beside, whereas a domestic Minister should by his good example and converse
promote holiness and sobriety in those of the Household, if he be himself
vicious and disorderly, they will be the more emboldened to be such too: or at
least, the Duties of Religion, wherein he is concerned will be the less
regarded on his account. It must therefore be remembered by all Heads of
Families, that having a spiritual as well as secular Government, and the charge
of their Household, as consisting of Christians as well as Men, it behooves them
to acquit themselves herein by taking care for Religion and Divine Worship, and
also that God may be so served as shall be best to his honor and good liking,
and for the Spiritual benefit of their Families; which does mind us to add in
the next place that,

VII. The practice of Devotion in the houses of Christians, as it is highly
becoming their holy profession, so it is a very great furtherance to their
leading lives agreeable thereunto. Our Religion is that general and high
Calling in Christ Jesus Phil. 3. 14.
which all profess; and they will grant it is their chief business to serve God,
and that it ought to be their greatest care to obey and honor him by a sober,
righteous and godly life; but if Religion be our chief Calling, can it suffice
to exercise the same one day in the Week? Is it not rather reasonable that they
be daily employed in it; and not that their whole time should be engrossed by
worldly Callings? if the Service of God be indeed their greatest business,
shall it not be minded every day as well as their others which are about the
things of this World? and is it not fit that God should be constantly served by
them in their houses at home, and not only in the Church, now and then, when
they cannot easily avoid it for fear of public censure? since men cannot choose
but own it should be their principal care to lead a good life well-pleasing to
God, without whose favor it can never be well with them, they must thence
think it needful that they be often exercised in those religious Duties, which
are the proper and likely means for the begetting and increase of holiness.
That Family Devotions, including Prayer and the Reading of the holy Scriptures
are really such, there needs little trouble to evince. To be much conversant in
Prayer does greatly conduce to make men good, because hereby there are renewed
impressions made of that great and holy God to whom we pray, and it leaves in
the Soul awful apprehensions of him: beside that it is one necessary part of
Prayer to beg the Grace of God: which he is ready to bestow on all who ask it
of him.

But the holy Scripture is the most apt and efficacious means of promoting
holiness, being written by Gods special direction, for that very purpose; For
it is given by inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16.
, it is a sanctifying word, as is implied in that Petition of our Savior for
them by whom the New Testament was to be set forth to the World, Sanctify them
through thy truth thy word is truth Joh. 17. 17.
: and it is able to make a man wise unto Salvation, as says the blessed
Apostle 2 Timothy 3. 15.
; how these sacred Writings have their happy energy, it is not hard to assign.
One account of it is that they make known unto us those Principles of Faith,
which are the fundamental reasons of practical Religion and strong enforcements
to it, as the being of a God and his glorious Attributes of Holiness, Goodness,
Omniscience, Power, Justice; the Creation of the World by him, and his
Providential Government of it; our Redemption by Christ; the immortality of our
souls, and the future retribution in the World to come; likewise in the
Scripture is the Law of God which does plainly declare both the Duties we are
to perform, whether toward God, our Brethren, or our Selves, as also the sins
of all sorts to be avoided by us, which is done so fully that it is thereby a
complete rule of action: For the Law of God is perfect Psalm. 19. 7.
; and the Apostle teaches that the holy Scriptures are sufficient to make the
man of God perfect thoroughly furnished to every good work 2 Timothy 3. 17.
; also because in the word of God it is so clearly shown what we are to do and
what not, hence it follows that by it men are reproved and convinced of sin,
and thereby disposed to repentance and amendment of life; it is convincing power
is with much Emphasis thus expressed by the Apostle: For the word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of thoughts and intents of the hearts Heb. 4. 12.
; and by means hereof, it reduces men from the errors of their ways; For the
Law of God converteth the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. and it is prescribed to the young
man, as that which would be most effectual to reclaim him from the disorders of
that vain Age. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? even by taking
heed thereto according to thy word, Psalm. 119. 9. How St. Austine that eminent
Father was rescued from his former ill course of life on his reading the last
Verses of the thirteenth to the Romans, himself has attested to the World
Confess. l. 8. c. 12.
. Again the Scriptures do make known those severe punishments both temporal and
eternal, which shall be the portion of evil doers: and they do also represent
the many and great rewards of a good Conversation, some whereof to be enjoyed
in this life, but the greatest of all which is set forth with highest
expressions, is a Kingdom of endless Glory prepared in Heaven. Now the
Principle of Self-love and a desire of happiness, being natural to all men, it
cannot be but these divine Writings should on this account have a potent
influence for delivering men from sin, and engaging them to Virtue and Holiness.

Of such admirable use are the sacred Books, for rectifying the minds and
governing the Lives of men: and so well fitted are they for this excellent
purpose; and we wonder that the good Father lately named did esteem them so
highly, and so much delight in the reading of them; for after his Conversion,
Cicero of whom he had been extremely fond before, became vile to him, and he
could think no Book comparable to the Bible, as he has Written of himself
Ibid. l. 3. cap. 5. and lib. 7. cap. 20. 21.
.

But it must be still understood, that whatever efficacy the Scripture has,
it is but in subordination to the Grace of God: It being the Sword of the Spirit
Ephesians. 6. 17.
, who does make use of it in slaying the Lusts and Vices of men, and subduing
them to the Kingdom of Christ; but the Divine Grace is never wanting to them
who make a diligent use of this written Word, which is the outward means by God
appointed, and he is ready to assist the same with his own concurrence and
blessing.

Since therefore the goodness and condescension of Almighty God, have been so
great in vouchsafing the holy Scripture, which is his kind Epistle from Heaven
imparting his mind to us for our own good; what a rude and ungrateful indignity
will it be if we care not to read it? Since he has given this light shining in
a dark place (as it is called by St. Peter 1 Pet. 1. 19.
) that we might not stumble and perish, how great is the madness, if hiding it
under a Bushel Mat. 5. 15.
, or shutting our Eyes against it, we love darkness more than light Joh. 3. 19.
. It is our singular happiness, above most other Nations of the Christian
world, that this Heavenly treasure does lie open to us in a Language which the
unlearned can understand: it is not Heresy with us, if a Laick read the Bible;
nor a Capital crime if he keep one in his house, that is in his own Vulgar
tongue; but the Guilt and Condemnation will be much greater, if having this
advantage, any shall refuse to make use of it.

It may further recommend to Christian Families the constant use of Prayer and
the sacred Scriptures, as very necessary to an holy Conversation, if we mention
what St. Austine has said to this purpose; to whom a great regard is due, not
only for his Eminent knowledge of Divine things, but also for his own great
experience in the Practice of Piety; by him it is declared that the best of men
have need of Prayer every day, as that by which they secure themselves against
the assaults of Sin and Satan. By Prayer (says he) they strive with the more
vigilance and stoutness against the Devil, the Prince, and King of all Vices,
that so his deadly suggestions may nothing prevail Lib. De Continent. cap. 8.
; and elsewhere, The daily reading of the Scriptures does purify all things:
it strikes into us the fear of Hell, and stirs up the heart of the Reader to
the joys of Heaven. Whoever would be always with God ought always to Pray and
Read: for when we pray we are speaking with God, and when we read God is
speaking with us De Temp. Sermon. 112.
; likewise hitherto belongs what Tertullian has said in this very case of
domestic Piety, when upbraiding the Heathen with their unprofitable Devotion
to the Lares, excluding that of the true Religion, which would be of real
benefit to them, Quae dei mentio? quae Christi invocatio? Vbi fomenta fidei ex
Scripturarum interlectione Tert. ad Vxor. l. 2. ^. 6.
? he taxes their Folly as well as Impiety, that while in their several
Families they were very punctual and solemn in performing superstitious Rites
to the Household Gods, they took no notice of him who was God indeed: wholly
neglecting the Christian Devotion of Prayer, and Reading the holy Scriptures,
which should nourish in them the saving Faith and Religion of the Gospel.

VIII. It may be another inforcement of Family Devotion to mention, how well it
has been practiced by the Ancient Christians, for it ought to have the
Authority of an Argument, and should demand our Imitation to have before us the
good examples of those who were in the first and purer Ages of Christianity;
now of them it does appear, that they were exceeding careful and zealous in the
daily performance of Religious Duties within their Houses, in the Morning and
Evening of each day all of the same Family did join in their Devotion, as may
be Collected from what we find to this purpose in the Fathers of those times
Clem. Alex. paed. l. 2. c. 9. Cypr. de Orat. dom. Basil. in Ascit. Chrysostom.
Hom. l. De precat.
. They would not begin the day without desiring the blessing of God on
themselves and their undertakings throughout the same: nor did they lie down to
rest without returning him thanks and imploring his watchful care over them.
After Supper ended (says Clemens Alexandrinus) having rendered our Thanks and
Praise to God, for that he had supplied us in the day with the good things
necessary for our use, and granted us to pass the same prosperously, we betake
our selves to our sleep Ibid.
. Nor did they think it enough to worship God in their Families at the
beginning and end of the day, but so intent were they on this Duty, as to break
off their natural rest, and leave their Beds in the night time that they might
then exercise their Devotions; for under the Heathen Emperors while the open
practice of religious Duties was so much persecuted, it was generally the
Custom of Christians to arise from sleep about Midnight for worshipping God,
with Prayers and Singing of Psalms, and the same continued in use even after
the Pagan Persecutions were over: Of these nocturnal Devotions we do often
read, as in the Father last named, when he speaks of Prayers to be put up not
only before going to bed, but also again in the time of night Strom. 7.
; and afterward in the same place: Wherefore we must also rise from our beds in
the night, and God is then to be praised, for blessed are they that watch for
him; per noctem exurgebant oratum, they arose by night to Pray Tert. ad Vxor.
lib. 2.
, and again, Ita Saturantur ut meminerint etiam per noctem orandum deum sibi
esse. They so feed at Supper as remembering they are to awake and worship God in
the night Apol. c. 39.
; thus does Tertullian testify of them; and to this refers that exhortation of
St. Cyprian, let us think that we always walk in the light, nor should darkness
which we have escaped hinder us; there should be no prejudice to our Prayers
from the hours of night, nor our Devotion suffer any damage through sloth and
laziness De Orat. Domin.
. Likewise these Prayers of the night are recommended by St. Chrysostom in one
of his Sermons In Act. Apost. Homil. 36.
.

Beside the times of more solemn Devotion from day to day, which we have
already mentioned, they did moreover invoke God as often as they received their
natural food. Before we eat (says Basil) let Prayers be made suitable to the
gifts of God, both of the good things he does bestow at present, and also for
those he has provided for the future: likewise let Prayers follow after meat,
and in them let our thankfulness be expressed Epist. 1 ad Gregor. Theol.
.

And St. Chrysostom does prescribe as a necessary Duty, that Christians begin
and end their Meals with thanksgiving to God; and he does propose it as a good
means for restraining men from abuse of the Creatures by intemperate Eating or
Drinking, and also for procuring the blessing of God on both Soul and Body Ad
Pop. Antioch. Homil. 89.
. We read in particular of the good Emperor Theodosius Junior, that he would
never eat or drink, nor taste so much as a Fig or any other Fruit, until he had
first given thanks to the great Creator Soz. in praefat. ad Hist. Eccl.
.

And when the Duty of Prayer was thus performed by them, they did also usually
read the holy Scriptures and Sing to the praise of God in pious Hymns; by their
frequent use of the Scriptures, they knew how excellent and beneficial they
were, and did therefore value them accordingly; for when in the Reign of
Dioclesian, there came forth an imperial Edict, requiring that these sacred
Volumes should be brought from their houses and given up for the Flames, there
were vast numbers of them, who chose to suffer exquisite Torments and Death it
self rather then they would be Traditores, or such as would Sacrifice their
Bibles to save themselves Baron. Ann. 302.
. The singing of Psalms was a great part of their Devotion; and therefore Pliny
in his account of the Christians to Trajan, does mention it as that wherein the
Religious service of their Assemblies did chiefly consist, that they did Carmen
Christo quasi Deo canere secum invicem Plin. l. 10. Epist. 97.
; and it is related of the same Theodosius we mentioned before, that he and his
Sisters did use to sing devout Hymns very early in the morning with alternate
voices Soc. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. cap. 22.
.

How in the houses of the ancient Christians the Duties of Prayer, reading of
the Scriptures and singing of Psalms were intermixed with the refreshments of
their ordinary Meals, these passages do show. Non prius discumbitur quam oration
ad Deum praegustetur, etc. They never sit down to eat, until they have first
tasted of Prayer -- after they have done eating one is called forth to sing to
the praise of God as he is best able, whether out of the holy Scriptures, or
else some Psalm of his own; by this it is to be tried how he has drank;
likewise their Meal is concluded with Prayer. So Tertullian of the Christians
in his time Apol. cap. 39.
.

The whole life of a Christian is an holy Festival, his Sacrifices are Prayers
and Praises, and Reading of the Scriptures before Meat; Psalms also and Hymns
at the time of eating, thus Clemens of Alexandria Strom. 7.
. Nor let the time of eating be void of heavenly grace; let your temperate
entertainment sound forth Psalms: and since thou have a good memory and musical
Voice, do then begin this duty after the usual manner; they are the words of
St. Cyprian Ad Donat.
.

And moreover good care was taken by the Parents and Governors of Families in
these elder times, that the persons belonging to them might be religiously
instructed and disposed to holy living, as shall be made appear under our next
consideration.

But the places which concern the Piety of the Ancient Christians, at their
times of eating, I have the rather cited, that they may be for instruction to
us of the present Age. When we consider how religious their entertainments then
were, and that they served for the nourishment of the Soul no less than the
Body, it may let us see how much we are degenerated from the pristine Sanctity,
and does at once both reprove and shame the irreligion of our days; in which it
is too common with many who are called Christians, to take their Meals no
otherwise than the bruit Beasts do theirs, save that they are less temperate
than these; they sit down at their Tables, and rise again without looking up to
Heaven, without any acknowledgment or thanksgiving to him whose Creatures they
all are, by which they are sustained, and whose Providence does cater for them
from day to day: it must needs look ill and scandalous, that after persons have
at a long sitting been filling themselves from the bounty of the Creator with
the plentiful varieties of Earth, Air, and Water; yet if they return him any
thanks at all, it is mostly done in such a superficial and lofty manner, as if
it were but a little inconsiderable Mode to be performed only for Fashions sake.

And at the entertainments of our times, how often is it, that instead of
calling upon the name of God, men profane it by wicked Oaths; instead of the
Scriptures read, the ears of the Company are taken up with loose and filthy
Communication; instead of holy Psalms, they are made first merry and then mad
with excess of liquors. Such impieties cannot be allowed in Families, where the
Governors of them are really good, nor will they consist with that holy
Discipline for which we are now pleading: they are contrary to the ancient
Practice of good Christians, and much more to the Precepts of that holy
Religion, which we all profess.

Lastly, the most pressing consideration, and that which all Masters of
Families should lay to heart is still behind, it is that in this Duty of
domestic Devotion the Eternal welfare of Souls is greatly concerned; for
frequency in Prayer and reading of the Scriptures, being so requisite as it is
for the maintenance of holiness, and a good life, where these are neglected,
how can it be expected, that persons will live as becomes the Gospel, and as
it is required of all whom God will admit into that holy Place, which no unclean
thing can enter Rev. 21. 27.
, and where without holiness no man shall see his face Heb. 12. 14.
? Is it not rather likely, that in houses where the name of God is not called
upon, nor his Word read throughout the Week, the Inhabitants will be Heathenish
and wicked not having God in all their thoughts, much less any fear of him or
his Laws before their Eyes? And what must become of such in the other World,
none can be ignorant that is acquainted with the Bible. Now it cannot be
doubted, but Masters of Families are obliged in Conscience to seek the
Spiritual good and future happiness of those under their Government; if they
provide not for them, as to the necessaries of this temporal Life, they have in
St. Paul's account denied the Faith, are worse than Infidels 1 Timothy 5. 8.
. What Censure then shall they be thought to incurr, if they altogether neglect
their more noble part, and take no care of them as to the things that concern
their eternal good in the Life to come? The holy Father of the faithful was
highly favored by God, as one who would endeavor that his Children and
Household might fear the Lord and keep his way Genesis 18. 19.
; holy Job was very careful that sin might not abide on those of his Family:
and therefore as often as his Sons had been Feasting, he suspecting that they
might have transgressed by excess, did quickly after call them together, to
Sanctify them, and to offer burnt Offerings for them according to their
number; and thus did Job continually Job 1. 5.
, and King David was so concerned to have a sober and religious Court, that he
solemnly resolves to thrust out thence all wicked and immoral persons, and to
have such only to serve him as were Faithful in the Land, such as walked in a
perfect way Psa. 101. 6, 7.
. It Is also mentioned in Commendation of Cornelius, while a Jewish Proselyte,
that being a pious man himself he had gotten a Family about him that were such
too throughout, a devout man (says the Text) and one that feared God with all
his house Act. 10. 2.
. And we may observe how zealous the Masters of Families were in the first
times of Christianity, to bring those of their houses into the way of
Salvation; for no sooner were any of them brought over to the true Religion,
but they made it their business to draw their Families after them; thus the
same Cornelius, when called by a Vision from Heaven to the Faith of Christ, was
careful to bring his Relations with him to the Preaching of Peter Act. 10. 24.
. When God had opened the heart of Lydia, it soon follows that her Household as
well as she are baptized Act. 16. 15.
; in like manner the Keeper of the Prison, being himself converted, all his
were baptized together with him Act. 16. 38.
; and after Crispus the Chief Ruler of the Synagogue had embraced the Faith his
whole Household believed Act. 18. 8.
.

It was Gods command to the Jews, that they should at home instruct their
Families in the Law delivered by Moses: particularly they were to do it every
Morning and Evening, and also to write it on the very door-Posts of their
Houses, and on their Gates Deuteronomy. 6. 7, 9.
. Now we cannot but think it is of equal concern that those of our Religion
should in like manner, have the Precepts of it daily rehearsed to them; nor can
we suppose that Christian Governors of Families, are less obliged then were
the Jewish either to the Service of God and Religion, or to set forward the
Spiritual good of such as belong to them; there is a general obligation, on
those professing the Gospel to endeavor the good and happiness of all men as
they have opportunity Gal. 6. 10.
; but it is more particular and binding in respect of them, to whom they are
more especially related; for to such they owe greater love, and as for
Governors of Families, they are not only bound in a special manner to consult
the spiritual welfare of them who are of their Family (some whereof are as
their very selves) but also on the account of their domestic Authority, have a
capacity and power lodged in them to enforce the pious means, by which they may
be set forward in the way of holiness; not to regard the Salvation of the
meanest Servant in their house is very uncharitable: but while they omit the
exercise of Religion, they are extremely unkind to the Souls of their Wives who
are their own flesh Ephesians. 5. 28, 29.
, and of their Children who are pieces of themselves, and in behalf of whom St.
Paul has given particular charge that they be piously educated Ephesians. 6. 4.
, as his Disciple Timothy had the happiness to be, of whom the same Apostle
does take notice that from a Child he had known the holy Scriptures 1 Timothy 3.
15.
, and imbibed the same Faith, which had first been in his Grandmother Lais and
his Mother Eunice 1 Timothy 1. 5.
; but how can those Parents be thought to have any true love to their Children,
who mind not to have them bred up in the practice of Piety, whereby they may be
seasoned with an early sense of God and Religion, and without which they must
needs be in danger of leading a dissolute life, and consequently of being
unhappy here and eternally miserable in the other World?

In the ancient times of Christianity, Parents did esteem it their greatest
charge and business to get their Children well instructed in Religion, and that
the seeds of Virtue and Piety might be sown in them betimes. Thus the Father of
Origin was careful that his Son might be taught in the holy Scriptures, and
well Principl'd in the true Religion, before he would set him on any Books of
humane literature. He caused him to apply himself to some part of the Bible
every day, and commit it to memory, so as to be able to repeat it to him; and
the Lad made such proficience, that within a short time he would search beyond
the Words into the Sense of Scripture, and not content with the ordinary
Readings, did propound to his Father many difficult questions Eusebius. Hist.
Eccle. lib. 6. c. 2.
; such were the forward indications of his great understanding; and we find in
the life of Constantine, how concerned he was that his Sons might be trained up
in all good Virtues; which he earnestly endeavored as well by his own
instructions as by setting such Tutors over them as were eminently religious;
and after they had been admited to be Partners in the Empire, he did not cease
exhorting them being absent by his Royal Letters, to practice the wholesome
precepts they had formerly received, and that they would account the knowledge
of God and his holy Religion of much greater value than Worldly riches and the
Empire it self Idem de vit. constable. ilb. 4 c. 5.
. Gregory Nazianzen in his Funeral Oration on his Brother Caesarius, speaks
of his Mother the pious Nonna, that as she had been Consecrated to God her self
by her religious Parents, so the Piety which as a Patrimony she received from
them, was transmitted from her to her own Children; and she was instrumental in
the Conversion of her Husband to the true Religion; who was afterward advanced
to the Episcopal Dignity, and zealously discharged that Office for above forty
years Orat. 10.
: And it is declared by the same Father, how his Sister Gorgonia had followed
the excellent Pattern of her Mother; in that she was the means of instilling
Piety into her Children, Grandchildren, and others of her Family: likewise her
Husband was by her won over to the strict practice of holiness Orat. 11.
.

Some modern Examples might here be added; but I shall only mention one which
may seem eminent enough to suffice instead of all: I mean, Sir Matthew Hale the
late Lord Chief Justice; a man never to be named without a reverence to his
memory; he was certainly the honor of his Country, and gave the greatest
credit to the time in which he lived. I need not tell the World how many and
great his Excellencies were; it is to the present purpose that beside his
extraordinary learning, especially in his own profession, and his admirable
care and integrity in the Administration of his great Office, he was a most
pious and devout Christian; and particularly was eminently so in his domestic
relation; he used constantly to worship God in his Family, and the Duties of
Religion there were always performed by himself if there were no Clergyman
present Dr. Burnet in the life of Sr. Mat. Hale.
; he took great care and omitted no endeavors toward the forming of his
Children to the love and practice of Religion; following them with repeated
instructions, which he not only delivered to them by word of thy mouth, but
that they might abide with them and still occur to their thoughts, he did use
to leave them in Writing, giving charge that they should take Copies of them.
Some of his Written directions to his Children have come abroad into the World;
in which he did excellently prescribe concerning their due observation of the
Lords day, and how they were to demean themselves in the public Duties of the
Church also he does therein enjoin them, the Devotion of Prayer and reading the
Scriptures in private; and we find him there putting them in mind, how It had
been his practice to give them Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, for
enabling them to steer and order their course of life, through an evil and
dangerous World: Now the example of this wise and good man, whose transcendent
worth is yet fresh in our memory, and his reputation so great throughout the
Nation, may, I hope, have some good influence to engage others in the same
relation to a pious imitation of him; as being really convinced, like as he
was, of how great concern it is in reference to the future welfare of those
under their care and government.

But if notwithstanding all Obligations to the contrary, any Governors of
Families should be so stupid and uncharitable, as to have little regard for the
spiritual good and safety of others related to them; yet the love they bear
toward themselves cannot suffer them to live in neglect of the important Duty
we have been urging upon them; for they must also consider that the state and
welfare of their own souls are herein most of all concerned: Beside, that the
omission of Prayer and Reading the Scriptures, must needs be prejudicial and of
ill consequence to themselves, as well as to the rest in their houses; nor can
they think well of their own condition to Godward, while they so much disregard
his Worship and Service: I say beside all this, they cannot but think that the
whole Sin and Guilt of this domestic Irreligion will be justly chargeable on
them; and they must expect that the impiety of those who are of their Families
will be laid to their account, as the Persons who might and ought to have
prevented the same; and if through want of pious Discipline, and the exercises
of Devotion, their Children or others belonging to their charge shall become
profane and wicked, how will they be able to answer for it at the great and
terrible day?

That they are so bound to consult and endeavor their good in the things which
concern their future state, as to be accountable to God the Judge of all, for
the neglect hereof they may understand from the pious and earnest advice in a
Tract, which goes under St. Austin's name Written to a Friend; and let each
Master of a Family suppose it spoken to himself; I beseech my Brother, I
beseech thee, that thou teach in thy house to all under thy Government from the
greatest to the least, the Love of Holiness, the Delights of the Heavenly
Kingdom, the Bitterness and Terror of Hell: that thou be solicitous and very
careful for their Salvation; because of all who are Subject to thee in thy
Family thou shall render an account; do thou Teach, Command, Charge, Persuade
them that they beware of Pride, Backbiting, Drunkenness, Fornication, of
Luxury, Anger, Perjury, and Covetousness, which is the Root of all Evils De
Salutar. Docum. c. 20.
.

And whoever are Faithful and Conscientious herein, being Zealous for Religion,
and for keeping up the Duties of it in their Houses, implying their vigilant
care, that all under their domestic Authority may serve God and live like
Christians, they do truly approve themselves as good Servants to their great
Lord and Master, to him of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named
Ephesians. 3: 15.
, and they shall not fail of being well rewarded by him; for his kind favor
shall be toward them, his blessing on their Persons, their Families and
Estates: and after they have a while devoutly served him in these their Earthly
dwellings, he will Translate them to his own glorious Habitation; they shall be
admitted to be of his own Royal Household, that they may adore and praise him
for ever together with the glorified Saints, and blessed Angels in Heaven:
Where it will be some addition to their Joy to meet their Wives, their
Children, and others of their Families, whom by their good Example, and pious
Government, they had helped forward in the way to that happy Place.

DEVOTIONS FOR THE USE OF FAMILIES.

FAMILY DEVOTIONS FOR THE MORNING.
A short Prayer before Reading the Scripture.
Oeternal God, who art Morning
the Lord of Heaven and Earth, infinite in Holiness, and of terrible Majesty,
to be honored, and had in reverence, by all them that draw near unto thee: We
pray thee to beget in us awful thoughts, and a pious temper of mind, suitable
to that great and holy God with whom we have to do; that so our religious
performance this Morning may find acceptance with thee; help us, O Lord, to
understand thy Will revealed in the Scripture, and to receive the same with
ready subjection; as thou do cause the Light of the day to arise upon us
without, so let thine Holy Word shine into our Souls, that it may be a Light to
our Feet and the guide of all our Actions till we shall come to the end of our
Race, and to the blessed Reward of all our holy Duties, in thy Kingdom of
Glory, through thy Mercy in Jesus Christ, our blessed Lord and Savior.

A Psalm and Prayer for the Morning.
THe Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work.

Day unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night shows Knowledge.

Their line is gone out through all the Earth, and their words to the end of the
World, in them has he set a Tabernacle for the Sun.

Which is as a Bridegroom coming out of his Chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong
man to run a Race.

His going forth is from the end of Heaven, and his Circuit unto the end of it,
and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.

I will sing, O God, of thy Power, yea I will sing aloud of thy Mercy in the
Morning: for thou have been my Defense and Refuge in the day of Trouble.

Unto thee have I cried, O Lord, in the Morning shall my Prayer prevent thee.

The Lord is thy Keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.

The Sun shall not smile by day nor the Moon by night.

The Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in, from this time forth
and for ever.

Blessed is the man whose Delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law
does Meditate day and night.

And he shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of Waters, that brings
forth his fruit in his Season; his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever
he does shall prosper.

Lead me, O Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine Enemies, make thy way
straight before me.

O hold thou up my goings in thy paths that my footsteps slip not.

O Almighty God, who art infinitely great and glorious, the Creator and
Governor of the whole World: thou deservest to be feared and Worshipped; we
desire therefore with humble Reverence to Adore thy Divine Majesty, presenting
our Souls and Bodies as a Morning Sacrifice, and earnestly imploring thy favor
and blessing, without which we cannot be in safety for one day or moment of our
Life. O lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us, which is much more
desirable than that of the Sun, and of greater value than all the Riches this
World can afford: We confess, O Lord, that we are guilty Sinners, and so justly
obnoxious to the frowns of thy displeasure and the severity of thy Justice. In
Sin we were conceived, and brought forth in iniquity; there are corrupt
inclinations within us to Rebellion, and Disobedience against thee and thy holy
Commands, and these have very much prevailed in the whole course of our Lives;
for from our Nativity to this present hour we have been still offending the
pure Eyes of thy holiness, by evil thoughts and inordinate desires, by vain
Words and irregular Actions. We have neglected the Duties by thee enjoined, and
committed the sins which thou have strictly forbidden.

But thou art a God gracious and merciful; who delights not in the death of a
sinner: and thy Son is a Mediator of Atonement and Reconciliation for all who
come unto thee through him; we do beseech thee therefore for his sake in whom
thou art well pleased, to pardon all our offenses and justify our persons, and
to receive us into thy love and favor as thine adopted Children.

That we may be capable of these great benefits, be thou pleased to work in us
an unfeigned repentance of all our sins past, a lively Faith in the merits of
thy Son, and serious resolutions of leading a sober, righteous, and godly life;
let the power of thy Grace subdue and mortify all corrupt lusts, and the
Principles of sin: and do thou endue us with all the Virtues of Christian
holiness, that being sanctified throughout, all the Faculties of our Souls and
Members of our Bodies may become instruments of righteousness unto holiness, in
thy Service and for thy Honor.

Accept, O Lord, our humble thanks for all thy manifold Mercies both spiritual
and temporal, for thy care and protection of us the Night past, that thou have
refreshed us with sleep, and preserved us to the beginning of another day; as
thou do lengthen out our life, so continue to us thy loving kindness which is
better than life it self; let thy kind providence Watch over us this day, to
secure us from those many dangers and evil accidents to which we are always
exposed: and grant us thy blessing and furtherance in our lawful Employments.
But above all, we beg the presence and assistance of thy special Grace, to
preserve us from sin and all the temptations to it: that neither inbred
corruption nor the snares of the World, nor the suggestions of Satan may draw
us aside from the way of righteousness, but let a pious fear of thy great and
holy name always possess our Souls. And that we may be the more careful and
circumspect in all our doings, help us to bear in mind that we are still under
thine all-seeing Eye to which all things are naked and open: and that we must
one day appear before thy just Tribunal to receive according to the things done
in the Body whether good or evil; let the consideration of the future
punishments which thou have threatened deter us from sin, and the prospect of
that glorious happiness, which the Gospel does promise, encourage our
obedience; that having a fixed eye on the eternal recompense of reward, we may
despise the pleasures of sin which are but for a season.

O Lord bless thy Church, purge it from all corruptions, and cause thy Gosple
to be known and embraced by all the Nations of the Earth; more especially, be
favorable to thy Church and People of this Kingdom; pardon our many and great
provocations; withold the Judgments we have deserved; guide and protect our
Sovereign Lord the King, and prosper his Government, that it may be happy both
to himself and his Subjects. Comfort and relieve all that labor under any
affliction of body and mind; give them patient submission to thy good pleasure,
and an happy deliverance out of all their troubles.

We implore thy special love and kindness to all who are our friends or more
nearly related to us; bless them in all their concernments both of body and
soul: make them good and prosperous here, and eternally happy hereafter.

O Lord pardon the infirmities of this our devotion, and grant thy favorable
acceptance, through the Merits and Intercession of thy blessed Son our alone
Savior Jesus Christ: who has taught us thus further to pray unto thee.

Our Father, etc. Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O Heavenly Father,
thy Fellowship and Comunion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us and remain
with us this day, thenceforth and for ever.

Another Psalm and Prayer for the Morning.
MY heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

Awake up my glory: awake Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake right early.

I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, I will sing unto thee among the
Nations.

For thy Mercy is great unto the Heavens, and thy truth unto the Clouds.

The Lord is good unto all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works.

He holds our soul in life, and suffers not our foot to be moved.

I will extol thee, my God, O my King, I will bless thy name for ever and ever.

Every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.

The day is thine, the night also is thine, thou have prepared the light and
the Sun.

Thou make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.

O Lord, thou art my God, early will I seek thee.

There be many that say, who will show us any good: Lord Lift thou up the light
of thy Countenance upon us.

And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us, and establish thou the work
of our hands upon us, yea the work of our hands establish thou it.

Forsake me not, O Lord, O my God be not far from me.

Teach me to do thy Will, for thou art my God; thy Spirit is good: lead me into
the Land of uprightness.

O Most great and glorious God, the whole World is the work of thine hands, and
thou governest all things both in Heaven and Earth: We do here admire and adore
thy Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, which are so visible and illustrious in all
the great Works of Creation and Providence: and we do humbly acknowledge our
dependence upon thee, who art the Author of our Life and the support of our
Being; by thee we have have been preserved and nourished ever since we were
born: and it is of thy care and kindness that we are still sustained from
morning to evening, and from evening to morning. When we consider the frailty
of our nature, and the many provocations of our life; we see great reason to
confess that it is of thy mercy we are not consumed. Grant, O Lord, that thy
long suffering and goodness may lead us to repentance: and as thy mercies are
new to us every morning, so we may renew our serious purposes of walking before
thee in holiness and righteousness all our days. Remember not against us the
errors of our former life, neither punish us as we have deserved, but through
the redemption of thy beloved Son, grant us pardon and reconciliation: and make
us partakers of all those rich benefits which he has purchased. And let the
grace of God which has brought Salvation, teach us to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts; to live in the pious fear of thee, and in faithful obedience to
thy holy Laws. But because of our selves we cannot stand upright, let thy Grace
be always sufficient for us; strengthen us with all Spiritual Might in the
inner man, that neither our own corrupt affections nor yet the snares and
temptations of the World, may ever cause us to depart from thee, but grant that
the Principles of faith and holiness being firmly rooted in us, we may be
always steadfast and immovable in our Christian Practice; suffer us not to be
too much in love with the things of this World, nor to lay up our treasure here
on Earth: but grant that our affections may be chiefly set on things above, and
our treasure laid up in Heaven, where it will never perish nor be taken from
us; while we are busy about many things that concern this present life, help
us still to remember the one thing necessary, making it our greatest care to
provide for our eternal State in the life hereafter. As long as thou shall
continue our abode in this World, let thy good Providence watch over our
persons and supply all our wants; help us to be thankful in prosperity, patient
in affliction, and in every condition to be therewith content; and do thou so
order and govern the several events and passages of our life, that they may all
help us forward in our way to Heaven.

O Lord, defend and preserve thy Church Universal, enlarge its borders, and
purge it more and more from all Error and Corruption; bless this Land of our
Nativity with Peace and Unity, with the continuance of thy Truth and Gospel,
the increase of righteousness and all Christian virtues. Bless the King's
Majesty with sound wisdom, and all princely endowments, that his Reign may be
prosperous, and the People happy under him; be favorable to all our Friends
and Relations, bestowing upon them all those good things that may be for their
comfort in this life, and their eternal happiness in that to come. Extend thy
pity to such as labor under any trouble or distress; give them strength to
bear their affliction, and in thy due time an happy deliverance.

We do also present unto thee our sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving for thy
care over us the night past; that our bodies have been refreshed with sleep,
and our life continued to another day; as thou do afford us a longer time in
the land of the living, so lengthen out thy favor and loving kindness, by
which alone our life can be safe and comfortable to us; and teach us so to
number our days that we may apply our hearts to heavenly wisdom; to make a
right use of our time by doing good works while it is day, because the night is
coming in which none can work.

O Lord let thy good Providence and heavenly Grace be present with us, and
watching over us throughout this day, to secure us from dangers and every
unhappy accident, to preserve us from evil actions, and to assist us in those
that be good; make our way prosperous in every business and undertaking, and
guide us always by thy Counsels till we shall come to thine everlasting
Kingdom, Through thy rich mercy in our blessed Sunday Morning
Savior Jesus Christ: in whose name and merits we offer up these our
Petitions, and conclude them in his own words.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead
us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us all this day and for ever.

A Psalm and Prayer for the Morning on the Lords day.
BY the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Host of them by the
breath of his mouth.

He gathers all the waters of the Sea together as a heap, he lays up the
deep in Storehouses.

Let all the earth fear the Lord, and all the Inhabitants of the World stand in
awe of him.

For he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it stood fast.

Know ye that the Lord he is good, it is he that has made us and not we our
selves, we are his People and the Sheep of his Pasture.

Enter into his Gates with Thanksgiving, and into his Courts with Praise, be
thankful unto him and bless his Name.

They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of
their riches.

None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for
him.

But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave, for he shall receive
me.

I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, I shall
not be moved.

Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth, my flesh also shall rest
in hope.

For thou will not leave my soul in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy
one to see corruption.

O how amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts?

My soul longs, even faints for the Courts of the Lord: my heart and my
flesh cries for the living God.

One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand.

I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the
Tents of wickedness.

For the Lord God is a Sun and a shield, the Lord will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

O come, let us worship and bow down before the Lord our Maker.

For he is our God, and we are the People of his Pasture, and the sheep of his
hand.

To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

ALmighty God who art great and glorious, infinite in all perfections, and of
incomprehensible Majesty; in comparison of whom the Princes of the earth are
but vile Worms, and all the Nations of the World less than nothing and vanity.
Thou deservest to be feared and magnified, to be adored and praised, and it is
our greatest honor to wait upon thee; thy service is the most perfect freedom,
and we cannot, but think it very meet and reasonable, that a good part of our
time should be devoted to thee and thine honor: yea our whole life is too
little to celebrate, as we ought, the excellence of thy divine Nature and of
thy great Works.

O Lord, this admirable Fabric of the World is of thy making; for in six days
were all things Created by thee, and the Seventh day in which thou did cease
from thy Work, thou did set apart for an holy Sabbath, in which the Sons of
men might remember thy Creation, and honor thee for it.

Wherefore on this day of our religious rest, we desire to meditate and admire
that wonderful workmanship which does appear in thy Creatures.

By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, with all that glorious Host of
Sun, Moon, and Stars, thou have founded the earth beneath and given life and
breath to all things living. We acknowledge thy signal kindness to our selves
above the rest of thy Creatures, in that thou did Create man after thine own
Image, making him little lower than the Angels; that thou have given him
dominion over the works of thine hands, and made him capable of eternal
happiness in the service and enjoyment of thy self.

O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches; and what is man that thou should magnify him?
That thou should set thine heart upon him?

We do likewise extol thy love to mankind, which has been further shown in the
great work of our Redemption. That after we had broken the Laws of our Creation
by sinning against thee, had fallen short of the glory of God, and were become
liable to Death and Hell, thou were pleased to send thine only begotten Son out
of thine own bosom to save us from destruction, and restore us again to thy
love and favor, who took on him the form of a Servant, lived a persecuted
life, died a painful and ignominious death for us men and for our Salvation; he
did alone thy justice by the Sacrifice of himself; overcame Death and the
Grave, and finished our Redemption by rising to life the third day, when he was
declared to be the Son of God with power by his wonderful Resurrection, which
we and all thy Church do this day commemorate.

O God, thine acts of favor have been thus great and admirable to usward, we
do therefore offer up our hearty praise and thanksgiving for the discoveries of
thy Wisdom, Power, and Goodness, in the Creation of us and the whole World; for
thy compassion and rich grace, in and through our blessed Savior Jesus Christ.

And we do here with deep Repentance humble our selves, for that our lives have
not better answered such obligations of thine to duty and obedience; for we
have sinned against thee as thou art our Creator, by not loving and fearing
thee as thou have deserved, by neglecting thy service, and employing our souls
and bodies, which thou have made, in actions displeasing to thee, and which
thou have forbidden. We have offended thee as the Author of our Redemption, by
not receiving the Gospel with a due love and esteem thereof, nor conforming our
lives to its holy precepts, nor walking suitably to that abundant grace, which
has therein appeared, teaching us to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts.

But, O thou Father of Mercies, who delightest not in the death of sinners, be
thou pleased to pardon and justify; to do away our iniquities, and receive us
graciously; bless unto us all the means of grace, and the opportunities of
receiving instruction from thine holy Word. When we appear before thee in the
Congregation of thy people, help us to be serious and devout as in thy
presence, to join in Prayer with an intent and fervent mind, and to hear thy
Word with reverence and submission; that by an attendance on thine holy
Ordinances; we may increase in Piety, and all the Graces of Christian Holiness;
for the righteousness and merits of that holy One, who died for our sins and
rose again for our Justification.

And we do also humbly beg for his sake, that thou would grant unto us thine
holy Spirit and Heavenly Grace, whereby thine Image may be renewed in us, that
we may from henceforth honor and serve thee from whom we have received our
being, and help us more and more to conform our selves to the death of Christ
by dying to sin, and to his Resurrection by rising to holiness and newness of
life. To this good end we pray thee to grant that on this thine holy Day, we
may sanctify thine holy Name, that our thoughts may be heavenly, and our
affections set on things above; that we may take delight in the exercises of
religion and may be in thy fear all the day long.

Bless thy Church and be thou graciously present in all Christian Assemblies
throughout the World, to hear the Prayers they shall this day put up, and to
prosper thy Word which shall be Preached, that it may become effectual for
pulling down the Kingdom of Satan, and for edifying the body of Christ in sound
Faith and real Godliness.

Let the light of thy glorious Gospel be spread abroad, and the borders of thy
Sons kingdom daily enlarged. Call home thine ancient people the Jews, and bring
in the fullness of the Gentiles, that all the Nations of the earth may be one
sheepfold under the one great shepherd of Souls.

We implore thy particular kindness for this Church and Kingdom; and more
especially for the Kings Majesty, that he may have Wisdom, Justice, Piety, and
all princely virtues, to govern according to thy Will for thy glory and the
good of thy people. And let thy true religion be continued to us for all
generations.

We present unto thee our hearty thanks for thy many and great benefits
vouchsafed to us; for our excellent being, our preservation hitherto, and all
temporal enjoyments: for our birth and education in a place where the truth and
purity of thy Gospel is professed and taught, where we have the freedom of
worshipping thee according to thy Will, and do enjoy the precious means of
Grace and Salvation.

Good Lord help us to make a wise and Christian use of all thy blessings, to
improve all spiritual advantages for the good and happiness of our souls; that
having well employed the Talents committed to us, we may at length be approved
by thee as good and faithful servants, and may enter into the joy of our Lord;
to which blessedness do thou in thy good time bring us all, through thy mercy
in Jesus Christ, in whose name and mediation we beg thy gracious acceptance of
our Persons and Prayers; which we further recommend unto thee in his words.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come; thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us: and lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us all evermore.

FAMILY DEVOTIONS FOR THE EVENING.
A short Prayer before Reading the Scripture.
ALmighty Creator and Evening
most wise Governor of all the World, thou art God, and there is none beside
thee, and thou only art to be worshipped; it is of thy mercy and happy
forbearance that we are yet alive, and it is the greatest happiness of our life,
that we can thus attend upon thee to hear thee speaking to us in thy written
Word, and to speak unto thee our selves by our Prayers and Supplications: O
Lord draw near to us, with thy favorable mercies, while we approach to thee in
our humble duty; have a gracious regard to this our evening Sacrifice, and let
thy good Spirit help our Infirmities; since thou have appointed the holy
Scripture for a Rule of our Faith, and a Law to all our actions, grant that we
may attend thereunto with godly reverence; let thy word dwell richly in us, and
have a powerful influence on our hearts and lives; that having obeyed thy Will
here on earth, we may receive the promise of eternal life in thine heavenly
Kingdom, through our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom with thy self and the holy
Ghost be all honor and glory world without end, Amen.

A Psalm and Prayer for the Evening.
O Give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for his mercy endures for ever.

To him that made great lights, for his mercy endures for ever.

The Sun to rule by day, the Moon and Stars to rule by night, for his mercy
endures for ever.

O Lord thou have searched me and known me.

Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my
ways.

If I say, surely the darkness shall cover me, even the night shines as the
day, the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.

I will say of the Lord, he is my refuge, my God, in him will I trust.

He shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall thou trust,
his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.

Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, and the arrow that flies
by day.

Nor for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor the destruction that
walks at noon day.

Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with
thee.

O Almighty and most glorious God, Creator of Heaven and Earth; we acknowledge
our dependence on thee; for we are the work of thine hands, and in thee we
live, move and have our being; wherefore our souls and bodies which thou have
made and hitherto preserved, we do humbly prostrate at thy Footstool, ascribing
unto thee honor and worship, adoration and praise, and with lowly subjection
submitting our selves to thy most great and excellent Majesty. It Is thy
wonderful condescension that thou do permit vile dust and ashes to have
freedom of access to thy Throne of grace; that thou art pleased to invite and
command us to present our supplications.

We are altogether unworthy to speak unto thee; and by reason of our manifold
sins do justly deserve thou should reject both our persons and prayers; for
the thoughts and imaginations of our hearts, the course and practice of our
life have been exceeding evil, and that continually: We have obeyed the lusts
of our depraved nature more than the precepts of thy sacred Word, and have
compli'd with the temptations of Satan rather then the motions of thy blessed
Spirit; thy Law which is holy, just, and good, we have broken from day to day:
and also slighted and abused the riches of thy grace discovered in the Gospel;
wherefore to us belongs nothing but shame and punishment: but with thee there
is mercy, and with thy Son plenteous redemption; we beseech thee therefore for
thy mercies sake, and for thy Sons sake whom thou have made a Sacrifice for
sin, that thou would blot out all our transgressions and remember our
iniquities no more; deal not with us after the strictness of thy Law, but
according to the gracious terms of the new Covenant, in which thou do
promise pardon and reconciliation to all repenting Sinners. We do here profess
our deep sorrow and humiliation for all our sins past, and our serious
resolution to lead the future part of our life in holy obedience to thy Will
and Commands.

But for as much as our sufficiency is of thee, and of our selves alone we can
do nothing that shall be good and acceptable in thy sight, be thou pleased to
supply our defects and strengthen our weakness; let thine holy Spirit lead us
into truth, and assist us in every good Duty. Write thy Law in our inward
parts, and put thy fear into our hearts that we may never depart from thee.

Prepare us, O Lord, for all events of thy providence, that in every condition
we may be therewith content; and grant whatever things shall befall us in this
World, they may work together for good, and be a furtherance to us in our
service of thee, and in our passage to eternal happiness.

And because thou have commanded that Prayers and Intercessions be made for all
men, we beg thy mercy for the whole race of Mankind, that the light of thy
Gospel may shine upon all the Earth, and every Nation thereof may partake of
Christ and the benefits of his Redemption.

Bless thy Church Universal, that it may flourish more and more in purity of
truth and holiness; and that the Gates of Hell may never prevail against it.

Vouchsafe thy special care and kindness to this Church and Kingdom to which we
belong; preserve the religion professed among us from error and corruption;
let piety, justice, and sobriety, increase and abound; that thou may delight
in us to do us good; for those happy ends bless him whom thou have anointed
King over us; fill him with sound wisdom and all princely virtues, that so he
may rule for thee here, and be rewarded by thee in thy Kingdom of Glory.

We crave thy choicest blessings for all to whom we have any particular
obligation; be thou a friend to our friends, to all who have done us good or do
wish us well.

Extend thy fatherly compassion to such as be in any affliction or distress,
whether of body or mind; comfort the sorrowful, relieve those that are in want,
send ease to all that are under any sickness or pain, relieve the oppressed,
give thy consolation and support to all who are persecuted for righteousness
sake, and in thy due time redeem thine Israel out of all his troubles.

We do likewise present unto thee our humble thanks for all thy mercies and
benefits so plentifully conferred upon us; for our being and the preservation
thereof, for all the good things appertaining to the present life. But above
all we bless thee for giving thy Son to be our Redeemer, for revealing to us
the way of Life and Salvation by the holy Scriptures; for thine Ordinances and
all the means of Grace, and for any measure of Faith and Holiness thou have
wrought in us. We thank thee for thy good providence over us the day past, that
thou have supplied our necessities, preserved us from dangers and prolonged our
life hitherto. And praised be thy wisdom and goodness for appointing the
constant successions of day and night, that man may go forth to his work until
the Evening, and then return to his place of rest and sleep. O thou Keeper of
Israel, who do neither slumber nor sleep, watch over us in our lying down,
and let thine Angels guard our Habitations; grant us to be refreshed with quiet
and comfortable repose, and that we may awake in health and safety the next
morning; let thy goodness, O Lord, continually follow us through all the parts
and passages of our life, till thou shall bring us to thine everlasting
Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our blessed Savior: in whose Words we continue
to pray unto thee.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name; thy Kingdom come; thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us: and lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us and abide with us,
henceforth and for evermore.

Another Psalm and Prayer for the Evening.
BLess the Lord, o my soul: O Lord thou art become exceeding glorious, thou art
clothed with Honor and Majesty.

Thou have appointed the Moon for seasons, and the Sun knows his going down.

Thou make darkness, and it is night wherein all the beasts of the Forest do
creep forth.

Man goes forth to his work, and to his labor until the evening.

O Lord, how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all, the
earth is full of thy riches.

The Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night
his Song shall be with me, and my Prayer unto the God of my life.

My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall
praise him with joyful lips.

When I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night watches.

Except the Lord build the house they labor in vain that build it, except the
Lord keep the City the watchman waketh but in vain.

It is vain to rise early and sit up late, to eat the bread of carefulness, for
so he gives his beloved sleep.

Consider and hear me, O Lord, my God, lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the
sleep of death.

ALmighty God our heavenly Father, who have commanded us by Prayers and
Supplication to make known our requests unto thee, and do promise thy
gracious presence, where two or three are gathered together in thy Name; we
vile Creatures do here present our selves and our Prayers to thy divine
Majesty, humbly confessing that we are unworthy to lift up our eyes to Heaven
the place of thine holy Habitation, because we have sinned against Heaven and
before thee, and do not deserve to be owned for thy Children; the inward
thoughts and affections of our heart, the words and actions of our outward life
have been very evil and that continually. We have been exceeding careless and
defective in our Devotion and Piety toward God, in the acts of charity and
brotherly kindness we owe to men, and in that mortification and self-denial
which thy Gospel does require; the inclinations of our own corrupt nature, we
have more readily obeyed than the righteous commands of thine excellent Laws;
and our care has been much greater about the things of this present life which
are earthly and perishing, then about things heavenly and spiritual, belonging
to the life immortal. We do therefore with shame and repentance humble our
selves, beseeching thee for the Merits and Mediation of thy blessed Son to
pardon all our offenses, and to receive us into thy love and favor as
perfectly reconciled; let not our former unthankfulness or abuse of mercies,
withhold from us the gifts of thy bounty; but be thou pleased to bestow and
continue to us all the good things that may be requisite and convenient for our
comfortable subsistence in this World, and for our eternal happiness in the
life to come. O Lord, our Governor who orderest all things both in Heaven and
earth, guide and dispose all the affairs and occurrences of our present
condition, as may be most for thy glory and our real benefit; preserve to us
the health of our bodies, the use of our reason, of our senses and other
necessary faculties; and let thy good providence still watch over us to defend
us from evil and to do us good. More especially, we beg the blessings of thy
divine Grace for the sanctification of our hearts and lives; enlighten our
minds with the saving knowledge of thy self and of Jesus Christ, whom to know is
life eternal; regulate our wills and affections, that we may choose what thou
do approve, and refuse whatever thou have forbidden, that our love may be to
thy Law and our chief delight in doing thy Commandments, and that we may hate
every evil work. Enrich our souls with all Christian Virtues, whereby we may be
qualified to honor and serve thee, to lead a sober, righteous, and godly life,
with a Conscience void of offense both toward thee, and toward all men.
Amidst all the dangers and temptations of this mortal state, let thine Almighty
power be our shield and support, give us minds suitable and prepared for every
dispensation of thy providence, that no events whether prosperous or afflicting
may do us any harm; but that we may be constant and steady in our Faith and
Duty, and by a continuance of well doing, may attain that life Eternal and
Crown of Glory which thou have promised.

Bless thy Church throughout the World, that it may flourish in truth and
holiness, and remain safe from all persecuting Powers. Be thou favorable to
this Church and Kingdom to which we belong, continue thy Gospel to us, and
grant that Piety, Justice, and whatever is is requisite to make us a good and
happy people may increase and abound.

We implore thy pity for all in any trouble or calamity, whether of Soul or
Body, that thou would please to afford them thy comfort and seasonable relief.

And we likewise beg thy favor and special kindness, for all our friends, that
thou would bestow thy blessings upon them both for life and godliness.

Accept, O Lord our return of thanks for thy goodness continued to us the day
past, that thou do still supply us with accommodations for the support and
comfort of our lives: that thou have preserved us from many evils, which if
left to our selves we should have fallen into: and that we are still alive,
whereas so many others have been this day cut off from the land of the living;
we bless thee for sparing us so long, and granting us so large a time for
making our calling and election sure; help us to improve thy long-suffering and
the day of Grace, by working out our own salvation: That when ever thou shall
call us hence, we may be ready and prepared to enter into the joy of our Lord.

We commend our persons and all belonging to us, to thy care and protection,
this night defend us from our ghostly enemies, and let no evil come nigh our
dwelling; grant us a quiet and comfortable repose, and that we may awake in
safety the next morning, disposed both in body and mind for thy service.

Hear us, O merciful Father, and fulfill our desires for the sake of our blessed
Savior who sits at thy right hand, in whose words we continue to pray unto
thee.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead
us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us and abide with us
henceforth and for ever.

A Psalm and Prayer for the Evening Sunday Evening
on the Lords day.
O Lord how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches.

When I consider thy Heavens the work of thy fingers, the Moon and the Stars
which thou have ordained.

What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
visitest him?

For thou have made him little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with
glory and honor.

Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thine hands, thou have put
all things under his feet.

Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the Princes take Counsel together
against the Lord and against his anointed.

Let us break his bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

He that sits in the Heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in
derision.

Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

Yea, I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.

I will declare the decree the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son this day
have I begotten thee.

Ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost part of the earth for thy possession.

The Lord has sent redemption unto his people, he has commanded his covenant
for ever, holy and reverend is his name.

He has showed his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his judgments unto Israel.

He has not dealt so with any nation, and for his judgments they have not
known them, praise ye the Lord.

ALmighty and most glorious God, we acknowledge thy great grace and favor in
permitting us to wait upon thee from time to time with our devotion and
supplications: thou art most perfect and happy in thy self, not needing any
service of ours, and yet thou art pleased to invite and command us to come unto
thee: thou art the high and lofty one, the Maker and Governor of all the
World, and yet do condescend to receive the addresses of us thy Creatures,
who are vile dust and ashes.

We must confess, O Lord, that our righteousness does not extend to thee, nor
can our religious performances deserve thine acceptance, for there is iniquity
in our most holy things; we do not attend upon thee, with that humility and
reverence, with that faith and servency, which thou may justly require. When
we draw near unto thee with our lips, our hearts are often far from thee; we
present our bodies before thee, when the thoughts and affections of our souls
are running after vanity.

And since our best Duties are so liable to thy displeasure; how much more the
ordinary and common actions of our life? and how can we stand before thy
justice if thou should call us to a strict account for all our careless
omissions of Duties by thee required, and our many commissions of what thy Law
has expressly forbidden? If thou should be extreme to mark what is done
amiss, O Lord, who could abide it? but thou art a God full of compassion, and
plenteous in mercy; and thou have given thine own Son to be our Mediator;
though we have no righteousness or oblation of our own that can procure thy
favor, yet be thou gracious to us for the sake of him who is the Lord our
righteousness, and for the merit of his most perfect Sacrifice which he made
for us, when he offered up himself a Lamb without spot or blemish; let the
blood of Christ cleanse us from all unrighteousness, and purge our conscience
from dead works to serve the living God. And that we may from henceforth walk
as the redeemed of the Lord unto all well-pleasing; give unto us thy grace and
holy Spirit for the mortification of sin, and the sanctifying of us throughout
in Soul, Spirit, and in Body; grant that our hearts and lives may be conformed
to thy heavenly Will, and the Precepts of thine holy Gospel; that we may fear
thee at all times, and love thee above all things, and serve thee with our
chiefest care and endeavor; let not the love of any worldly good, or the fear
of any temporal evil cause us to turn aside from thee into any sinful practice:
but grant that we may still account it our highest interest to please thee and
enjoy thy favor: and that we may be more careful and diligent in securing our
eternal happiness hereafter then for the momentary things of this present life;
help us often to consider the vanity of this World; the approach of death, and
the certainty of a future judgment; and to fix our thoughts on the recompense
of reward, that so we may be steadfast and immovable, in the Duties of our
Christian profession, as well knowing that our labor shall not be in vain in
the Lord.

And because our life is but a vapor which does quickly vanish, and we know
not how soon thou will bring us to the dust of death, give us daily to prepare
for our great change, and to be doing good while we have time and opportunity,
because there is no work nor understanding in the Grave whither we are going.

We render our due thanks for thy great mercy and long suffering in the
continuance of our life hitherto, and lengthening out unto us the day of Grace
and Salvation; whereas so many others who might have lived to this time as well
as we, have been removed from the land of the living. And we bless thy great
name both in behalf of our selves and this whole Nation, for the free use of
the holy Scriptures, the truth of thy heavenly Doctrine, and the purity of thy
Worship. That thou have so long preserved the religion professed among us
notwithstanding the many attempts that have been made against it; help us all
to value and improve these inestimable blessings; and be thou pleased still to
continue them to us for all generations. We thank thee in particular for the
opportunities of waiting upon thee this day in the Duties of thy solemn
Worship; pardon all the defects and infirmities of our religious service:
accept our Devotions at the hands of our great high Priest, and let the Prayers
of us and thy whole Church obtain thy gracious acceptance as presented to thee,
with the incense of his Merits.

Let thy word abide in us, taking root in our hearts, and bringing forth good
fruit in our life and actions; and grant that all the pious instructions we at
any time receive, may prove effectual for building us up in our holy Faith, and
helping us forward in the way of holiness, which leads to eternal life.

We beg thy mercy for all those Nations, which yet sit in darkness and in the
shadow of death, that the Sun of Righteousness may arise upon them to guide
their feet into the way of peace. And be thou pleased to extend thy fatherly
piety to all the distressed Members of thy Church, giving them seasonable
relief in all their afflictions and necessities; more especially be thou near
at hand to the comfort and deliverance of all those who are any where oppressed
or persecuted for the sake of thy Truth and Gospel, and grant that the rage of
thine and thy peoples enemies may be at length restrained; cause the wickedness
of the wicked to come to a perpetual end, but let the just be established.

We recommend to thy special care our own particular friends, and all more
nearly related to us, that thou would bless them in their souls and bodies,
and give them all the good things, that may be for their prosperity here, and
their eternal happiness hereafter.

Finally, we desire for our selves thy favorable kindness this ensuing night;
grant us to lie down in peace with thee, and under thy protection; let thy
watchful providence secure us from all the perils of darkness; and command
thine holy Angels to be our defense against that evil one, who like a roaring
Lion seeks day and night whom he may devour; give us a sweet repose, and
bring us in safety to another day. And grant that all the days of our life we
may honor and serve thee, and at length receive the glorious reward of
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ: in whose blessed Name and Words, we
further pray unto thee.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread; and
forgive us our trepasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead
us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O Heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us this Night and for
evermore.

DEVOTIONS When any Person is sick.
A short Prayer, with which to begin.
ALmighty God, who hear In sickness
Prayer, and art near unto all that call upon thee; thou art our only refuge in
trouble, and have commanded us in the time of sickness to Pray one for another
that we may be healed. O let our cry come unto thee, and be thou entreated for
thy Servant who is afflicted in body. We do confess, we are altogether unworthy
to intercede with thee, by reason of our manifold sins, for which we do here
humble our selves with hearty repentance, most earnestly begging thy gracious
pardon for the sake of our blessed Redeemer, who is the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the World; through him be thou reconciled unto us, and with
Fatherly compassion receive our Prayers which we do not presume to offer up,
but in his Name and Mediation, who suffered for us and is ready to pity the
sufferings of others. To him with thy self and the holy Ghost, be all Honor
and Glory, world without end. Amen.

These Portions of Scripture may be suitable to the condition of the Sick.
Psalms 6. 25. 27. 31. 32. 34. 38. 42. 73. 88. 103. Job 1. 2. 5. 7. Isa. 38.
Lament. 3. Mat. 8. Romans 8. 2 Cor. 4. and 5. Heb. 12.

A Psalm.
LIke as a Father pitieth his Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

For he knows our frame, he remembers that we are dust.

As for man his days are as Grass, as a Flower of the Field, so he flourishes.

For the wind passes over it and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know
it no more.

But the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that
fear him, and his righteousness unto Childrens Children.

Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver him in the time
of trouble.

The Lord will preserve him and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon
earth.

The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing, thou will make all
his bed in his sickness.

Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
them all.

I looked on my right hand and beheld, but there was no man that would know me;
refuge failed me and no man cared for my soul.

I cried unto the Lord, I said thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land
of the living.

Attend unto my cry, for I am brought very low.

Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, for he shall pluck my feet out of the
Net.

Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails me, hide not thy face from me,
lest I be like unto them that go down into the pit.

And enter not into judgment with thy Servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified.

For thy name sake, O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.

Turn thee unto me and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted.

The troubles of mine heart are enlarged, o bring thou me out of my distresses.

Look upon mine affliction and my pain, and forgive all my sins.

Forsake me not, O Lord, O my God be not far from me.

Make have to help me, O Lord, my Salvation.

The Prayer.
O Lord our heavenly Father, who art a God full of compassion, and have
promised that if we call upon thee in trouble thou will deliver us, bow down
thine ear to our supplications, and let us find mercy to help in this time of
need.

Our life is in thine hand, for in thee we live, and move, and have our being
from day to day: and when thou hidest thy face we are troubled: at the breath
of thy displeasure, we wither as Grass, and fade away as the flower of the
Field; but thy Mercy is over all thy Works; thou do not willingly afflict
nor grieve the Children of men; thine anger endures but for a moment; but in
thy favor is life. O Lord, be favorable at this time and extend thy wonted
pity to thy Servant now laboring under thy visitation; who is there in heaven
but thee? and there is none upon earth on whom we can rely for succor but thy
self alone. Thou can send ease and recovery, when humane skill and natural
means do quite fail: and thou have declared in thy Word that the Prayer of
Faith shall save the sick. O Lord, strengthen our faith and fulfill thy gracious
promise; our trust is only in thee, for on thee do we depend for life and
health and all things. It Is thy property that thou do kill and make alive,
thou do wound and also heal, that thou turnest man to destruction and say
return ye Children of men.

We do therefore most heartily beseech thee, O merciful Father, that as thou
have laid thine affliction on the person of thy Servant, so thou would of
thy tender compassion remove it from him (her); bless the means that may be
used for his (her) recovery: rebuke the distemper, and if it be thy blessed
Will, restore him (her) again to perfect health.

O blessed Jesus, who when thou wast on earth had compassion on the sick, and
did go about healing all manner of diseases, show now thy pity, speak but the
word and thy Servant shall be whole. Thou Lord our Redeemer, who have taken our
frail nature, and did become like unto us in all things, Sin only excepted,
have a fellow feeling, we pray thee, of our infirmities. Thou who art the
mystical head of all the Faithful afford thy present kindness to this afflicted
member of thine own body, which is the Church.

Grant, O merciful Father, that while his (her) bodily weakness or pain shall
continue, he (she) may have inward strength and comfort in the soul. Vouchsafe
unto him (her) the constant use of his (her) reason and understanding, and a
pious exercise of all Christian graces. Enable him (her) with unfeigned
repentance to lament the errors of his (her) whole life, and by a lively Faith
to lay hold on the Merits of Christ for Pardon and Salvation; help him (her)
with submission and godly patience to bear thy chastisement, resigning himself
(herself) to thy good pleasure; and let his (her) whole trust and considence be
in thee and thy gracious promises. Grant him (her) a full remission of all his
(her) sins, and a comfortable assurance of thy love and favor, which is more
desirable than life it self.

O most wise and powerful God, who can make all things work together for
good, sanctify this thy fatherly correction, that it may turn to his (her)
spiritual benefit, and let the issue thereof be comfortable and happy; grant
that the affliction, which at present does seem grievous, may afterward yield
the peaceable fruits of righteousness, and that it may make him (her) more fit
and prepared for that happy state in which there shall be no more sickness nor
^orrow, but all fullness of joy and pleasure for evermore.

And help us all seriously to consider our own frailty and the great
uncertainty of our present life, to live in expectation of death, and by a
constant practice of holiness to lay up for our selves a good foundation
against the time to come; that when this earthly Tabernacle shall be dissolved,
we may be received into an eternal habitation in the highest Heavens. Good Lord
hear our prayer and let our supplications find a gracious acceptance through
the worthiness of him, who is our Intercessour at thy right hand: In whose holy
words, we further call upon thee.

Our Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven; give us this day our daily bread, and
forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us; and lead
us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil, for thine is the Kingdom, the
Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us and abide with us
henceforth and for ever. Amen.

A PERSUASIVE TO Private Devotion.

A PERSUASIVE TO Private Devotion.
ALTHOUGH it be the more eminent part of our Christian Devotion, when we join
with others in the Service of God (who is thereby openly owned and honored by
us, and we do by our concurrence, both encourage and assist the Piety of
others) whether it be in the greater Assemblies of the Church, or the lesser of
Families at home: yet however it must be said, that this alone does by no means
fulfill our duty to God, nor yet sufficiently answer the needs and exigencies of
our own State; and therefore private and single Devotion, ought also to be
minded by all who would please the Almighty and enjoy his favor, by all who
would consult their safety amidst the many particular circumstances and
emergencies of their life; and every Christian should think of religious
Worship (as one of the Ancients does teach him) That it must not only be
performed in the Church but also in the Family and in his private Chamber: that
he have God always hallowed in his heart for that he himself is the Temple of
God Lact. l. 6. de ver. Cult. cap. 25.
.

And by another before him, it is given for a note of a good Christian, that he
will pray in every place, but so as not to appear openly to others to do it
Clem. Alex. Strom. 7.
. Thou must have (says a third) thy private prayers, which God may see in
secret, and reward thee for them openly Basil. in Asc. Tom. 2 p. 181.
.

Under this private Devotion in its full notion are comprised Prayer,
Meditation, reading of the holy Scriptures, and other pious Books; and though
we shall proceed with respect to the first of these especially, yet we would
not be thought to divide such good company, but while recommending private
Prayer to intend Meditation and Reading too; they do indeed mutually assist
each other, and we cannot be without either of them. Now to enforce this
excellent Duty in which both the reality and comfort of a Christian do so very
much consist, we shall briefly propose some persuasive considerations, which
may easily prevail on all who are truly disposed to the Practice of Religion,
or the prosecution of their own interest.

I. It does appear out of holy Scripture, that we are not only to worship God
and call upon him in company with others, but that he expects moreover, to be
honored by the devout service of every man singly and apart, and that each
person in his own behalf, should seek unto him for his benefits: this is
manifestly contained in those Texts, where it is given in charge that every one
address himself to God on his own particular occasions; as to call upon him in
the day of trouble Psalm. 50. 15.
, and if any man be afflicted let him pray Jam. 5. 13.
; In which places it cannot only be meant that the party afflicted is to crave
the Prayers of the Congregation, or of the Minister where he lives; but chiefly
at least, that he is himself alone to call upon God and supplicate for his help
and deliverance; and this must be done in many sad cases which afford no
opportunity of having the Prayers of others; again when we are bid in every
thing to make known our requests Phil. 4. 6.
, it must needs intend that we are to do it in particular cases and matters of
private concern; though they fall not under the public or ordinary Prayers.

And when it is commanded that in all places we lift up holy hands 1 Timothy 2. 8.
, it does certainly include the places of our privacy and retirement; and this
Text, Mr. Mede will have peculiarly understood of private Prayer Conc. Lat. De
Vener. Sac.
. But the precept of our Savior is very express, Enter into thy Closet, and
when thou have shut the door pray to thy Father which is in secret Mat. 6. 6.
; the words are plain, and to neglect the duty enjoined in them is to live in a
known sin, which we are highly concerned to beware of as we tender the safety
of our souls.

II. Let us set before us the examples of eminent and renowned persons by whose
practice this Duty of private Devotion is recommended to us. That it was in use
with the holy Patriarks of old does appear on sacred Record; of Abraham, Genesis
15. 2. and Chap. 17. 18. of Isaac, Genesis 25. 21. and of Jacob, Genesis 32. 9.
Concerning Isaac that other Text, Genesis 24. 63. might also be added, where it is
in our translation, that he went out to meditate in the Eventide; but the
original word does signify submissa voce loqui labio tenus murmurare, to speak
just moving the lips, without any audible sound, as is wont to be in private
prayer more than in meditation, and thus it was in the supplication of Hannah 1 Samuel 1. 13.
; but that the Verb in that place may signify to pray does appear from hence,
that the Substantive coming from it is used for Prayer, in other Texts of
Scripture; as Psalm. 5. 1. and 19. 14. and therefore both in the Caldee
Paraphrase and the Arabic version, it is: And Isaac went out to pray; likewise
it is thus understood by Munster, Vatablus, and the same is approved by
Grotius; we are also told by the first of these, that the Jews themselves have
generally taken the Text in this sense; but whether it be meant of Prayer or
Meditation, it is much indifferent to the present purpose, since the latter as
well as the former is an act of Devotion (...) the resolved custom (...) devout
Prince, (...) ^^^self to God three times every day: At Evening (says he) and
Morning, and at Noon will I pray Psalm. 55. 17.
; and the same was done by the Prophet Daniel; nor could any danger affright
him from it; for notwithstanding a Royal decree to the contrary which made it
Capital, in his Chamber he kneeled on his knees three times a day and prayed
and gave thanks unto his God Dan. 6. 10.
. That the Apostle St. Peter was wont to retire for his Devotion, may be seen,
Act. 10. 9. where it is said, that about the sixth hour (one of the usual times
for that Duty) he went up upon the house to pray; choosing that place as most
distant from all noise and disturbance; likewise St. Paul as we often read had
his private Prayers; they were such in which he be sought the Lord thrice, that
the Thorn in the Flesh might depart from him 2 Cor. 12. 8.
: and those wherein he did earnestly intercede for the Churches himself had
planted; whereof there is mention in his Epistle to them Ephesians. 1. 16. 3. 14.
Phil. 1. 9. Col. 1. 9.
.

It is in Ecclesiastic History concerning James the brother of our Lord who
for his eminent sanctity was surnamed, The Just, that by frequency of praying
his Knees became void of sense, being hardened like those of a Camel Eus. Hist.
Eccles. l. 2. cap. 23.
. And the learned Origin, as from his childhood he had been accustomed to
religious Duties under the education of his good Father: So he was most strict
in the Practice of his Devotion throughout his whole Life; all his time almost
both by day and night, was divided between Prayer and Reading the Scriptures;
nor would he take the natural refreshments of the body without those others of
the soul; for whenever he sat down to meat somewhat of the Bible was still
read, and the same was done at his lying down to sleep Hieron. ad Marcel.
Epist. 18.
.

The Emperor Constantine thought it his greatest honor to have access to God
in private Devotion; for it is reported of him that notwithstanding all the
affairs of his vast Empire: Every day at stated hours shutting himself up he
alone conversed with his God Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 21.
. And we read of our King Alfred, who wore the Crown of this Realm about nine
hundred years ago, that as he allotted the one half of his Revenue to pious
uses, so he devoted the like proportion of his time to the exercise of
Religion: they who speak least say, that dividing the twenty four hours of each
natural day into three parts, one eight hours he allowed himself for eating,
sleeping, and recreation: another he consigned to hearing causes, doing
justice, and other transactions of his Government: and all the rest he spent in
Prayer, reading the Scriptures, and holy Meditation; he had usual times of
Devotion, by night as well as by day, which he constantly observed; and he
would often leave all company and go to the Church by himself alone that he
might there worship God; he had a manual of devotion, which he always carried
about with him; and on some leaves of Paper that were bound up with it for that
purpose, he wrote down several pious sentences out of the holy Scriptures;
which he used to read over for exciting his devotion; and to promote piety in
all his Subjects, he began a translation of David's Psalms into the English
tongue, though he did not live to finish the same In vit. Aelf. per Aelf. Coll.
Alumn. l. 3. p. 161. Bal. de Script. Cen. 2. n. 26. Speed. Hist. book 7. chapter 36.
. But behold a greater than these, for our Savior himself was very frequent in
this retired exercise of Devotion; it was usual with him, as we read in the
Evangelists, to withdraw himself from Company that he might pray alone Mat. 14.
23. Mar. 1. 35. Luke 5. 16.
; he did so thrice within a short space a little before the Jews laid hands on
him Mat. 29. 36, 39 42, 44.
; and he was one whole night at Prayer in the solitude of a Mountain Luke 6 12.
; this Practice of Christ is well enforced by St. Cyprian, Neither has our
Lord, by words only taught us to pray, but also by his own deeds, while praying
frequently himself and making evident what we are to do by the testimony of his
own example, as it is written: And he withdrew himself into the Wilderness and
prayed; and again, he went out into a Mountain to pray, who was without sin,
how much more does it concern us to pray? if he watching throughout a whole
night prayed with continued supplications, how much more ought we to watch by
night in often repeating over our prayers Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
?

Nor may any pretend that these examples are above their imitation: or that it
may not be expected the ordinary sort of Christians should come up to this
pitch of piety, for we have further to add, that to worship God in private
Prayer, has been a common practice and that in all Religions. Among the Jews
there were composed forms for every man's private use: and in these they did
call upon God at certain hours every day; which they were careful to observe,
wherever they happened to be, or in what business soever they might be engaged.
Architectus, vel in culmine arboris, insidens asino, illico descendat and
recitet. When any usual time of Devotion should come: If a man were working on
the house, or were in the top of a tree, or on the back of his Ass in the way,
he was immediately to come down and rehearse his prayers; and they had beside
Ejaculations, Prayers and Benedictions to be used on several occurrences. When
any one did behold a place where some Miracle had been shown for the people of
Israel, or where Idolatry had been rooted out, or a place in which there was
then an Idol, he was to put up a short prayer; when any did see an Ethiopian,
a Dwarf, one that was crooked, or any way maimed, he was to use a thanksgiving;
when seeing a fair tree, or a beautiful face, he was to give thanks, saying
blessed be God who is the author of all beauty in the Creature, etc. See Dr.
Lightfoot Hor. Heb. in cap. 6. Mat.
Cornelius was but a Jewish Proselyte, and not one of them neither who were
Proselytes of Justice, so as to be admitted a Member of that Church, and to
join with them in the holy place of the Temple: but he was only a Proselyte of
the Gates, uncircumsised, and not conforming, save to the seven Precepts of
Noah; so that he was still reputed as a Gentile, and had no entrance into the
Temple nearer then the atrium Gentium and immundorum, the outer Court of the
Gentiles, and of the unclean, and yet of him it is said that he was (...) a
devout man (...), constant in his prayers to God Act. 10. 2, 3, 4.
; it was at the ninth hour, one of the ordinary times of Prayer, when being at
his private Devotion, the Angel from God appeared to him directing him unto the
way of Salvation by Christ.

It will not seem much that this pious Duty has been thus regarded by men of
the true Religion, when we consider that even Mahometans and Heathens have
practiced the same.

The Turks profess great strictness in Devotion as enjoined them by Mahomet
their pretended Prophet, who in his Alcoran, calls Prayer, The Pillar of
Religion and the Key of Paradise; and has required it to be performed five
times every twenty four hours, the first time allotted for it is between day
breaking and the rising of the Sun, the second at noon, the third between Noon
and the going down of the Sun, the fourth at Sunsetting, the fifth at an hour
and half in the Night; they allow nothing to hinder their observance of these,
no not the decree of the Sultan should he command them any thing to be done
when it is a time of Prayer; and they think they may not be diverted or break
off abruptly, though an armed Enemy should be at their Camp or Gates, nor if a
fire should happen in the very Chamber where a person is praying; how fixed and
intent they would be thought to be in the acts of Devotion, we learn from one
who knew them well and does thus relate of them. The Turks with devout Ceremony
and profound attention perform their holy Duties, supposing that prayer is
become fruitless which is interrupted by scratching of the Head, rubbing the
Hands, or any other gesture not essential to Prayer Busbeq. Epist. 3.
. They have indeed an ambitious affectation of being esteemed devout, and do
betray their own hypocrisy and vain Glory in that they often choose to recite
their private Prayers in places where they may be seen: and especially they
love to do it, where there are any Christians to take notice of them.

And as for the Heathen, though benighted as they were in the darkness of
ignorance and superstition, yet they could see it to be both their duty and
interest to make their particular addresses, to those whom they esteemed as
Gods; that this was customary among them does appear by that of Plato where he
says, The Gods did sometimes grant and at other times deny the petitions
presented to them. (...), both privately and in public Plat. Alceb. 2.
; and again in the same Dialogue using the same words, he mentions one
petition, which the Lacedaemonians did still offer up as well in their private
as public prayers; it is observed by Seneca that men were best pleased with
the freedom of private Devotion; his words are, Men would be more sparing in
making their Prayers, if they were to be made openly; so willing are we rather
to pray secretly and within our selves, even when our supplications are best
Sen. lib. 2. de Benef. cap. 1.
; and we find that this was not practiced by such only as were more eminent in
Virtue, but also by the common sort and those of the worst complexion; as does
appear by the sharp reflections both of Moralists and Poets, on the foul
disorders of which many were supposed guilty in their secret Prayers, while
presenting such Petitions to their Gods as they would not dare to utter in the
hearing of men Sen. de Benef. li. 6. cap. 38. and Epist. 10. Plutarch. de
Defect. Orat.
; as when the Votary would pray: That such or such a person by whose death he
was to gain an Estate might be taken out of the way Pers. Sat. 2.
; that he might be able to defraud others and yet seem honest and religious all
the while, that the night might hide his crimes and his deceits be always
concealed from the notice of men Hor. l. 1. Epist. 16.
; We do also meet with the Precepts given by some of their Philosophers, for
directing men in their private Prayers; as that of Socrates, who taught, That a
man should only beg for himself good things in general, leaving particulars to
the Gods, who alone could know what would he fit for him Val. Max. lib. 7. c. 2.
; and it is advice given in Plato that no man should be hasty in praying for any
thing, but diligently consider, lest he should deceive himself in desiring
things that be hurtful, while he thinks them good Plat. Alcebiad. 2.
. It was the saying of Athenodorus, sometime the Tutor of Tiberius, that men
should ask nothing of God in private but what they might pray for in the
hearing of others g; and Seneca does advise, that a man pray for a sound mind,
and first for the good health of his Soul, afterward of Body Sen. Epist. 10.
; whereunto the Satyrist does agree in his orandum ut men's sit sana in corpore
sano; and the same Moralist has in that place subjoined this excellent rule in
reference to private Prayer: so live thou with men as one seen by God, and so
speak to God as if heard by men. The same is delivered by Macrobius, and he
speaks of it as a known precept of Philosophy Macroh. 1. Saturn.
; many instances do occur in Heathen Writers of persons represented making
their particular Prayers for themselves, as in Homer, Virgil, Lucian, and
others. In one of Plato's Dialogues, Socrates is brought in praying after this
manner, O Loving Pan and all ye Gods that inhabit this place, grant to me that
I may be beautified in my soul, and whatever good things I possess without,
they may be a kind furtherance to those which I have within me: that I may
esteem the wise man alone to be truly rich, and may attain so much of this kind
of riches as none can bear or carry away, but he that is good Plat. in Phaedro.
. And there is extant a Prayer of the Lyrick Poet from his own hand, That
Apollo (whom he invokes) would grant him to enjoy the good things he had
acquired, with health of body, and a sound mind, and that he might pass his old
age with reputation and delight Hor. car. l. 1. Ode 31.
. It does thus abundantly appear, that the Gentile-Worshippers did privately
and apart adore their Gods, putting up Prayers to them, and I have the longer
insisted on it, that it may shame the Christians out of their neglect herein;
who profess a Religion that prescribes the strictest rules of Piety; who are
also clearly instructed out of the holy Scripture concerning their Duty to God,
and have singular inducements to the performance of it. And since they who
wanted all these advantages could yet esteem it their necessary duty, to be
singly devout as well as in company with others, it must be a strange piece of
irreligion in us, if we think it too great trouble to wait on the living and
true God with our private supplications: and it will be altogether inexcusable,
should we confine our Worship of him to the Christian Assemblies: as if it were
not worth while to serve God, but where we may be seen by men.

III. There are so many private concerns and accidental occurrences to each
Christian, as make it altogether necessary that he apply himself to God in
secret prayer; as when he is to confess or beg the pardon of any particular sin
he has unhappily fallen into; or to desire the removal of some present
affliction on himself or belonging to him; when he is to implore the assistance
of divine Grace against some Temptation with which he is beset, or the
protection of divine Providence from an imminent danger whereof he is afraid:
when concerned to crave the presence and blessing of God in any business or
undertaking, wherein he may be engaged, or to return him due thanks for some
special mercy he has lately received. Now if the case be thus private and
particular, it is requisite our Prayers should be so too: which cannot be as it
ought, either with respect to God or our selves, unless suitable to such like
occasions whenever they shall happen. And we find in Scripture, how the
Servants of God have used to adopt their devotion to their present exigence,
and the various circumstances of their condition; as Jacob in that Prayer of
his, when under apprehension of violence from Esau his Brother Genesis 32. 9.
; Hannah when being grieved at her barrenness, she would obtain a Child from
the Lord 1 Samuel 1. 11.
; thus Hezekiah on notice of his speedy death from the Prophet 2 King. 20. 3.
; and, David in his Penitential Psalm after his foul miscarriage in the matter
of Vriah Psalm. 51.
; likewise in several others of his Psalms, wherein are Prayers and Praises on
all particular occasions, as the Titles of them do show; such are Psalm 18. 52.
54. 56. 57. 59. The like may be seen in the supplications of Ezra and Nehemiah
Ezra 9. 11. Neh. 1. 8, 9, 10, 4, 4.
; from hence then we may easily observe the great need and usefulness of
private Prayer; which will better appear, when we consider,

IV. That privacy is in a special manner advantageous to devotion, and the
better exercise thereof; it has indeed been ever thought of greatest
convenience to all those acts and employments that belong to the rational part
and require the intentions of the mind; whence many of the Philosophers of old
chose to withdraw from places of concourse, that they might more effectually
give themselves up to Study and Contemplation: particularly the Pythagoreans
did for this end prefer a solitary life; and of Plato it is observed, that
avoiding the City, he fixed his Academy at some distance in the Country; But
retirement has been most of all approved as a good help to Piety, and the
duties of it; by some Christian Writers much has been spoken in the praise
thereof on this account Basil. in Epist. ad Chilonem. Hieron. ad Heliodor. and
l. 2. cont. Jovin. August. ad frat. in Eremo.
, especially by St. Basil and Hierom, who were themselves addicted to that
course of life: in the constitutions of Justinian it is said, A solitary life
with the contemplation that does accompany it, is a sacred thing, which of its
own nature does lead the soul to God; nor is it only advantageous to those who
practice it, but is also of known benefit to others by reason of its holiness
and devotion toward God Novel. Constable. 133.
.

By Eusebius out of Philo's book de vita contemplativa, it is reported of
certain Asceticks (so have they been called, who professed a more strict and
sedulous exercise of Piety) living in several parts of Egypt, that forsaking
worldly employments and the ordinary places of habitation, they abode solitary,
practicing abstinence, divine contemplation, and devotion Eusebius. Eccle. Hist.
l. 2. c. 17.
; these he would have to be Christians, but is therein corrected by Scaliger,
who thinks they were of that Sect among the Jews called Essenes; and for that
he is himself reproved by Valesius, who does suppose them of the Jewish
religion, though some passages in the account given of them will not allow them
to be Essenes. But however it is sufficiently known that Christians too have
used retirement to the same religious purpose; in the times of Persecution
under the Heathen Emperors, great multitudes of them being forced to quit
their Dwellings made the Deserts their refuge, where they improved Necessity
into a Virtue, by employing their solitudes in Fasting, Prayer, Meditation, and
Reading the Scriptures; so that in some time this way of living became a matter
of choice, and was advanced into an holy institution; Paul of Thebais was the
first example of note, that recommended the same, of whom it is related that he
lived solitary for near an hundred years, likewise one Anthony an Egyptian did
set it up in his own Country, and Hilarion did the like in Syria and Palestine.

It must be granted that this at length corrupted into Superstition, Idleness,
and an empty name; and we cannot think it any real service to religion to
persuade men (as some have done) wholly to abandon humane Society; since they
cannot do it without laying aside many important duties, both for the service
of God and the good of Mankind; yet for some time and on some special occasion
of a man's life it may be of necessary use to retire from the World and the
affairs of it; it was so thought by a great and wise Prince in the last Age. I
mean Charles the fifth, who having taken up an apprehension of his own death
approaching, from the appearance of a Comet, soon after resigned his Empire and
Kingdoms, and retired into a small Village, that he might without interruption
attend the great business of Religion in order to another World Hen. Spondan.
Anno 1556.
. But by some it is said, that this serious temper of mind in the Emperor was
occasioned, partly by the unfortunate turn and ill success of his affairs after
so much of Victory and Glory formerly enjoyed by him; and partly by the
prevalence and growth of the Protestant interest after all his endeavors to
suppress it; from the former he had a deep conviction concerning the vanity of
sublunary things; and therefore resolved to take off his affections and himself
from the World, and to provide for his lasting security elsewhere: and the
latter suggested to him that the Religion he had hitherto so much opposed was
owned and assisted from Heaven, and therefore it was not safe to be any longer
concerned against it; and it is supposed, that in his latter days * See Dr.
Burnet Hist. Refor. r. 21. part. p. 214.
of retirement when he had leisure thoroughly to consider, and no worldly
interest to be a wrong biass, he fell into a good liking of the Reformation,
and died a real Convert to it.

Now whatever there is in privacy by which it does contribute to Piety, and our
better service of God, may always be found in the close retirement of secret
devotion; a man is then separate from the World, from all company, and
business; may freely converse with God, and his own Soul; may for his spiritual
benefit contemplate the Word of God, and all his wondrous Works, the things
that have been, that are, and which shall be hereafter; and while thus taken
up, it may be truly said of him, That he is never less alone then when alone.
It Is almost peculiar to single devotion, that it does admit the useful Duty of
holy Meditation; which cannot so well be exercised, when we join in public:
and whatever the Duty be wherein we are privately engaged, we can more easily
be serious and intent in it then amidst the usual occasions of diverting the
mind, which are in places where many assemble.

And as privacy is thus helpful to our being more heavenly and devout, so in
the single exercise of Piety there is this other advantage, that whereas in
public devotion we are confined to such Prayers as are intended for general
use, and therefore cannot reach every particular case: the Christian when
praying alone can with freedom lay open his wants and desires; he is not then
bound up to words nor things, but may choose the matter of Prayer, and speak for
himself as his own heart shall suggest and his present condition require; for
though Forms of private devotion, are very expedient and indeed necessary for
the greatest part of Christians, yet (as a late reverend Divine of our Church
has said Dr. Tully in Precat. Domin. Expos.
) None is so oblig*d to them, but that (if able to do it) he may supplicate to
God from his own present conceptions. And before him the learned Hammond to the
same purpose: In the Closet (says he) it is not suggested by our Church, but
that every one may ask his own wants in what form of words he shall think fit
Dr. Ham. Pract. Cat.
; and truly all who know how to express their minds to men, may be supposed
capable of doing the like in private to God too (wherever there shall be need)
so as to be accepted by him; for he does not so much regard the Artifice of our
words, as the disposition of our hearts, when we speak to him; We have before
observed that holy men in Scripture did use to pray, pro re nata, according to
their present occasion; and to the instances already given we may add, that of
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 8. and also that of our Savior himself, Mat. 26. 39. When
we read, the holy Spirit does help our infirmities, directing us to things we
ought to pray for Romans 8. 26.
; and when our own Church does teach us to desire of God, that he would make us
to ask such things as shall please him Collect for 10th. Sund. aft. Trin.
, it does suppose our choosing Petitions in Prayer, and that we may not err in
that choice; which will not be understood of stated Prayers, and must therefore
refer to the private and occasional supplications of which we now speak; and
unless we sometimes make use of such, we shall be extremely defective in our
devotion, both as to our duty toward God, and our regard to the good of our
selves and others; for how else can we in a suitable manner offer up praise,
and thanksgiving, or deprecate evils, and beg mercies, according to our own and
the needs of other Christians, as on many particular occasions we ought to do?
it being impossible that these should be fully provided for by any forms
composed for private use, and much less will the public Prayers descend to
them.

V. If a man serve God in private, it is one good evidence of his being sound
and sincere in Religion; for those who are void of all true Piety, who are but
Hypocrites or Atheists, may and often do outwardly join with others in the acts
of public Worship; though from no better inducements than that they may comply
with the custom of the place, or to please others on whom they depend, or that
they may gain to themselves a good reputation; as some in our Savior's time,
who were not real in their Piety (for he calls them Hypocrites) and yet would
pray standing in the Synagogues, and in the corner of the Streets, to be the
more observed by others; and from this occasion (that his own followers might
not rest in an outward show of religion, but be sincere and truly pious in the
duties of it) he enjoined them the practice of private devotion, as it follows
in the same place Mat. 6. 5, 6.
; for acts of Piety, when in secret, cannot likely proceed from Worldly
Motives, but do rather suppose a Soul really affected with a sense of God and
Religion: That a true Christian Faith is more eminently impli'd in secret
Prayer the holy Father St. Cyprian has intimated in these words: He has
commanded us to pray privately, in secret and retired Places, in our very
Chambers, because it is more agreeable to Faith, that we apprehend God to be
every where present to hear all men, and by the fullness of his divine Majesty
to penetrate into all secret and hidden things Cypr. lib. de Orat. Domin.
: Though it be accountable enough why bad men may frequent the devotions of
Christian Assemblies; yet why any should adore and supplicate by himself alone,
when none else can take notice of it, it is not easy to assign any other
reason, than that he has an inward reverence of an infinite God, as of one who
ought to be served, and who is able in all things to do him good; after St.
Paul had been stricken blind by that light from heaven, which shone on him in
the way, when he was first called to the Christian Faith, he having in devout
Prayer evidenced a true conversion; Ananias is immediately commissioned by God
to go to him, that by the laying on of his hands he might receive his sight,
and also the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost to qualify him for the
office of an Apostle Act 9. 11, 17.
; Arise (says God) and go into the street, which is called strait, and enquire
in the house of Judas for one Saul of Tarsus, for behold he prays. If
therefore we would avoid the sin and danger of being formal Professors and
Hypocrites, and would approve our selves to God and our own Conscience, as real
and sincere in the Religion to which we pretend, we are concerned not to
acquiesce in outward and visible Duties; but to be also conversant, in those
others of private Devotion; which as it is an evidence of true Holiness, so
will it be a very good means to cherish and preserve it in us. For

VI. By the constant exercise of Religious Duties in private, the life and
power of Godliness is very much maintained: and it is of excellent use to secure
men in the fear of God and a steady obedience to him; for since the acts of
Piety, whereof none but God is Witness, must be thought to proceed from
Conscience, and to be a compliance with its Dictates, it may easily be
presumed, that while men are conscientious in performing this so pious a Duty,
they will be alike disposed, as to other parts of Christian holiness; and not
venture on any gross and deliberate sins, but carefully avoid all temptations
to them; beside a frequent exercise of private Devotion, must needs beget a
serious and heavenly temper of mind, and leave such holy impressions, as will
restrain corrupt motions, and fortify the Soul against the daily assaults of
Sin and Satan. Moreover it being a part of this private Devotion to read the
holy Scriptures, the Christian will thereby be still put in mind both of the
Duties which God requires, and the Sins which he has forbidden, as also of the
great and precious promises, belonging to the former, and the severe
threatenings denounced against the latter. And it must needs have the like
effect as including holy Meditation, of God as Creator, Lord, and Judge of
Mankind, as infinite in Holiness, Knowledge, Justice, Power, and the Author of
all the good we have, or do hope to enjoy: of our selves as Beings dependent,
sinful, frail, and as having immortal Souls, which shall be for ever happy or
miserable in another World, according to our good, or ill conversation in this;
these and such like thoughts are apt to beget good resolutions, and make men
circumspect, and holy, in all their ways. And there is this further, that by
such attendance on God and Prayer to him; we engage him to have a particular
care of us, to give us his Spirit for our guide and support, and to strengthen
us with all might in the inner man, that we may be preserved holy and blameless
unto his heavenly Kingdom. 1. These. 5. 23. 2 Timothy 4. 18.
On these accounts, St. Chrysostom has pronounced it impossible that the man
who is constant in his Devotion should lead a sinful life Ad Pop. Antioch. Hom.
89.
.

VII. This Duty of private Devotion is the greatest comfort and surest refuge
of a Christian, amidst all the fears and hazards, all the troubles and
calamities, of this present state: and he can by no means subsist without it:
it is a remedy still at hand on all occasions, and whenever he finds himself
oppressed either by passions within or sufferings from without, he can ease his
Soul by pouring out his complaints as David was wont to do Psa. 55. 2. 47. 3.
142. 2.
: and lighten himself by casting his burden upon the Lord, as the Scripture
does direct Psalm. 55. 22.
; when all means do fail us, God is a very present help in trouble 1 Pet. 5. 7.
; and is nigh unto all that call upon him Psalm. 46. 7.
; he alone can succor us in cases of greatest moment, and when we are most in
need; if thou art under grief or inquietude of mind, thou may apply thy self
to him, as the Father of Mercies, and God of all comfort 2 Cor. 1. 3.
; in a time of present affliction or threatening dangers, thou may fly to him
as Governor of the World, and one who can provide for thy deliverance, or else
turn the most troublesome events to thy real advantage; when thou art perplexed
with the guilt and power of Sin, whither can thou go, but to him whose
property and prerogative it is to forgive, who is the God of all Grace 1 Pet.
5. 10.
, and able to succor them who are temptedi? if thou art under sickness or any
fear of approaching death, what can thou do better then seek to him, who
alone has the power of Life and Death, can direct to, and bless the means of
recovery; or else translate thee to a more happy life in Heaven? At all times
and in all places, when in solitude and confinement, when wanting the
opportunity of public Prayers, and the society of other Christians, the
comfort and benefit of private Devotion will still remain with thee, and be
thine inseparable support when all others fail; and whether thou art alone or
no thou may in a moment of time ascend up to Heaven in divine ejaculations,
to him who is Cordis non Vocis auditor Cypr. de Orat. Dom.
; and by the help hereof thou can drive on thy great concerns above amidst
the ordinary affairs of this life; for we find it urged on Christians by the
ancient Fathers, that they would mix the acts of Devotion with all their
secular employments; by one of them it is put into the Character of the pious
Christian, that, In his walking, in his discourse, in his taking rest, in
reading, and in all his humane affairs, he does still offer up Prayers to God
Clem. Alex. Strom.
; Any time (says another) is convenient for Prayer and Singing of Psalms; so
that while the hands are employed at work, the tongue may be also sometimes, if
possible, (which is indeed more useful) for edification of Faith: if not with
the heart, at least let God be praised in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual
Songs, as it is written; and let Prayers be performed at the time of working
Basil. in Ascetic.
; Again, A man, when he goes to market, or is walking by himself may make long
Prayers: he may while sitting in his Shop, or Working at his Trade give up his
Soul to God; thus St. Chrysostom Ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 89.
. And in those days Christians did practice accordingly: We read in St. Jerome,
that in his time the laborers might every where be heard sounding forth godly
Songs; The Countryman at the Plough had his Hallelujahs, the Mower his Hymns,
and the Vinedresser would be singing David's Psalms Ad Marc. Epist. 17.
.

But above all there is from private Devotion this most desirable advantage,
that whatever shall happen the man who has the testimony of his own
conscience, for his sincere Piety in the closest privacies of his life, will
have reason to be cheerful in the worst of times and under the greatest
disasters, he is still safe, though the earth be removed and the Mountains
carried into the midst of the Sea, though the waters roar and be troubled and
the Mountains shake through the swelling thereof Psalm. 46. 2, 3.
; yea, should he be brought to the most dismal extremity, even the Valley of
the shadow of death, yet he need not be afraid Psa. 23. 4.
, while he can say with Hezekiah, that he has walked before God in truth and
with a perfect heart 2 Kings 20. 3.
; and there is an example more near to the purpose in the Prophet Daniel; who
when by the contrivance of his implacable enemies condemned to the Den to be
devoured by Lions, was yet nothing terrified: for that his Devotion thrice a
day in his Chamber (the very thing by which they had designed his ruin) was his
ground of confidence; and the Heathen King could thence encourage him saying,
Thy God whom thou servest continually he will deliver thee Dan. 6. 16.
; and he really did so, as it follows in the relation.

It is most certain that every person whatever will find himself obliged
sometime or other to have recourse to God in prayer on his own particular
account, as in a time of personal affliction, or threatening danger: especially,
when the terrors of death draw near. In such cases to which all are subject,
nature and the principle of self preservation will set men a praying: so that
they who had used to forget God and his service, yet in their affliction will
seek him early Hos. 5. 15.
, and the very Heathen when tossed in a tempest will every one cry unto his God
Jon. 1. 5.
. Now as we desire God shall hear us in our need and distress, we are concerned
to own and worship him at other times; for if in our prosperity he be slighted
by us, and never called upon, how can we expect he shall give ear, or take any
notice of us, in our time of necessity? the Prayers we then put up will be
reckoned to proceed not from any piety to God, but wholly from self-love, and
servile fear. We see how God is represented by Solomon as to his carriage
toward such ill men as had lived in contempt of him and his service, in spite
of all persuasions to the contrary; for it is threatened that as God had called
and they had refused, so there would be a time of fear and distress, And then
(says he) shall they call upon me, but I will not answer them, they they shall
seek me early but they shall not find me Prove. 1. 28.
; hitherto does belong what is reported of Bias one of the Grecian wise men,
that happening to be at Sea, with some whom he knew to be of impious lives,
when these (the Ship being in great danger by a storm) cried out to the Gods,
he said to them, Hold your peace that they may not take notice ye are here on
board: Diog. Laert. in vit. Biant.
meaning that their Prayers could do no good, but would rather endanger the
Ship the more by letting the Gods know there were such as they in it; we must
not deny, but that God may indeed in the needful time hear the supplications of
such as had not used to make their particular addresses to him: but there is
little reason to expect it; and it is a dangerous folly to live in neglect of
the Duty on the presumption it will so be.

Be persuaded therefore, O Christian to seek the Lord, while he may be found,
to honor him with thy constant devotion, that thou may have comfortable
assurance of his ready help; when in any case of extremity thou shall call upon
him; he is thy best friend whom alone thou can rely upon: and if thou
would maintain that friendship with him which thou art to prize above all
things in the World, it must be by converse and intimacy in this heavenly Duty.
And consider with thy self what an honor and privilege it is that thou, who
art but a clod of earth art allowed the freedom of access to the great God of
heaven; and to present thy Petitions to him as often as thou shall please. If
thou had the like liberty with thy Prince on earth, thou would certainly
value it very highly, and think it a great weakness not to make use of it for
thine own advantage; how then can thou excuse thy self if notwithstanding the
leave and encouragement given thee, thou neglect thine approaches to him who is
the great Lord of the whole Universe, and having all things at command is able
to do for thee whatever thou can request of him. If thou desire the good
things of this World, the God whom thou art to wait upon is he who gives
Riches and Wealth Eccles. 5. 19.
; and his blessing makes men to thrive Prove. 10. 22.
; would thou ascend to honor? he is the highest fountain of it; for
promotion comes not from the East nor from the West, but God sets up one
and pulls down another Psalm. 75. 6.
: and them that honor him he will honor 1 Samuel 2. 30.
; do thou wish to enjoy health of body? consider that he to whom thy Prayers
should be presented and he alone does keep off diseases Deuteronomy. 7. 15.
: and to confide in other Physicians is to hazard thy life 2 Cbron. 16. 12, 13.
; if thou have a mind to be wise and knowing, thou art directed to ask wisdom
of him, who gives liberally Jam. 1. 5.
; and take for a great truth that saying of the famous Luther, Been orasse est
been studuisse, to pray devoutly it is the same as to study hard. For
confirmation whereof hear the experience of Aquinas, the Angelical Doctor of
the Schools who himself professed, That his knowledge and learning, he had
acquired more by praying then by study Corn. a Lap. in Zach. c. 12.
.

If thou art real in Religion thou believe a divine providence; that thy self
and all thy concerns are in Gods power, and at his dispose: and how can thou
rest satisfied if thou seek not his favor by doing him service, and without
imploring to thy self his particular care and kindness? thou know that in
him thou do live, and move, that without him thou can not be prosperous in
any undertaking, nor avoid the many evil occurrences to which thou art still
exposed every hour of the day; and how then will thou presume to set forth in
the morning without begging his gracious presence, his blessing and safeguard?
thou can not be ignorant what unhappy Casualties may attend the night: what
Dangers there are from the Prince of darkness, and the violence of ill men. And
will thou venture to lie down without committing thy self, and what is thine,
by earnest Prayer to that Keeper of Israel who never sleeps Psa. 121. 4.
; and who saves them that trust in him Psalm. 37. 40.
? thou art convinced that thy being and the continual preservation of it,
together with all the good things thou do partake of whether pertaining to
this life or the next, are from God as the sole Author of them: and can thou
find in thine heart to be so base and unworthy as to deny him thy poor homage;
and the cheap returns of Thanksgiving and Praise? thy nature is frail, thy life
uncertain, and there are many ways by which death may at unawares break in upon
thee: so that in the morning it is doubtful to thee whether thou shall outlive
the day, and in the Evening whether thou may survive the night, and therefore
of what mighty consequence is it, that each Morning and Evening thou make thy
peace with God, by a Penitent Confession of thy Sins, and an humble
supplication for the Pardon of them through the Merits of thy Redeemer?

In short thy unspeakable obligations to Almighty God, the constant dependence
and necessities of thy being, the notices and convictions of thine own mind, do
all enforce upon thee this great Duty; and by it thou art wisely to consult
both the security and prosperous state of thy present life, and also thine
eternal happiness in that to come. And remember the day is coming in which God
will Judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ Romans 2. 16.
: in which he will discern between those who served him (in private) and those
who served him not; then shall our Saviors promise be faithfully performed,
who has said that if thou make it thy Religious practice to enter into thy
closet and there pray to thy Father which is in secret, thy Father which sees
in secret shall reward thee openly Mat. 6. 6.
; and at the general retribution for thy private Acts of Piety, thou shall be
publicly owned before the great assembly of Men and Angels, and be advanced to
a Kingdom of everlasting Glory.

DEVOTIONS FOR THE USE OF Particular Persons.

PRAYERS FOR Particular Persons IN THE MORNING.
A Prayer before Reading the Scripture.
Oeternal God thy goodness Morning
is exceeding great, and thy Mercies are renewed to me every Morning. I come
now to acknowledge my dependence on thee, presenting my religious service and
imploring thy blessing; although I am altogether unworthy to draw near unto
thee, and unable to perform any Duty that shall deserve thine acceptance; yet
be thou pleased to receive me with thy wonted Mercy, and let thy Spirit help
mine infirmities; grant me rightly to understand, and readily to embrace thy
blessed Word, that it may be for direction and comfort to me through the whole
course of my life; cause it to abide in me, that I may be thoroughly furnished
unto all good Works, through Jesus Christ: to whom with thy self and the holy
Ghost be all honor and glory, world without end.

A Prayer for the Morning.
HEarken unto the voice of my cry, my King and my God, for unto thee will I
pray.

My voice shall thou hear in the Morning, O Lord, in the Morning will I direct
my prayer unto thee and will look up.

ALmighty God the Maker and Preserver of all things, from whom I have my life
and subsistence, I do with humble prostration admire and adore thine infinite
Majesty, for thou art God and there is none beside thee, thy Nature is most
Excellent and Glorious in Wisdom, Power, Goodness, and all other perfections:
and thy Works have been wonderful and gracious toward the Sons of Men. But
what is Man that thou art mindful of him? and what am I vile Creature, that I
should be admitted to thy Throne of Grace; O Lord, I am but Dust and Ashes, and
therefore unworthy thou should have any regard unto me: I am a polluted
Sinner and therefore unfit for thy presence or any testimony of thy favor, the
frame and disposition of my heart is to sin and folly: and the practice of my
life, have been always disobedient and provoking to this very day. I desire
therefore with shame and hearty repentance to humble my self, begging thy
merciful pardon of all my sins past, through the Merits of Christ, and the
assistance of thy special Grace for the future, whereby I may be enabled to
lead a sober, righteous, and godly life. Since I am thy Creature, who have made
all things for thy self, and thine own glory, let it be my chief care to serve
thee: and whether I eat or drink, or whatever I do, to do all in thy fear and
to the honor of thy great Name; as I have been bought with a price, even the
precious blood of thy dear Son, so grant I may glorify thee both in my body,
and soul which are thine, and whatever power or opportunities thou do
vouchsafe unto me, help me to employ the same in doing good and discharging my
Duty both toward thee and toward men: that I may not be barren or unfruitful,
but always abounding in the Work of the Lord; and for the greater usefulness,
and comfort of my life, be thou pleased to continue to me my understanding and
senses, together with health and soundness of body: and let my Members and
Faculties be always instruments of righteousness unto holiness. O stablish my
heart by thy Grace that I may be constant in thy Faith and Fear, in sincere
obedience to thy holy commands; and so after a patient continuance in
well-doing may receive the promised reward of eternal life.

O Lord, I do thankfully acknowledge the continual Mercies of thy good
Providence, by which I have been preserved and cherished hitherto. I bless thee
for the protection and refreshment of the night past, and that thou have
prolonged my life to another day; be thou pleased to guide and defend me
throughout the same; bless and prosper my endeavors in every lawful
undertaking and suffer me not to fall into any danger or unhappy accident.
Above all do thou preserve me from sin and the temptations to it; and let
neither the World, the Flesh, nor the Devil, draw me aside from thee into any
wicked practice; but grant that I may still walk on in the way of righteousness
without turning from it into those sinful paths that lead down to the Chambers
of death.

Bless thy people throughout the World; and send thy comfort and deliverance to
all who are in any distress or affliction of body or mind.

Preserve this Church and Kingdom to which I belong and make us happy in Truth,
Righteousness, and Peace; do good to all my friends: and if I have any Enemies
forgive them and turn their hearts. O Lord, pardon the defects of this my
devotion, accept my person, and hear my Prayer, through the Righteousness and
Intercession of thy blessed Son my alone Savior; In whose own Words, I further
call upon thee.

Our Father, etc.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Communion, O
blessed Spirit, be with me this day and for evermore. Amer.

Another Prayer for the Morning.
CAuse me, O Lord, to hear thy loving kindness in the Morning, for in thee do I
trust: Cause me to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my soul
unto thee.

Order my steps in thy Word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.

O Lord my God, who art the Author of my being, and the giver of all the good
things which I have at any time received; I do here offer up my bounden Duty of
Worship and Praise: and I do present my Soul and Body to be consecreated unto
thee and thy Service: despise not I pray thee the Work of thine own hands; but
though I am vile and unworthy by reason of Sin, yet according to thy rich
Mercy, and for the worthiness of thy beloved Son, be thou pleased to overlook
whatever is amiss in me, and to receive me graciously as one of thine adopted
Children. That I may be qualified for thy love and favor make me conformable
to thy divine Image in righteousness and true holiness; do thou govern my will,
and affections, that I may choose the good and refuse the evil; that I may love
what thou do command, and hate whatever thou have forbidden.

O Lord, who know my ignorance and folly, instruct me how to demean my self
in all the affairs and passages of my life: thou who see my weakness,
strengthen me by thy Grace, that I may be able to resist all evil motions, and
temptations to Sin, and to perform all the Duties of my Christian obedience;
suffer me not to err from thy Commandments; but let the direction of thy Word
and Spirit, be as a voice behind me; showing the way wherein I should walk,
when I am turning to the right hand or to the left; confirm my Soul in thy true
Religion, and the holy fear of thy great Name; make me steadfast and immovable
in thy Service, that being faithful unto the death, I may at length receive,
that Crown of everlasting Life, which thou have promised.

Be thou pleased to bless me in my body with health and strength, in my Soul
with increase of divine Knowledge, of true Piety, and all saving Virtues; and
give me such a measure of temporal good things as may best contribute to my
real happiness.

I yield thee humble thanks that I have been preserved and refreshed the Night
past, that I am kept alive to this Morning; as thou have brought me out of the
shades of Night, so help me to cast off the sinful works of darkness, and to
walk as becomes a Child of Light; let thy presence be with me, and thy
blessing upon me in the day following; give thine Angels charge to keep me in
all my ways, that I fall not into any disaster: and let thy Grace be sufficient
for me, that I be not exercised in any evil work; but grant me to abide in
perfect safety, and to be still holy and upright before thee, to the end of
this day, and of my whole life, through my blessed Savior Jesus Christ; in
whose holy Name and Words, I continue to pray unto thee.

Our Father, etc. Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O Heavenly Father,
thy Communion, O blessed Spirit, be with me this Day and for evermore. Amen.

A Psalm and Prayer for the Morning on the Lords day.
I Laid me down and slept, I awaked Sunday Morning
for the Lord sustained me.

O God thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thirsts for thee.

To see thy Power, and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in thy Sanctuary.

Blessed is the man whom thou chusest, and causest to approach unto thee: that
he may dwell in thy Courts; we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy
house, even of thy holy Temple.

The Heavens are thine, the Earth also is thine: as for the World and the
fullness thereof thou have founded them.

I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and and wonderfully made: mavelous
are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.

My substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret, and curiously
wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.

Thy Eyes did see my substance yet being imperfect, and in thy book all my
Members were written: which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there
was none of them.

Let Israel hope in the Lord: for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous redemption.

And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, in the Assembly of the upright,
and in the Congregation.

The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.

His Work is honorable, and glorious, and his righteousness endures for ever.

He has made his wonderful Works to be remembered: the Lord is gracious and
full of compassion.

I praise the Lord, for thou art become my Salvation.

The Stone which the builders refused, is become the head Stone of the Corner.

This is the Lords doing, it is mavelous in our Eyes.

This is the day which the Lord has made; I will rejoice and be glad in it.

MOst gracious God, blessed be thy name, that thou have brought me to a new
day, and to another Christian Sabbath: That thou do not only lengthen out my
natural life, but also the means and opportunities of Grace, for obtaining the
life eternal. Thou alone art worthy to receive adoration, and Praise, from Men
and Angels: and it is the greatest honor I am capable of to be employed in thy
Service. But I do acknowledge my self very unworthy to approach thy presence,
or to receive any token of thy favor; for I am a polluted Sinner, and my whole
life has been a continued disobedience against thee and thy righteous Laws; I
have neglected the good Duties by thee required, but have been very forward to
do those evil things, which thy Law has forbidden. And my sins are much the
more heinous and provoking, because committed against the light of thy Gospel,
the great obligations of thy Mercies, and after Vows and Promises of better
Obedience, Wherefore I do here humble my self at thy Footstool, lamenting all
the Offenses of my former life; and earnestly begging thy gracious pardone O
Lord, I do condemn my self but be thou pleased to acquit me, for the Merits and
Mediation, of thine own Son, who has fulfilled all righteousness, and made a
perfect Atonement by the Sacrifice of himself. And as I pray to be freed from
the guilt of sin by Justification, so I desire to be delivered from the Power
and Dominion of it, by thy sanctifying Grace. Be thou pleased to mortify in me
all corrupt lusts, and sinful affections; and to renew me after thine own Image
in righteousness and true holiness. To this end bless unto me thine holy
Ordinances; make them effectual for my spiritual benefit; and grant that in the
religious Duties of this holy day, I may sanctify thee in my heart, and make
thee my fear and dread.

O Lord this is a day set apart for thine honor in remembrance of the Worlds
Creation; which thou did complete in six days: and of our redemption by
Christ, which was finished by his Resurrection. I do therefore ascribe unto
thee Praise, Thanksgiving, and Worship, for this glorious Fabric of Heaven and
Earth, and the whole variety of Creatures contained in them; more especially,
for that excellent being thou have given to man; whom thou did make after
thine own likeness, and advance to an eminence and dominion over the Works of
thine hands. I do with all humble reverence own and adore thee as the Author of
mine own life, and being, yielding thee due thanks, that thou have placed me in
the highest rank of thy Creatures; that thou have endowed me with a reasonable
soul and such noble faculties, as do fit me for the Knowledge and Service of
thy self, and the happy enjoyment of thee for ever.

And praised be thy Name for thy great Mercy and rich Grace in sending thine
only begotten Son, from thine own bosom, to redeem Mankind from Sin and Misery;
and to direct the World in the right way of Life and Salvation. I bless thee
for the manifestation of the Gospel by him Preached, and for the great
confirmation of it by his Resurrection from the dead; let the light of this
Heavenly Doctrine shine over all the Earth, that so all the Kingdoms thereof
may become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ.

Be propitious to that part of the World where thy Gospel is already planted;
let thy Church be reformed more and more from all corruptions both of Doctrine
and Practice; remove all the unhappy causes of discord and division, that all
who profess thy Name may agree in thy Truth, and live in Unity and Godly Love.

More especially be thou gracious to this Church and Kingdom whereof I am a
Member; pardon our abuse of thy great Mercies, and all other our provocations;
grant that the Inhabitants of the Land may turn from the evil of their ways
unto the Lord their God: that thou may rejoice over us to do us good; give
us outward peace, and prosperity, and continue thy Gospel and true Religion to
us, and the Posterities that shall come after us: I beg thy kindness for all
who are my particular friends, or more nearly related to me, that thou would
bless them in their persons and in all their concernments both of this life and
of that which is to come. And, o thou who art the Father of Mercy and God of
all consolation, show thy tender pity to all who are under pain, sickness,
want, sorrow, or any other calamity; and wherever there be any that suffer
persecution for the sake of righteousness or in defense of thy Truth and
Gospel, be thou near to them for their comfort and happy deliverance.

Have respect, O God, to the Prayers and Supplications of thy people, which
shall this day be offered up in the Christian Assemblies throughout the World;
assist and bless thy holy Word which shall be preached, that men may be edified
by it in sound Faith and real Godliness.

Be merciful, O Lord, to me thy Servant, lift thou upon me the light of thy
Countenance, and let thy Grace be always present with me: grant that on this
thy day I may not only abstain from worldly employments, but also from all the
works of Sin; give me a spiritual temper of mind, that my Meditations and
Desires may be heavenly; and that I may serve thee in holy Sunday Morning
Duties with sincere Devotion, grant that by a pious Celebration of this
religious Rest on Earth, I may be the better prepared for keeping an eternal
Sabbath in thine heavenly Kingdom. These things I humbly beg in the name of thy
beloved Son my blessed Savior, concluding as he has taught me.

Our Father, etc.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with me this day and for evermore.
Amen.

PRAYERS FOR Particular Persons IN THE EVENING.
A Prayer before Reading the Scripture.
O Lord my God, blessed be Evening
thy Name for this great privilege of waiting upon thee: and that thou have
given me a willing heart to make use of the same; it is of thy Mercy that I am
alive this Evening, and not numbered among those many, who have the day past
perished from the Land of the Living; I do acknowledge thy long-suffering and
goodness: and I will not give sleep to mine Eyes, nor slumber to mine Eyelids
till I have rendered unto thee my bounden Duty of Worship and Praise; be thou
pleased to assist and accept my present Devotions; teach me by thy holy Word to
live according to thy Will: and lead me by it in the way to everlasting Life,
through Jesus Christ my blessed Redeemer. Amen.

A Prayer for the Evening.
LOrd, I cry unto thee, make have unto me, give ear unto my Voice, when I cry
unto thee.

Let my Prayer be set before thee as incense, and the lifting up of my hands as
the Evening Sacrifice.

O Eternal God, thy property it is that thou hear Prayer: and though thou
art the high and lofty One, yet art thou nigh unto all that call upon thee; be
thou pleased to bow down thine ear at this time to the Supplications of me
thine unworthy Servant: and let me find Grace and acceptance with thee while I
Worship at thy Footstool; I do here offer up my self a living Sacrifice, and do
humbly adore thy divine Majesty as the great Creator, and Governor of the
whole World; as the Author of all that I am, and of all that I do enjoy; unto
thee, O Lord, belong Honor, and Service, and Praise; but unto me nothing but
shame and punishment: for I have offended the pure Eyes of thy holiness from
day to day by repeated transgressions; and as thou have not ceased to do me
good, so have I been constant in the unhappy returns of unthankfulness and
disobedience. I have neither loved, nor feared, nor served thee, as I ought to
have done; and my sins are more then I am able to number. I do therefore humble
my self before thee with hearty repentance, imploring thy gracious pardon
through the Son of thy Love, whom thou have set forth to be a Propitiation for
sin. Be thou reconciled unto me for his sake: and make me partaker of all those
benefits which are the purchase of his redemption. Impute not unto me the
iniquities of the day past, but forgive whatever I have therein thought, or
said, or done amiss either against God or against man. O Lord grant me thy
favor, speak peace to my Conscience, and that I may no more return to folly,
be thou pleased to work in me both to will, and to do the things by thee
required; give me an hatred of sin, and a love of holiness, that I may abhor
what is evil, and cleave to that which is good; incline mine heart unto thy
Statutes and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. O thou who know my
sinful frailty, and to how many Temptations my life is exposed, assist me by
thine own Grace, and strengthen me with all might in the inward man: help me to
crucisie the Flesh with the affections and lusts thereof; to reject all the
allurements of Sin, and so to resist the Devil that he may flee from me:
Whatever temporal blessings I receive at thine hands, grant me to use them
aright with all thankfulness, and sobriety; and also to undergo with Christian
patience any chastisement or affliction thou shall please to lay upon me; let
every dispensation of thy Providence be sanctified to my spiritual good, that
nothing may ever separate me from thy love and favor; for as much as this
World passes away, and all the enjoyments of it are of short continuance,
suffer me not to set my heart or affections on any thing here below: but raise
them up to the things above, to that glorious inheritance reserved in heaven
which fades not away; and since my days come to an end and I am still
hastening on toward my great change, help me to be always preparing for it, by
doing good and working out my Salvation with fear and trembling; that so death
may not be terrible, but a welcome passage to a life of glory.

Bless the Land of my Nativity; grant us peace and plenty, and let the truth
and purity of Religion still continue and prevail among us.

Be thou a Friend and Patron to all my Friends and near Relations, make them
holy and prosperous in this World, and for ever happy in the next.

Send thy consolation and succor to all who are in sorrow, want, sickness, or
any other affliction, but especially to such as do suffer for the sake of
righteousness and a good conscience.

Accept, I pray thee, my humble thanks for all thy Mercies; for thy holy
Scriptures and the means of Grace: for all the good things pertaining to this
life. I bless thee for thy great kindness toward me the day past: that I have
escaped dangers, that my life is continued to me, together with thy wonted
benefits, both for the necessities, and comfort of my present condition.

And since thou who have made the Day for action and business, have also
ordained the Night for a time of rest and repose; be thou pleased to watch over
me in lying down, and to grant me the comfortable refreshment of a quiet sleep.

O Lord, let thy Grace and Goodness never forsake me, till I shall enter into
thine everlasting rest in the highest Heavens, through thy rich Mercy in Jesus
Christ. To whom, with thy self, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor and
Glory, Worship and Praise, World without End, Amen.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy comfortable
Communion, O holy Spirit of Grace, be with me and thy whole Church henceforth
and for ever.

Another Prayer for the Evening.
THe Lord will command his loving kindness in the day time, and in the night
his Song shall be with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.

I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, for thou Lord only make me
dwell in safety.

MOst gracious God, the Maker of all things, and the Giver of every good and
perfect Gift, thou deservest to be worshipped and served, to receive
Thanksgiving and Praise; from thee I have derived my life and being, and it is
of thy great Mercy I am not consumed; thy goodness has been my support, and
comfort ever since I was born. I do therefore prostrate my self with humble
adoration, submitting my soul and body to thy divine Majesty, and offering up
my thankful acknowledgments of all thy Mercies and Benefits conferred upon me.
I bless thee for my redemption by Christ, and all the means of Grace and
Salvation: for the comforts of this present life, and all my temporal
enjoyments; I thank thee for that kind Providence which has watched over me
this day; that thou have continued my life, and preserved my person from those
many evils to which I am always exposed. O Lord, I am less than the least of
all the Mercies I have received at thine hands, for my sins have been very many
and exceeding great. I have broken thy righteous Laws, both by neglecting what
thou have commanded, and by doing what thou have strictly forbidden: and my
practice has been very unsuitable to the rich Grace, and holy Precepts of thy
excellent Gospel; so that I have justly deserved thy wrathful displeasure, and
the severities of thy justice. But thou art a God plenteous in Mercy, ready to
forgive, and thou have given thine own Son to be a propitiation for Sin. O
Lord, I come unto thee in his Name, most humbly beseeching thee, that through
his Merits the Transgressions of my life may be all blotted out, and my person
freely justified from all unrighteousness: More particularly, I beg the pardon
of whatever Sins I have fallen into the day past, whether in thought, word, or
deed. O merciful Father, be thou perfectly reconciled unto me this Evening. And
be thou pleased to deliver me more and more from the power and dominion of sin,
that I may be the servant of righteousness, and live in constant obedience to
thee and thy commands; strengthen me by thy Grace against the corruptions
within me, and all temptations from without: and keep me by thy mighty power
through Faith unto Salvation.

Bless thy Church and People throughout the World, and let the Kingdom of thy
Son be daily enlarged. Be propitious to this Church and Nation; pardon our
great sins, and avert the judgments we have deserved; keep us in peace and
safety, and let truth and holiness still flourish among us.

Show thy favor to all my friends, to such as have done me any good or do wish
me well, bestowing on them all the blessings that pertain both to life and
godliness.

Have pity on all who are in any distress or tribulation, giving to them thy
speedy comfort and relief: and be thou a present help in the needful time of
trouble to all who cry unto thee: finally I commend my self to thy Fatherly
care this Night, humbly praying that thy watchful Providence may be my guard
and defense; grant unto me a quiet and comfortable rest, that my frail nature
being refreshed thereby, I may awake the next Morning the better fitted for the
Duties of another day.

Hear me, O Father of Mercies, and do for me above what I can ask or think,
through the Merits of my blessed Redeemer. To whom with thy self and the holy
Ghost, be all Glory, Dominion, and Praise, World without End. Amen. Sunday
Evening


Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with me, all thine and mine
henceforth for evermore, Amen.

A Psalm and Prayer for the Evening of the Lords day.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, to sing praises unto thy
name, O most high.

To show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every
night.

The earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, the World and they that dwell
therein.

Thy hands have made me and fashioned me, give me understanding that I may
learn thy commandments.

All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy Kingdom, and talk of thy Power.

My lips shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee, and my soul which thou
have redeemed.

I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.

One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand.

How sweet is thy Word unto my taste, yea sweeter then honey to my mouth.

Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against thee.

I will delight my self in thy Statutes, and I will not forget thy Word.

I will bless the Lord, who has given me Counsel, my Reins also shall instruct
me in the night season.

Into thine hands I commit my spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth.

O Most glorious God, the mighty Creator, and wise Governor of all things;
the heaven is thine, the earth also is thine, with all that in them is; and
thou can do whatsoever thou please in all places of thy dominion: wherefore
unto thee alone it does appertain to receive honor, and worship, and service,
from the Sons of men. I do thankfully acknowledge, it is a very great favor
and privilege that I am so often admitted into thy presence, and have this
liberty granted of presenting my supplications unto thee, who art a God hearing
Prayer; for what am I, vile Dust and Ashes, that I should take upon me to speak
unto the Lord? or how can I expect to find any acceptance with thee, who have
so greatly offended thine holy Majesty by my repeated transgressions? O Lord my
very righteousness is as filthy rags, and my best performances are sinful and
poluted. I have waited upon thee this day in the duties of thy Worship, but it
has been with much weakness and distraction; my thoughts and affections have
not been heavenly and devout: nor have I honored thee as I ought, on the day
consecrated to thee and thy service.

But, O God, who art gracious and merciful, slow to anger and of great
kindness, be thou pleased to overlook whatever has been amiss in my life and
actions from my Nativity to this moment: grant me an interest in the Merits and
Redemption of the Lord Christ, and let his precious blood cleanse me from all
unrighteousness; pardon the defects of my obedience, and of all my religious
duties, through his most perfect Sacrifice, who has taken away Sin by the
Oblation of himself once for all.

Add thy blessing to all the opportunities and means of Grace vouchsafed to me;
and cause thy Word to abide in me, that it may be as good seed taking deep
root, and bringing forth abundantly the fruits of righteousness. Grant, O Lord,
that as I have been created by thee, so I may make it my chief business to
honor and serve thee both in soul and body: and as Christ died for my Sins and
rose again for my Justification, so I may crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts thereof, and rise daily from the death of sin to a life of
holiness.

Enable me to walk as becomes the Gospel, having a Conscience void of offense
both toward God and toward Men: that as he who has called me is holy, so I
may be holy in all manner of conversation.

Take off my affections from earthly things which are vain and perishing, and
set them on the things above in which alone my true happiness does consist; fit
me by suitable grace for every dispensation of thy Providence: that I may know
how to want and how to abound, how to mourn or rejoice, how to be in sickness
or in health, and in every condition to be therewith content; let thy Fatherly
wisdom cause all things to work together for good unto me; and that the several
occurrences of the present life may help me forward in my Christian course,
toward the attainment of eternal Salvation.

And because my nature is frail, my life uncertain, and I know not how soon I
shall be taken from the land of the living, help me seriously to consider my
latter end, to be still preparing for death, and by numbering my days to apply
mine heart to sound wisdom; that when I shall put off this earthly Tabernacle,
I may be admitted into an house not made with hands eternal in the heavens.

O God, who art the Creator of mankind, and did send thine own Son that the
World through him might be saved, extend thy goodness to all the kindreds of
the earth, causing the light of thy glorious Gospel to shine upon them, that
their feet may be guided into the way of peace and everlasting happiness; let
all Nations become subject to the Kingdom of thy Christ, and the number of
thine Elect be filled up, that the glory of thy Salvation may be revealed.

Accept, O Lord, my evening oblation of Praise and Thanksgiving, for all thy
rich Mercies vouchsafed to me. I bless thee for my being, since by thee I have
been fearfully and wonderfully made; for thy preservation of me to this moment,
and for all the accommodations and comforts of the present life.

But above all I magnify and adore thine inestimable goodness, in making known
unto me the way of salvation and happiness by Jesus Christ, in continuing to me
the seasons of Grace, and of waiting upon thee in thine holy Ordinances; help
me to make such a good and pious use of all thy benefits, as may be for thy
glory and for mine own eternal welfare.

And since thy wise Providence has ordained that the Night should succeed the
Day as a time of rest and refreshment, I pray thee that this Night may be so to
me thy Servant: grant me to be safe and secure under thy protection from all
the terrors and perils of darkness, and to awake the next morning in health
and safety: O Lord, hear my Prayer, and let thy presence and loving kindness
always be with me to the end of my life, for the sake of thine only begotten
Son my alone Savior; to whom, with thy divine Majesty, and the holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory World without End. Amen.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, thy Love, O Heavenly Father, thy Fellowship
and Communion, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with me henceforth and for
evermore. Amen.

A Psalm and Prayer to be used by a Person who is under Sickness.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thy In sickness
wrath, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.

Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak: O Lord heal me for my bones are
vexed.

My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, Lord, how long?

Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: O save me for thy mercies sake.

For in death there is no remembrance of thee, in the grave who shall give thee
thanks?

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: according to the
multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

Wash me thoroughly from mine inquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

Why art thou cast down, o my soul, and why art thou disquieted, within me?
hope thou in God for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my
countenance and my God.

Yea, though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of death yet will I fear no
evil: for thou art with me thy rod and thy staff comfort me.

O Lord, my times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine enemies.

Let my soul live and it shall praise thee, and let thy judgments help me.

Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee.

My flesh and my heart fails me: but God is the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever.

ALmighty God and most merciful Father; thou art the Author of my being; and as
my life, my health, and strength are from thee, so they are and ought to be at
thy dispose: and I do humbly confess, that because of my sinfulness and
disobedience, it is just with thee to afflict me with sickness and pain, yea and
to cut me off from the Land of the Living. O Lord, I bear about me a body of
Sin and Death, and am liable to the penalties of that first transgression; for
by one man Sin entered into the World and Death by Sin. Likewise the practice
of my life has been very evil, and my sins still repeated from day to day. I
have not made it my chief business to serve and glorify thee which is the end
of my Creation: nor has the time of my life and health been employed as it
ought in doing and receiving good. The faculties of my Soul and Members of my
Body have been made the instruments of Sin. I have not been duly thankful for
thy manifold Mercies, nor made a right use of them; and I have too much
despised thy goodness and forbearance which should have lead me to repentance.

I do therefore acknowledge the justice of thy dealings; for why should a man
complain of the punishment of his sins.

But, O thou Father of Mercies, who delightest not in the death of a sinner; be
favorable unto me. Enter not into judgment with thy servant, neither let thine
anger wax hot against me, but forgive my Sin and deliver me, for in thee do I
trust.

I know, O Lord, that afflictions rise not from the Dust, but are of thy
sending; and I do desire to hear the voice of thy Rod, and to turn to him that
smites. I do with hearty repentance humble my self at thy footstool, lamenting
all the errors of my former life: and I do give up my Soul and Body to thy
Will and Governance; resolving and promising by thy Grace to live and act
hereafter in all holy obedience to thee and thy righteous commands. O deal not
with me after mine iniquities, nor punish me as I have deserved; but remember
the sufferings of thy Son, who himself bore our sicknesses, and the punishment
due to us in his own death. I believe in him as my alone Savior; my trust is
in his Merits; and I do humbly beg for his sake that thou would be reconciled
unto me: that thou would heal my Body and comfort my Soul.

O God, who art the preserver, of men, who have declared in thy word that thou
art nigh unto such as pray unto thee, and have promised to deliver when called
upon in the day of trouble, be thou pleased to bow down thine ear, and extend
thy compassion, in removing the distemper under which I now labor; do thou who
art the great Physician prescribe and bless the means that may be for my
recovery: and restore me again if it be thy blessed Will to a state of health
and strength, then will I praise thee with a thankful heart and will serve thee
faithfully all my days. But I do humbly submit my self to thy good pleasure,
and not my will but thine be done. Though thou visit with thy Rod yet take not
thy loving kindness from me; and while my body shall be afflicted, be thou
pleased to strengthen and support my Soul with thy Grace and inward
consolation; help me with cheerfulness and Christian patience to bear thy
chastisement; with a firm and constant faith to trust in thee and thy precious
promises. Grant that this present visitation may be sanctified to my spiritual
benefit, and through thy wise ordering in the issue turn to my real advantage,
and that I may by experience know that in very faithfulness thou have afflicted
me. Let this thy fatherly correction teach me to be more dutiful and obedient:
and grant that by considering the vanity and uncertainty of health of life and
worldly enjoyments, I may be the more careful to set my affections on things
above, and to breath after that immortal life of perfect bliss which thy Gospel
has promised. And grant, O Lord, that whether in health or sickness, in
prosperity or affliction, I may still honor and serve thee: that whether I
live I may live unto thee, and whether I die I may die unto thee, that whether
I live or die I may be thine; And so an entrance may be ministered to me into
the everlasting Kingdom of my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: In whose Name and
Merits, I do earnestly recommend unto thee my present condition, and all my
Concern; both of Soul and Body; praying further in his Words, Our Father, etc.

Thy Grace, O Lord Jesus Christ, my Redeemer, thy Love, O Heavenly Father, thy
Consolation, O blessed Spirit of Grace, be with me and all thy People
henceforth and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

