Judge DODARIDGE, HIS Law of Nobility and Peerage WHEREIN THE ANTIQVITIES,
TITLES, DEGREES, and Distinctions; Concerning the PEERS and NOBILITY of this
Nation, are Excellently set forth. WITH The Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, and
Yeomen; and matters Incident to them, according to the Laws and Customs of
ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for L. Chapman, and are to be so his Shop next door to the
Fountain-Taverne in the Strand, 1658.

THE TABLE. The several Dignities, Degrees, and Titles, treated of in this
discourse.
IMprimis of the King. 1 Of the Prince. 14 Of Dukes, and their Patents. 36 Of
Marquesses. 58 Of Earls and their original. 60 Of Viscounts. 90 Of Barons in
general. 91 The definition or description of a Baron. 92 The Etimology and
derivation of the word Baron. 94 The antiquity of the dignity of Barons, and
the sundry uses of the name. 95 The tenor and proper signification of the word
Baron. 99 Of Barons by tenure. 99 Of Barons by writ. 134 Of Barons by Patent.
155 Privileges incident to the Nobility according to the Law of England. 162
Certain cases, wherein a Lord of the Parliament has no privilege. 200 Of
Nobility and Lords in reputation only. 208 Of Noble Women. 210 Of Ladies in
reputation. 234 Of Knights, and matters incident to the degree of Knighthood
according to the Law of England. 237 Observations concerning a
Knight-Batchelour. 277 Of Esquires. 278 The definition of Gentry or Civil
Nobility. 285 Of Yeomen. 288
A Treatise concerning the Nobility, according to the Laws of ENGLAND.
AS in man's body (for the preservation of the whole) diverse Functions and
Offices of Members are required; even so in all well-governed Commonwealths a
distinction of persons is necessary. And the Policy of this Realm of England,
for the maintenance and government of the Commonwealth of the same, has made
a threefold division of persons: That is to say;

First, The King, or Sovereign Monarch; under which names, also a Sovereign
Queen is comprised, as declared by the Statute thereof made in the first year
of Queen Mary, Anno 5 Parl.

Secondly, The Nobility, which do comprehend the Prince, Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Viscounts, and Barons Spiritual and Temporal.

Thirdly, The Commons, by which general words are understood Knights,
Esquires, Gentlemen, Yeomen, Artificers, and Laborers: But my purpose at this
time, being only to speak of the Nobility, and especially so much of them as I
find written in the Books of the common Law, and Statutes of this Realm; This
first I have observed, That our Law calls none Noble, under the degree of a
Baron, and not as men of foreign Countries do use to speak, with whom every
man of Gentle Birth is counted Noble; for we daily see, that both Gentlemen and
Knights do serve in the Parliament, as Members of the Commonalty, vide Lamberts
Justice of Peace, Lib. 4. Cap. 13. Neither do these words, the Nobles, the high
or great men of the Realm, imply the Person and Majesty of the King, Dier. 155.
But with the Civilians, the King is reckoned among his Nobles, Doct. Ridley,
fol. 93.

The Nobility are known by the general name of Peen of the Realm, or the
Barony of England; for Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, and all other of the
Nobility do sit together in the Kings great Council in Parliament, as Barons,
and in right only of their Baronies. And therefore by the general names of
Barons of this Realm, and for the Baronage thereof, we do understand the whole
Body of the Nobility. The Parliament-Robes of Dukes differing nothing from the
Barons, but they wear the Guards upon their shoulders three or four fold; for
although Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Viscounts in their Creations are attired
with Garments of Silk and Velvet, yet in the Parliament they use the same as
Barons do, made with Scarlet, with diverse differences of white Furre, set with
Freinges or Edging on their shoulders: for there they sit by reason of their
Baronies, and according to their dignity take their places, Thomas Mills, fol.
66.

And hence it was, that those bloody Civil Wars, concerning the liberties
granted by the great Charter, both in the time of King John, and H. 3, his
son, persecuted by all the Nobility of this Realm (some few excepted) are
called in our History, The Barons Wars: Neither have the Spiritual Lords and
Peers of the Parliament any other title to that preeminency, but because of
their ancient Baronies: For although originally all the possessions of Bishops,
Abbots, and Pryors, were given and holden in Franckalmayn, yet shortly after
the Norman Conquest; most of their Tenures were altered, viz. per Baroniam, as
appears by Matthew Parris, Anno 1070. 66, and of that Tenure have continued
ever since, as you may read by the Consultations of Claringdon, in the Reign
of Hen. 2. and in Glanvile and Bracton.

But the Tenure of all Abbots and Pryors were extinguished by the uniting and
conveying them to the Crown, by the Statute of dissolution of Monasteries, made
Anno 31 Hen. 8. Cap. 13. And though the Nobility of England in Titles, and by
certain Ceremonies may be distinguished, yet a Baron is in equipage, as unto
Nobility and privileges incident to their dignities, with Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Cooks 6. part 53. And it is in ordinary experience, That Dukes, and
others of any high degree of Nobility, in cases criminal, are tried by Barons,
together with many Earls and Viscounts, as their Peers, and Peers of the Realm.

Nobilitas generally signifies, and is derived of the word Nosco, to know,
signifying in common phrase of speech, both with the Latins, and eke with us
Englishmen, a generosity of Blood and Degree, and therefore one said, vir
nobilis idem est quod notus and per omnia, etc. A Noble man is he who is known,
and the Heroical virtues of his life, talked of in every man's mouth. But
especially it is applied and used to express the reward of virtue in honorable
measure, and generis claritatem.

And this is not to be omitted, That the Law does prohibit any Subject of this
Realm to receive Titles of Honor or dignity of the gift or Donation of a
Foreign Prince, or King, or Emperor; for it is a thing greatly touching the
Majesty of the King and the State of his Kingdom Est jus Majestotis and inter
insignia summae potestatis. It is the right of Majesty, and amongst the
Ensigns of high power, vide Cook 7. part 25.6. And if that man shall bring an
action, and in the Writ is styled by such foreign title and name of Honor,
the defendant may plead, in abatement of his Writ, That he is no Duke,
Marquess, Earl, or Baron; whereupon if the plaintiff or demandant take issue,
this issue shall not be tried by Jury, but by Records of the Parliament,
wherein he fails.

And if an English man be made Earl of the Empire, or of any other foreign
Nation created into Honor, and the King also do make him into any Title of
Honor in England, he shall now be named in all his judicial proceedings,
only by such name and title as he has received from the King of this Realm,
whose Subject he is: and if by the King of England he be not advanced to Title
of Honor, then shall he bear the name of his Baptism only, and Surname,
unless he be a Knight, 20 Ed. 4.6. Cook 7. part 16. a.

A Duke of Spain, or of other foreign Nation comes into England by the Kings
Safe Conduct, in which also the King does style him Duke, according to his
Creation; nevertheless in all proceedings in the Kings Courts, he shall not be
styled by his name of dignity, Cook in the last Book before.

And though the said Noble person be also by the Kings Letters Patents, and by
his foreign name and title of dignity made Denizen, for that is the right
name, so called, because his legitimation is given unto him; for if you derive
Denizen from Denizee, as one born within the Allegiance or Obedience of the
King, then such a one should be all one with a natural born Subject, wherein a
Denizen fails in many things, or if they be naturalized also by the authority
of Parliament, whereby he seems to be in all things made as a Subject born in
England, yet he shall not be styled with his foreign title of dignity, Cooks 7
part 15. a.

And so it is if a Noble man of France, etc. come into England as Ambassador,
and here by lawful Marriage has issue a son, the father dies, the son is
by birth a natural Englishman, yet he shall not bear the Title of Honor of
his father; and the cause and reason hereof is, Because the title of his
Nobility had his original by a French King, and not by any natural peration;
which thing is well proved both by authority of Law, and experience in these
days; for in the book last mentioned, in that leaf is resolved a more stranger
case, that is, albeit that a Postnatus of Scotland or Ireland, who is in these
days a natural Subject to the King of England, or any of his posterity, be he
the heir of a Noble man of Scotland or of Ireland, yet he is none of the
Nobility of England. But if that Allien or stranger born, or Scot be summoned
by the Kings Writ, to come unto his Parliament, and is therein styled by his
foreign style, or by other Title whereunto he is invested within England by
the Kings grant, then from thenceforth he is a Peer of this Realm, and in all
Judicial and legal proceedings he ought to be so styled, and by no other
name, 39 Ed. 3.36.

And it was the case of Guilbert Humphreyvile, Earl of Angers in Scotland. For
it appertains to the Royal prerogative of the King to call and to admit any
Alien born, to have voice and place in his Parliament, at his Parliament at his
pleasure, although it is put in practice very rarely and seldom time, and that
for very great and weighty considerations of State: And if after such
Parliamentary Summons of such a stranger born, question do arise, and the
issue, whether he is of that title or no; it may well be tried by the Records,
which is the only lawful trial in that case, Cooks 7. part 15. a 6 part 53.

But there is a diversity worthy the observation (for the highest and lowest
dignities are universal) and therefore a Knight, in all place soever he
received his title of dignity, and so ought of right and by Law be named in the
Kings Courts, 26 Ed. 4.6.39. Ed. 3.36.

Also if the Emperor, or the King of Denmark, or any other foreign King come
into this Realm by Safe Conduct (as he ought) For a Monarch or an absolute
Princ^, though he be in League, cannot come into England without License and
Safe Conduct of the King of England; but any subject to such foreign King in
league may come into this Realm without License, Cook 7. part 21.6. In this
c^se he shall sue and be sued by the name of Emperor or King, otherwise the
writ shall abate. There is a notable president cited out of Fleta, where
treating of the Jurisdiction of the Kings Court of Marshalsey, it is said, And
these things he may lawfully do by Office (that is to say) the Steward of the
Kings Household, notwithstanding the liberty of any other, although in another
Kingdom, where the offender may be found in the Kings house, according to that
which happened at Paris, held in the 14 year of Ed. 1. of one Engleam of
Nogent, taken in the Household of the King of England (the King himself being
then in Paris) with Silver dishes lately stolen, at which deed the King of
France being present, and whereupon the Court of the King of France did claym
cognizance of the plea concerning that theft, by Jurisdiction of the Court of
Paris, the matter being diversely debated in the Council of the King of Fr^n^e;
at length it was ordered that the King of England should use and enjoy that his
Kingly prerogative of his Household, where being convicted by Sir Robert Fitz.
John Knight, Steward of the Kings Household of the theft, by consideration of
the same Court, was hanged on the Gallows in St Germans fields, Cooks 7. part
15.6.

And there (by the way) may also be noted from the reason in the recited Books
alleged the person of a King in another Kings Dominions is not absolutely
privileged, but that he may be impleaded for debt or trespass, or condemned
for Treason committed within the said Dominions; for it is a general Law of
Nations, That in what place an offense is committed, according to the Law of
that place they may be judged, without regard of any privilege; neither can a
King in another Kingdom challenge any such prerogative of immunity from Laws,
for a King out of his proper Kingdom has no merum Imperium, absolute power,
but only does retain bonoris titulos and dignitatis, the Titles of Honor and
Dignity, so that w^ere he has offended in his own person against the King of
the Nation where he is, per omnia distringitur etiam quo^d personam, he may be
distrayned even to his own person. And the same Law is of Ambassadors, ne
occasio daretur delinquendi, lest occasion of offense be given, like as a
sanctuary will save a man's life from manslaughter, but not when manslaughter
is committed within the Sanctuary, for then he does wilfully wave the benefit
of all privileges and prerogatives, and nevertheless it binds firm, that
Ambassadors are called Legates, because they are chosen as fit men out of many,
and their persons be sacred both at home and abroad, so that no man injuriously
may lay violent hands upon them without breach of the Law of Nations, and much
less upon the person of a King in a strange Land.

Bracton a Judge of this Realm in the Reign of King Hen. 3. in his first Book,
8 says in effect as follows:

There is no respect of persons with God, because God is no accepter of
persons; for as unto the Lord, he that is greater, is as the lesser, and he
that does govern, as the servant; but with men there is a difference of
persons, viz. The King, and under him Dukes, Counts, Barons, Vavasors, and
Knights; Counts so called, because they take their name from the County, or
from the word society, who may also be termed Confull, of Counselling; For
Kings do associate such men unto them to govern the people of God, ordaining
them into great honor, power, and name, when they do gird them with swords
(that is to say) ringis gladiorum, with the Belts of their swords; ringis, so
called * quasi renes girans and circundans, for that they compass the Reins of
such, that they may keep them from incest and luxury, because luxurious and
incestuous persons are abominable unto God; upon this cause were the stations
and encamping of Arms, called in the ancient language of Rome castra, even of
the word Castrare, to geld, since that they ought to be castrata vel castra. In
that place ought a good General to foresee that Venus delights be as it were
gelded, and cut off from the Army, vide Sir John Fern his Book, entitled, The
glory of generosity. The sword also does signify the defense of the Kingdom
and Country.

There be other Potents under the King, which are called Barons (that is to
say) robor belli, the strength of War. There be others which are called
Vavasors, viri magnae dignitatis, men of great dignity; for Vavasor cannot
better be said to be any thing, than Vas sortitum ad valetudinem, a vessel
chosen for valor, or as men standing with their General ad valuas Regni: and
this is enough, if not too much in general spoken of the Nobility of England;
now follow I a more particular discourse of them according to their several
degrees.

The Prince.
THe Kings eldest Son and Heir apparent is styled Prince, Quasi primum locum
capiens post Regem, the first next the King. To him it was permitted by the
Statute of 24. Hen. 8. cap. 13. To wear Silk of the color of Purple, and Cloth
of Gold of Tissue in his apparel, or upon his horse; but by another Statute
made in the fourth year of King James, Chap. 25. all Laws and Statutes
concerning apparel are taken away; And by the Statute of 34. Hen. 3. cap. 2.
Taking shall not be from henceforth made by others, then by the Purveyors of
the King, of the Queen, and of the Prince their eldest Son, and that if any
other man's Purveyor make such taking, it shall be done of them, as those which
do without warrant, and the deed judged as a thing done against the peace, and
the Law of the Land, and such as do not in manner aforesaid shall be duly
punished.

To eschew maintenance, and nourish peace and amity in all parts of the Realm;
many Statutes have been made in the Reign of Hen. 4. prohibiting the giving of
signs or Liveries to any but to their menialls: Nevertheless, by the Statute
of 2. Hen. 4. cap. 21. It is provided, that the Prince may give his honorable
Liveries of signs to the Lords, or to his meniall Gentlemen; and that the said
Lords may wear the same, as they wear the Kings Livery, and that the menialls
of the Prince may also wear the same, as the Kings menialls.

But afterward, by occasion of diverse other Statutes of latter times made by
sundry other Kings, for the suppressing of that enormity of maintenance, and of
the general words in them, that privilege of the Prince was abridged, or
rather taken away, therefore the Statute of 12. Ed. 4. was made as follows.

Item, Our Sovereign Lord the King considering, that the Prince the first
begotten Son to the King of England, has been at their liberties to give
their Liveries, and signs at their pleasure, and that diverse Statutes against
givers and takers of Liveries and signs, as well in the time of his noble
reign, as in the time of his progenitors and predecessors has been made, and
that by force of the said Statutes his dear beloved first begotten son Edward
Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester, is as well as any other
person restrained to give any such Liveries and signs, as our Sovereign Lord
the King; willing that his first begotten son the Prince be at his liberty in
receiving any person, and giving his signs and Liveries in as large form as
any Prince, first begotten son of any of his Noble Progenitors and
predecessors in time past have been, has ordained and established by authority
of the said Parliament, that the Prince shall be at his liberty to retain and
give his honorable Livery and sign at his pleasure, and that the persons so
retained, or to whom such Liveries or signs be or shall be given, may be
retained and received, and wear the same Livery and sign without trouble,
impediment or impeachment, pain, contempt, or forfeiture, or any penalty
contained in any of the said Statutes, or in any thing in them comprised
notwithstanding: Nor that the said Statutes in any manner shall extend to any
retaining to be made by the said Prince, in giving, taking, or retaining of any
Livery or sign of the Prince.

By the Statute 21. Hen. 8. cap. 13. The Prince may retain as many Chaplains as
he will, though all others of the Nobility, other then those of the Kings blood
be restrained to a certain number, and they, or any of them may purchase,
license or dispensation, and take, receive, and keep personages, or benefices
with cure of souls.

By order of the common Law, a King might have a reasonable aid of all his
Tenants, as well of those that did hold of his highness by Knights service, as
of those that did hold their Land in soccage.

That is to make his eldest Son Knight, But first note that the aid is not
to be recovered before the Son be of the age of 15. years, or before the
Daughter accomplish the age of 7. years, Fitz Harbert Not. brevium,
and for the Marriage of his eldest Daughter, and the sum of money was not in
certainty, but at the Kings pleasure, till by the Statute made in the 25. of
Ed. 3. cap. 11. by which is enacted, as follows.

Item, It is assented that reasonable aid to make the Kings first Son Knight,
and to marry his eldest Daughter, shall be demanded and levied, after the form
of the Statute thereof made, and not in other manner, that is to say, of every
Knights Fee, holden of the King without mean rate, 20s and no more, and of
every 20l of Land, holden of the King without mean in soccage 20s, and no more,
and so rata pro rata of the Lands in soccage. And for Lands of the tenure of
Chevalry, according to the quantity of the Fee.

By another Statute, made in the said 25. year of Ed. 3. cap. 2. amongst other
things it is declared, that to compass or imagine the death of the Kings
eldest Son and Heir, is crimen lasoe Majestatis, high treason, or if a man do
violate the Wife of the Kings eldest Son and Heir, it is high treason, and
see the Statute 20. Hen. 8. cap. 13. And so was the ancient common Law of
England, and not a new Law made by this Statute, Cooks 8. Part. 28.6. But this
Statute is a manifestation and declaration, or publication of the ancient
common Law in this Case.

By a Statute made in the said 25. year of King Ed. 3. It is declared, because
the people be in ambiguity, and doubt of the children born in the parts beyond
the Sea, out of the Kings Legiance of England, should be able to demand any
inheritance, within the same Legiance or not. Whereof a Petition was put into
the Parliament late holden at Westminster the 17. year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lord the King assembled in this Parliament, and was not at the same
time wholly assented. Our Sovereign Lord the King willing that all doubts and
ambiguities should be put away, and the Law in this case declared, and put in a
certainty, has charged the said Prelates, Earls, Barons, and other wise men of
his Council assembled in this Parliament, to deliberate upon this point, who
with one assent has said, That the Law of the Crown of England is, and always
has been such that Les Enfants du Roy, the children of the King of England in
whatsoever part they be born, in England, or elsewhere, be able, and ought to
bear the inheritance after the death of their Ancestors, which Law our
Sovereign Lord the King, the said Prelates, Earls, Barons and other great men,
and all the Commons assembled in this Parliament, do approve and affirm for
ever.

Note, These words in the Statute, Les Infants du Roy, have briefly set down,
and in a vulgar manner, for loquendum ut vulgus, and not in form of exquisite
pleading for sentiendum ut docti, and therefore ought to be understood largely,
Cooks 7. part. 11.6. and as the Latin word liberi is with the Civilians,
Bract. lib. 2. cap. 29. has these words, Item descendit jus vero heredi
ubicunque not in fuerit, vel in utero matris, intra mare, vel ultra: Nec potest
sibi aliquis facere beredem, quia solus Deus heredem facit. The right does
deseend unto the true Heir, wheresoever he shall be born in the Womb of his
Mother on this side the Sea, or beyond, no man can make an Heir unto himself,
because God only does make the Heir, read the Statute, and Cook 7. part. 18. a.
Where you shall see that though generally, the birthplace is observable, yet
many times Legiance, and obedience without any place within the Kings Dominions
may make a Subject born, for though we see by experience almost in every
Parliament, Ambassadors, Merchants, and the Kings soldiers does show there in
such causes, to have their children naturalized, or made denixens; yet that
does proceed only of doubt, and needless scupulosity and ignorance of the
Law; even as we see men that are doubtful, desire to be resolved, as may
appear by sundry covenants in bargaining, more then necessary. And by renewing
of Chartes, though there be no forfeitures; and by suing forth particular
pardons, when a general is granted by Parliament, Priests, and Ministers see
to the Parliament, for legitimation of their children.

And in the Articles confirmed by Parliament, touching the marriage between
Philip Prince of Spain, and Queen Mary, a special proviso was, to bar him
from being Tenant by the courtesy of the Crown, in case he should have iss^e
by her, and survive, which was superfluous; because the Common Law would have
denied this last point. See the Lord Cromwels Speech in the case of the
Postnati, fol. 36.

But note that if an Alien Enemy come into this Realm, and his Wife English, or
stranger, be delivered of a child within England; this child notwithstanding
his birthplace is an Alien born, for want of allegiance in the Parents, Ibidem.

King Henry did create Edward his eldest Son the first Prince of Wales, and
did give unto him the dignity and Dominion of it, to be holden of him and his
Heirs, Kings of England; and after that time, the eldest son of the King of
England has been Prince of Wales, and as incident to the State and dignity of
a Prince, and might make Laws and Statutes, and use jurisdiction and authority,
as amply as any King of that Nation could do. Cooks 7. part. 21.6. Vide Mills,
fol. 312.
Plowden. 126. For Wales was a Kingdom in ancient time. But in a Statute made
in the 12. Ed. 1. Wales was united and incorporated into England, and made
parcel of England in possession. And note in Tho. Mylls 112. the devise of the
said King was to draw the Welchmen to acknowledge the Kings eldest Son, Edward
of Carnarvan to be their Prince.

Also by another Statute made 27. Hen. 8. cap. 24. a general resumption of
many liberties and franchises heretofore, taken or granted from the Crown, as
the authority to pardon Treason, murder, manslaughter, and felony, power to
make Justices in Oyre, Justices of assize, Justices of peace, Goal delivery,
and such like; so that from thenceforth, the Kings eldest Son, has only the
name and style of Prince of Wales, but no other Jurisdiction then at the Kings
pleasure is permitted him, and granted by his Letters Patents, as by the tenor
thereof following, made by King Henry the eight, to Edward his son, and heir
apparent may appear.

Henry, Ireland was before, 33. Hen. 8. a Lordship, and now is a Kingdom, and
the King of England, was as absolute a Prince and Sovereign, when he was Lord
of Ireland, as now when he is styled King of the same, Cooks 7. part.
By the grace of God King of England, and of France, Lord of Ireland, etc. To
all Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Justices,
Viscounts, Governors, Ministers, and to all our Bailiffs, and faithful
Subjects greeting, out of the excellency of Royal pre-eminence, like as the
beams from the Sun, so does inferior honor proceed; neither does the
integrity of Royal luster, and brightness by the natural disposition of the
light-affording light, feel any loss or detriment by such borrowed lights;
yea, the Royal Scepter is also much the more extolled, and the Royal Throne
exalted, by how much more nobleness, preeminences, and honors, are under the
power and command thereof.

And this worthy consideration allureth, and induces us with desire to the
increase of the name and honor of our first begotten, and best beloved Son
Edward, in whom we behold and see our selves to be honored, and our Royal
House also, and our people subject to us, hoping by the grace of God (by
conjecture taken, of his gracious future proceedings) to be the more honorably
strengthened, that we may with honor prevent, and with abundant grace
prosecute him, who in reputation of us, is deemed the same person with us.

Wherefore by the Council and consent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Viscounts,
and Barons of our Kingdom, being in our present Parliament, we have made and
created, and by these presents, make and create him the said Edward Prince of
Wales, and Earl of Chester, and to the same Edward we give and grant, and by
this Charter have confirmed the Name, Style, Title, State, Dignity, and the
honor of the said Principality, that he may therein in governing, rule, and in
ruling, direct, and defend. We by a Garland upon his head, by a Ring of Gold
upon his Finger, and a Virge of Gold, have according to the manner invested him
to have, and to hold to him, and to his Heirs the Kings of England for ever.

Wherefore we will and straightly command, for us, and our Heirs, that Edward
our Son aforesaid, shall have the Name, Style, Title, State, Dignity, and
honor of the Principality of Wales, and of the County of Chester aforesaid,
unto him and his Heirs, the Kings of England aforesaid for ever; These being
witnesses, the Reverend Father John Cardinal and Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, our Chancellor, and William, Archbishop of York,
Primate of England, Thomas Bishop of London, John Bishop of Lincoln, and
William Bishop of Norwich; our most welbeloved Cousins, Richard Duke of York,
Humphry Duke of Buckingham; our welbeloved Cousin, Richard Earl of Warwick,
Richard Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Wiltshire; and our welbeloved, and
faithful Cousins, Ralph Cromwell, Chamberlain of our House, William
Falconbridge, and John Sturton, Knights; Dated at Our Palace at Westminster the
fifteenth day of March, and in the year of Our Reign thirty two.

And here (by the way) may be observed, that in ancient time, and in the time
of the English Saxon Kings, the use was as well in penning the Acts of
Parliament, as of the Kings Letters Patents, when any lands, franchises or
hereditaments, did pass from the King of any estate of inheritance, as also in
their creations of any Man unto honor and dignity, the conclusion was with the
sign of the Cross in form aforesaid (that is) his Testibus etc.

But long time that form has been discontinued, so that at this day, and for
many years past, all the Kings Patents for lands, franchizes and
hereditaments, do conclude with test me ipso; nevertheless in all creations
of honor and dignity by Letters Patents, the ancient form of concluding with,
his testibus, is used at this day, Cooks 8. part 19.

And it has been resolved by the Judges, that all Acts of Parliament and
Statutes whien do concern the Prince, who is the first begotten son of the
King, and heir apparent to the Crown, for the time being, Perpetuis futuris
temporibus, in all succession of ages and times be such Acts, whereof the
Judges and all the Realm must take conusance, as of general Statutes, for
every subject has interest in the King, and none of his subjects (who is
within his Laws) be divided from him, being his head and Sovereign; so that
the business and things of the King does touch all the Realm, and namely,
when it does concern the Prince, the first begotten son of the King, and
Heir apparent to the Crown, Corruscat enim Princeps radiis Regis Patris sui
and censetur una persona cum ipso; For the Prince shines with the beams of
the King his Father, and is holden to be one person with him. Cooks 8. part 28.

Although the Prince by express words has no privilege by the great Charter
of the Forest, 9 H. 3. cap. 11. for hunting in the Kings Forests or Parks,
passing by them, and sent for by the Kings commandment; yet by construction the
Prince is to take benefit and advantage thereby, as well as Bishops, Earls, or
Barons, who are expressed, Crompt. Courts, des Justices de Forests, 167.

In the Parliament, 31 H. 8. c. 10. an Act concerning the placing of the Kings
children, and Lords in the Parliament, and other assemblies, were amongst other
things made as follows.

First, it is enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or persons, of
what degree, estate or condition, whatsoever he or they be, (except only the
Kings children) shall at any time hereafter attempt or presume to sit, or have
place at any side of the cloth of state in the Parliament chamber, neither of
the one hand of the Kings Highness, or of the other, whether the Kings Majesty
be there personally present or not.

The Prince shall not find pledges for the prosecution of any Action, and
therefore shall be amerced more then the King should be, or the Queen his wife,
Vide Cooks 8. part, 61. b.

Of the most noble and excellent Prince that now is, it is truly said, that he
is omni nomine numine magnus, by destiny, name, and providence of God, the
greatest; before Cook to the Reader, before his 8. Book, the last leaf.

Nevertheless as he is a distinct person by nature from the King, so is he
distinct by the Law, viz. a Subject, and holds his principalities and
seigniories of the King; neither shall he have all those Prerogatives which the
King shall have; for example, when the King seizes his Subjects lands, or
takes away his goods from him, having no title by order of the Law so to do:
In this case the Subject is to sue to his Sovereign Lord by way of Petition
only, for other remedy has he not, but suit by Petition can be to none other
then to the King; for no such suit shall be made to the Prince, but Actions as
the case requires, as against a Subject, Stamf. praerog. ca. 22.

And in token of subjection, the Prince does not upon his Posie of his Arms
disdain the old Saxon word ( Ich dien, I serve) as Lambert does mention in his
Book of Perambulation of Rent. 364.

And there is a case, that Gascoin chief Justice of Engl: in the time of H. 4.
did commit the Prince, who would have taken a prisoner from the Bar in the
Kings Bench, and the Prince did humbly obey, and did go at his command; in
which the King did greatly rejoice that he had such a Judge who durst minister
justice upon his son, and also that he had a son so gracious as to obey, Court
de Banco Regis, 79. Crompton.

A question was moved to the Justices in the first year of H. 7. what order
should be in that present parliament, for the anulling and making void certain
attainders, for so much as diverse who were returned of that Parliament did
stand attainted of treason; and all the Justices resolved, That so many of the
Knights of the shires, or Citizens, or Burgesses as stood then attainted of
treason, should depart out of the Parliament house at the reversall of the Act
of Parliament for their attainders. But as soon as the Act of Parliament was
reversed and annuld, that they and every of them (that is to say) Lords and
Commons should come into their places, and then may proceed upon any thing
there moved lawfully, as lawful persons; for it is not convenient that they
who are attainted should be in places of lawful Judges.

And then another question was moved, What shall be said of the King himself?
for he also was attainted by his Predecessor Rich. 3. and after communication
had amongst themselves, all did agree that the King was a person able, and
discharged of any former attainder ipso facto. That he took upon him to reign,
and to be King, by which it manifestly appears, that by the Laws of England
there can be no inter regnum within the same; and that presently by descent,
the next heir in blood is co^pleatly and absolutely King, without any
essential Ceremony, or act to be done ex post facto. And that Coronation is
but a royal ornament, and outward solemnization of the descent, and of this
last matter. Read Cooks 7 part, fol. 10.6. and that there follows.

Of Dukes.
THe form of the Patent of Duke of York that now is.

Rex, etc. To all Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts,
Barons, Justices, Governors, Knights, Ministers, And to all Bailiffs, and
faithful Subjects, greeting: Whereas We often times call to mind how many and
innumerable gifts, and what excellent benefits that great worker of all
goodness of his only benignity and clemency, has abundantly bestowed upon
Us, who by his power has consociated diverse and mighty Lions in firm peace
without any strife, but also has amplified and exalted the bounds and limits
of our Government, by his unspeakable providence above our progenitors, with an
indissolvible conjunction of the ancient and famous Kingdoms in the right of
blood under our Imperial Diadem; in regard whereof, we cannot but most
willingly acknowledge our fruitfulness and issue, plentifully adorned with the
gift of Nature, which he has vouchsafed upon us, because in truth, in the
succession of children, a mortal man is made as it were immortal. Neither
unto any mortal men, at leastwise unto Princes not acknowledging superiors,
can any thing happen in worldly cases more pleasant and acceptable, then that
their children should become notable in all virtues, gooodnesse, manners, and
increase of dignity; so as they which excel others in nobleness of blood, and
indowments of Nature, might not be thought of others to be exceeded.

Hence it is, that that great goodness of God, which is showed unto us in our
fertility, to pass in silence, or to be thought not to satisfy the Law of
Nature, whereby we are chiefly provoked to be well affected, and liberal to
those, in whom we behold our blood to begin to flourish, coveting with great and
fatherly affection, that the perpetual memory of our blood, with honors, and
increase of dignity, and all praise may be affected: Our well-beloved Son,
Charles Duke of Albany, Marquess of Ormond, Count of Rosse, and Lord of
Ardmannoth; Our second begotten son, in whom the Royal form and beauty worthy
honor, and other gifts of virtue, do now in the best hopes shine in his tender
graces: We erect, create, make and ordain, and to him the name, style, state,
title, dignity, authority, and honor of the Duke of York do give, and him of
that Name, with the title, state, style, honor, authority, and dignity, with
other honors to the same belonging and annexed, by the girding of the sword,
cap, circlet of gold put upon his head, and the delivery of a golden Virge, we
do really invest; to have and to hold the same name, and style, state, and
dignity, authority, and honor of the Duke of York unto the aforesaid Charles
our second begotten son, and to his heirs males of his body, lawfully begotten
for ever. And that the aforesaid Charles our second begotten son, according to
the decency and state of the said name of Duke of York, may more honorably
carry himself; we have given and granted, and by this our present Charter we
confirm for us and our heirs, unto the aforesaid Duke, forty pounds to have,
and yearly to receive to the foresaid Duke and his heirs for ever out of the
Farms, issues, profits, and other commodities whatsoever coming out of the
foresaid County of York, by the hands of the Sheriff of the same County for
the time being, at the Terms of Easter, and Michael the Archangel, by even
portions; for that express mention of other gifts and grants by us unto the
same Duke, before time made in these presents made, does not appear
notwithstanding.

These be witnesses, the most excellent, and most beloved Henry, Prince, our
first begotten son, Vlrick Duke of Holst, brother of the queen our beloved
wife, and the Reverend Father in Christ, Richard Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate and Metropolitan of all England; and also our welbeloved and faithful
Counselor, the Lord Elesmore, and Chancellor of England, Thomas Earl of
Suffolk, Chamberlain of our household; and also our dear cousin, Thomas-Earl of
Arundel, and our well-beloved cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of
Northumberland, Edward Earl of Worcester, Master of our horse, George Earl of
Cumberland; and also our well-beloved cousin, Henry Earl of Southampton,
William Earl of Pembroke; and also our well-beloved cousins, Charles Earl of
Devon, Master of our Ordinance, Henry Earl of Northampton, Warden of the
Cinque Ports* John Earl of Mar, Robert Viscount Eranborne; our principal
Secretary; and our well-beloved and faithful Counselor Edward Lord Zuch,
President of our Council in the Principality and Marches of Wales; and also
ou^ wel-beloved and trusty Robert Lord Willoughby of Earsby, William Lord
Mounteagle, Gray Lord Chandois, William Lord Compton, Francis Lord Norris,
Robert Lord Sidney; our well-beloved and faithful Councillors, William Lord
Knowles, Treasurer of our household, Edward Lord Wotton, Comptroller of out
household; and our well-beloved and faithful Counselor, Alexander Lord; and
also our wel-beloved and faithful Counselors, George Dunbarr; Lord of
Barwick, Chancellor of our Exchequer; Edward Lord Bruise of Kinlose, Master of
the Rolls of our Chancery; and also our faithful and well-beloved Thomas Lord
Eskine of Bielton, Lord Balmermoth, and others; given by our hand at our
Palace of Westminster the sixth day of January, in the second year of the
Reign of K. James.

K. Edw. 3. in the 11 year of his Reign, by his Charter in Parliament, and by
authority of Parliament did create Edw. his eldest son, the Black-Prince D. of
Cornwall not only in title, but cum feodo, with the Duchy of Cornwall, as by
the tenor of the said Letters Patents exemplified may appear, Cooks 8 part, in
the pleading, Habend' et tenend' eidem duci, et ipsius et heraed' suorum Regum
Angliae siliis primogenitis, et dicti loci ducibus in Regno Augliae
hereditatoria successoris: To have and to bold to the same Duke and his heirs
Kings of England, the first begotten sons, and Dukes of the same place, in the
kingdom of England, and to hereditary succession; so that he that is
hereditable must be heir apparent of the King of England, and of such a King,
who is heir unto the said Prince Edward: And such a first begotten son and heir
apparent to the Crown, shall inherit the said Dukedom in the life of the said
King his father, with manner of limitation of estate, was short, excellent, and
curious, varying from the ordinary Rules of the Common Law, touching the
framing of any estate of inheritance in fee-simple or fee-tail. And
nevertheless by the authority of Parliament, a special fee-simple is in that
only case made, as by judgment may appear in the Book aforesaid, and the case
thereof, fol. 27. and 21 E. 3.41. b.

And ever since that creation, the said Dukedom of Cornwall has been the
peculiar inheritance of the Kings eldest son, ad supportandum nomen and on us
bonoris, to support the name and weight of that his honorable estate, during
the king his fathers life; so that he is ever Duxnatus non creatus, a Duke
born, not created; and the said Duke the very first day of his nativity is
presumed and taken to be of full and perfect age, so that he may sue that day
for his livery of the said Dukedom, and ought of right to obtain the same, as
well as if he had been full 21 years of age.

And the said Black-Prince was the first Duke in England after the Conquest;
for though Bracton, who made his Book in H. 3. says, Et sunt sub rege duces,
as before appears, yet that place is to be understood of the ancient kings,
who were before the conquest; for in Mag. Charta, which was made in Anno 9 H.
3. we find not the name of Duke amongst the Peers and Nobles there mentioned.
For, seeing the Norman Kings themselves were Dukes of Normandy, for a great
while, they adorned none with this honor of Duke.

And the eldest son of every King, after this creation, was Duke of Cornwall,
and so allowed; As for example, Henry of Munmouth, eldest son of H. 4. and
Henry of Winsor, eldest son of H. 5. and Edw. of Westminster, the first son of
Ed. 4. and Arthur of Winchester first son of H. 7. and Edward of Hampton first
son of H. 8. but Richard of Bordeaux, who was the first son of the Black-Prince
was not Duke of Cornwall, by force of the said creation; for albeit, after the
death of his father he was heir apparent to the Crown, yet because he was not
the first begotten son of a King of England (for his father dyed in the life
time of king Ed. 3.) the said Richard was not within the limitation of the
grant and creation, by authority of Parliament, made in the 11 year of king
Edward above mentioned. And therefore, to supply that defect, in the 5. year of
Ed. 3. he was created Duke of Cornwall by a special Charter.

Elizabeth eldest daughter to king Edw. 4. was not Durches of Cornwall, for she
was the first begotten daughter of king Edw. 4. but the limitation is to the
first begotten son.

Henry the 8. was not in the life of his father, king H. 7. after the death of
his eldest Brother Arthur Duke of Cornwall, by force of the said creation; for
albeit, he was sole heir apparent to the king, yet he was not his eldest
begotten son, Cooks 8 part. 29. b. and 30. a.

And the opinion of Stamford a learned Judge, has been, that he shall have
within his Dukedom of Cornwall the kings Prerogatives, because it is not
severed from the Crown, after the form as it is given; for, none shall be
inheritour thereof, but the kings of the Realm: For example, whereas by the
Common Law, if a man hold diverse Manors, or other lands and tenements of
several Lords, all by kn^^hts service, some part by priority and ancient
Feoffment, and other lands by posterity, and by a latter Feoffment, and the
Tenant so seized dies his son and heir within age: In this case the custody of
Wardsh^p of the body, and his marriage, may not be divided among all the Lords,
but one of them only shall have right unto it, because the body of a man is
entire; and the Law does say, That the Lord of whom some part of those lands be
holden by priority; and by the same tenure of Chivalry shall have it, except
the king be any of the Lords; for then, though the Tenant did purchase that
land last, yet after his death the king shall be preferred before all, or any
other the Lords, of whom the Tenant did hold by priority: And so shall the Duke
of Cornwall in the same case have the same Prerogative, if his Tenant dye
holding of him, but by posterity of Feoffment, for any tenure of his Duchy of
Cornwall, although the said Duke is not seized of any particular estate,
whereof the reversion remains in the king; for the Prince is seized in fee of
his Dukedom, as before is said.

John of Gaunt the fourth son of king Edward 3. did take to wife Blanch, who
was daughter and heir to Henry Duke of Lancaster, who had issue, Henry
afterward king of England, so that the said Duchy of Lancaster did come unto
the said Henry by descent from the part of his mother, and being a subject he
was to observe the Common Law of the Land in all things concerning his Duchy.
For if he would depart in Fee with any part thereof, he must make livery and
seizen, or if he had made a Lease for life, reserving rent with a reentery for
default of payment, and the rent happen to be behind, the Duke might not enter
unless he do make a demand, or if he had aliened any part thereof whilst he
was with age he might defeat the purchaser for that cause, and if he would
grant a reversion of any estate for life or years in being, there must also be
Attornment, or else the grant does not take effect.

But after that he had deposed King Richard the second, and had assumed upon
him the Royal estate, and so had conjoined his natural body in the body
Politic of the King of this Realm, and so was become King: Then the
possessions of the Duchy of Lancaster were in him as King, and not as Duke.
For the name of Duke being not so great, as the name of a King, was drowned by
the name of King; and by the State Royal in him who was Duke, for the King
cannot be a Duke within ^^s own Realm: but out of his Realm he may.

And likewise the name of the Duchy, and all the Franchizes, Liberties, and
Jurisdictions of the same, when they were in the hands of him who had the
Crown and Jurisdiction Royal, were gone by the Common Law, and extinct, for
the greater does distinguish the less, and after those times the possessions
of the Duchy of LANCASTER would not pass from King Henry the fourth, but by
his Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, without livery of seisin,
and without Attornment; and if he make a Lease for life being Duke, reserving a
rent with reentry, for default of payment, and after his assumption of the
Crown the rent happen to be unpaid, he might reenter without demand; for the
King is not bound to do such personal Ceremonies as the Subjects are by the
Law compelled to do. Therefore to have the said Duchy to be still a Duchy,
with the liberties to the same, as it was before; and to alter the order and
degree of the lands of the Duchy from the Crown, the said King H. 4. made a
Charter by authority of Parliament, which is entitled Charta Regis Henrici
quarti de seperatione ducatus Lancastria a corona authoritate Parliamenti anno
Regni sui primo. The Charter of Henry the fourth, for the separation of the
Duchy of Lancaster from the Crown by the authority of Parliament, in the
first year of his reign of the said King, as by the tenure thereof may appear.

And so by authority of Parliament, the said Duchy, withal the Franchises and
liberties, were disjoined from the Crown, and from the Ministers and Officers
of the Crown, and from the receipt of the revenues of the Crown, and from the
order to pass by such conveyance which the said Law did require in the
possessions of the Crown.

But although the possessions of the Duchy by force of the said Statute stood,
divided from the Crown, and ought to be demeaned and ordered, and pass as they
ought before Henry the fourth was King; yet there is no clause set down in the
said Charter, which does make the person of the king, who has the Duchy in
any other degree then it was before; but things concerning his person, shall in
the same estate as they were before seperations: Insomuch, as if the Law before
the Charter, by the authority of Parliament adjudged the person of the King
always of full age, having regard unto his gifts, as well of the lands which
he does inherit in his natural body, as in that he does inherit in the right
of his Crown, or politic body, it shall be so adjudged for the Duchy land
after the said Statute; for the Statute does go, and reach unto the estate,
condition, and order of the lands of the Duchy, but does not extend to the
person of the king, who has the lands in points touching his person, neither
does it diminish or alter the preheminences which the Law does give, or
attribute to the person of the King. For if king Henry 4. after the said Act,
had made a Lease, or other grant of parcel of the Duchy by the name of H.
Duke of Lancaster only, it had been void; for it should have been made in the
name of Henry 4. king of England.

And thus stood the Duchy of Lancaster, severed from the Crown all the reign
of H. 4. H. 5. and H. 6. being politiquely made for the upholding of the Duchy
of Lancaster, their true and ancient inheritance, howsoever the right heir unto
the Crown might in future time obtain his right thereunto (as it happened in
king Edward 4. his time:) But after king Edward 4. obtained his right unto the
Crown of England, and was in his remitter, he in Parliament attainted H. 6. and
appropriated unity, and annexed the said Duchy again unto the Crown of
England, as by the Statute thereof made in the first year of his Reign may
appear.

By which Statute three things were ordained:

1. First, the County Palatine of Lancaster was again established. 2. Secondly,
he did vest it in the body politic of the kings of this Realm. 3. Thirdly, he
did divide it from the order of the Crown Lands; and in this force it did
continue until the time of H. 7. who forthwith (being descended from the house
of Lancaster) did separate it only in order and government from the Crown, and
so continues at this day, and all that is before spoken concerning the Duke
and the Dukedom of Lancaster, appears in Plowden, 212. and that which there
follows.
Before I write further concerning the Nobility, I should set down the form of
the Kings Letters Patents of their Creations, and the manner of solemnity used
in the admittance and investry of Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons,
according to their several degrees. But I do willingly omit so to do, partly
because in effect the same may appear by that before recited Patent, for the
Creation of a Duke (altering only such things which of right ought to be
altered) and partly because their Patents are not only extant and of Record,
but also because all those things are to be read in a printed English Book of
this subject, judicially made by Tho. Mills, being a matter also proper to the
College and Corporation of Heralds, and not unto the drift of my discourse,
and I will briefly set down some other things observable concerning each of
them.

Of Marquesses.
A Marquess, that is, if we consider the very nature of the word, is a
Governor of the Marches, and has the next place of honor after a Duke.

This title came to us but of late days, and was not bestowed upon any one
before the time of King Rich. 2. who made Robert Vere Marquess of Dublin, and
then it became with us to be a title of honor; for before time those that
governed the Marches were called commonly Lords Marchers, and not Marquesses.

After the Normans had conquered this land, it was carefully observed by them
as a matter of much moment, and a point of special policy, to place upon the
confines and borders of the Britains, or Welsh, etc. not then subdued, men of
much valor, not only sufficiently able to encounter the inrodes and invasions
of the enemy; but also willing to make onset of them, and enlarge the
Conquest; these men thus placed, were of high blood, credit, and countenance,
among their countrymen the Normans, and in whose faith and power the Conqueror
reposed special confidence and trust, and therefore in their territories given
unto them to hold their tenures, were devised to be very special, and of great
importance, and their honors enriched with the name and privileges of Earls
of Chester, and for the North border of Wales created to be a County Palatine,
and the Barons of the middle Port of the South Marches, were adorned in a
manner with a Palatine Jurisdiction, having a Court of Chancery, and Writs only
among themselves pleadable, to the intent that their attendance, might not thence
be driven for the prosecution of controversies, and quarrels in the Law: and
as for the other part of the South Marches, they seemed sufficiently fenced
with the River of Severn and the Sea.

Of Earls.
FIrst, It is to be observed, that originally within this Kingdom, Earldomes
of Counties in the ancient English Saxon Government, were not only Dignitie^
of Honor, but also Offices of justice, for that they did further the
administration of justice in the Counties whereof they were Earls or Aldermen.
They had likewise their Deputies under them, the Sheriff an Officer yet in
being, and retayning the name of his Substitution, in Latin therefore called
Vicecomes, as it is to be read at large in Cambden.

The Earls, in recompense of their travel concerning the Officers of the
County received a Sallary, namely, the third penny of the profits of the said
County; which custom continued a long time after the Conquest, and was
inserted as a Princely benevolence or gift in their Patents of Creation (as by
diverse ancient Patents thereof may appear) which afterward were turned into
pensions, for the better maintenance of that honor, as appears by a Book
Case upon the pleading of a Pattent, whereby King Henry the sixth Created that
worthy Knight, Sir John Talbott Earl of Shrewsbury; which pension is so annexed
to their dignity, as that by any means of Alienation, it cannot be at any time
severed and disjoined from the same; and therefore in respect of such pensions,
which were the third part of the profits of the County, or such other sum given
in lieu thereof, some men have, not without probability thereof imagined, quod
Comites nominabantur quia in multis fiscu Regii Socti et Comites item
participes essent, vide Cooks 7 part 34. a.

Of the single Earls, and not Palatine within the Realm of England, there were
and have been principally two kinds, but every of them subdivided into
several branches, for they either take name of a place, or hold their title
without any place at all. Those that take their name of a place are of two
kinds; for either the same place is a County (and this is most usual) as the
Earl of Devon-Shire, Cornwall, Kent, etc. or else of some other place being no
County as a Town, Castle, Honor, or such like; of which later sort, some are
most ancient, having their original even from the Conqueror, or shortly after,
as the Earldome of Richmond in Yorkshire, Clarence in Suffolk, Arundel ni
Sussex; all which had their original in the time of the Conqueror, by Donation
of those Castles and Honors the Earldome of Bath, in the time of H. 7. and
after in the time of H. 8. erected in the Family where it now remains: and
the Earldome of Bridgewater, whereof Giles Dawbery was created in the time of
H. 7.

Earldomes, which have their titles without any place, are likewise of two
kinds, either in respect of office, as is the Earl Marshall of England; for it
is granted in this or the like manner, Officium Marescalli Angliae, with
further words, viz. A. B. etc. Comitem Marescall^^^ Anglia creamus ordinavimus
and constituimus, etc. By which it appears that the very Office is an
Earldom, which title of Earl Marshall of England, King Richard 2. gave first to
Thomas Newbray, Earl of Nottingham, whereas before they were simply styled
Marshalls of England, Cambden. 167.

The second sort of Earls by birth, and so are all the Sons of the Kings of
England, if they have no other dignity bestowed upon them; and therefore it was
said that John afterward King of England, in the life of his Father, Hen. 2.
was called countiscane terrae, before he was affied to Alice the daughter of
the Earl of Moreton in France, though Hollenshed, fol. 103. writing of the
degrees of people in England, says, That the Kings younger Sons are but
Gentlemen by birth, till they have received creation from the King of high
estate.

Earls, and all others of the degree of Nobility, and honor, have Offices of
great trust and confidence, being for two principal purposes, ad consulendum
Regi tempore Pacis, to Council the King in time of peace, the other, ad
defendendum Regem and Patriam tempore belli, to defend the King and Country in
time of War; and therefore Antiquity has given unto them two Ensigns to
resemble both the said duties; For the first, the head is adorned with a Cap of
honor, and a Coronet, and the body with a Robe in resemblance of Council.
Secondly, They are girt with a sword, in resemblance, that they must be
faithful and true to defend the Prince and Country, Cooks 7. part. 34. a.

But to come to the Kings high Council of Parliament, No man ought to presume
before he has received the Kings-Writ of Summons, for the rule is ad consilium
ne accedas antequam voceris, the form of a writ of Summons to an Earl is as
follows.

Rex, etc. Unto his welbeloved Cousin Edward, Earl of Oxford greeting. Because
by the assent and advise of our Council, for certain weighty and urgent
business, concerning us the State and defense of our Kingdom, and Church of
England; we have ordai^ed to be holden a certain Parliament at our City of
Westminster, the 22. day of November next coming, and there together with you,
and with the Prelates, the great and noble men of our said Kingdom, to have
conference and treaty; commanding, and firmly enjoining you, upon your faith
and allegiance, whereby you are holden unto us, that the dangers and perils
imminent of that business considered, and all excuse set a part, you be
present the said day in the same place with us, and with the Prelates, and
great and noble men aforesaid, to treat and give Council upon the aforesaid
business; and hereof fail you not, as you tender us, our honor, and the
safeguard, and defense of our Kingdom and Church aforesaid. Witness our self
at Westminster in the second day of March, in the first year of our Reign.
Cromptons Courts, tit. Parliam. 1. which is recited out of the Book of Entries.
594.

Upon this Writ, three things have been observed.

First, A privilege incident to an Earl, or other of degree above him; for the
Kings does salute him by the name of his Cousin, although he peradventure be of
no consanguinity to the King.

Secondly, When the King does summon an Earl, or any other Peer of the Realm of
the Parliament, he does send his Writ, directed to himself particularly, and
not to the Sheriff of the County, as the general Summons are for Knights and
Burgesses for the Parliament.

Thirdly, The Writ is to the Earl of Oxford greeting not naming him Knight,
though he be a Knight, and though that degree be parcel of his name, as
appears, 3. Hen. 6. fol. 29.

And Priscot chief Justice in the 32. H. 6.29. That i^ an Esquire be made
Knight, he loses the name of Esquire: But if a Knight be made a Nobleman, he
does still retain the name of Knight, and so ought to be styled in all Writs.
And Cooks 4. part. fol. 118. a. says, That if a Baron be created an Earl, yet
his title of Baron does continue. But in Plowdens Book. 213. It is agreed, That
if the Crown of England do descend to a Duke, within England, his name of Duke
is gone for omne majus tollit minus.

The increase of Name by the Addition of Honor.
AFter a Man is created an Earl, Viscount, or into any other title of honor
above them, his title is become parcel of his name (and not an addition only)
and in all legal proceedings, he ought to be styled by that his dignity.

In the first year of King Edward 3. fol. 151. a Writ of Formedon, was brought
against Richard son to Allin, late Earl of Arundel, and did demand the Manor
of C. with the Appurtenants, etc. The Tenant hy his learned Council, did
plead, that he is Earl of Arundel, and was Earl the same day of the Writ
purchased, and demanded Judgment of the Writ, because he was not named in the
same according to his dignity, and title of Honor, to which the Demandant,
says, That at day, and time, when he did purchase the Writ, the Tenant wat not
known, nor taken to be an Earl, and it is hard Justice, if the Writ should
abate without any default in the Plantiffe. Nevertheless, Because the truth of
the matter, so that the Earldom did descend unto him, before the Plaintiff
commenced his Action, and purchased his Writ against him; therefore by
judgment, his Writ was abated, although the Tenant was not at that time known,
or holden to be an Earl. But if a Baron be Plantiff or Defendant, etc. It is
not of necessity to name Baron, 8. H. 6.10. Yet see a distinction of Barons
concerning this matter here following, Fol. 27. b.

And so Reynald Gray was reputed an Esquire, after the Earldom descended to
him, till at the last, it was published, and decla^ed by the Queen, and by the
Heralds, that he was Earl of Kent in right, and by descent, although he was
reputed, or named Earl before that time, Dyer 318. lib. 10.

Addition of Name.
BUt an Addition may be used or omitted at pleasure, except in some special
cases, where processes of Utlary lies, as hereafter follows, the title of
Supremum caput ecclesiae Anglicanae, which was by Act of Parliament, in the 26.
year of H. 8. c. 1. and an. 35. H. 8. cap. 3. annexed to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm, is no parcel of the Kings by style: but only an addition of the
Kings style, so that it may be omitted in the Summons of the Parliament (as it
was done in the first year of Queen Mary) or used, as it was by the late Queen
Elizabeth, and by the King that now is, at his pleasure, and so it is adjudged
as you may read in Dyer, In the first year of Queen Mary, Fol. 98. And so is
the Law declared by authority of Parliament. 1. and 2. Phil. and Mary, cap.
8.256. See in Fox his Book of Martyrs, Fol. 217. An argument made by Hiles
contrary.

But between the Majesticall style of the King, and the title of honor,
appertaining to a Subject; this cifference is between grants or purchases made
by, or to the King; and grants or purchases made by, or to a Nobleman, etc. For
in that first Case it is necessary, that the Name of Kings be expressed,
otherwise they are void and of none effect. But if a Duke, Earl, or other of
the Nobility do purchase, or grant by the Name of Baptism, and surname,
omitting other title of honor; it is not void, but good enough, for it is a
rule in the Law, That every man's grant shall be construed most strongly against
the grantor, and must for the benefit of him, to whom the grant is made, and so
ut Res magis valeat quam pereat, that the matter may rather be strengthened,
then void; for there is a great diversity in Law, between Writs and Grants; for
if Writs be not formally made, they shall be abated, which is no greater
prejudice, then the purchasing another Writ; But if a Grant should so Ligerfie,
be made void, then the party has no remedy to have a new; for that cause the
Law does not favor advantages, by occasions of Misnomer, more then the strict
rule of the Law does require, Cooks 6. part. 64. b. Et sequentia, false Latin
shall abate a Writ, but not a Grant, Ibidem.

And if an Earl be Plantiff or Demandant, and hanging, the Writ shall not
abate; but nevertheless he shall proceed and count by the name of an Earl,
according to such title of honor, as he did b^ar at the time of his action
commenced, Pasch. 13. Edw. 3. brief 259. Pasch. 19. Edw. 3. Procedendo. 2.32.
Hen. 8.39. 7. Hen. 6.14. b. Et sequentia. 25. Ed. 3.39. 22. Rich. 2. brief
9.37. and Pasch. 24. Edw. 3.14. But if the Plantiff in a quere impedit, be made
Knight, hanging the Writ, the Writ shall abate, Cooks 7. part. 27. b.

There is a Statute made in the first year of H. 5. c. 5. where in is contained
as following.

Item, It is ordained and established, that in every Original Writ of accounts
personal, Appeals and Indictments, in which the Exigent shall be awarded in
the Name of the Defendants. In such Writs, original Appeals, and Indictments,
addition shall be made of their estate and degree, or mystery, and the Towns,
Hamlets or places, and the Counties where they were, or be conversant, and if
by Process upon the said Original, Writs, Appeals or Indictments, in the
which the additions be omitted, any Outlaries be pronounced, the said Writs and
Indictments shall be abated, by the execution of the party, wherein the said
additions are omitted, provided always, that though the said Writs of
additions personal, be not according to the Records, and deeds by the
surplussage of the additions aforesaid, That for this cause they are not
abated; and that the Clerks of the Chancery, under whose names such Writs shall
go forth written, shall not leave out or make omission of the said Additions,
as is aforesaid, upon point to be punished, and to make a fine to the King by
the discretion of the Chancellor. And this Ordinance shall begin to hold place
at the suite of the party, from the least of Saint Michael next ensuing
forwards.

Although the addition of estate, degree and mystery to be added unto names, be
written in the Statute, first and before the additions of place and Counties,
yet it has been used always after the making of the said Statute, to place
the additions of estate, degree, and mystery, after the places and County in
every Writ, Appeals and Indictments against common persons.

But the use is otherwise in Appeals and Indictments of Treason or Felony
against Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls for their names of degrees, are in such
Cases put before the Additions of places and Counties, as Charles Earl of
Westmerland, late of Bramspeth in the County of Durism. Thelowell. lib. 6. cap.
14.

Names of dignity, as Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights, Serjant at Law, etc. Be
contained within this word degree, for gradus continet statum in se, and non e
contrario, degree does contain state in it self, and not of the contrary; for
the state of a man, as Gentleman, Esquire, Yeoman, Widow, single-Woman, etc.
And the art or craft of a man is his mystery, by Brook chief Justice in the
Common Pleas, in abridgement of the Case of 14. Hen. 6. fol. 15. titul. nosve
dignitat. 33.

See in Cooks 8. parts 156. John Style is bound by obligation to W. B. the
obliger is afterward made into a title of honor, or a Knight, the Bond is
forfeited W. B. by his Attorney draws a note or title, for an original,
according to the Defendants degree (although it vary from the specialty) as it
ought to be made by the Statute, but the Cursitor mistaking, did make the
original only, according to such addition as was specified in the obligation,
omitting his degree of dignity, and the entry of the C^pias alias and plures,
was according to the said Original, but in the Exigent, and Proclamation, and
in the Entry of it, the Desendant was named according to his degree of dignity,
upon a Writ of Error, after judgment doubt was, if this might be amended in
another Court, then where the original was made.

Injuries done to the name and honor of a Nobleman.
IN the second year of Richard 2. in the first Chapter, It was inacted, that
counterfeiters of false news, and of horrible and false lies of Prelates,
Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other Nobles, and great men of the Realm; and also of
the Chancellor, Treasurer, Clerk of the Privy Seal, Steward of the Kings House,
Justices of the one Bench, or of the other, and of other great officers of the
Realm, of things which by the said Prelates, Lords, Nobles, and Officers
aforesaid, were never spoken, touched, nor thought in great slander of the said
Prelates, Lords, Nobles, and Officers, whereby debates, and discords might
arise betwixt the said Lords, and Commons, (which God forbid;) and whereof
great peril and mischief might come to all the Realm, and quick subversion,
and destruction of the said Realm, if due remedy be not provided. It is
straightly defended upon grievous pain, for to eschew the said damages, and
perils, that from henceforth none be so hardy, to find, say, or tell any false
news, lies, or other false reports of Prelates, Lords, and of other Officers
aforesaid; whereof discord, or any slander might arise within the said Realm,
and he that does the same, shall incur, and have the pain ordained thereof by
the Statute of Westminster, in the first Chapter 33. which will, that he be
taken and imprisoned, till he have found him, of whom the word shall be moved.

And further, By another Statute made in 22. Richard 2. cap. 11. It was
moreover enacted, That when the said offender is taken, and imprisoned, and
cannot find him that spoke the words, then he shall be punished by the advice
of the Council. And to the intent that such evil disposed persons, which by
their lewd speeches, and slanderous words or reports, do endeavor, to break,
or disquiet the peace of the Realm, might the sooner be inquired, found out,
and punished, by a Statute made Anno 2. Phil. and Mary. It was further
established, That the Justices of Peace in every, Shire, City, or Town
Corporate, within the limits of their several Commissions, shall have full
power to examine, hear, and determine the causes aforesaid, in the said two
Acts of Edward the first, and Richard the second specified, and to put the said
two Statutes, and every branch in them contained in due execution, that
condign punishment be not deferred from such offenders; and besides, the before
mentioned penalties assigned to be inflicted upon transgressors, by the
aforesaid Statutes, every Nobleman, and great Officer of the Realm, against
whom any scandalous words, false news, or lies be spoken, may prosecute against
the offender, an action, de scandalis magnatum, and recover damages against
him; and in like sort, may every inferior person, for any such like words of
infamy against him, pursue an action upon his cause against the offender, and
recover his damages.

And if any person shall exhibit a Bill into the Starrechamber against a
Nobleman (or other,) and amongst other things, charge him with murder, piracy,
robbery, or other felony, or to be a procurator thereof, or accessory
thereunto, or with any other offense, which is not examinable in the said
Court; the defendant in the said Bill, may prosecute against the complanant
therein, an action upon the cause, and recover his damages, for his Bill was
exhibited of malice by the complainant, to remain of record in the said Court,
to the infamy and slander of the defendant, and not punish him for the said
offenses suggested in the said Bill by a course of Justice, seeing the Court of
Star Chamber has no authority to inquire of, or punish the same offense; but
if the complainant did suggest in his Bill of complainant, any matter against
the defendant, which is examinable in the said Court, then no action upon the
case is maintainable against him by the defendant, therefore though the matter
surmised be merely false, for it is done in course of Justice and sub judice
lis est, whether the matters suggested be true, or false, until they be
proved: And in former ages, speeches tending to the reproach of others, were so
odious, that King Edgar, Le. 4. ordained that his tongue should be cut out,
which did speak any infamous, or slanderous words of another. Dyer. 285. and in
Kelway. 13. Henry 7.27. Cooks 4. part. 14. Book. 2. Richard 3.9.6. In which
Book you may read at large, where the Lord Beauchampe did sue an action upon
the Statute of the 2. Rich. 2. cap. 5. de scandalis magnatum against Sir
Richard Crafts, because he did sue a Writ of forging of false deeds against the
said Lord Beauchampe, and the defendant does justify the said slander by the
use of the said Writ, etc.

And the demurrer was good, and out of the intendment of the Common Laws, or
Statute Laws, concerning slanderers; for no punishment has been at any time
appointed for suits in Law, though the matter be false, and for vexation only,
other then amerciaments, or fine to the King; and therefore the plantiff is
sufficiently discharged against the said Lord Beauchampe, not only for the time
that the suite is depending, but after the action tried, or otherwise ended,
yea, though the Plantiff were nonsuited, or by other means it went against
him; for if actions of revenge upon the event it would terrify, and discharge
many, who have just cause to complain for fear of infinite vexations for the
event and success of suits, and matters in action, is uncertain, Cooks 6.
part. 40. a.

There is another foul puddle that arises from the same corrupt quagmire, and
distilleth out of a heart, likewise infected with malice and envy; but is
divised, and practiced by another mean, then the former, which is by libelling,
secret slandering and defaming of another, for this privy backbiter, does not
by words impeach his adversary in so manifest and turbulent manner, as the
collerick menacer in his fury does, seeming to sit quietly in his Study, he
does more deeply pinch him, and infixeth a more durable wound into his fame and
credit, then the other boisterous fellow does in his body, who in a moment,
threatens to do more then peradventure he after is willing, or dares to do in
an age. The Menacer lays open his Name, and his grief, and stands in the
face of his enemy, and discovers the corrasive of his, and does thereby give
a forewarning to his adversary, to provide for, and defend himself.

Note, That if a man do write unto another scandalous words, and reports,
touching a Nobleman, and this Letter be signed with his Seal, and subscribed
with his name; yet upon this Letter, showed upon evidence, the Nobleman may
recover damages in an action, de scanlis magnatum, whereof you may see two
Presidents in Cromptons Justice of Peace. 85.
But this secret Canker the Libeller, concealeth his name, hides himself in a
corner, and privily stingeth him in fame, reputation, and credit; who then
neither knows from whom, or for what cause he receives his blows, nor yet
has means therein to defend himself; and whether his libelling, secret
slandering, or defaming, be against a public Magistrate, or private Person;
Yet it may tend to the breach of the peace, to the raising of quarrels, and
effusion of blood; But if a man do write any matter of defamation to the party
himself, that is thereby traduced and subscribe, and seal the same without
other publication done by himself Quaere.
and so may be a special impediment, which all good policy endeavors to
maintain; for if it be against a public Magistrate, it is a great scandal,
and offense to the King his chief Magistrates, and the whole Government of the
Realm, to assign such an Officer to rule and govern others, who himself is void
of government, and shall deserve to be impeached with such crimes, as he shall
be taxed with, or shall be imputed unto him by such an infamous Libell; and if
it be but against a private person; yet seeing that a Libell, or other note of
infamy is intended to defame him, to tread his honor and estimation in the
dust, and root out his reputation and credit from the face of the earth, to
make him a scorn to his enemies, and to be derided and despised of his
neighbors; it does greatly kindle the wroth of him, and of such as be of his
kindred and allies, and true friendship, and urge them to revenge; whereupon,
do often times ensue grudges, quarrels, frayes, combats, and manslaughter.
Sometimes the malicious defamer, powers out his venom in writing, by a
scandalous Book, Epigram, or Rhyme, either in Meeter or Prose* Some other times
by songs, scoffs, jests, and taunts, and diverse times by hanging of pictures of
reproach, signs of shame, or tokens of disgrace near the place the party
thereby traduced, does most converse, as the picture of the gallows, pillory,
cucking-stool, horns, or other such like. In which cases, the Law has
provided, that the party delinquent, when he is found out, and discovered,
shall be sharply punished; For he may be either indicted for the same offense,
by the ordinary course of the Common Law, or else a Bill may be exhibited
against him in the Starrechamber, where he shall be punished, according to the
quality of his demerits, by sine, and imprisonment; and if it be an exorbitant
offense, then by pillory, loss of his ears, whipping, etc. Or the party
grieved, may have an action of the case against the offender, and recover his
damages: And in this case it is not material, whether the Libel be true or
false, or the parties scandalized thereby, be living or dead, or be of good
name or evil, for though the party be defamed, and the Libell true be evil,
yet our good Laws be provided to punish him, and such like evil men by due
course of Justice, after his offense is presented, inquired of, tried, and
proved to his face, before lawful Magistrates, thereunto assigned, and he is
not to be carped, accused and condemned in a corner behind his back, by any
other private person, who in trudeth himself without warrant to be a Censurer
of manners, and rather seeks the discredit of the party then, then the
reformation of his faults, for his secret searching into, and sifting into
other men's conditions, diving into their offenses, and divulging them to their
discredits does convince the offender to be a man of a lewd disposition to have
made shipwreck of his conscience, and does brand him, during his life, with the
name of an infamous Libeller, or scandalous backbiter, Fardinando Pulton, Fol.
16. Cooks 5. part. 125.

And to conclude this matter, concerning the wrong done to the name and dignity
of a Nobleman, this may be added, That it is unlawful for any person to usurp
the Arms of another. Cook to the Reader before his third Book, Fol. 8. to A.
Yea, if a Noblemans Coat, Armor, or Sword, or other Gentleman's bearing Arms at
the solemnizing of their Funerals, set up in the Church Chapel or Chancell,
for the honor of the body defunct be taken down by the covetousness of the
incumbent there, pretending them as offerings due to him, or if they be defaced
by any other; such are to be punished grievously as malefactors, and in that
case the action shall not be given to the Widow, though she be Executrix or
Administratix of her husbands goods for such things as serve for the honor of
the party deceased, are not to be accounted inter bona Testatoris, as the goods
of the Testator; but the heirs shall have the action as the defender of his
Ancestors honor, Nam cui injuria ei avervat jus, to whom the wrong is done,
right does belong; but the wrong is offered to the house and blood; and therein
especially to the heir, qui est totius geniturae splendour, of the whole
kindred; and therefore to him attaineth the right of action in the case.

Viscounts.
NExt unto Earls or Counts in order, follows the Vicount, this is an ancient
name of Offiee, but a new title of honor, and by Henry the first brought in,
who conferred that title upon John Lord Beamont.

Barons.
A Among the Nobles and Honorable; Barons have the next place, and the last
of the Rank; It now follows somewhat to speak in general of the dignity and
degree of a Baron. First, the definition or description of a Baron. Secondly,
The Etymology of the name. Thirdly, The antiquity thereof, and the diverse uses
of the name in former ages. Fourthly, The divisions and considerations of the
several kinds of Barons. And lastly, A declaration of the diverse and sundry
privileges allowed by the Laws of this Realm, unto the Barons and Nobility of
the same; wherein the vulgar and common person has no participation.

The Definition or Description of a Baron.
IT is a rule in Law, that definitions in Jure sunt periculosissimae rarium est
enim ur non subverti possunt. And therefore I do not often find any definition
or a description of a Baron delivered by writers. Nevertheless in this our
Commonwealth of England, me thinks that a Baron may be described in a
generalty, answerable to every kind thereof in this manner.

A Baron is a dignity of Nobility and Honor, next under the Vicount above the
Banneret and Valvafor, adorned with the title of Lord, holding with us the same
place, as did the Patricii or Senators amongst the Romans. The Books of Law do
make difference between Dukes, Earls, Ma^quesses, and Vicounts, which are
allowed names of dignity, and the Baron: For they affirm that Baron needs not
to be named Lord or Baron by his Writ; But the Dukes Marquesses, Earls, or
Vicounts ought to be named by their names of dignity, 8. H. 6.10.32. H. 6.3.
Cook 8. parts 53. b. a. part. Pigot, Lambert. l. 4.488. Cambden fol. says,
that our common Lawyert do not allow a Baron to be one of the degrees of the
Nobility: Nevertheless, I do take the Books are to be understood of the Barons
by Tenure, or Barons by Writ only: For the title of a Baron by Patent, is in
his Letters Patents, under the great Seal adorned and named by the style of
Status gradus and dignitas; and therefore as requisite to be named, as such
dignities are a parcel of the Name of the poss^ssor, as well as the Style and
Title of a Duke, Marquess, Earl, and Vicount, etc.

And although there may be conceived this difference last mentioned between the
Baron by Tenure or Writ, and the Baron by Patent; yet they being all Members of
the higher House of the Parliament, they are thereby made equally Noble,
Honorable, and Peers of the Realm as they are Barons only, without any other
distinction that I have observed; and thus much concerning the three degrees of
Barons within this Realm may suffice to be said in general upon this occasion
for the better understanding and direction of the rest to be handled.

The Etymology and Derivation of the Name Baron.
MAny Wits have labored to yield the Etymology and signification of this
word; wherein following their own fantasies, there has been bred much
variation of opinion. As for Etymology of words, I agree with him that says,
That it is Levis and fallax and plerumque ridicula, for sapenumero ubi
proprietas verborum attenditur sensus veritatis amittitur. It may have some
use, and serve a turn in Schools, but it is to light for judgments in Law, and
Seats of Justice, Cook 7. part. l. 27. b. Thomas Aquinas sets down a more
certaln rule in vocibus videndum non tam a quo quam ad quid sumitur, and words
should be taken, sensu currenti, for use and custom is the best expositor of
Laws, and words, quem penes Arbitrium and jus and norma loquendi. In the Lord
Chancellors Speech in the Case of Postnati. fol. 61. And forasmuch as the word
may aptly import men of strength, Bracton as before appears, not unaptly
uses this signification thereof, in these words, Sunt and alii potentes sub
Rege qui dicunter Barons boc est Robur belli.

The Antiquity of the Dignity of Barons, and the sundry uses of the Name.
IT seems that the dignity was more ancient, then the Name, for in the
ancient Constitutions Feedall of the Land, there is no mention made of the name
of Barons, howbeit, the learned Interpreters do understand, that dignity to be
comprehended under those which are there called Valuasores Majores, and
afterward called Capitanii, for of the Valuasores, there were three kinds
Valuasores, Majores, sive Capitanii; which are thought to be the Barons,
Valuasores minores and valuasini or valuasores minimi. The like dignity within
this Realm before the Conquest had those, which of the English Saxons were
called Thanes, whereof read Lambert in his Preambulation of Kent. Fol. 366. And
the Book of Doomsday, remaining in the treasury of the Exchequer.
Nevertheless, the name of the Baron was not much used within this Realm until
the Norman Conquest, and after that the word Baron seems to be frequented in
this Realm in lieu and place of the word Thane among the English Saxons, for as
they in general and large signification, did some time use the same to the
sense and meaning, and to import a Freeman, borne of a free parentage, or such
like; so did the Normans use the word Baron, and therefore called their free
Citizens of their best esteemed Cities, and free Burgesses of their best
esteemed Towns and Borroughes by the name of Barons. And so the Citizens of
London, Barons of London in diverse ancient Monuments, of whom also Bracton
makes mention, Fol. 272. a. Also there are diverse Charters, wherein mention is
made of such like Barons, as the Barons of Warwick in the Record of Doomsday;
and even to our time the free Burgesses of the five privileged Ports are
called Barons of the Cinque Ports. And for that also diverse of the nobility of
Barons, as well spiritual as temporal, did in ancient time sit in the
Exchequer to determine the difficulties and doubts there arising; The Judges of
that Court have been from most ancient time called, and yet are Barons of the
Exchequer.

Moreover, the English Saxons had two kinds of Thanes the like has been
observed; as touching Barons for the Kings and Monarchs of this Realm have had
their immediate Barons being the Peers of the Realm; and in like manner,
certain other of the Nobility, especially Earls, which have had jurisdiction
Palatine, and Earls Marchers, whose Countries have confined upon the coasts of
the enemy; have had under them for their better defense, a kind of Barons. As
namely under the County Palatine of Chester, were these Barons, the Barons of
Halton, Mounthalt, Malebanck, Shipbrooks, Malpase, Massa, Rinderton, Stockport,
etc. The Earldom of Pembrook in Westwales being first erected by Arnulphus
Mountgumory, that conquered part of that Country. And therefore the Earls
thereof, being an Earl Marcher, had also under him his Barons, as appears by
the Parliament Rolls, 18. Ed. 1. It has been therefore a common opinion
received, that every Earldom in times pa^^ had under it ten Barons, and every
Barony ten Knigh^^ Fees holden of him, and that those that had fourtee^ Knights
Fees were usually called, and promoted to the dignity of Baron. Also Lords and
Proprietors of Manors, were in respect of them oftentimes in ancient
remembrance called Barons (but abasiveth) and the Court and their Manor called
thereof Courts Barons, o^ which Glamvile speaks, Fol. 67. l. 8. c. 11.

It rests now for the more explanation of the use o^ the name of Baron, that
we call to remembrance, tha^ which has been before spoken, that the custom of
ou^ Country is, that if a Baron be created an Earl, the elde^ son of the said
Earl in the life of his Father, takes upon him the name and title of the
Barony, although h^ want the Privileges belonging to a Baron.

The tenor and proper signification of the word Baron.
BArons honorable, are of three kinds, by Tenure, by Writ, by Creation; As for
Barons by prescription, which some men have spoken of, they are intended to be
all one with the Barons by tenure, or tho^^ whose Ancestors time out of mind,
have been called to the Parliament by Writ; for otherwise there are hardly such
to be sound as are Barons by prescription only.

BARONS by Tenure.
BArons by tenure are those which do hold any Honor, Castle, or Manor as
the head of their Barony per Baroniam, which is Grand Serjeanty: And these
Barons by tenure are of two sorts; Barons spiritual by tenure, and Barons
temporal by tenure. Of Barons spiritual by tenure sufficient is said before
in the first leaf of this Treatise, whereunto this may be added, That it
appears by all ancient Writers of our Laws, as Britton, Glanvile, Bracton,
and the rest, that the Archbishops and Bishops of the Realm in the ancient
Saxons days, as well during the time that this Realm was divided into diverse
Kingdoms, as also after the uniting of them into one Monarchy, were called to
the Parliament or Assembly of States or wise men, not so much in respect of
their tenure, for in those days all their tenures were by franck almoigne; but
especially for that the laws and counsels of men are then most current and
commendable; and have a more blessed issue and success, when they are grounded
upon the fear of God, the root and beginning of all true wisdom: and
therefore our wise and religious Ancestors called to their general Council,
or Witten Agmore, or Court of Wisdom (as they called it) those chief and
principal persons of the Clergy, which by their place and profession, by their
gravities, learning, and wisdom, might best advise what was the law of Gods
acceptable will and pleasure, that they might frame their humane laws
answerable, or at least no^ contrary and repugnant thereunto.

As touching the temporal Barons by the tenure, mention is made of them in the
Books of the Law, Records, and ancient Monuments of the Realm: these are the
words of Glanvile; Mortuo enim aliquo capitals Bar^ne suo, statim Baroniam in
manusua retinet Rex, donec haeres garantum suum fecerit de relivio, licet
haeres ipse plenam habuerit atatem: Which relief of Barons for the Barony by
tenure was at that time uncertain, and rentable at the pleasure of the King: Of
which also he writes thus. Dicitur autem rationabile relivium alicujus juxta
consuetudinem regni, de feodo unius Militis centum solidos: de socenglo vero,
quantum valet census illiut saccagii per unum annum: De Baronis vero nihil
certum statutum est, quia juxta voluntatem and misericordiam Domini Regis
solent Baronli capit^^es de reliviis suis Domino Regi satisfacere, lib. 9. cap.
4. But such uncertainty was brought to certainty by the statute of Magna Charta
cap. 2. so here we have speech of the Barony Temporal by tenure, and of the
relief due for the same.

In tertio H. 3. there was argued an ancient Prerogative belonging to the
Crown, and usual even from the Conquest unto these times, authentickly
written in these words, and so reported by Fitzherbert: Quod si aliquis Baro
Domini Regis tenent de Rege obiisset, and non haberet haeredes nisi filias, and
primogenitae filiae maritatae sunt in vita Patris, Dominus Rex daret postnatam
siliam, quae remaneret in haereditate patris, alicui milit' suor', cum tota
haereditate Patris sui de qua obiiss^t seisitus, ita quod alia filiae nihil
recuperent versus postnatam filiam in vita sua: Et omnes Reges habuerunt hanc
dignitatem a conquestu.

Also Bracton lib. 5. fol. 351. and fol. 357. does make express mention of
Barons temporal by tenure.

It shall be needless here again to remember the former alleged assertion of
Bracton, that the head of a Barony descending unto daughters should not be
divided by partition, which argues likewise the tenure by Barony. But let us
descend to other authorities, that is to say, to the Bookcase in 48. E. 3. fol.
30. Sir Ralph Everden his case; by which case of law is most evidently proved
that there are Barons by tenure, and in regard of such their tenure ought to b^
summoned to Parliament. And to this purpose you may read a private statute in
the eleventh year of Henry the sixth mentioned also in Cambden concerning the
Earldome of Arundell: and also another statute to the same purpose made 27. H.
6. for the final determination of a controversy between William Earl of
Arundell, and Thomas Earl of Devonshire, for place and pre-eminence in
Parliament.

I would wish that those who deny that there were or are any Barons by tenure,
should consider advisedly the statute of Westminster the 2d. cap. 41. where the
Fees of the Eatle Marshall and Lord Chamberlain are expressed, which are to be
taken by them, upon the homage done of every Baron by tenure, whether the Baron
holds by whole Barony or by less.

But ere I proceed further, there arises a question here to be considered, the
resolution whereof may give great light, and in a manner determine the matter
in hand. The Question therefore is this.

Question.
If a Baron by tenure alien and grant away the Honor, Castle, and Manor
holden by Barony, whether shall such alience or grantee take upon him the state
title and dignity of a Baron or no? and what shall become of such a dignity of
Baronage after such alienation or grant made?

They which do deny that there are any such Baronies by tenure, do use these as
their chief and principal motives and reasons.

First, if there be any Baronies by tenure, then the alience or grantee of such
Honor, Castle, or Manor so holden, must hold by the same tenure that his
feoffor or grantor before held; But that was by Barony; Therefore such alience
or grantee must hold by Barony: And if such grant or alienation be made to
persons base, vulgar, or ignoble, they then should by such tenure be made
noble, which were mavelous absurd and full of inconveniency; for, Non Dominus
domo, sed domus Domino honestatur, see Tho. Mills Peroration fol 3.

Secondly, it is very evident and manifest that many ancient Mannours which in
old time were holden per Baroniam, and were the Head of Baronies, are now in
the tenures of mean Gentlemen, and others, who neither do or may challenge
unto themselves in any respect thereof any Nobility, without the great and high
displeasure of the Kings most excellent Majesty, who is the fountain of all
Nobility within his Dominions.

Thirdly, some ancient Barons there are which have aliened and sold away those
Castles and Mannours, of the which they have and bear the name and dignity of
Baronage, and yet themselves do still retain and lawfully keep their estate,
dignity, and degree of Baron, and have been and usually are (such alienation
notwithstanding) summoned nevertheless to the Parliament, and they do take and
hold their ancient place according.

The Answer.
For the better answer to be made to these objections, being of all others the
most material and of moment used in this behalf, it shall be convenient for
the more easy unfolding the state of this question, to exhibit certain
necessary and requisite propositions; and upon them to draw true and infallible
conclusions, and then to prove them by authority of Law, consent and time, and
manifold presidents: which done, the answer will be easily made (as I
conceive) to every of the foresaid objections.

First therefore, if a Baron by tenure, which holds any Castle, Honor, or
Manor per Baroniam, do alien or give the same, either he does it without any
license obtained from his Majesty so to do, or else by some certain license in
that behalf obtained.

If he do it without, license, then the conclusion is certain by the laws of
this Realm, the Barony, Castle, Honor, and Manor so aliened without license
or consent is forfeited; and the same Honor, Castle, or Manor so holden by
Barony, and so aliened, is to be seized into the Kings hands for the said
forfeiture, and such dignity and estate no longer to be borne and continue, but
to be resumed and extinguished in the Crown, from whence it was derived. Read
hereof in Stamfords Prerogative cap. 7. But nota in Cook 2. part 80. b.

The reason thereof is notable, if we call to remembrance that which was
formerly alleged out of Bracton; That Baronies are the strength of the Realm,
and suffer no division; they suffer also no alienation, without the consent or
license of the sovereign Monarch; for so should the Realm be enfeebled, and
base persons enabled, without desert of virtue or prowess. For where the thing
so aliened is an Honor or head of the Barony, it differs much from the
ordinary tenure in capite, whereof if the Tenaut make alienation without
license, he is only to pay fine by the statute 1. E. 3. cap. 12. whereof also
before the making of the statute there was diversity of opinion at the Common
Law after the statute of Magna Charta. But let me cite some authorities for the
proof of these allegations. Glanvile, the most ancient Writer of the Laws of
this Realm now extant, has these words: Notandum autem, quod nec Episcopus,
nec Abbas, quia little Baroniae sunt de eleemosyna Rege and Antecessoris ejus,
non possunt de Dominicis suis aliquan partem dare ad remanentiam, sine assensu
and confirmatione Domini Regis, lib. 7. cap. 1. in fine, and statut. Westminster cap.
42.

In Edward the thirds time certain land, being parcel o^ the Barony of
Brember, was aliened by William de Bruise the Baron thereof, without license of
the King; and in the argument of a cause concerning the same, Green one of the
Judges delivers this for law, That parcel of a Barony or Earldome held of
the King in chief, cannot be aliened or dismembered without his license; and if
it be, it shall be seized into the Kings hands as forfeit, and the King shall
be seized thereof in his own right again.

In 46. E. 3. it was found by office that William Bishop of Chester had leased
unto one John Peston for his life a Manor, which was parcel of the Manor
of the said Bishopric, without license; and it was resolved by the Judges,
and other of the Kings Council, that the same was forfeit; but by mediation of
the said Council the Bishop submitted himself to the King, and made a fine;
and several Scire facias issued out against them that had received the maine
profits, to answer unto the King thereof. And thus much concerning alienation
of Baronies without license.

But on the other part, if a Baron by tenure which holds any Honor, Castle,
or Manor by Barony, do grant or alien the same by license, I must again
distinguish: For either such alienation is made for the continuance of his
Barony, Honors, Lands and Tenements, in his own name, blood, issue male: Or
else the same alienation is made for money, or other recompense, or otherwise,
to a mere stranger: and hereof ensues this second conclusion or assertion.

That if such alienation be made for the continuance of the Barony in his name
and blood, or issue male (as many have made the like) then have the issue male
together with the Barony, be it Castle, Honor, or Manor so holden, held also
and lawfully enjoyed the name, style, title, and dignity of a Baron; and
thereof have the heirs general, or next heirs female been excluded and
debarred. And for the proof of this assertion there may manifold presidents be
produced, whereof certain have happened almost in every age for 300. years
space; namely, so long in effect as there have bin observations thereof: of
which some certain do ensue.

William de Ferrariis, Comes Derby, obiit Anno 30. H. 3. Robertus de Ferrariis
Comes Derby. Johannes de Ferariis, Dom. De Charley.

Margaretae Comitissa Derby, and Domina de Grooby. Will. de Perrar. Dom. de
Grooby ex dono Matris. William de Ferrariis, Dominus de Grooby.


It appears by an office found after the death of William de Ferrariis Lord
of Grooby 23. H. 6. that Margaret Lady of Grooby gave to William Ferrars her
second son, and to the heirs of his body, the Manor of Grooby, etc. By
virtue of which gift, the said William Ferrars and his heirs were ever after
Barons of Grooby.

Robert Walleron Baron of Kilpeck died in 1. Ed. 1. without heirs of his body;
and Robert Walleron, son of William, brother of the said Robert, was his next
heir; yet notwithstanding the said Robert dying gave to Allen Plagenet son
of ^^^lice his sister, the Castle, Manor, and Lordship of Kilpeck, with the
appurtenances, To have unto the said Allen, and to the heirs of his body
coming, as appears by his office, etc. By virtue of which gift the said
Allen was Baron of Kilpeck, and summoned among other Barons to the Parliament:
and he died 27. E. 1.

Walleron Baron of Kilpecke. Robert Walleron Baron of Kilpee obiit sine exitu,
5. E. 1. William Walleron. Robert Walleron the next heir. William Deyncourt
Baron of Blaxronry by reason of the entaile, obiit 38. E. 3. William Deyncourt
ante patrem. William Deyncourt Baron of Blackney.

John Deincourt. John Deincourt.

Alice married to Plagenet. Allen Plagenet Baron of Kilpecke, coron. dono.



Edmond Deynecourt Baron of Blasteny, obiit An. 20. E. 2. Edmond Deyncourt.
Isabel his next heir.


The King to all Christian people sends greeting, etc Know ye that whereas
lately, for that our well-beloved and faithful subject Edmond Deyncourt
pondered and considered that both his Surname and also his Arms after his
death in the person of Isabell daughter of Edmond Deyncourt his heir apparent,
should be blotted out of memory, most earnestly he desired that his Surname and
Arms after his death for ever might be had in remembrance: To whose request,
for the worthy service as well to our father Edward late King of England, as
also to our self, by our Letters Patents do grant and give license for us and
our heirs, so much as in us lies, to the said Edmond, to dispose and give all
his Manours, Lands, Tenements, and Knights fees, with their appurtenances and
Advowsons of Churches, Abbeys, and Priories, and Hospitalls, which he holds
of us in chief, to whom he pleases, To have and to hold to him and his
heirs, for us and our heirs, by the service thereof for ever.

By which Grant the said Edmond gave all his Lands and Tenements to one William
son of John Deyncourt, and to his heirs of his body coming: And the said
Edmond dyed the last year of Edward the second, and the said William in the
time of Edward the third was summoned among other Barons to the Parliament, by
virtue of the same gift, until his death, which was Anno 3. E. 3.

It appears by diverse offices in the time of King Edward the third, that John
Handlow in the right of Maud his wife was seized of the Manor of Holgate,
Acton Burnell, etc. for term of her life, remainder to Nicolas Handlow alias
Burnell, son to the said Maud and John by a fine in the Court levied, and
that John Lovell was next heir of the said Maud, and her firstborn son by
her first husband: and afterward the said Nicolas was summoned among other
Lords to the Parliament, by reason of the fine aforesaid, and not the said John
Lovel, who was next heir.

Edward Burnell Baron of Holgate. Philip Burnell Baron of Holgate. Maud Burnell
heir to her brother. John Lovell the first husband. John Lord Lovell. John
Lord Lovell.

John Handlow second husband Nicolas Handlow Baron of Holgate. Hugh Handlow,
alias Burnell, Baron of Holgate.




Thomas de Beauchamp the elder Earl of Warwick, by a fine levied 18. E. 3.
entailed the Manor and Castle of Warwick, with diverse other possessions, to
himself for term of his life, the remainder whereof to Guy his eldest son,
and to the heirs males of his body issuing; for want of such heirs the
remainder to come to Thomas Beauchamp, brother to the foresaid Guy, and to his
heirs males of his body issuing, etc. And afterward the said Guy died without
heirs male of his body, leaving two daughters and heirs living: afterward the
said Earl dyed, and the said Thomas the son entered into the Castle and
Manor aforesaid, with other the premises, and was Earl of Warwick by reason
of the entaile aforesaid, notwithstanding that Katharine, daughter of Guy, and
next heir to the said Thomas the elder, was living 30. years after his death.

Thomas Beauchampe Earl of Warwick. Guy de Beauchampe first son, obiit ante
patrem, 30. E. 3. Katharine lived in 21. R. 2. Elizabeth.

Tho. de Beauchampe Earl of Warwick, by reason of the entail, obiit anno 1.
H. 4. Rich. Beauchamp Earl of Warwick obiit 17. H. 6.
William Beauchampde Beauchamp L. of Aberganey obiit 12. H. 4. Richard de
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, obiit 9. H 5.


Richard Earl of Arundell, by a fine, 21. E. 3. entailed the Castle, Town,
and Manor of Arundell, with other Lands, to him, and to his heirs Males,
begotten of the body of Ellenor his wife. By virtue of which entaile John Lord
Matrovers, Earl of Arundell, after the decease of Thomas then Earl, which
died without heir Male, although the sisters of the said Thomas possessed
diverse Lands and honors, or the which the said Thomas died seized in Fee
simple, war Earl of Arundell.

Richard Earl of Arundell Richard Earl of Arundell, obiit anno 21. R. 2.
Thomas Earl of Arundell obiit anno 3. H. 5. Elizabeth married to Tho. Mowbray,
Duke Norfolk. Married to Lewthall. Jane Lady of Abergany.


John Arundell, Knight, Lord Matrovers. John Arund. Lord Matrovers, obiit, 6.
H. 4. Io. Arund. L. Matrovers, obiit 9. H. 5. Io. E. of Arun. by reason of the
entail.




Thomas Lord Barkley was seized in his demesne as of fee of the Castle of
Barkley, and Manor, etc. and a fine levied in the Kings Court 23 E. 3. of the
aforesaid Castle, Manor, etc. to him for term of his life, remainder to
Morris his son, and to the heirs males of his body issuing, with other
remainders as aforesaid: the which said Morris had issue Thomas Lord Barkley,
and James Barkley Knight; which James dyed in the life of his brother, leaving
James his son and heir living. After, the said Thomas Lord Barkley died Anno
5. H. 5. leaving Elizabeth his daughter and heir married to Richard Earl of
Warwick; after whose death James his Nephew on the brothers side entered into
the Lands, Castles, and rem' aforesaid, by virtue of the entaile, and was
summoned among the Barons to the Parliament, as Baron of Barkley 9. H. 5. which
Elizabeth died in 1. H. 6.

Tho. Lord Barkley. Morris Lo Barkley. Tho. Lord Barkley. Eliz. married to
Rich Earl of Warwick.
Sir Ia. Barkley died before his brother James Lo. Barkley by reason of the
entaile.



Thomas Lord Delaware died seized in his demesne as of fee tail, to himself
and to the heirs males of his body issuing, by reason of a fine levied in the
time of his ancestors of the Barony Delaware, with diverse other lands in other
counties, and died 5 H. 6. without heirs of his body; and Reignold West Knight
of the half blood was next heir, by reason of the entaile aforesaid, and was
summoned to the Parliament, by the name of Reignold Lord Delaware Knight,
although John Griffith was heir general of the aforesaid Thomas Delaware,
being of the whole blood, as appears by the genealogy ensuing.

John Lord Delaware, son of Roger. John Lord Delaware Elisabeth daughter to
Adam L. Wels. John Lord Delaware died without issue. Thomas Lord Delaware died
without issue.
Roger Lord Delaware. Elisabeth daughter to the Lord Mowbray his second wife.
John Griffin heir general to the Lord Delaware. Sir Reignold West Lord
Delaware by the entail.




Katharine married to Nicolas Latimer. Katharine married to Griffin. Johan
married to Tho West Knight.


John de Vere, Earl of Oxford, seized in his demesne, as of Fee tail to him
and his heirs Males of his body, issuing of the honor and county of Oxford,
with diverse other Lands, Anno 18. H. 8. died without heirs of his body, and
his three sisters were his next heirs general, but John de Vere his next
heir Male, as appears, was Earl of Oxford, by reason of the said entaile,
and none of the three sisters obtained Dignity.

Richard de Vere Earl of Oxford, died 4. H. 5. John de Vere Earl of Oxford,
died 1. E. 4. John de Vere Earl of Oxford died without issue, 4. H. 8. George
de Vere Knight. John de Vere Earl of Oxfo. died without issue, 18. H. 8. Eliz.
married to Sir Antho. Wingfield Knight. Vrsula married to Edm. Knightley Esquire.
Dorothy married to Nevill.

Sir Robert de Vere Knight. John de Vere. John de Vere John de Vere Earl of
Oxford, by virtue of the entaile.



William Lord Paget of Bewdesert was seized in his demesne as of fee, of the
Baronies of Langden and Hawood, and of, and in the Mannours of Bewdesert,
Landen, etc. And being so seized, by fine quinto Mariae entailed the Baronies
and Mannours aforesaid to him and his heirs males of his body issuing: And
afterward Anno 5. Eliz. died, leaving Henry his son next heir male. Which
Henry entered into the Baronies and land aforesaid, by virtue of the foresaid
fine, and died thereof seized 11. Eliz. leaving Elizabeth his only daughter
and heir. After whose death Thomas Paget, brother and heir male of the said
Henry, entered into the Baronies and Mannours aforesaid, and was summoned to the
Parliament by virtue of the aforesaid fine.

William Lord Paget of Bewdesert deed anno 5. Eliz. Henry Lord Paget died An.
11. Eliz. Elizabeth his daughter and heir.
Thomas Lord Paget, by force of the entailes, after the death of his brother

Robert Lord Ogle entered into the Barony of Bothal and Ogle, with diverse other
Manors and Lands in the County of Northumberland, by conveiance; which was to
himself for term of his life, the remainder to the heirs males of his body
begotten; and he took to his wife Dorothy Witherington, by whom he had issue
Robert Ogle his eldest son, and Margery his daughter married Gregory Ogle of
Chippington: And the said Robert the father, after the death of the said
Dorothy his wife, took to his second wife Ioane Ratcliffe, by whom he had issue
Cutbert his second son; and after died. After whose death Robert the son
was Lord Ogle, from whom the same descended to Cutbert, being brother of the
half blood, by virtue of the said entaile, and not to the said Margery, nor
unto her heirs, being of the whole blood unto the said Robert the son.

Robert Ogle Lord Ogle. Dorothy daughter of Henry Withrington first wife.
Robert Ogle L. Ogle died without issue. Margery married to Ogle of Chippington.
Cutbert Ogle of Chippington.
Cutbert Ogle L. Ogle died. Margery Ogle married Robert Witherington. Thomas
Ogle.
Joan the daughter of Cuthbort Ratcliff Kni. the second wife.

Moreover, concerning the second objection, it is very true that many ancient
Mannours, which were anciently holden by Barony, as the head or parcel of a
Barony, are now in the hands of Gentlemen mean and un-noble by blood, who
neither do nor may claim any Nobility or honor thereby. But the reason that
some former gifts made by the Kings Majesty's progenitors, the supreme
Sovereigns of this Realm, to such as they honored, in augmentation and
support of their honor, and by honorable services, should thus come to the
hands of mean pers^nages, are twofold.

First, for that such Mannours have been aliened by license unto such persons
before spoken, whom such possessions alone cannot make noble.

Secondly, (and that was usually such Mannours as were holden by Barony) have
upon diverse encheasons and occasions come to the Crown, by way of revertor, or
eschete, or forfeit, by means whereof the ancient tenures derived from the
Crown (by reason of those lands so coming again to the Crown) were extinct,
and after the said lands were given or conveyed to others, reserving other
services than those which at the first were due for the same; so that it was no
marvel to see that some Mannours anciently holden by Barony, or other
honorable service should now be holden in soccage, or by other trivial or
mean tenure.

As to that which was thirdly objected, that some ancient Barons there are
which have aliened and sold away those Castle and Mannours, of the which they
have and do bear the name and dignity; and yet nevertheless themselves do
still retain and keep lawfully their estate, dignity and degree of a Baron,
and have been and are called to the Parliament, such alienation
notwithstanding. To this I answer, That it is true, but it proves nothing
against the former resolution: And therefore for better satisfaction of this
observation, it is to be considered, that such Barons either be originally
Barons by writ, or Barons by tenure. Barons by writ (in this respect now in
hand) are of two kinds; For either in such writ, whereby they or their
Ancestors were at first summoned, they were named only by their own names; or
else there was addition given them of the principal place of their abode;
which was done either for distinction sake, to sever them from some honorable
person of the same surname; or else to give them such honorable title by
addition of the place, which place notwithstanding was not holden by Barony:
And therefore if such a Baron do alien away that place which anciently was his
seat, he may nevertheless retain his honorable title, in respect had of such
a place.

But if a Baron by tenure do alien away the honourarable Castle, or Manor
holden by Barony, unto a mean person, not capable of honor, and that by
sufficient license so to do, and after the alienour which made such alienation
be called by writ to the Parliament, under the title, or as Baron of such
Honor, Castle, or Manor so aliened, he is not any more a Baron by tenure in
respect of that place, for that he has aliened that away which he held by
Barony; but thenceforth, after such writ of summons, he is become a Baron by
writ, and may retain the name of Baron by title of the place, as Baron by
writ, such alienation notwithstanding; forasmuch as the writ directed at the
pleasure of the Prince, does give unto him that addition of name and dignity.
And thus much touching the resolution of the said question, and satisfaction of
the said objections, and of Barons by tenure.

BARONS by writ, which is the second kind of Barons mentioned in the former
Divisions of BARONS.
A Baron by writ is he, unto whom a writ of summons (in the name of the King)
is directed, to come to the Parliament, appoin^ed at a certain time and place
to be holden; and there, with his Highness, the Prelates, Nobility, and
Peers, to treat and advise touching the weighty affairs of the Realm: The
form of which writ is much to the effect of the writ before mentioned in the
title of Earl; which kind of writ is as well directed to the Barons by tenure,
as Barons by creation, Patent, or otherwise. But those which are not Barons by
tenure, nor by Patent, and have only such writs, are therefore called Barons
by writ; and upon receipt of such writ, and place taken accordingly in
Parliament, ought to enjoy the name, dignity, and honor of a Baron.

Touching the antiquity of Barons by writ only, and their first institution, I
find little or no mention before the time of H. 3. And therefore I conceive
that either the first of all, or at least that the first frequent use of such
Barons was had and devised 49. H. 3. in case of necessity, and upon a
lamentable occasion. For in the discord between the King and his Nobility, in
those troublesome wars, seditions, and rebellions, which they moved against
the said King, there were many cruel battles fought, to the great effusion of
English blood: of which rebellions Simon Earl of Leicester was ringleader, for
the defense of liberties (as they pretended) granted by Magna Charta, and the
Charter of the Forest, which are even to this day the principal grounds of
the positive Laws, and are the most ancient statutes in use within this
Realm, and for defense of other constitutions and ordinances then made at
Oxford: And after diverse fields fought by them at Northampton, Rochester,
Lewis, and other places; last of all was the catastrophe of that tragedy
finished at Evesham, where the said Earl of Leicester was slain, the King had
the victory, and the rebellious Barons had the overthrow; whereupon presently
ensued the Parliament holden at Winchester, and after at Westminster, where
such of the Barons as were slain in the field against the King, and such
others of them also as were taken captive, and were fled, were to be attainted
and disinherited of their livings: wherefore for as much as the number of
Barons who had continued faithful unto the King, was small. (who were the
Peers upon whose trial then these things were to be accomplished) it was
holden a necessary policy to supply the number of the diminished Barons, and to
fill up their rooms in Parliament with other wise and fit men, of the best
account and livelihood, upon summons by writ: By reason whereof at those
Parliaments were called the Abbots and Priors of the Realm, as well those that
held not by Barony, as others: and diverse others of the most worthy of the
Laity not holding by Barony: And these by means thereof were thenceforth Barons
by writ. But certain of the said Abbots and Priors, which held not by Barony,
and thought it a burden to their houses, got themselves upon petition
afterward to be exempt, as by diverse records thereof remaining in the Chancery
may appear.

This moreover is to be noted concerning the writ of summons to the Parliament,
that these writs in form of their direction are diverse. Some directed by
special name of Barons: as, Rex, etc. Edmundo Baroni de Staffort; Johanni
Baroni de Greystock: Johanni Baroni Dudley. Some others by the name of the
party, with addition of the place; as, Johanni Stronning de Knocking Militi;
Edmundo Gray de Ruthin Militi; Edvardo Gray de Grooby Militi; Johanni le Scroop
de Masham Militi; Willihelmo Zouch de Harrington Militi; naming the chief
Castle or Manor of such Baron, which always stands afterward for the head
place of the Barony: wherefore the said Baron and his heirs shall be surnamed
and called, and shall continue that name of place, although he do alien away
the same, as before is said. Some others are named in this manner, with the
title of Lord; as, Johanni Beauchamp Domino Clinton, Henrico Piercy Domino de
Poynings. To some others the said writ is directed only by their name, without
any addition of place or dignity; as, Willihelmo de Lovell Militi, Tho de
Scales Militi, Willihelmo Devereux Militi. See Tho. Mills Nobility Political
and Civil.

But the nature, quality, and condition of these Barons by writ is aptly
discovered by the debate of a question often moved among men, and spoken of
concerning the descent and continuance of a Barony by writ: which question for
the more orderly disposition thereof, I do divide into these articles or
points.

Question.
First, whether a Barony by writ may descend from the Ancestor to the heir, or
not?

Secondly, admit such a Barony may descend, then whether it do descend to the
heir female or not, if there be heirs male, though not so near as the
females.

Thirdly, admit it do descend to the heirs females, then whether may the
husband of such heir female take upon him the name, style, and dignity of such
Barony in jure uxoris, or not?

As touching the first question, it shall be requisite for the more
satisfaction of all men to allege such principal reasons as are wont to be
produced on both parts.

Those therefore that maintain the negative part, denying that such Barony
should descend, do strengthen themselves with these or the like arguments, viz.

Nobility and honor, which are given in respect of wisdom, counsel, and
advice, being gifts of God to the person of a man, cannot extend to any other
person, or descend from one man to another: for it is a rule of the law of
reason, Quod privilegium personale personam sequitur, and extinguitur ad
personam: But such is the dignity of a Baron by writ: Therefore it is reason
that it should not descend from the Ancestor to the heir.

Again, if the calling to Parliament by writ be the efficient isntrumental
cause of such Nobility to the Ancestor, the not calling of the heir is the
loss of that Nobility; for if the heir have defects of nature in him, as
Idiocy, Frenzy, Leprosy, and such like, whereby he is unfit for counsel and
conversation, by what reason should he enjoy that dignity whereof he is either
unworthy, or incapable: for the effect has no place where the cause does
fail. And hereof they do conclude that such dignities of Baronies by writ
should not descend.

Of the contrary part the affirmative part is proved thus, viz. Honor which is
given in respect of the wisdom and virtue of him upon whom it was first
bestowed, is not only a due recompense for himself while he lives, but also
a memorable reward thereof in his Posterity. The words of Cicero to this effect
are most excellent, Hominis boni semper Nobilitati favemus, and quia utile est
reip. esse and homines dignos majoribus suis, and quia valere debet apud nos
claros hujusmodi senes fuisse, ne reip. moriretur memoria etiam mortuor, honor.
Therefore this kind of honor is patrimoniall and hereditary, for things which
are once granted to a man by the King for his honor, are not again to be
returned, either to his loss and discharge, or to his heirs.

Secondly, if the infamy of the Ancestor be a blot to the Posterity, as
affirms the wise man, The children complain of an ungodly father, because
they are reproved for his sake: And for that also the Law of the Realm does
corrupt the blood of the Posterity by and upon the offense of Ancestor, reason
would also that the honor due to the Ancestour should be likewise honor to
the posterity: for contraries do carry also their contrary reasons.

For the determination whereof it is to be noted, that diversity of reason has
bred diversity of opinion.

Some men there are that think that the dignity of a Baron by writ is not
descendable from the Ancestor to the heir, unless the heir be likewise so
called by writ to the Parliament, and that then it becomes an inheritance,
and not before.

But this objection is repugnant to the nature of a descent, which (for the
most part) does carry the patrimony descendable by act in law, presently upon
the death of the Ancestor unto the heir, or not at all. Wherefore the custom
of our country, and manifold presidents do prove, that this kind of Barony
does descend from the Ancestors to the heir, and there needs not any words of
heirs in the writ of summons. Only one president there is in a special writ,
sometimes directed to Sir Henry Bromsted in 27. H. 6. wherein he was styled
Lord Veysey; wherein there are these words inserted, Volumus tamen vos and
haeredes vestros masculos de corpore vestro legitime procreatos excuntes,
Barons de Veysey existere, which is to be read in Co. 7. part. 33. b.

Wherefore as it is true, that where the heir of any such Baron by writ is
called to the Parliament, that his descent of honor is thereby established and
approved by the gracious judgment of our sacred Sovereign; so it is also true
that if it shall stand with his Highness pleasure that such heir shall not be
summoned at all, (for none can come to so high a Council unless he be called)
then that Nobility is much empaired, and in a manner extinguished, in the
censure of all men; for that it had none other original but by writ of
summons, from the which in the judgment of the supreme sovereign he is excluded.

As to the second principal point, whether the Barony by writ may descend to
the heirs females, it shall not be amiss likewise to view the reasons of
either part, and by conflict of argument the truth may the better be discerned.

Those that maintain the affirmative part do reason after this manner: In
reason the sex of the heir female ought no more to bar her of the dignity,
than the nonage of the heir male ought to bar him, although during his nonage
he be unable to do the service; but as the service of the one is forborne for a
time, so the sex of the other may at all times be supplied by the maturity and
sufficiency of her husband.

Offices of honor which do much import the public weal, being passed by
inheritance, do descend to the heir female, if there be no nearer heir male.
As the office of the high Constableship of England, which descended to the
daughters of Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, a memorial whereof
is in Dyer 285. but more at large in Keilway 6. H. 8.

Also the office of Lord-Steward descended to Blanch daughter to H. Earl of
Lancaster: the like may be said of the office of Earl Marshall, which
descended by an heir female unto the house of Norfolk; all which offices are
unfit to be exercised by a woman, as it is unfit for a woman to be summoned to
the Parliament as a Baroness by writ. And many noble houses in England do
support the dignity of Baronage unto them descended by women.

They which stand on the negative part of this controversy, do encounter their
adversaries on this manner, viz. The writ of summons to the Parliament, whereby
the Baron by writ has his original, is to call that honorable and worthy
person so summoned to be one of the number of that right high and honorable
Assembly, and to be a Judge to sit, hear, and determine life and member, plea
and right of land, if there shall come occasion; likewise to give counsel and
advice in the most weighty affairs of the Realm. But these things are
convenient for the quality of men, unfitting and altogether unbeseeming the
sex of women: Ergo, having respect unto the final purpose of such writs, such
inheritances should only descend unto the heir male, and not unto the heir
female.

Secondly, if it shall be answered, that although the heir female to whom such
inheritance is descended, be unfit in her own person for the accomplishing of
these things, yet she may marry with one sufficiently able, for her, and in her
behalf, to execute the same: this answer will neither satisfy nor salve the
inconveniences. For admit that such heir female were at full age at the death
of her Ancestor, unmarried, it does lie in her own choice who shall be her
husband; so shall the pleasure of the Sovereign in the choice of his Council,
in the great causes of the Realm, be subject to the will of his subject in the
choice of her husband, which were altogether inconvenient.

Thirdly, if such husband shall be called in the right of his wife, the writ
should make some mention hereof: for otherwise it may well be taken that the
husband was chosen in his own person, and in behalf of himself, and not in
regard of his wife, or such pretended dignity descended unto him: But there was
never such writ of summons seen wherein the wife was mentioned; and if the
husband of such wife have been called to the Parliament, which is always by
generally writ, not mentioning his wife, he is now made thereby a Baron of
himself, and in his own right, by that writ.

Having thus heard both sides speak, place does now require to interpose
opinion to compound this controversy.

This question or point is somewhat perplexed, by means of difficult
presidents: for first, it is observed that some presidents do prove that
Baronies by writs have descended unto heirs females, whose husbands have been
called to the Parliament, whether in regard of themselves, or in regard of
their wives it matten not. But sure it is, that the marriage of such Ladies
gave them occasion so to be summoned; and such husbands and their posterity
have and do lawfully bear the same name of dignity, which the Ancestors of
such wife did before rightfully bear: For by this controversy there is no
purpose to call the right of such noble houses into question. Howbeit,
secondly, this is to be observed out of the presidents, and to be acknowledged
of every dutiful subject, that the Kings Majesty is nevertheless at liberty
to call to the high Council of Parliament, whom his Highness shall in his
Princely wisdom think most meet: which his Majesty's Progenitors have in former
ages observed.

And therefore whereas Radulph Lord Cromwell being a Baron by writ died without
issue, having two sisters and coheirs; Eliz. the eldest married to Sir Tho.
Nevill Knight, and Joan the younger married Sir Hunt Bourcher, he who had
married the younger sister was called to the Parliament as L. Cromwell, and not
the said Sir Tho. Nevill, who had married the elder sister. 3. It is to be
observed, that if a Baron by writ die without heir male, having his daughter,
sister, or other collateral heir male, that does or can challenge the lands
of the said Baron deceased, by any ancient entaile or otherwise, the title of
such heir female has bin heretofore allowed as by the honorable opinions and
relations of the right honorable the late Commissioners in the office of Earl
Marshall, signified unto the late Queen, upon the Petition of the sister and
heir of Gregory, late Lord Dacres deceased, may appear.

Moreover, in the same Pedigree of the said Lord Dacres it is expressed, that
Thomas, sometimes Lord Dacres, had issue Thomas his eldest son, Ralph his
second son, and Humphrey his third son. Thomas the eldest, dyed in the life
time of his Father, having Issue Joan his daughter and heir, who was married
unto Sir Richard Fines Knight. And after Thomas Lord Dacres, her Grandfather,
and Father unto the said Sir Ralph and Humphrey dyed. After whose death, Henry
6. by his Letters Parents, bearing date at Westminster, 7. Novem. Anno 7.
regni, reciting the said Pedigree, and Marriage, does by his Letter a Pattents
accept, declare, and repute the said Richard Fines to be Lord Dacres, and one
of the Barons of his Realm. But afterward in the time of Edw: 4. the said
Humphrey Dacres after the attaindor of the said Ralph, and himself by an Act
of Parliament, which was in 1. Ed. 4. and after the death of the said Ralph,
and after the reversall of the same Act, by another Act, 12. Edw. 4. the said
Humphrey made challenge unto the said Barony, and to diverse Lands of the said
Thomas his Father; whereupon both parties after their title had been considered
in Parliament, submitted themselves unto the Arbitrament of King Edw. 4. and
entered into Bond each to other for the performance thereof. Whereupon the said
King in his award under his Privy seal, bearing date at Westminster, 8.
April. Anno regni 13. did award, that the said Rich: Fines in the right of Joan
his wife, and the Heirs of his body lawfully begotten, should be reputed, had,
named and called, Lord Dacres, and that the said Richard Fines, and the Heirs
of his body by the said Ioane begotten, should keep, have, and use the same
state and place in every Parliament, as the said Thomas Dacres Knight, late
Lord Dacres had used, and kept, etc. that the heirs of the body of the said
Thomas Dacres Knight, late Lord Dacres, lawfully begotten, should have and hold
to them and their Heirs, the Manor of Holbech, And furthermore the said King
did award on the other part, that the said Humphrey Dacres Knight, and the
Heirs males of the said Thomas late Lord Dacres, should be reputed, had,
named, and called the L. Dacres of Gillesland: And that he and the heirs males
of the said Thomas then late Lord Dacres, should have use, and keep the place
in Parliament next adjoining beneath the said place, which the said Rich: Fines
Knight, Lord Dacres then had and occupied, and that the heirs of the body of
the said Joan his wife should have and occupy. And that the Heirs males of
the said Thomas Dacres, late L. Dacres should have to them and to the heirs
males of their bodies begotten, the Manor of Jothington, etc. And so note that
the name of the ancient Barony, namely Gilestand, remained unto the Heir male,
unto whom the land was entailed. Moreover, this is specially observed, if any
Baron by writ do die, having none other issue then Female, and that by some
special entail or other assurance there be an heir male which does enjoy all,
or a great part of the lands, possessions, and inheritances of such Barons
deceased, the Kings of this Realm have used to call to the Parliament by writ
as Baron such heir male, omitting the Husband or issue male of such heir
female, and this also appears by a notable controversy in the time of Henry
7. between Sir Robert Willoughby Lord Brook, and Richard Lord Latimer, for
the Barony of Latimer which in effect was: The said Lord Brook did challenge
the Barony of Latimer, as cosen and Heir to Elizabeth his great grandmother
who was sister and heir to John Nevill, Lord Latimer, who died without issue
and hereupon exhibited a Petition to Henry 7. in Parliament, whereto Richard
then Lord Latimer was called to answer, because he then enjoyed the said title
and dignity; The said Richard Lord Latimer, by his answer did show that it was
true that after the death of the said John Nevill, Lord Latimer dying without
issue, the said Elizabeth was the sister and next heir, and married unto Sir
Thomas Willlonghby Knight, second son of the Lord Willoughby, but Henry 6. for
that the said John Nevill was dead without issue, and that the next heir was
female, did therefore call to the Parliament, George Nevill Knight second son
of Ralph Earl of Westmerland to be Lord Latimer, as Cozen and next heir male
of the said John Nevil Lord Latimer, which George was grandfather of the said
Richard Lord Latimer, namely Father of Henry Lord Latimer, Father of the said
Richard, In debate of which cause, the question now in hand whether a Barony by
writ may descend unto the heirea semales, was advisedly considered of by the
said King and his Nobility in Parliament, and in the end adjudged with the said
Richard Lord Latimer: which President does afford us two Judgments in this
point, one in the time of Hen. 6. when the writ was directed to the said Sir
George Nevill, whereby he was summoned as Lord Latimer to the Parliament, and
as heir Male, and not the said Sir Thomas Willoughby Knight, husband of the
said Eliza. heir male: And the second judgment was given in the time of Henry
7. whereby the Barony was adjudged unto the said Richard Lord Latimer coming
of the special heir male, against the said Lord Brook descended of the
general heir male.

But here the President before remembered of the Barony of Dacres may be
objected to encounter this confusion: For there was an heir female martied
unto Sir Richard Fines who by the declaration of Hen. 6. was Baron of Dacres in
the right of his wife, and there was also Ralph and Humfrey the heirs males,
before whom the heir female was preferred by the censure of Henry 6. and
Edward 4.

This objection is easily answered. For although Hen. 6. through the Princely
favor which he bare unto Sir Richard Fines had declared him to be Lord
Dacres in the right of his wife, yet notwithstanding did Ralph Dacres being
heir male unto the then Lord Dacres deceased, bear also the name of (...)
Dacres, and by that name was attainted in Parliament. Wherefore the reason why
the heir male could not be regarded was the said attainder of the said Ralph
and Humfrey his brother, and therefore when Humphrey 12. Edw. 4. labored to
have the said attainder reversed, he submitted himself unto the Arbitrament of
the King, who to satisfy both Competitors, because both had well deserved of
him, after he had admitted them to his favor he allowed the one to be Lord
Dacres, the other to be Lord Dacres of Gillesland; and thus much concerning the
second point, whether a Barony by writ may descend unto the heir female or not.

As concerning the third point, admitting such descent to be to the heir
female, when there is no heir male at all that may claim the same, for then
does this question take place, whether the husband of such heir female shall
enjoy the dignity in the right of his wife or no; wherein we are to rest upon
a resolution had and given in this special question which was in this manner.

In the time of Hen. 8. when Mr. Winbie took upon him the style of Lord
Talboys in the right of his wife, having none issue by her, the said King
assisted both by Civil and Temporal Lawyers gave sentence, that no husband of
Baroness in her right should use the style and dignity until he had by her a
Child, whereby he should become Tenant by the courtesy unto her inheritance.

The special reasons that occasioned this sentence were two: First it should
be inconvenient for her husband this day to be a Baron and Peer of the
Realm, and to morrow by the death of his wife so become none, and that without
the death of the party.

Secondly, if he had issue by his wife and were in^^taled to be Tenant, by the
courtesy of England of the wives land; if he shall not also bear the style and
dignity of her Barony, then should his son after the death of his mother
dying in the life time of his father be Baron and Lord without land, for so the
Father should have the land as Tenant by the courtesy, and the son the
Lordship without Land. And thus much said concerning the nature, quality, and
estate of a Baron by writ, and for resolution of the several points and
Articles of the question proposed may suffice.

Barons by Batent, which is the third kind of Barons, mentioned in the former
division of Barons.
THere is also a fourth means of creation by act of Parliament, but the first
a mentiond, and this by Patent are most for the honor of the King, for thereby
the donation does proceed from his highness only, as from the fountain of all
honor and dignity, but when the creation is by Parliament, every one may be
said donator, Cooks 8. part. 19.

A Baron by creation, by reason of Letters Parents, is that Noble person whom
the Kings Majesty, or any of his progenitors, Kings of the Realm, have created
Barons by such their Letters Patents, But this manner of creating Barons by
Patent, began in the Reign of R. 2. who created first John Beauchamp of Holt,
Baron of Kidderminster by his Letters Patents, 8. October, anno 11. But Mils
says in 30. H. 6. this was brought in.

This kind of dignity of Baron, shall be of such countenance in descent, or
otherwise as shall be limited in the Habendi in such Letters Patents
contained, for it may be but for the life of him, to whom it is gi^en, or for
te^^e de anter vie, of some other man's life, as some hold opinion, in 9. H.
6.29. for Cuius est dare, ei^^est disponere, it may be in special a genetall
tail, and this kind of estate tail, was usual before the Statute made 13. E.
1. by which estate tail in Lands and Tenements was created, as appears by
the Patent, whereby Hubert de Burgo was made Earl of Kent, in the time of H.
3. by these words, Habend' sibi and hered' suis decorpore Margaretae uxoris
suae s^roris Alexandri Regis Scotiae procreatis and pro defectu talis exitus,
remanere rectis heredibus dicti Huberti, and that estates in tail are at this
day titles of honor by the Statute of Westminster. 2. vide Nevils case Cooks 7.
part. 33. For the better explanation of this kind of dignity, the resolution
also of certain questions shall be very requisite.

Question.
If a Nobleman, and his Progenitors have for a long time been called to the
Parliament, and be a Baron, either by tenure or writ, and have had in regard
thereof a place cortaine in Parliament, if afterward the same Nobleman should
be created a Baron of that Barony, and by the same name by Letters Patents,
whether shall he and his heirs retain his old place in Parliament, which he
had according to the former dignity, or whether shall be lose his old place,
and take a new place, according to the time of his creation only.

Answer.
The case of the Lord Delaware received a resolution somewhat answerable to
this question. Cook 11. ^art. the Lord de ^a wares case.
Tho. Lord Delaware 3. E. 6. being in some displeasure with William West his
Nephew, and heir, who was Father to the now Lord De la ware, procured ^n Act
of Parliament, by the which the said Will, West was during his natural life
only clearly disabled to claim, demand, or have any manner of right, title, or
interest by descent, revenue, or otherwise, in, or to the manor, lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, title and dignity of Thomas Lord De la ware, his
Uncle: After the said Thomas De la ware dyed, and the said William West was in
the time of the late Queen Elizabeth restored, and afterward in the 8. year
of her Reign, was created Lord De la ware by Patent, and had place in
Parliament, according to his creation by Patent, for that by the said Act of
Parliament, in the time of E. 6. he was excluded to challenge the former
ancient Barony, and after he dyed, whether the new Lord Delaware should take
his place to the ancient Barony by writ, or according to his Fathers creation
by Patent, was the question, the opinion of the late Queens Counsel, being
Her Majesty's Attorney General, and Solicitor, were that the acceptance of
the new creation by the said William West, could not distinguish the ancient
dignity in him at the time of his creation, but ahe dignity was at that time by
the Act of Parliament, 3. Ed. 6. in obeisance, suspense, or consideration of
Law, and he thereby utterly disabled to have the same during his life only: so
as other acceptance could not extinguish that dignity, which he then had not,
nor could not conclude his heir, who was not disabled by the said act of 3.
Ed. 6. to claim the ancient Barony: which opinion of theirs was seen and
allowed by the resolution; of the chief Justice of England and Lord chief
Baron, and so signified unto the Lord Keeper: but this is to be noted by the
reasons made for the said resolution, that if the said William West had been
Baron, and entitled, or in possession of the ancient dignity, when he
accepted the said creation, the Law perchance might have been otherwise, but
that remains as yet unresolved; nevertheless the rule codem mado quo quid
constuitur dissolvitur, but by grant which is made a matter in fact, a man
cannot transfer his ritle of honor, Cook 7. part.

And thus much concerning the three degrees of Barons within this Realm, may
suffice to be said in general upon this occasion, for the better understanding
and direction of that which follows to be handled.

And in this place I think it not impertinent to mention one case, which I
read in the books of the common Law, concerning the descent of a title of
honor, whereof the Ancestor had estate in fee simple.

There is a maxim in the Law, Possessio fratris de feodo simplici facit'
sororem esse heredem, the possession of the brother in see simple does make his
sister to be his heir. But if a man by any of the three names before
mentioned be created into a title of dignity to him and to his heirs for ever,
and he has issue a son; and a daughter by one Venture, and has also a son
by a second wife, afterward the Father dies, and his eldest son enters
into all his Fathers inheritance, and also enjoys the title and name of
dignity, which his Father had, but dies without issue.

In this case the dignity shall go and deseend unto the younger son, though
he be but of the half blood unto him, that last enjoyed that name and title by
descent, and shall not descend unto his sister of the whole blood; and yet in
this case she should only be her brothers heir of all his fee simple Lands,
and the reason and cause hereof, is because Possessio fratris, because the
possession of the brother is the maine and sole cause, which may give title to
her, his sister, which fails in this cause of dignity: For it cannot be said,
that her eldest brother was in possession of his title of honor no more then
of his blood: For the dignity was inherent to his blood, so that neither by his
own Act neither by any act to be done by another, did he gain any more
actual possession (if so it may be termed) then by the law did descend unto
him, and therefore the younger brother may well by the Law make himself heir
unto his Father of the honor, though he cannot be heir unto his brother, so
that this word (Possessio) which is none other then pedis positio, a fixing of
the foot, extends only unto such things, of which a man may (by his entry or
other (...)) and does require actual possession, Cooks 3. part. ^^. Ratcliffs
case.

And having thus much dilated concerning the crea^^s, and other things incident
to the degrees of No^^ty: I cannot with silence pretermit something to ^^lare
concerning that sufficiency and ability of estate which the Law does require to
be in every of them, ^^rding to their several dignities.

The Common Law that always will, that decorum ^^ed convenience be observed;
considering the charges ^^d expenses appertaining to these degrees and
dig^^ies, being offices of principal service to the King ^^d the Realm, both
in time of war and peace (as ^^th been said*) has ordered that each of them
have (...) convenient portion, and value of lands of inheri^^o^ for the support
of their honors, which sup^^yes are as sinewer conjoined unto the same: For in
^ertue and in riches (as Aristotle counsels) all the ^ld Nobllity consisted,
and which two as Ecclesiastes ^^atheth^) makes a good accomplement: for says
he, V^ilior est sapientia cum divitiis conjuncta. Lamberts Perambulation of
Kent, 368.

Therefore a Knight ought to have 20. l. land by the year, a Baron 13. Knights
fees and a quarter, an Earl to knights fees: and this does appear by the
Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 2. For alw^ies the fourth part of such Revenues,
which is by the Law requisite to the dignity, shall be paid to the King for
relief: as for example: The relief of a Knight is five pound, which is the
fourth part of 20. l. which is the revenue of a Knight: see the Statute hereof,
1 E. 2. and the relief of a Baron is a 100. marks, which is the fourth part
of his revenues: that is to say 400. marke^ year, which does include 13.
Knights fees, an^ quarter; and the relief of an Earl is a 100. l. wh^^^ is
the fourth part of 400. l. which is the revenue of Earl: and it appears by
the Records of the Excheq^^^ that the relief of a Duke amounts unto 200. l.
(...) by consequence his revennue ought to be 800. l. per (...) number, and this
is the reason in every of our books, the every of the Nobility is presumed in
our law, (...) have sufficient freehold, Ad sustinendum nomen and onus, and to
what value these ancient Rents in ti^^ of H. 3. and Edw. 1. at this day do
amount unto, ever^ man knows not Cook, 7. part. 33.

And in cases of decay of Nobility, and meane^, (...) Senatores Romani rere
amotisenata, as senators of Ro^ were removed from the Senate: so sometimes th^^
are not admitted to the upper house in the Parliame^^ though they keope the
name and title of dignity sti^^^ Sir Thomas Smith de reipub. Angl. 221. And by
a S^^tute made 31. H. 8 ca. 10. The Lords have their p^^^ces prescribed after
this manner following: viz. the^^ four, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord
Treasurer, t^^ Lord President of the Council, and the Lord Pri^^ Seal, being
persons of the degree of a Baron, or (...) bove, and in the same act appointed
to sit in the P^^liaments: and all assemblies or Council above all doties, not
being of the blood royal, viz. the Kings brother, Uncle, Nephew: and these
six the Lord Hi^^ Chamberlain of England, the Lord Marshall, and the Lord
Admiral of England, the Lord Steward of the Kings House, and the Lord
Chamberlain of the Household by that act to be placed in all assemblies of
^^^ncell after the Lord Privy* Seal according to (...) degrees and estates, so
that if he be a Baron, (...) he is to sit above all Barons, or an Earl above
(...) Earls; and so likewise, the Kings Secretary be^^^ a Baron of the
Parliament, has a place above all ^^^ons, and if he be a man of higher
degree, he ^ll sit and be placed according thereunto.

Privileges incident to the Nobility according to the Laws of England.
When a Peer of the Realm, and Lord of the Parliament is to be arraigned
upon any trea^^^ or felony, whereof he is indicted, and whereupon ^^e has
pleaded not guilty; the King by his Letters ^^^tents, shall assign some great
and sage Lord of (...) Parliament to be High Steward of England, for (...) day
of his arraignment, who before the same day ^^all make precept to his Sergeant
at arms, that is ^^pointed to serve him during the time of his Com^^ssion to
warn to appear before him 18. or 20. Lords of the Parliament, or 12. at the
least upon the ^^me day; and then at the day appointed, when the ^^igh Steward
shall be set under the Clothe of State upon the arraignement of the Prisoner,
and has caused the Commission to be read: the same Sergeant shall return his
Precepts, and thereupon, the Lords shall be called, and when they have
appeared and set in their places, the Constable of the Tower shall be called
to bring his Prisoner into the Court, who then shall bring his Prisoner to the
Bar, and the H^^ Steward shall declare unto the people, the cause, (...) the
King has assembled thither those Lords and (...) and persuade him to answer
without fear, (...) then he shall cause, the Clarke of the Crown to re^^ his
endictment unto him, and ask him, if he (...) guilty or not, whereunto when
he has answer^ not guilty, the Clarke of the Crown, shall ask h^^ how he
will be tried, and then he will say by G^^ and his Peers, and then the Kings
Sergeants (...) Attorney, will give evidence against him, whereunto when the
Prisoner has made answer, the Constable shall be commanded to retire the
Prison^ from the Bar to some other place, while the Lord do secretly
confer in the Court together, and the^ the Lords shall rise out of their
places, and consu^^ amongst themselves, and what they affirm, shall be done
upon their Honor, without any oath to be ministered unto them; and when they
all, or the greatest part of them be agreed, they shall return to their
places and sit down, and then the High Steward shall ask of the youngest Lord
by himself; if he that is arraigned be guilty or not of the offense, whereof
he is arraigned, and then of the younge^^ next him, and so of the residue one
by one, until he have asked them all, and every Lord shall answer by
himself, and then the High Steward shall send for the Prisoner again, who
shall be led to the Bar, to whom the High Steward shall rehearse the verdict
of the Peers, and give judgment accordingly (...) Stamford Pleas dol Corona,
lib. 3. cap. 1. Poulton 188.

The antiquity of this kind of trial by the opinion of the last recited
Authors is grounded from the Statute of Magna charta so called, not in regard
of the quantity, but in regard of the weight thereof; Cook Epistle to the 8.
part, fol. 2. c. 29. beginning thus: Nullus liber homo etc. nec super eum
ibimus, ne^ super eum mittimus, nisi per legale judicium parvu' ^^orum. But I
take it to be more ancient, then the ^^me of Hen. 3. as brought into the Realm
with the Conqueror, being answerable to the Norman and French Laws, and
agreeable with the Customs Fewdall, where almost all the controversies arising
between the Sovereign, and his vassal are tried per judicium Parvu' suorum.

And if a Peer of the Realm upon his arraignement of treason, do stand mute,
or will not answer directly, judgment shall be given against him as a
Traitor convicted, and he shall not be pressed to death, and thereby save the
forfeiture of his lands; for treason is out of the Statute of Westminster; the
first c. 12 15. E. 4.33. Dyer 205 and 300. But if he be arraigned upon an
indictement of felony, he may be mute.

It appears by this Statute of Magna charta, that a Peer of the Realm shall
be tried by his Peers, only in case where he is indicted at the Kings suite
of treason or felony; for the words of the Statute be, (We will not pass or
sit in judgment upon him but by his Peers;) But if an appeal of murder, or
other felony be sued by any Common person against a Peer of the Realm, he
shall be tried by Common persons and not by his Peers: Stam. Pleas del Coron.
lib. 3. cap. 1. Brook trial 14^ Poulton 188, 6. This privilege has some
restrain^ as well in regard of the person, as in the manner of proceedings.

As touching the person; First, the Archbishops and Bishops of this Realm,
though they be Lords of the Parliament, if they be impeached of such an
offense, they shall not be tried by the Peers of the Realm but by a jury of
Knights and other substantial^ persons upon their oaths, the reasons thereof
alleged is, for as much, as Archbishops and Bishops cannot pass in like
cases upon the trial of any other of the Peers, for that they are prohibited
by the Common and Ecclesiastical Laws to be Judges of life and death, and
reason would that the other Peers should not try them, for this trial should
be mutual, for as much, as is performed upon their Honors without any oath
taken.

And so by the way, you may see the great regard the Law has to the word of a
Peer of the Realm; when he speaks upon his Honor, even in a case
concerning the life of a man, and that of a Peer; and therefore ought they
much more to keep their words and promises in smaller matters, when they
engage their Honors for any fast cause or consideration. Crompton Courts. 13.

Secondly, as touching the Persons no temporal Lords, but they that are Lords
of the Parliament, shall have this kind of trial, and therefore, hereout are
excluded, the eldest Son and Heir apparent of (...) Duke in the life of his
Father, though he be called an Earl, and it was the case of Henry Howard Earl
of Surrey, Son and Heir apparent of Thomas Duke of Suffolk, in 38. H. 8.
which is in Brooks abridgement, treason; likewise the Son and Heir apparent of
an Earl, though he be called Lord or Baron: And all the younger Sons of the
Kings are Earls by birth, though they have no other creation, but shall not be
partakers of this, or other privileges incident to the Lords of the Parliament.

Thirdly, those that are Barons of the Nobility of Ireland, or of Scotland, if
upon the like offense committed in England, they be apprehended in England,
they shall not have their trial by Peers, no though they were borne within
England, for they received their dignity from a King of their Nations; But if
the King of England at this day do create one of his subjects of Scotland to be
Viscount Rochester within England, or by ordinary summons under his great
Seal, do call him to his upper House of Parliament, and do assign him a
place, and to have a voice there in his great Council, amongst the Lords and
Peers of the Realm, he shall thereby also be a Peer of the Realm, and be
partaker with them in all privileges; and thus much concerning the restraint
of the said privileges in respect of the person; as touching the manner of
proceeding, it appears, by the said statute of Magna charta c. 29. that a
Peer of the Realm shall be tried by his Peers, only in case where he is
indicted at the Kings suite of treason or felony: for the words of the statute
be, Nec super cum ibimus; But if an appeal of murder, or other felony be sued
by any Common person by a Peer of the Realm he shall be tried by Common
persons and not by his Peers, Stam. Pleas, del Corone lib. 3. cap. 1. Poulton
118. and so was Fines Lord Dacres tried in appeal of murder; 33. H. 8. Brook
Abridgement trials, 142.

The Nobility of this Realm enjoy that privilege, that they are not to be
impanelled in any Jury or Inquests, to make trial, or Enquiry upon their
corporal oaths between party and party; for they may have their writ for
their discharge to the Sheriff.

Rex and Vic' Com* etc. quia barons regni nostri i^ Assizis Iuratis
seurecognitionibus aliquibus poni non consueverint ut dicunt nisi little
sacramentumadeo sit necessarium quod sine illis veritas inquire non potest;
Tibi precipimus quod dilectum and fidelem nostram, A.B. in Assizis Iuratis seu
recognitionibus aliquibus non ponas seu poni faciatis contra voluntatem suam
sine mandato nostro speciali, nisi. suam presentia ob aliquam causam
specialiter exigatur test, etc.

But it is a rule in Law, vigilantibus non dormientibus subveniuns Iura: For if
the Sheriff have not received any such writ, and the Sheriff have returned
any Lords in Iuries, or in Assizes, etc. and they thereupon do appear, they
shall be sworn, and if they do not appear, they shall loose their issues,
35. H. 6.46. and in such case they must purchase a writ out of the Chancery,
reciting their privilege directed to the Justices before whom such noble
persons are so impannelled, commanding them to dismiss him or them, that were
so impannelled out of the said pannell, Fitz, na. br. 165.

This privilege has restraint in two cases; first if the Enquiry concern the
King, and Commonwealth in any necessary or important degree, or business of the
Realm, then this privilege is not allowed, nor takes place; and therefore
diverse Barons of the marches of Wales were impannelled before the Bishop of
Ely, and after Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer to enquire of a notable
outrage, committed by Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, against Humphery
de Bohu^, Earl of Hereford, and Essex; and his Tennant in Wales the 12th.
year of Ed. 1. where John de Hastings, Edmond de Mortimer, Theonald de
Bordmor, and others Barons of the Marches, challenged their Privileges
aforesaid, and much insisted upon the same, but it was afterward answered by
the Courts, as by the words in the Record^ appears; Domino quod res ista Dom.
Regem and Coronam and dignitatem suam tangit. dictum fuit Dominum Regis Johan.
de Hastings, and omnibus aliis magnatibus supra nominatis quod per statu and
Iure Regni, and per conservatione dignitatis Coronae and pacis suae apponunt
manum ad librum ad faciendum, id quod eis ex perte Dom. Regis in jungeretur,
The Barons aforesaid did nevertheless persist in the Challenge, and in the end
both the said Earls between whom the said outrage had been perpetrated,
submitted themselves to the Kings grace, and made their Fines.

Secondly, this Privilege has no place in case of necessity, where the truth
of the case cannot otherwise come to light; for the words of the Writ in the
Register before mentioned are Nifi sua presentiae ob aliquam^ causam
specialiter exigatur. etc. Register, 179. If a Nobleman do bring an Action of
debt upon an Account in case where the Party is to be examined, which is
always intended to be upon Oath, upon the truth of his cause by virtue of the
Statute of 2. H. 4. cap. 8. It shall suffice to examine his Attorney and not
himself upon Oath. 3. H. 6.48. Cook 6. part 53.

And this Privilege the Law does give to the Nobility, that they are not to be
arrested by any Warrant of any Justice of the Peace for the peace, or for the
good behavior, nor by a supplicavit out of the Chancery so called, because it
issues out at the supplication of the party, or from the Kings Bench, for
such an opinion has the Law conceived of the peaceable disposition of
Noblemen, that it has been thought enough to take their promise upon Honor
in that behalf, Lamb. Instice of Peace, lib. 2. cap. 2. Fol. 17. E. 44.24. E.
3.33. subpenae, Fitz, 20.

And as in civil causes, the like rule does the Court of Equity observe in
causes of conscience; for if the desendant be a Peer of the Realm in the
Star Chamber, or Court of Chancery, a Subpena shall not be awarded, but a
Letter from the Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper, in liew thereof, and if he do
not appear, no attachment shall go forth against him. For in the 14. Year of
the late Queen Eliz. the Order and rule was declared in the Parliament
Chamber, and so to be enrolled in the Parliament, that attachment is not to be
awarded by Common Law, custom or president, against any Lord of the
Parliament, Dyer, 315. a. and if he do appear, he may make his Answer to the
Bill of complaint, upon his Honor only, and is not compelable to be sworn.

By the Statute 5. Eliz. chap. 1. It is enacted, that all Knights, and
Burgesses of the Parliament, shall take their Oath for the Supremacy, and so
shall Citizens, and Barons of the Cinque Ports being returned of the
Parliament, before they enter into the Parliament House, which Oath shall be
according to the tenor, effect, and form of the same Oath verbatim, which is*
and as it is already set forth to be taken in the Statute, 1. Eliz. provided
always that for so much as the Queens Majesty is otherwise sufficiently
assured of the faith and loyalty of the temporal Lords of her ^igh Court of
Parliament; Therefore this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to com^ell any temporal person, of or above the degree of a ^aron of
this Realm, to take or Pronounce the Oath ^bovesaid, nor to incur any
Penalty limited by this Act, for not taking or refusing the same.

If any Peer of the Realm be sued in the Common Pleas, in an Action of debt,
or trespass, and Process are awarded against him by Capias or by Exigent,
then he may sue a Certiorare in the Chancery, directed to the Justices of the
Common Pleas, testifying that he is a Peer of the Realm, and the Writ is thus.

Rex. etc. Iusticiarijs suis de banco salutem, mandamus vobis quasi G. F. miles
little nobis ad sectam alicujus per Actionem personalem in placitatus existat.
talem processum and non alium versus ipsum in actionem predicta scire saciat
qualem versus Dominos, magnates, Comites, seu Barons, Regni nostri Anglium qui
ad Parl. nostra de suminicionem nostra venire debent aut eorum aliquem secundum
legem and consuetudinem regnum nostri Angl. feri faciendum quia pred. G T.
vnius Baronum Regnum in pred. ad Parliamentum, nostri de suminitionem regia
venient, record. and hoc vobis mandanus, and alijs quorum interest innatescimus
test est. lan. H. N B. fol.. 247.

For unless the Court be judicially certified by the Kings Writ out of the
Chancery, that the defendant is a Lord of the Parliament, Jf a Capias or
Exigent issue forth against him no error, neither is it punishable in the
Sheriffs his Bayliffes, or Officers, if they execute the said process, and
Arrest the body of the said Noble person, for it appertains not to them to
argue or dispute the Authority of the Court, but if the Court be thereof
certified in form aforesaid, they will award a Supersedeas which is in the
Book of Enteries in the Title of Error, Sect. 20. and there are two reasons
or causes, wherefore no Capias or Exigent lies against any Peer, the one
because of the dignity of their persons, the other by Intendment of Law, there
is none of the Nobility but have sufficient Freehold which the Plaintiff may
extend for their payment or satisfaction, but a Capias or Exigent lies against
a Knight, for the Law has not that opinion of his Freehold, as the Court said
in 26. H. 8. vide 27. H. 8.22. in Brooks abridgement Exigent, 2. and 3. Cooko
6. part 52. and 54.

And if any of the Nobility happen to be so wilful as not to appear, the
Court will compel the Sheriff to return great issues against him, and so at
every default to increase and multiply the issues, as lately against the Earl
of Lincoln has been in practice.

By the Ancient Laws of this Realm before the coming of William the
Conqueror, many good Laws were made for the keeping of the peace, amongst
others that every man above the Age of 12. years should be sworn to the King,
as you may read more at large in Lamberts perambulation of Kent, 21. which we
in remembrance thereof do keep at this day in view of Frank-pledge or leete
Court; but Noblemen of all sorts are neither bound to attend the Leete, nor to
take that Oath as appears by Britton cap. 29. treating of this Court called
the Sheriffs Turn Courts, of which the Leete seems to be extracted and
agreeable, thereunto is the Statute of Marlbridge, cap. 10. in these words, de
turnis vice contra provisum est, quod necesse non habeant ubi venire
Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores, Committes, Barons, vide, the Lord
Chancellors Speech in the case of Post-nari, fol. 78.

If a Writ of Error be brought in Parliament upon a Judgment given in the
Kings Bench, the Lords of the higher House alone without the Commons are to
examine the errors, vide Jbid. fol. 22.

Jn 11. H. 4.2. b. In a case concerning a distress taken for expenses and Fees
of the Knights of the Parliament, it is agreed for Law that the Baronies and
other Lands as are parcel of their ancient Lordships and Baronies, but for
other Lands they are. But there is a question made, one which is no Barron, but
ignoble do purchase any ancient Barony, whether he shall be discharged of such
ignoble purchase, by reason only of such his purchase, challenge, or pretense
to have Nobility and place in Parliament, as before in this treatise more at
large appears; for as Lands by Villainy service do not make a Villainy or
Bondsman, which being free does purchase the same, as Littleton does teach lib.
2. cap. 12, though by his Tenure he shall be bound to do such Villainy
service, so of the other side, and that is holden by Barony, does not make the
villainy peasent or ignoble which purchases the same, to be noble, although the
charge of such tenure do lie upon him in respect of the service of the Realm.

It is said in our Books, that a day of grace or by the favor of the Court is
not to be granted to the Plaintiffes in any Suite or Action wherein a Nobleman
is defendant, 27. H. 8.22. 27. E. 3.88. because thereby the Nobleman should be
longer delayed then the Ordinary course of the Court is, and such Lord is to
have expedition of Justice in respect that he is to attend the Person of the
King, and the Service of the Commonwealth, but if there be no ignoble person
party to the Suite; the Judges do and may at their discretions grant upon a
motion and prayer, a day or more of trial otherwise then by the strict course
of the Law the Plaintiff may challenge.

Cambden fol. 169. writing upon the Subject says; where the Noble man is
demandant the Tenant may not be essoyned; for the delay and causes aforesaid,
to which J would also subscribe but that the Book of 3. H. 4, 5, 6. is
otherwise adjudged (if I do misunderstand it) there the King brought a Quare
Impedit. against a Common person, and the defendant was essoyned by the rule of
the Court; Therefore a fortiori, he might be essoyned against a Nobleman.

Jf any Peer of the Realm, being a Lord of the parliament, be plaintiff or
demandant, defendant or Tenant, in any Action real or personal, against
another, whereupon an issue is to be tried by a Jury, the Sheriff must return
one Knight at the least, to be of the Inquest, otherwise upon a challenge made
the whole Pannell shall be quashed, which by the order of the Law is appointed
to be done, for Honor and reverence due to the persons of that degree, for (as
the words of the Book are) when a Peer of the Realm is party, the Law is
otherwise, then when the Suite is between other persons, Fitz. Chall. 113.13.
E. 3. in a Quar. Impedit. against a Bishop adjudged, Plowd. 117. Dyer 208. b.
27. H, 8.22. b.

But the Earl of Kent by the name of Reignald Gray Esquire. brought a Writ of
Entry against Sir H. G. Knight, 4. Eliz. and the parties did plead to an issue,
the venire facias was awarded, which the Sheriff did return served, and a
Pannell returned according, in which pannell there is no Knight named* the
truth of which Cause was, that after the return made, the demandant is
published and declared by the Queen and the Heralds, to be Earl of Kent, in
right and by descent, although he had not been so reputed, or named Earl
before, and also after that time (that is to say) at the then last parliament,
the Tenant is made a Baron by a Writ of parliament, and both parties have
places and voices in parliament, and then the Jury do appear in the Court of
Common pleas, and the Earl of Kent did challenge the array, because no Knight
was returned, but it was not allowed him by the Court, for the ^dmittance of
both parties as to the contrary; and no default can be laid to the Sheriff;
for he had no notice of the honorable estates of either of the parties, the
demandant not being then known or reputed to be an Earl by descent or of the
Tenants then also being no Baron. Dyer, 318.

How much the Common Law has always prohibited perpetuities in Lands and
Tenements, you may see in Corbets Case, in the first part of Sir Edward Cooks
Book, Fol, 84. and in many other Cases in the rest of his Books, also
Littleton Fol. 145. says, it is a Principle in the Law, that every Land of
Fee-simple may be charged with a Rent in Fee-simple by one way or other, but of
the Kings Majesty upon the Creation of any Peer of the Realm, Duke,
Marquess, Earl, Vicount, or Baron, do (as the manner is) by his Letters.
Patents give unto such new created Noblemen an Annuity or Rent for the support
of his degree, which they call creation Money, this is so annexed unto the
Dignity, that by no grant, assurance, or any manner of Alienation it can be
given from the same, but is still incident, and a support of the same Creation,
Dyer fol. 21. etc.

Jn all Cases wherein Suite of Law, a Baron or Peer of the Realm, is to be
amerced (other then a Duke) his amercement is no less the 12 100. s 9 E. 4.9.
21. E. 4.77. 38. E. 3.31. 9. H. 6.21. but the amercement of a Duke is 10. l.
19. E. 4.9. 1 H. 6.7. although the Statute of Magna Charta, Chap. 14. be in the
negative, viz. Comites at Barons non amerciantur nisi per pures suos et non
nisi secundum modum delicti, and yet the usage has ^educed it into a
certainty, also by the same Statute it ^ppeareth, that such amercements should
be afferred per ^ures suos, but for that it were troublesome to assemble ^arons
for so small a matter, such amercements in times ^ast has been afferred by
the Barons of the Exchequer, who sometimes were Barons of the Realm, as is
before in this Treatise mentioned, and hereof writes Bracton, Lib. 3. Tract.
2. chap. Fol. 116. viz. Comites ^iero vel Barons non sunt amerciandi, nisi per
paces suos secundum modum delicti, and hoc per Barons de Scacario vel coram
ipso Rege. Vid. Cook 8. part, 39. and sequentiae, this Section is to be
omitted, because it is more fitly to be written hereafter.

If a Plaintiff recover against a Peer of the Realm, in an Action of debt or
trespass, upon such a Plea pleaded by him, or other default in him, so that a
Fine thereby does grow to the King, and thereupon on a Capias per Fine issues
out against him, this shall not prejudice that Nobleman, so as the Plaintiff
may thereby take advantage by prayer that he shall abide in Execution, for the
Plaintiff neither without his prayer, nor though he do pray it, by the
opinion of Brian, Justice 14. H. 7.21.

Whereas by a Statute made 32. H. 8. Cap. 16. It is enacted, that the Subjects
of the Realm shall not keep in their Families or Houses above the number of
Four Strangers borne, nevertheless by a proviso in the said Act, every Lord
of the Parliament has his privilege allowed unto him to keep in his Family
the number of six Strangers borne, any thing in that Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

By the Statute of 24. H. 8. Cap. 13. a. A Privilege was granted to the
Nobility according to their degrees concerning their Apparel, but because by a
Statute made in the first Year of the King that now is, Chap. 25. all Laws
and Statutes made concerning Apparel, are taken away, I leave further to
speak of that matter 1. Jac. cap. 25.

By the Statute of 5. R. 2. cap. 12. The King our Sovereign Lord of his Royal
Majesty defends the pass utterly of all manner of people, as well Clerks as
others, in every Port and other Town and place upon the Coasts of the Sea,
upon the pain of forfeiture of all their goods, except only the Lords and
other great men of the Realm, and true and Noble Merchants, and the Kings
Soldiers, and every person then is before excepted, which after publication of
this Ordinance made shall pass out of the said Realm without the Kings
special License, which License the King wills and commands that it be not
from henceforth made, but in one of the Ports under written, that is to say,
London, Sandwich, Dover, Southampton, Plymouth, Dartmouth, Bristoll, Yarmouth,
St. Buttolphe, Kingstone upon Hull, Newcastle upon Tine, and the other parts
and passages toward Ireland, and the Isles pertaining to England, shall forfeit
toward the King as much as he has in goods as before is said, but because this
Statute is also taken away by a ^^te Act of Parliament, made in the fourth
year of King James. cap. 1. J do not set down this for ^ne of the
Privileges appertaining to the Nobility (...) this day.

But Phillip Earl of Arundel Son of Thomas Duke of Norffolke, was taken upon
the Sea passing in^o France, about the 30. year of the late Queen, and was
fined in the Star Chamber to a great sum, because he did not take Shipping at
one of the Ports mentioned, Cromptons Courts 31. Whereas by the Statute of 2.
H. 2. Parl. 2. cap. 1. It is ordained, that the Justices of Peace in every
County named of the Cuorum should be resident in the Shieres wherein they are
Justices, there is a Proviso whereby the Lord and Peers of the Realm named in
such Commission are excepted.

By the Statute of 1. E. 6. cap. 12. amongst other things, it is enacted, that
in all and every case and Cases where any of the Kings Subjects shall and may
upon his Prayer have the Privilege of his Clergy, as a Clarke Convict, that
may make purgation in all those Cases and every of them, and also in every Case
and Cases of Felony, wherein the privilege and benefit of Clergy is taken
away by this Statute (wilful malice and poisoning, of malice prepensed) only
excepted the Lord and Lords of the Parliament, and Peer and Peers of the
Realm having place and voice in Parliament, shall by virtue of this Act of
Common grace upon his and their Requests and Prayer, alleging that he is a
Lord or Peer of the Realm, claiming the benefit of this Act though he cannot
read without burning of the Hand, loss of Inheritance, or corruption of his
blood, be adjudged, deemed, taken, and used for the first time only to all
Jnstructions, intents, and purposes as a Clarke Convict, which may make
purgation without any further or other benefit of the Clergy to any such Lord
or Peer from thenceforth at any time after, for any cause to be allowed,
adjudged, or admitted any Law, Custom, Statute, or any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

By this Statute a Lord of the Parliament shall have the privilege of his
Clergy, where a common person shall not, viz. for the breaking of a house by
day or night, for robbing of any in the high way, and in all other cases
excepted in the Statute of 1. E. 6.12. saving in wilful murder, and poisoning.

But in all other cases wherein Clergy is taken away by any Statute made since
the said Statute of 1. E. 6. he is in the same Degree that a common and
inferior person is, but the Court will not give him the benefit of this
Statute, if he do not require it.

Jf the Lord of the Parliament does confess his offense upon his Arraignment,
or does abjure, or is outlawed for Felony, it seems that in those cases he
may have the benefit of this Statute, viz. his Clergy, for that by the Statute
of 18. Eliz. cap. 18. he nor any other need to make his purgation, but shall be
forthwith delivered out of prison by the Justices, sed quaere Poulton, 202. b.

By the Jmperiall Constitutions Nobiles non torquentur in quibus plebeij
torquerentur and nobiles non suspenlantur sed decapitantur; and so it is almost
grown into a Custom in England by the favor of the Prince, for rare is it to
have a Nobleman executed in other form, yet Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the
South in 33. H. 8. and Lord Sturton 4. Mar. were hanged, Brook Jury 48.

Jn the first year of the late Queen Eliz, cap. 1. in the Acts of Parliament,
for the uniformity of Common Prayer, etc. there is contained this proviso, and
be it enacted and ordained, that all the Lords of Parliament for the third
offense above mentioned, shall be tried by their Peers and not by any
Ecclesiastical Courts, read the Statute at large.

At the Common Law it was lawful for any Nobleman, or ignoble to retain as
many Chaplains as he would for their Instruction in Religion, but by a
Statute made 21. Hen. 8. cap. 13. A restraint was made, and a certain number
only allowed to the Nobility, and such Chaplains for their attendance have
Immunities as by the Statute at large may appear, viz: Every Archbishop and
Duke may have six Chaplains, whereof every one shall or may purchase License
or dispensation, and take, receive, and keep two Personages or Benefices, with
cure of Souls, and that every Marquess or Earl may have five Chaplains,
whereof every one may purchase License or Dispensation and take, receive, and
keep two Parsonages or Benefices with cure of Souls, and that every Viscount
and other Bishop, may have four Chaplains, whereof every one may purchase
License, and receive, have, and keep two Parsonages or Benefices with cure of
Souls as aforesaid, And that the Chancellor of England for the time being,
and every Baron and Knight of the Garter may have three Chaplains, whereof
every one shall now purchase License and Dispensation, and receive, have, and
keep two Benefices with cure of Souls, read the Statute at large.

And forasmuch as retaining of Chaplains by Lords of great estates is
ordinary, and nevertheless some questions in Law have been concerning the
true understanding of the said Statute: J think it not impertinent to set
down some subsequent resolutions of the Judges touching such matters.

If a Bishop be translated to an Archbishop, or a Baron to be created to an
Earl, etc. yet within this Act they can have but only so many Chaplains as
an Archbishop or Earl might have; for although he have diverse dignities, yet
he is still but one selfsame person to whom the Attendance and service ^ould
be done, so if a Baron be made a Knight of the ^arter, or Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, he ^all have but three Chaplains in all, and sic de simi^^us.

Also if such an Officer allowed by the Statute to ^^ve one, two, or more
Chaplains, do retain accor^ingly, and after he is removed from his Office in
this ^^se, he cannot be now non-resident or accept of a se^ond Benefice if his
Compliment, were not full before his remaining, and yet in that case it
behooves ^^e Chaplain to procure a non obstante, otherwise ^e may be punished
for his non-residency.

So if an Earl or Baron do retain a Chaplain, and before his advancement
his Lord is attainted of Treason, as it was in the Case of the Earl of
^estmerland, after the said Attainder such a Chap^aine cannot accept a second
Benefice; for though his Lord be still living according to nature, yet after
the Attainder he is a dead Person in the Law, and therefore out of the case to
have Privilege for himself or for his Chaplains.

If a Baron have three Chaplains, and every one of them, have two Benifices,
and after the Baron dies, yet they shall enjoy those benefices with cure,
which were lawfully settled in them before, but in this case though the said
Chaplain be resident upon one of his Benifices yet now he is become
unpunishable for being non-resident upon the other, for cessante causa ces^
effectus, the same Law is if a Baron be attainted of tre^son or Felony, or if
any Officer be removed from (...) Office, Et sic de similibus, vide Actons
Case, Cook, (...) part. Fol. 117. for all those matters.

A Baron or others of degree of Honor do retain^ such number of Chaplains as
are allowed by the Statute and after upon suite and request, the said noble
person does retain more Chaplains.

In this Case, they that are first retained shall only have privilege, nam
qui prior est tempore potior est Iure^ so if a Lord do at any time retain
more Chaplai^^ then are allowed by the Common Law, the lawful number only
shall have privilege, and in this case which of them first promoted, shall
have privilege, and the rest are excluded, for in equali Iure inelior est
condi^^^ possidentes.

Jf a Nobleman do retain Chaplains (above the number) at several times, if
any of his first Chaplai^^ die, the next that was then retained shall not
succeed, for his first retayner was void, and therefore in thi^ Case it does
behove him to have a new retayning after the death of the predecessor, and
before his advancement, nam quod initio non valet in tractu temporis non
co^valescit.

If a noble person retain such a number of Chaplains as is by the Law allowed
him, but afterward upon some dislike or other cause do discharge some of them
from their attendance or service, the Lord in this case cannot retain others,
thereby to give them privilege, during the life of them so retained and
discharged: and the reason thereof is, because the first Chaplains were
lawfully retained, and by virtue thereof during their lives might purchase
dispensations, to have advantage according to the statute: and therefore if the
discharge of their service and attendance might give a liberty to the Lord to
retain others, by such means the Lords might advance Chaplains without
number, by which the statute should be defrauded; and the said statute must be
construed strictly against non-Residents and Pluralities, as a thing
prejudicial to the service of God, and the ordinary instruction of the people
of God. These premises are to be read in Cooks 4 part fol. 90. Druries case.

By the statute of 3. H. 7. cap. 14. it is enacted as follows, viz. Forasmuch
as by quarrels made to such as have been in great authority, office, and of
counsel with the King of this Realm, has ensued the destruction of the King,
and thereby the undoing of this Realm: so that it has appeared evidently,
when the compassing of the death of such as were the Kings true subjects was
laid, the destruction of the Prince was imagined thereby; and for the most part
it has grown and been occasioned by envy and malice of the Kings own
household servants; and for that by the laws of this land, if actual deeds
were not, there was no remedy for such false compassing imaginations and
confederacies had against any Lord, or any of the Kings Council, or any of the
Kings great Officers in his household, as Steward, Treasurer, Controller; and so
great inconveniences did ensue, because such ungodly demeanours were not
straightly punished before that an actual deed was done. For remedy whereof it
was by the same statute ordained, that the Steward, Treasurer, or Controller of
the Kings house for the time being, shall have full authority and power to
enquire by twelve sad men and discreet persons of the Check-roll of the Kings
honorable household, if any servant, admitted to be his servant, sworn, and
his name put into the Check-roll of the household, whatsoever he be, serving in
any manner office or room, reputed, had, and taken under the estate of a Lord,
make any confederacies, compassings, conspiracies, imaginations, with any
person or persons, to destroy or murder the King, or any Lord of this Realm,
or any other person sworn to the King, Council, Steward, Treasurer, or
Controller of the Kings house, that if it be found before the said Steward for
the time being, by the said-twelve men, that any such of the Kings servants as
is aforesaid has confederated, compassed, conspired, or imagined as abovesaid,
that he so found by the enquiry, be put thereupon to answer, and the Steward,
Treasurer, or Controller, or two of them, have power to determine the same
matter according to the law: and if he be put in trial, that then he be tried
by other twelve sad men and discreet men of the same household, and that such
misdoers have no challenge but for malice, and if such misdoers be found guilty
by confession or otherwise, that the said offense be adjudged felony, and they
to have judgment and execution, as felons attainted ought to have by the Common
law.

In the statute made in the second year of H. 5. cap. 10. authority is given
to the Sheriff, and other the Kings Justices, for the better suppressing of
Riots and Routs, etc. to raise Posse Comitatus, the power of the County: and
the same liberty does the Common law give in many other cases. Nevertheless
may not the Sheriff upon such authority command the person of any Nobleman to
attend that service; but if the Sheriff upon a Supplicavit against any
Nobleman, in that case do return that he is so puissant, that he cannot or
dare not arrest him, the Sheriff shall be grievously amerced for such his
return: For by the writ under the Great Seal of the King, commandment is to
all Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes, Earls, Vicounts and Barons, and to all liege
men of the County, to be ayding unto him in that which to his office
appertains: And therefore by intendment no person whatsoever can resist the
execution of the said writ of the King. Also the Sheriff may by his discretion
levy three hundred men (if need be) to aid him in that behalf. Cromptons
Justice 134.3. H. 7.1. Cooks 5. part. 71. b.

The words of the great Charter of the Forest, in the eleventh Chapter, are as
follows: Every Archbishop, Bishop, Earl, or Baron, coming to us at our
commandment, and passing by our Forest, it sha^^ be lawful for hini to take
one beast or two by the view of the Forrester, if he be present; or else he
shall cause one to blow a Horn for him, that he seem not to steal our Dear.
This statute does speak but of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls and Barons; yet if
a Duke, Marquess, or Viscount, which be Lords of Parliament, be coming
toward the King by his commandment, they also shall have the benefit of this
article.

So if the King send to any of the Lords aforesaid to come to his Parliament;
or send to him by writ of Subpoena, to appear in the Chancery, before his
Council, or send for him by his missive, or by Messenger, or Sergeant at
Arms, in all these cases he shall have the benefit of this statute, because
they came at the Kings commandment.

The same Law is if a Scire facias go out of the Chancery or Kings Bench to a
Lord of the Parliament: but if such process go forth for a Lord to appear
before the Justices of the Common Pleas, or before the Barons of the Exchequer,
and he comes upon that, he shall not have the benefit of the statute; for he
does not come unto the King, and the words be, veniens ad nos; and all the
process which are made out of the Chancery and Kings Bench are, quod sit coram
nobis; and so are the Process out of the Star Chamber. Also Lords which come
to visit the new King after the death of his Father, (though not sent for)
shall have the privilege: and so note this statute is a warrant dormant to
such Lords, which is also to be understood as well of their returning homewards
as of their coming toward the King. Manwood Forest Laws cap. 181. Cromp.
Courts 167. b. Note this statute does give license to kill or hunt in the Kings
Parks, though the letter of the statute be transientes per forrestam nostram,
Passing by our Forest, Cromptons Court 168.

Note, in certain cases the Law does give privilege to the Sons or Brethren of
Noblemen, though themselves be not of that degree. Vide 21. H. 8 cap. 13.7. E.
6. cap. 5.

CERTAIN CASES WHEREIN A LORD of the Parliament has no PRIVILEGE.
THe King may by his absolute power commit a Nobleman to prison durante
beneplacito suo, from whence he cannot be discharged by bail or mainprise, or
by the common writ de homine replegiando: And by the same power it is if a
Noble person be committed to prison by the Kings Council, for they are
incorporate to his Highness, and do command as with the Kings mouth. And the
same law is if a Noble be committed to prison by the absolute commandment of
the Kings Judges sitting in their places of Judicature, Stamf. lib. 2. cap. 18.
fol. 72.1. as you have before when the Prince himself was committed by the
chief Justice sitting in the Kings Bench, and he was not baileable.

Also if a Capias and an Exigent may be awarded by the Justices out of their
ordinary Jurisdiction against such persons upon an Indirement for Felony or
Treason, as common experience she weth.

The statutes of Praemunire are 27. E. 3. cap. 1.16. R. 2. cap. 5. upon which
statutes an Abbot which was a Lord of the Parliament was impleaded, and he did
pray privilege to appeate by an Atrurney; and by the rule of the Court he
could not, because the statute is general and against it; but by special writ
out of the Chancery he might. And so in case where he does pray to be received.
For if a Lord of the Parliament, holding lands of another in Fee simple, does
forbear or withold to do and pay his services due to his Land lord, and
that by the space of two years, whereupon he does bring a writ of Cessavit,
which is his remedy given him by the Law, thereby to recover the inheritance of
the land: but the said Lord for the saving of his tenancy, being minded to pay
all the arrerages before judgment given against him (as by the Law he ought to
do) in this case he must come in proper person, and not by Attorney, 15. H.
7.9 b.

If a noble man, in contempt of any process which has been awarded from out
of any the Kings Courts, does make rescous, and wilfully does refuse to obey
the said writ, and the same his offense does appear of record to the Court by
the Sheriffs return, there may be and shall be awarded against him a Capias, 1
H. 5. Case ult. 27 H. 8.22. Cooks 6. part. 54.

If any Lord do depart this Realm, as Ambassador or otherwise, by the Kings
lincence or without license, and do not return at the Kings Commandment, or
upon the Kings writ under his privy Signet; the King may seize his lands,
goods, and chattells, Dyer 108. b. and 17. the Duchess of Suffolks case.

If a Lord, arrested upon a Supplicavit for the peace, do wilfully refuse to
obey the arrest, and make rescous upon his return shall issue an attachment
against the said Lord for his contempt to take his body; and this is the way to
obtain peace against any Lord of the Parliament, whereas the party could not
have an attachment against him, if the Subpoena had been duly served and
peaceably accepted, although the said Lord had not appeared thereunto,
Cromptons Justice of Peace 134.

If a Lord of the Parliament does with force and arms detain a man in prison,
in his House or elsewhere, the remedy is in such cases by himself or his
friends abroad at liberty to have a writ called de homine replegiando to
deliver him; but if the Lord, to prevent the execution thereof, and of malice,
do keep or convey away this man, so wrongfully imprisoned, so privily, as that
the Sheriff cannot execute his said writ; then will the Court award a
Witheram, whereby the Sheriff shall attach and arrest the body of the said
Lord, and imprison him until he do deliver his said prisoner, 11 H. 4.15.

All Lords are compellable to take the Oath mentioned in the Statute of 3 Jac.
4. and vide the Statute 7 Jac. cap. 6. who have authority to minister the said
Oath to them. Bracton lib. 5. fol. 337.6 H. 3. and 351. writing of essoines,
delivers this learning, that if a Baron that holds by Baron tenure have his
absence excused by essoine, he which casts such essoine or excuse, ought to
find surety that the said essoine is true; but in case of common persons it
shall rest upon the credit and integrity of the Essoince, and so is the use at
this day.

The Statute of magna charta cap. 1 a. is quod liber homo non amercietur pro
parvo delicto, nisi secundum modum illius delicti and pro magno delicto
secundum magnitudinem delicti and nulla praedictarum miscricordiarum ponatur,
nisi per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de vicinate, and accordingly
is the Law thereunto at this day.

But the subsequent words in the said Statute, viz. Comites and Barons non
amercientur nisi per pares suos, and non nisi secundum modum delicti, are not
in use, for whether the offense be great or small, for which they are to be
amerced, their amercement must be certain, viz. of a Duke ten pound, and of
any other of the Nobility.

Also whereas the amercement should be offered per pares the use is to offer
them by the Barons of the Exchequer, Cooks 8. Rep. 40. Bracton lib. 3. Tractat.
2. cap. 1. fol. 116. b.

When a Peer of the Realm is arraigned in Appeal of Felony, he shall not
have that privilege to be tried by his Peer, as he should in case of
Indictment, but must undergo the ordinary trial of twelve men, Stamford Pleas
of the Crown lib. 3. cap. 1. Brook trial 142. Ferdinando Poulton 188. b. Read
the book of Entries title appeal Sect. 7. also in Case of an Indictment, the
Defendant, though a Peer of the Realm, may not challenge any of his Triers,
either peremptorily or upon causes which in like cases permitted to all other
common persons.

The Judgment to be given against any Lord of the Parliament in case of Felony
or Treason, shall be no other than according to the usual judgment given
against common persons; and although the execution be not pursuant (but with
the loss only of their heads) yet that is by the special grace of the King,
and not ex debito, as by the examples of Thomas Lord Dacre 33. H. 8. and of the
Lord Sturton 2 Mariae, may appear, Brook tit. Jury 48.

By attainder of Treason or Felony is corruption of blood, so that their
Children may not be heirs unto them, nor unto any of their Ancestors. And if
he were a noble man before he is by the attainder made ignoble, and not only
himself, but also his Children, having no regard unto the Nobility which they
had by their birth, and this corruption is so strong and high that it cannot be
saved by the Kings pardon or otherwise than by authority of Parliament,
Stamford Pleas del Coronae lib. 3. cap. 34.

But here it is to be observed, that Nobility is not a thing substantial, but
mere accidental; for that may be present or absent without corruption of the
Subject whereof it depends; for experience shows that the passage of
honorable titles are restrained by exorbitant crimes, when as nature in the
mean while cannot be thrust away with a fork. Wherefore although the Lawyers
do term and call that extinguishment of Nobility, which happens by such
heinous offenses committed as corruption of blood, nevertheless they use not
this manner of phrase and speech as though Nobility were naturally and
essentially in the humor of blood more than any other hereditary faculty; but
because the right of inheritance which is by degree of communication of blood
directed, is by that means determined and ended, and also in regard of the
hatred and detestation of the crime it is called corruption of blood, note in
Dyer 16. Eliz. 332. the Lord Charles Howards case.

If one be made a Knight in a foreign Kingdom by a foreign Knight, yet he
is to be so styled in this Realm in all legal proceedings; but if a man be
created by the Emperor an Earl of the Empire, or into any other title of
dignity, he shall not bear this title here in England. Cooks 7. part. 16.20.
E. 46.

If there be a Father and Son, and the Father is seized of lands holden in
Capite or otherwise by knightly service, the King does create the same Duke and
Earl or of any other degree of Nobility, and afterward the Father dies, his
Son being within the age of one and twenty years, he shall be in ward; but
if the King had made him Knight in the life of his Father, he should not have
been in ward after the death of his Father, neither for the lands descended or
for his marriage, though he be within age, Cooks 6. part. 74. in Druries case.

Nobility, and Lords in reputation only.
THere are other Lords in reputation and appellation, who nevertheless are not
de jure, neither can they enjoy the privilege of those of the Nobility that
are Lords of the Parliament.

The son and heir of a Duke, during his fathers life, is only by courtesy
of speech and honor called an Earl, and the eldest son of an Earl a Baron;
but not so in legal proceedings, or in the Kings Courts of Justice, Brook
Treason 2. But the King may at his pleasure create them in the life of their
Ancestors into any degree of Lords of the Parliament, Cook 8. part 16. b.

A Duke or other of the Nobility of a foreign Nation, does come into this
Realm by the Kings safe conduct: in which the Kings said Letters of Conduct he
is named Duke, according to his Creation: yet that appellation makes him not a
Duke, etc. to sue or to be sued by that name within England, but is only so
reputed. But if the King of Denmark, or other Sovereign King, come into
England under safe conduct, he during his abode in England ought to be styled
by the name of King, though he have not merum imperium out of his own
Kingdom, yet he shall retain honoris titulos, Cook. 7. part 15. b. and
sequentia.

All the younger sons of the Kings of England are of the Nobility of England,
and Earls by their birth, without any other Creation, and only Lords in
reputation.

And if an English man be created Earl of the Empire, or of other title of
honor by the Emperor, he shall not bear the title in England, and therefore
is an Earl only in reputation.

A Lord of Ireland and Scotland, though he be a Postnatus, is not a Lord in
England in legal Courts of Justice, though he be commonly called and reputed a
Lord.

NOBLE WOMEN.
ALthough Noble women may not sit in Parliament, in respect of their sex, yet
they are in the law Peers of the Realm; and all or most of the Prerogatives
before mentioned, which to Noblemen are belonging, do also appertain to them,
Cook 8. part 53. But the opinion of some men has been, that a Countess,
Baroness, or other woman of great estate, cannot maintain an action upon the
statute de scandalis Magnatum, because the statute of 2. R. 2. cap. 5. speaks
but of Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, or other Nobles, and other great men of
the Realm: and of the Chancellor, Treasurer, Clarke of the Privy Seal,
Steward of the Kings house, Justice of the one Bench or of the other, great
officers of the Realm: by which words they conceive the meaning of the makers
of that statute was, only to provide in that case for Lords, and not for women
of honor. Crompton Justice of Peace 45. b.

Also if any of the Kings servants, within his Checkroll, do conspire the
death of any Noble man, it is not felony within the compass of the statute 3.
H. 7. cap. 13.

Honorable women are of three sorts: By creation, by Descent, or by Marriage.
King Henry the eighth created Anne Bullen Marchioness of Pembrook: and so may
the King create any woman into any title of honor, as to his Highness shall
seem good. As the King by by his Letters Patents openly read in the Parliament
did create (...) Widow, the sole daughter of (...) late Baron of Abergavenny,
Baroness De le Spencer. Cambden 63.6.

Noble women by descent are those to whom either the lands holden by such
dignity do descend as heir; and they are said to be honorable by tenure: or
those whose Ancestors to whom they are heirs, were seized of an estate
descendable unto them, in their titles of Dukedomes, Earldomes, or Baronies: or
those whose Ancestors were summoned to the Kings Parliament, for thereby also
an inheritance does accrue to their posterities.

Noble women also are those who do take to their husbands any Lord or Peer of
the Realm, although they of themselves were not of any degree of Nobility,
Fortescue de laudibus legum Anglia, fol. 100. Question and doubt has been
made, whether if a man be summoned to the Parliament, and afterward die
without issue male, the dignity and title of honor may descend to the heir
female; and many arguments have been made pro and contra, in that which at
this time I do purposely omit because I have before discoursed thereof in the
title of Barons in this Treatise.

Concerning the title of honor descendable to the heir female by reason of a
tenure in her Ancestor, there need no more doubt to be made than of offices of
honor, the which do much import the public wealth, and being of estate of
inheritance, do descend to the heir female, if there be no heir male: as the
office of high-Constableship of England, challenged in the time of H. 8. by the
Duke of Buckingham, and judged by the advice and resolution of the Judges, as
by a note of that case extant, whereof my Lord Dyer in his Reports has a
memorial, is most evident, Dyer 283. b. Kellaway 6. H. 8.170. b. which
descended to the daughters of Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, as
before is declared; the office of a Lord Steward descended to Blanch daughter of
Henry Earl of Lancaster, in whose right John of Gaunt her husband enjoyed the
same. The like may be said of the office of Earl Marshall, which descended by
an heir female unto the house of Norfolk; all which offices are as unfit to be
exercised by a woman, as it is unfit for a woman to be summoned to the
Parliament as Baroness by writ, as before is written.

And when the title of honor does descend to a woman, if question in Law do
arise between the noble woman and any other person, whether she be of that
degree of nobleness or no, the issue shall be tried by the Record thereof, and
by the Kings writ it shall be certified, and not by a Jury of twelve men, even
as it should be in case her Ancestors had been party, Cooks 6. part. 53. and
7. part. 15.

Although the Laws of this Realm regularly do make all the daughters, where
there are no sons, equally to inherit Lands and Tenements, and to be but one
heir to their Ancestor; yet it is not so in the descent of dignities and
titles of honor, for inheritances concerning matters of honor, being things
in their nature entire, paticipating of superiority and eminency, are not
partable amongst many, and therefore must of necessity descend unto one, and
that is to the eldest daughter, sister, aunt, or cousin female, inheritable
where there is no heirs males that may lawfully challenge the same; and so in
this point is the civil Law.

Nevertheless there was a Judgment in the time of H. 3. touching the descent
of the Earldome of Chester, after the death of the Earl, who dyed without
issue, his sisters being his heirs: which Judgment was, that the said
Earldome should be divided amongst the said copartners, as other lands, and
that the eldest should not have it alone, 23. H. 3. Fitz. partic. 18. But this
judgment was holden erroneous, even in those times wherein it was given: For
Bracton (a learned Judge who lived in that age) thus writes thereof, treating
of Partition among Copartners, lib. 2. cap. 34 fol. 76. b. De hoc autem quod
dicitur, quod de feodo militare veniunt in divisione capitalia messuagia, and
inter cohaeredes dividuntur, hoc verum est, nisi capitale messuagium illud sit
caput comitatus propter jus gladis quod dividi non potest; vel caput Baroniae,
castrum, vel aliud aedificium, and hoc ideo ne sit caput per plures particulas
dividetur, and plura jura Comitat' and Baroniarum deveniant ad nihilum, per
quod deficiat regnum, quod ex Comitatibus and Baroniis dicitur esse
constitutum: Si autem plura sunt aedisicia quae sunt capita Baronia, dividi
possunt inter cohaeredes, facta electione salvo jure essentiae, quia cum plura
sunt ibi jura, quodlibet per se poterit integre observare, quod quidem non est
in uno, ut praedictum est, licet a quibusdam dicatur, quod in aliis regionibus
aliquando de consuetudine dividatur, sed quod nunquam divids debeat in Anglia
videtur, nec visum fuit contrarium, and erit consuetudo regionis observanda,
ubi haereditas and quae petitur, and personae nascuntur quae petunt, and unde
sic dicatur quod in regno Anglia aliquando facta fuit partitio, hoc fuit
injustum.

It is therefore evident, that Baronies and dignities of Honor, do by the
Laws of this Realm, descend unto the eldest Coapercener, and the Judgment
given once to the contrary thereof Bracton does rightly account to be unjust,
his reason is notable, for in as much as the honor of the Chivalry of the
Realm does chiefly consist in the Nobility, reason would not that such
dignity should be divided amongst Coaparceners, whereby through multitude of
partitions, the reputation of Honor in such succession and so divided, might
be impaired; or the strength of the Realm being drawn into many hands, with
the decrease of livelihood by partition should be enfeebled; in which
Resolution Britton the learned Bishop of Hereford, who compiled his Book of
the Laws of the Realm by the commandment, and in the name of E. 1. according
Britton 187. and therefore howsoever that Judgment was given or whenever, it
is nevertheless very evident that it was soon redressed; for if it were given
upon the death of Renulph the last of that name the Earl of Chester, who dyed
about 17. H. 3. without issue, the Writers of that time do testify, that the
Earldom of Chester came wholly unto John Scot the son of David Earl of
Huntington and Anguish, and of Maud the eldest sister of the said Renulph, if
it were given upon the death of the said John Scot, who dyed without issue
about 14. H. 7. yet notwithstanding the said Judgment stood not in force, for
that the said King assumed the said Earldom into his own hands upon other
satisfaction made to the sisters Coparceners of the said John Scot. Ne tanta
hereditas colos deduceretur. Matthew. Paris Monast. S. Albani in Arr. fol. 3.66.
B. tamen vido Vill. fol. 75. et Ioh. Guill. 78.

For this it is to be observed out of Presidents, and to be acknowledged of
every dutiful Subject, that the King is at liberty to call and advance to
honor whom his Highness shall in his Princely wisdom think most meet, and
therefore whereas Ralph Lord Cromwell being a Baron by Writ, dyed without issue,
having two sisters and co-heires, Elizabeth the eldest, married unto Sir Thomas
Nevill Knight, and Ioane the younger married unto Sir Hunt Burther, he who
married the younger sister was called unto the Parliament as Lord Cromwell, and
not the said Sir Thomas Nevill who had married the eldest sister; and Hugh
Lupus the first and great Earl of Chester, was by the Conqueror his Uncle
creared Earl of Chester, Habemus sibi and heredibus adeo libere per gladium
sicut ipse Rex tenuit Angliam per Corenam, Hugh dyed without issue, and the
inheritance of his Earldom was divided amongst his four sisters, and the
eldest had not the Seigniory entire unto her self. Read Mills 74, 75. Cooks
b. part 53. and 7. part 15.

If a Woman be Noble by birth or by descent, with whomsoever she does marry,
though her Husband be under her degree, yet she does remain Noble for her
Birthright, Est Character in delibilis, Cook 4. part, 118. b. 6. part. 53. b.

Other Women are enobled by Marriage, and the text says thus, viz. Women with
the honor of their Husbands, and with the kindred of their Husbands, we
worship them, in the Court we decree matters to pass in the name of their
Husbands, and into the house and surname of their Husbands we do translate
them, but if afterward a woman do marry with a man of baser degree, then
loses she her former Dignity, and follows the condition of her latter
Husband, Fortescue de laudibus legum. Angl. 100. And as concerning the second
disparaged Marriage, as aforesaid, many other books of the law do agree, for
these be rules received in those Cases, Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili
desit esse nobilis and eadem modo quo quidem Constitut, dissolvitur, Cooks 6.
part 53. B. and 4. part 118.

It was the Case of Ralph Hayward Esquire, who took to his wife Anne, the
widow of the Lord Powes, they brought an Action against the Duke of Suffolk
by the name of Ralph Hayward Esquire and the Lady Anne Powes his wife, and
exception was taken for misnaming her, because she ought to have been named
by the Husbands Name, and not otherwise, and the exception was by the Court
allowed; For said they, by the Law of God she is Sub potestate viri, and by
our Law her Name of Dignity shall be changed according to the degree of her
Husband, notwithstanding the curresies of the Ladies of Honor and Court. Dyer,
79.

And the like was also in Queen Mary's Reign, when the Duchess of Suffolk
took to her Husband, Adrian Stoakes Prob. 4 5 6. and many other presidents
have been of latter time, and herewith agrees the Civil Law punctually,
Digest. lib. 1. Tit. 9. Lege 8. Eodem de Dignitate, Liber 12. Lege 2.

In this case of acquired Nobility by Marriage of Question in Law be, whereupon
an issue is taken between the parties, that is to say, Duchess or not
Duchess, Countess or not Countess, Baroness or not Baroness, the trial
hereof shall not be by Record, as in the former case, but by a Jury of 12. men,
and the reason of the diversity, is, because in this case the Dignity is
accrewed unto her by marriage, which the Lawyers term matter in fact, and not
by any record, Cooks 6. part. 53. a.

But a noble Woman by Marriage, though she take to her a second Husband, a man
of mean degree, yet she may keep two Chaplains according to the Proviso in
the Statute of 21. H. 8. c. 13. for and in respect of the honor which once she
had, viz. at the time of the retayner, and every such Chaplain may purchase ly
cense and dispensation, Cooks 4. part 117. Cowels Instutions lib. tit. 10.15.
but her Chaplains may not be nonresident afterward.

And forasmuch as the retayning of Chaplains by Ladies of great estates is
ordinary, and nevertheless some questions in law have been concerning the
true understanding of the said Statute law, I think it not impertinent to set
down some subsequent resolutions of the Judges touching such matters.

Anne Baroness of Mount Eagle in her Widdowhood, did retain two Chaplains
according to the Statute, and one of them had but one Benefice, and therefore
did obtain a dispensation with a confirmation from the Queen according to the
tenor of the said Statute, but before he was presented to his second Benefice,
the Lady did take to Husband Henry Lord Compton, whereby she did forsake her
former dignity of Baroness of Mount-Eagle; and afterward the said Chaplain did
accept a second Benefice, and was thereunto admitted and inducted, and the
Judges have resolved that the Chaplain has done nothing herein, but according
to the meaning of the Statute, and that the Ladies marriage between his
Retainer and acceptance of his second benefice, was no Countermand Revocation
or determination of that Retainer, which the Lady lawfully then did make, but
that she living, he might proceed to the filling up of the qualification, Causa
and origio est materia negoti; for though the wife of a Nobleman during the
covecture, cannot by Law rerain a Chaplain to be quallified according to the
statute: because by Intendment her Husbands Chaplains are sufficient for that
Office; yet forasmuch as the Retainer was lawful: then she was widow, that
being the principal matter, shall enable him to take use and benefice after
her marriage: for though the husband and wife are but one person in Law, yet as
the Text is, sunt animo duo in carne uno. Bracton, lib. 5. fol. 363, a.

And in this case by the death of the Lord Compton, her first Retainer, was not
determined; for without any near Retainer, her said Chaplain may take his
second benefice and also for that cause, so long as the said Chaplains do
attend upon their said Lady in her House, they shall not be endammaged for
Non-residency, Cooks 4. part, 117. fol. 90. and. 76.

That which remains concerning the further exposition of this statute, you may
read before in the title of privilege of Lords.

So long that the wise of a Duke be called Duchess, or of an Earl be a
Countess, and have the fruition of all the Honors, appertaining to that
estate, with kneeling, tasting, serving, and the rest, and so long shall a
Barons widow be saluted: Lady and a Knights wise also by the courteous Speech
of England, quandiu Maj. aut viduit^ vic. durant, except she happen to relaps
with an Adulterer; for as the Laws of this Kingdom do adjudge that (...) woman
shall lose her dower in that case, viz. west cap. B. F.N.B. fol. 150. H. Perk.
fell. 70. Kitchen 162. b. as Ru^o^ Lands, and Tenants, so justly; so does the
Laws of Gentry and Nobleness, give sentence against such a woman advanced to
Titles of Dignity by the husband, to be unworthy to enjoy the same, when she
putting her husband out of mind, has subjected her self to another.

If a Lady which is married come through the Forests, he shall not take any
thing but a Duchess, or (...) Countess shall have advantage of the statute,
de Char^^ Porest, 11. Art. during the time that she is unmarried, Cromptons
Court fol. 167, b.

Whereas it is contained in the great Charter among^^ other things in the Form,
which follows: no Freema^ shall be taken or imprisoned, or deseised of his
Free-ho^^ or his Liberties, or Free-customs, or shall be outlawed o^ banished,
or in any wise destroyed, nor go upon him b^^ by the lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the Law o^ the Land In which statute is no mention made, how
women, Ladies of great estate; because of their Husbands, Peers of the Land,
married or sole; that is to say, Duchess, Countess, or Barronesse, shall be
put to answer, o^ before what Judges they shall be judged, upon an Indictment
of Treason, or Fellonyes by them committed, o^ done, because whereof it is an
Ambiguity in the Law o^ England, before whom and by whom, such Ladies so
endicted shall be put to answer, and be judged by our said Sovereign Lord the
King, willing to put out such Ambiguities and Doubts, has declared by
Authority aforesaid; that such Ladies so endicted, or hereafter to be endicted,
whether they be married or sole thereof, shall be brought in answer, and put to
answer, and judged before such Judges, and Peers of the Realm; as Peers of the
Realm should be, if they were endicted of any Treasons, or Fellonyes, done or
hereafter to be done, and in like manner and Form, and in none otherwise, Anno
2. H. 6. Cap. 9. Which statute was but a Confirmation or Declaration of the
common Law, vide Cooks, 6, part 52. b.

This is a Rule in the civil law, si filia R. nubat alicui dom. vel. Comiti
dicetur, semp. Regalis. As amongst Noble women there is a difference of
degrees, so according to their distinct excellentnesse, the law does give
special Privileges as follows.

By the statute of 25. E. 3. cap. 2. It is High Treason to compose or imagine
the death of the Queen, or to violate the Kings Companion.

The Kings Espouse is a sole person, exempted by the common law, and she may
purchase by Fee-simple, or Make leases, or Grants without the King, she may
plead and be impleaded, which no other married woman can do without her
husband, Cook 4 part 23. B. Theol. lib. 1 a. cap. 4.24. E. 3.63. vide Bracton
363. a.

All Acts of Parliaments for any cause, which any way may concern the Queen and
her Capacity, are such statutes whereof the Judges ought to take recognisance,
as of general statutes; for though the matter do only concern the Capacity of
the Queen; yet it does also concern all the subjects of the Realm, for every
subject has interest in the King, and none of his Subjects who are within hi^
Laws is divided from the King being his head and Sovereign, so that his
business and things do touch all the Realm, and as all the Realm has
interest in the King, so and for the same Reason in the Queen being his wife,
Plouden 23.1. a. Cooks 8. Repl. 28.

A man seized of diverse Lands in Fee, holden by Knights service, some by
Prioritie that is by ancient Feofment holden of others, and some other parts
holden by the same tenure of the King by posterity, the King grants his
Seigniory to the Queen, and afterward the Tenant dies, the son within age
in this case the King shall have the Wardship of the Body, and have the
Prerogative even as the King himself should have had, 3. E. 3, 4. vide etiam
Stamford Prerog. Reg. cap. 2.

The Queen, wife unto the King or widow, shall not be amerced if she be
nonsuited in any Action or otherwise, in which cases any other subject of what
degree soever shall be amerced, for in this case the Queen shall participate
the Kings Prerogative, Cooks 6. Report 62.

But the Queen shall not in all cases have the same Prerogatives that the King
shall have in the same case; as for Example, Petition is all the remedy the
Subject has when the King seizes his Lands or takes away his Goods from him
having no title by order of Law so to do, contrary to the opinion of some
ancient Books, as you may see Stamfords Prerog. cap. 19. But in such suit
shall be made to the Queen, but actions against other Leiges of the King,
according as the case shall require, for by the same reason that the Queen may
be Plaintiff and Demandant in actions without the King by the same reason that
the Queen may be Plaintiff and Demandant in actions without the King, by the
same reason he shall be Defendant or Tenant, without pertaking such
Prerogatives as do appertain to the King, 11. H. 4.64. B. Stamford Prerog.
cap. 22. ^n fine.

Against the King by his Prerogative, Nullum tem^us occurit Regi, but time
shall run against the Queen H. 18. E. 3.2. a. and aplenarty by six mouths
is a good plea in a Quare Imp. brought by Philippa Regina Angliae ibid. fol. 1.
et 13. b. Stamford Prerog. cap. 18. trope finem.

In 21. E. 3.13. b. It is thus to be read, note that a protection was sued
forth against the Queen, in a Writ which she brought, and it was allowed though
she be a person exempt.

Nevertheless by this short case following may be observed, that the Justices
do not easily suffer any proceedings in Law against the Queen, wife or
widow, but will hold with their Inmities as much as they may by Law.

A Writ of dower was brought against Isabel Queen of England, mother of the
King that then was, and the Court said to the Plaintiff, the Queen is a
person of dignity and excellency, and we are of opinion, that she shall not
answer to the Writ, but it behooveth you to sue to her by Petition, and
thereupon the Demandant dixit great. and she prayed the Court to grant a
continuance of her Action until another day, so that in the mean time she
might sue to speak with the Queen but the Court would not agree to make a
Continuance, but said, that upon her request they might give d^^ precepart. and
so it was done for the Queens Council would not agree to a continuance, for
thereby the Queen should be accepted as answerable, 10. (...) 3.379.

The wife of the Kings eldest son also has some Prerogative, in regard of
the excellency of her Husband, which the wives of other Noblemen have not, for
by the Statute of 25. E. 3. it is high Treason to violate the wife of the Kings
eldest son and heir.

Dutchesses also and Countesses have special Honor appertaining to their
Estates, as kneeling and tasting, and such like, which things as appertaining
more properly to the Heralds then to this legal discourse I leave unto them.

By the Statute made 7. Iac. cap. 6. entitled, And Act for the Administering
the oath of Allegiance and Reformation of Women recusants if any person or
persons of or above the age of 18. years and degrees aforesaid* must and
hereafter shall stand and be presented, indicted, or convicted for not coming
to Church, or not receiving the holy Communion or Sacraments of the Lords
Supper, according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm before the Ordinary,
or other having lawful power to take such presentment or indictment, then 3. of
the Privy Counsel of the King his Highness his Heirs or Successors and no
other, whereof the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Chancellor, Lord Privy Seal, or
principal Secretary to be one, upon knowledge shall require such person or
persons to take the said Oath, but it shall be lawful to and for every Bishop
within his Diocese, to require any Baron or Barons of the age of 18. or above,
to take the said Oath.

Also in cases of indictment of Felony or Treason, a Baroness shall have the
same trial by Peers, as does appear by the Statute of 20. H. 6. cap. 9.
which any other Noble woman of higher degree shall have, which privilege is
denied to all of a lower degree then a Baroness.

Ladies in Reputation.
The wife and widow, and widow of the son and heir of a Duke or Earl in
the life of his Father, is a Lady by courtesy of speech and honor, and takes
place according as in ancient time has been permitted by the Sovereign Prince
and allowance of the Herald, but in legal proceedings they are not to have
privileges, nor to be named according to such sirnames of dignity, but the
King may at his pleasure create such men in the life time of their Ancestors
into degrees of Lords of his Parliament, and then the Law is otherwise.

If a Noblewoman of Spain come into the Realm by safe conduct, or otherwise
by the King, she be styled by such her foreign style of dignity, yet in the
Kings Courts of Justice she shall not be named by such title, though by common
speech she be a Lady in reputation.

An English woman borne does take to her Husband a Spanish or French Duke,
though he be made a Denizen, yet he shall not bear his title of dignity in
legal proceedings.

A German woman is married to the Earl of Northam. or to other the Nobility of
England, unless she be made a Denizen, she cannot lawfully claim the
privileges or title of her husband, no more then she can to have dower, or any
jointure from him.

An English Woman does take to Husband the Earl of Kildare in Ireland, or if a
Lord of Scotland, though he be a post natus, take an English woman to his wife
their wives shall not participate their husbands Titles of Dignity.

But if the King do create one of his Subjects of Scotland, naturalized here by
Act of Parliament, to be Viscount Rochester within England, and after by his
Writ of Summons under his Great Seal, do call him to his uper House of his
Parliaments, and assign him a place there in his great Council amongst the
Lords and Peers of the Realm, he is now also a Peer of this Realm, and
shall be partaker with them in all Privileges, and by consequence, his wife,
widow, and children after him, 32. E. 3.35. in le case de Gilbert Humfrevill.

But if an Englishman by the Emperor be made Earl of the Empire, his wife
shall not bear that title of Honor, either according to Law or in Reputation.

All the Daughters of Dukes, Marquesses and Earls are by custom of long time
used in the Kings Houses or palace, named Ladies, and have precedencie and
place according to the degrees of their parents, and so of this custom the Law
does take notice and give allowance for the honor and decency; but
nevertheless, in the the Kings Courts of Justice they bear not these titles
of Honor no more then the sons of such Noble person may do, brothers to
such Ladies.

Finis Nobilitatis.
A TREATISE OF KNIGHTS AND Matters incident to the Degree of Knighthood,
according to the Laws of England.
THE particular kind of services, by which lands of Inheritance are
distinguished be two, viz. Knight service, and socage; vide Littletons Soccage,
c. 26.

In ancient time, Tenure by Knights service was called Regale Servitium, Cook
in his Preface to his 3. Book, fol. 3, a. because it was done to and for the
King and the Realm, and formi secum servitium, as appears in Anno 19. Edw.
2. Title Avowry 224.26. ass. p. 66.17. H. 4.19. Cooks 7. part 8. a. Calvin's
case, because they which do hold by soccage, ought to do and perform their
services out of the Realm, Littleton, 35. Et ideo formi secum dicipoterit quia
sita and capitur foris, and Hum. Servitiam persolvuntur ratione tenementarum,
and non personarum. Bracton, fol. 36.

And as Knights service land requires the service of the tenement in warfare
and battle abroad, so Soccage tenure commands his attendance at the plough;
the one by manhood defending the King or his Lords life and person, the other
by industry maintaining with rents, corn and victuals, his estate and family.
See Lambert Customs of Kent, fol. 389.

For they did thus order their own lands and tenements, one part they kept and
detained in their own hands, and in them stately houses and Castles were
erected and made for their habitation and defense of their persons and the
Realm; also Forests and Parkes were made there for their pleasures Solace and
Delight.

One other part hereof was given to the Nobles and others of their Chivalty,
reserving tenure by Knights service. The third part was bestowed upon men of
meaner condition and quallity, with reservation of soccage tenure; and in this
manner the Dukes and other the Nobles with their menialls and followers
dissipate to a great part of their lands, viz. to their Gentlemen of quality to
hold by Knights service, and to others of meaner condition by Soccage tenure.

Gervasius Tilburiensis, a learned man, who flourished in the days of King
Hen. 2. in his Dialogue of the observation of the Kings Exchequer, has in
effect as follows, Until the time, says he, of King Hen. 1. the King used
not to receive money of their lands, but victuals for the provision of their
house, and toward the payment of their Soldiers wages, and such like charges;
Money was raised out of the Cities and Castles, in which Husbandry and Tillage
was not used and exercised; But at length when the King being in the parts
beyond the Seas, needed ready money for and toward the Furniture of the
wars, and his Subjects and Farmers complained that they were grievously
troubled by carriage of Victuals into sundry parts of the Realm far distant
from their dwelling houses; the King directed Commissions to certain discreet
persons, who having a regard of those Victuals should reduce them into
reasonable sums of Money, the leavying of which sums they appointed to the
Sheriff, taking order withal, that he should pay them at the scale or beam,
that is to say, That he should pay six pence over and above every pound
weight of money, because that they thought that the money in time would wax so
much the worse for the wearing. Cambdens Perambulation of Kent, fol. 172, 173.
Vide Littleton, libro 2. fol. 26. Note also Gervasius Tilburiensis, who lived,
Anno 1160. Anno 6. Hen. 2. And Cambden, fol. 178.

It was anciently ordained, that all Knights Fees should come unto the eldest
Son by succession of Heretage, whereby he succeeding his Ancestors in his
whole Inheritance, might be the better enabled to maintain the wars against
the Kings Enemies or his Lords: And that the Soccage Fee should be partable
between the Male Children to enable them to increase into many Families, for
the better furtherance in and increase of Husbandry. See Cooks Preface to the
Reader, in his Ninth Book, Fol. 2.6.

But as nothing is more unconstant then the estate we have in Land and livings,
if at least I may call that an estate which never stands even so long since.
These tenures have been so indifferently mixed and confounded in the hands of
each sort, that there is not now any note of difference to be gathered by them.
See Lamberts perambulation of Kent, fol. 10.

Et quia tale servitium formi secum non semper manet sub eadem quantitate, sed
quandoque praefat. ad plus quandoque ad minus Ideo qualitate Regalis Sencitii
and quantitate fiat mentio in charta ut tenens vectu tenere possit quid and
quantum persolvere tentatur. Bracton, fol. 36.

And therefore the certainty of the law in this case is; That he that holds
by a whole and entire Knights see, must serve the King or other Lord forty
days in the wars, well and sufficiently arrayed and furnished at all points,
and by twenty days if he hold but the moitie of a Knights fee, and so
proportionably, vide Littleton, fol. 20.

Anno 7. E. 3.1333. fol. 246. It was demurred in Judgment, whether the 40.
days should be accounted from the first day of the muster of the Kings Host,
or from the day that the King does first enter into Scotland, but it seems
that the days shall be accounted from the first day that the King does enter
into Scotland, because the Service is to be done out of the Realm.

And they who hold per regale servitium, are not to perform that service
unless the King do also go himself into the wars in proper person, and
that by the opinion of Sir William Hall Chief Justice of the Court of Common
Pleas, Term. Trin. Anno. 7. Ed. 3. fol. 246. but see Anno 3. H. 6. Titulo
protec. 2. In which case it was observed that seeing the protector (who was pro
Rex) went the same, was adjudged a Voyage Royal, vide Cook, 7 part of his
reports, and in Fitz-^erbert, Natura brevia, 28. fol. 83.

Also when before the statute, De quia emptores terrarum, made Anno 18. Ed. 4.
the King or other Lord had given Lands to a Knight to hold of him by service in
Chivalry to go with the King or with his Lord, when the King does make a Voyage
Royal to subdue his Enemies by 40 days well and conveniently arrayed for the
Wars.

In this case, the Law has such regard to the dignity of Knighthood, that he
may find an able person to go in that expedition for him, and the Knight is not
compellable by his tenure to go in person, as do ordinary soldiers, who are
hired and entertained by pressed money or wages Anno 7. Ed. 3.296.600.8. part
fol. 49. b. And see Littleton fol. 20. another reason in this case.

There have bin many varying opinions of Countries of a Knights Fee, as you may
read in 5. Ed. Cook 9. part of his Reports, fol. 124. where he seems to
prove that antiquity has thought that 20. l. in land was sufficient to
maintain the degree of a Knight, as it appears in the ancient Treatise.

Demodo tenendi Parliamentum tempore Regis Edw. filii Regis Etheldred. Which
also does concur with that Act of Parliament made Anno 1. Ed. 2. de militibus,
by which Act of Parliament Census militis. The state of the Knight is measured
by 20. l. land a year, and not by any certain content of acres, and with this
does agree the state of Westmin. ca. 36 and Pitz-natum Br^v. 82. where 20. l.
land in socage is put in Equipage with a Knights Fee, and this is the most
reasonable estimation, for one acre may be less in value then many others,
vid. An. 27. E. 3. c. 11. the printed books of the titles of honor, 319. M.
Seldom nata. And it is to be observed, that the relief of a Knight, and of all
Superiors that are noble, is the 4. part of their revenue by the year, as of a
Knight. 5. l. which is the 4. part of 20. l. and sic de cet. And this does appear
by the statute of Mag. charta ca. 8 as in Cooks 9. report. f. 124. b. And
because this tenure does concern service in war, the Tenants, therefore are
named milites a militia. For though the word do properly signify a soldier,
yet antiquity has appropriated that name to the chiefest of the military
profession, vid. Bract. f. 35. b. In our law they are styled Miles, and never
Equites; yet so, that Miles is taken for the selfsame, that Chevalier by M.
Seldom in his Titles of Honor, 1. Impression f. 334. Bracton f. 79. makes
mention of Rod-knights, that is to say, serving horsemen, who held their lands
with condition, that they should serve their Lords on horseback, and so by the
cutting of a piece of a name, as our delight is to speak short, this name of
Knight remains with us, Cambden fol. 171. for Armiger scilicet Esquire, which
is a degree under a Knight was in the Military Service.

Note, that he that holds by a whole Knights Fee, must be with the King by
40. days well and conveniently arrayed for the war, Littleton fol. 20. which is
to be understood to serve on horseback. And in all Nations the name of this
dignity is taken of Horses; for the Italians calls them Caveleiri, the
Frenchmen Chivalers, the Germans Roysters, our Britains in Wales, Morgogh. All
of Ryding, and in Latin we call them equites aurati, for at their creations
beside the sword and girdle, guilt spurs, were added for a matter of more
ornament.

See the statute of Anno 8. H. 5, C. 3. M. Seldom f. 317. and when a Knight
does commit any offense, for which he is by the Law to suffer death.

The use has bin in the beginning of this punishment to degrade and deprive
him publicly of his Honor of Knighthood. For it is but life lost or taken
away, Vide Mills fol. 81. by ungirding his Military girdle, by taking away his
sword, his guilt Spurs cut off with a Hatchet, his Gauntlets plucked off from
him, and the schochean of his Arms reversed, 4. E. 4.20, Cambden 171 b. and of
the degradation of a Knight, which was Andrew Horkley, under E. 2. who was a
Scot born, by that King created Earl of Carleile, vide Seldom, his Titles of
Honor fol. 337.

And by the statute made Anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13. entitled, An Act of
Reformation of apparel. It was permitted for Knights to wear in a Collar of
Gold, named a Collar of 55. Esses. And although this dignity of Knighthood had
its original, and was given to men of war; yet in all successions of Ages, and
in all Nations the same also is bestowed on men of peace by Sovereign Kings,
that in several Functions and places in the Commonweal be of singular desert,
whereby the service of the Commonweal at home is levelled and made equal with
that abroad, for as Tully said truly, Parva sunt focis. Arma risi est Consilium
domi. He that receives the Dignity of a Knight kneeleth down, and the King
slightly smites him upon the shoulder speaking these words unto him
therwithall in French. So is Chevalier a nome de dieu, that is to say, Be thou
a Knight in the name of God, and then afterward thereupon the King says,
Avances Chevalier, that is, arise Sir Knight, vide Hooker al. Vocrell, his C.
10. fol. also Seldom f. 37. who there speaks of our Earl Marshal of England
for making of Knights; for a Knight is not made by Letters pattents, or by the
Kings Writs, as are those of greater dignity, but by the sword; For this Honor
is supposed to be given on the sudain, and therefore it is commonly done only by
the sword without any pattent, but the King may by his Letters Patten's create
a Knight.

Earls in ancient time had power in Knighthood, M. Seldom title Honors, fol.
136. But now neither may the Prince nor any other of the Nobility make a
Knight, but only the King or his Lieutenant by Commission hereof, vide Cook 6.
part Dyer reports. f. 74. b. No man is born a Knight, Seldom f. 3.18 as he may
be to titles of Honor, Causa patet. But a Knight may be made so soon as he is
baptized, as in that book is mentioned, excepts Knights Barronets, whose
posterity does receive that title by descent with some limitation; as in the
Kings Books thereof may appear. Note also in the said Titles of Honor, fol. 318
and 313. the first Knight made in England.

With us in England there are diverse sorts of Knights, whereof Camden fol. 171.
and Mills do write at large; but my purpose is only to speak of one order of
them: amongst the Romans there was but one Order of them, And these were next
in degree to the Senators themselves, as with us they are to the Barons; and
they who simply without any addition be called Knights, howsoever they are in
Order ranked last; yet by institution they be first and of greatest antiquity,
and the other attributes according to the several inventions of particular
Princes.

And I do not remember, that in our Law books, I have read any thing concerning
the Order of Knights, with addition, viz. Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Garter, Knight of the Bath, Knight Barronet, Knight Banneret, But in the
statute of 21. H. 8. cap. 13. where it is thus enacted.

Every Knight of the Garter may have three Chaplains, whereof every one may
purchase license or dispensation, and receive, have, and keep two Benefices
with care of souls, and they of this Order whereof I have now writ, are called
Knights of the spur, and Butcher Knights. And so it is used in the statute of
13. R. 2. cap. 1. and in the statute of 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. Hereof see Cambden
176. and M. Seldens Title of Honors, fol. 336.

Between Doctors of the Civil law, and Knights have ever bin question for
precedence and Sergeants at law* since either of them have obtained credit in
the Common wealth: as may appear by the comparison that Tully makes between
Mucius Maurena, a Knight of Rome, and Publius Sulpicius a Lawyer; either of
them standing for the Consulship. In his Eloquent Oration m^de for Mu^ena, and
many Disputes of Bardell and Bardus, arguing the Case to and fro: which
although it be yet disputable in foreign Countries, where the civil law is in
credit; yet here amongst us in England, it is without controversy, and so the
precedence thereof is undoubtedly in the Knight and Sergeant at law, in regard
of their Callings. But if they both are of equal degree of knighthood, or a
Sergeant at law not Knight, then it goes otherwise, as by Knighthood, by
Seigniority, and by Serieantship, by the Kings Writ and degree allowed
thereupon, Dr. Ridley 95. and so Seldom his Titles of Honor, fol. 55. touching
part of this Discourse, not all.

The opinion of some men has lately bin, that Knights Lieutenants, that is to
say, such as have been Ambassadors to foreign Princes or Judges within the
Realm, may and ought to have, during their lives, precedencie above men of
their own ranks, after these their Offices expired, and many of them do
stand strongly hereupon, and sub judice lis est, not determined by judgment,
but admitting it to be so by way of Argument in that case; yet all the Heralds
do utterly deny that privilege to the Mayor of London and Aldermen, or
Justice of the peace, who have their limited Jurisdiction of Magistracy
confined within the compass of their own walls and divisions.

But touching the former, they are general Magistrates throughout the Realm,
and their employment concerns the whole Commonweal, and having the public
Justice of Honor of the whole estate committed unto them, do more
meritoriously draw from thence a greater respect of honor, according to the
generallitie of their administrations and employments, which an inferior and
more confined Magistrate may have.

The name of a Knight is the name of Dignity, and a degree, as is the name of a
Duke, Earl, etc. But in all actions he shall be named Knight, otherwise the
Writ shall abate, See The^wall, lib. 3. cap. 3.

A Knight also must be named by the name of Baptism, and by his surname, as
Sir Jerome Bows Knight, but those of degree honorable, who are made by
pattent, may be named only by their Christian name, and by their title of
honor, as John Earl of Clare, and that for two causes; first, because of
their solemn creations, it is notorious, (et nomen dicitur a noscendo.)
Secondly, there is but one of that title of honor within England, and
therefore it is certain what person he is, but otherwise of Knights, as it is
certainly known in Anno 8. Edw. 4.24. a.

And Priscot Chief Justice says in 32. H. 6. fol. 26. b. that if an Esquire
be made a Knight, he loses his name of Esquire; but albeit a Knight may be
made a Nobleman, or of any high degree, he still retains the name of Knight,
and so ought to be styled in the making of all Writs. See Milles; fol. 81.

Also, if a man do recover in an action by the name of John Styles Esquire, and
afterward he is made a Knight, he must sue out his Scire facias by the name of
Knight, Vide Long. anno 5. Ed. 4. fol. 19.

And this name shall not dye with him, for if he were bound by an Obligation
by the name of Gentleman or Esquire, and afterward is made Knight and dies,
the Plaintiff in the Action to be brought against his Executors must name him
Knight, otherwise the Writ shall abate, Vide anno 7. H. 4.7.6. and 26. Ed. 3.
fol. 64. a.

Thomas Ormond was attainted by Parliament by the name of Thomas Ormond Knight,
whereas he was no Knight, he shall not forfeit any thing by that attainder,
because it cannot be intended the same person, for this word Knight is parcel
of his name, 21. E. 4. fol. 17. a. If a Grant be made to H. Knight, when he is
no knight, it is a void Grant. But if it be a Feofment in Fee with livery of
seism, the livery it makes good Vide Broek titulo Grants, 50. Anno. 4. H. 6.

If the Plaintiff or Demandant do in his Writ name the Defendant or Tenant
Esquire when he is a Knight, the Writ shall not only abate, but also the
Plaintiff or Demand^nt may not have another writ by Iournier account. Finches
book 59. Vide Cooks b. part. de les Reports 1. b. But by the statute Anno 1.
Ed. 6. cap. 7. It is amongst other things Enacted, that albeit any person or
persons being Justices of Assise, Justices of Goal delivery, or Justices of the
Peace within any of the Kings Dominions, or being in any other of the Kings
Commissions whatsoever shall fortune to be made or created, Duke, Archbishop,
Earl, Marquess, Viscount, Baron, Bishop, Knight, Justice of the one Bench or
on the other, or Sergeant at Law, or Sheriff? yet notwithstanding, he and they
shall remain Justices and Commissioners, and have full power and Authority to
execute the same in like manner and Form; as he or they might or ought to have
done before the same.

By the statute of Anno 5. H. 5. cap. 5. It is enacted as follows, That every
Writ original of accounts personal appeals, and Ind^ctments shall be made
with the addition of their Estates and Degrees, etc. and a little after it is
provided, That if the said Writs of accounts personal be not according as the
record and deed by the surplusage of the additions aforesaid, that for this
cause they are not.

John a Style Gent. is bound by obligation to one A. B. the Obliger is
afterward made Knight, the Bond is forfeited. A. B. by his Attorney draws a
note or title for an original Writ, according to the defendants degree, though
it vary from the original, specially as it ought to be made by the statute:
But the Cursitor mistaking did ^ake the original only according to such
addition, as was specified in the Obligation, omitting his degree of dignity,
and the Entry of Capias alias and plures, was according to the said original:
but in the Exigent and Proclamation, and in the Entry of it, the Defendant was
^amed according to his degree of Dignity, upon a Writ of Error, after
judgment, doubt was, if this might be a^ended in another Court, then where the
original was made; and at last, it was resolved by all the Court, that the
Record should be amended by the Cursitor, and made according to the Note or
Title delivered unto him by the Plaintiffes Attorney, Cook 8. part fol. 15. b.

It appears in our Book of Law, that the highest and lowest Dignity are
uniuersall; For as if a King of a Foreign Nation come into England by leave of
the King of this Realm (as it ought to be) in this case he shall ^^e and be
sued in the name of a King, 11. Ed. 3. Test Breccon. 473. So shall he sue or be
sued by the Name of a Knight, whersoever he received that degree of Dignity,
^o. Ed. 4.6. H. 6.14. but otherwise it is, as ^f a Duke, Marquess, Earl or
other Title of Honor given by any Foreign King; yea though the King by
Letters Pattents of ^ife conduct, do name him Duke, or by any other his
for^eign Title of Dignity: For experience shows, that Kings joined in league
together (by a certain mutual, and as it were a Natural power of Monarchs,
according ^o the Law of Nations) have denized one another sub^ects and
Ambassadors, graced with this title of Honor.

Therefore though a Knight receive his Dignity of Foreign Prince, he is so
to be styled in all Legal proceedings within England, Vide Cook, 7. part.
fol. 16. b.

And Kings were wont to send their sons to the^^ Neighbor Princes, to
receive Knighthood at their hands, Vide Seldom, fol. 331. and 308. thinking
that i^ was more honorable to take Arms of some other, le^^ affection might
seem to prevent judgment, when the father gave them that honor.

Thus was our King H. 2. sent unto David King o^ Scots, and Malcombe also king
there, sent unto our H 2. and our king to the king of Castile, to take of them
Military or Civil Arms, for the terms and phrase^ they used in that age for
the making of a knight, Vid^ Camden 174.8. vide Seldom, fol. 315.

And knights in all foreign Countries have eve^ place and precedencie
according as they are ancient knights, which privilege is deemed to Noblemen,
for be they never so ancient in forraigce Countries, they shall go before as
Puesneys.

The degree of knighthood is not only a Dignity and honor to the party, for
so it is termed in Brook, title Additions, fol. 44. but honorable for the
kingdom; and therefore it has been an ancient Prerogative of the kings of
this Realm, at their pleasure to compel men of worth to take upon them this
degree upon the payment of a Fine, as appears in Ann. 7. H. 6.15. Pitzh.
Abridg. tit. Im. 12. and by the Statute, a. 1. Ed. 2. de militibus. But we see
by experience in these days, that none are compelled thereunto, and that is
the reason; wherefore if the Plaintiff be made knight hanging the Writ it
shall abate, because he has changed his name, and that by his own act, Vide
Cook 7. part f. 27. b. part 10. b. 1, Ed. 6. cap. 7. contrary.

And for that cause also by the common Law, not only the king, but every Lord
of a Manor ought to have of every of his tenants a reasonable fine to make his
eldest son knight, Vide Bracton, fol. 36. b. and all lands are subject to these
aides, except only ancient Demeasnes, and grand and petty serjeantly tenures,
as the Law has been anciently delivered, Vide Fiszh. Not. bre. f. 83. a. and
Seldom, f. 13. where it is also said, one that wrote a little after the statute
of West, the first allows as a good bar to the avowry for the tenant to
plead, that the father himself is no knight, so that one not knighted cannot
claim the aid of his own Tenants, Briton de Prises de Avers.

And it was not at the liberty of the Lord to make more or less of his
Tenants, by the common Law in this case but by the statute at Westminster, 1.
cap. 35. it is put into certainty, viz. forasmuch as before this time
reasonable and to make one son knight, or to marry his daughter was never put
into certainty, nor how much should be taken at that time, whereby some levied
unreasonable aid, and more often then seemed necessary whereby the people were
sore grieved.

And it is therefore provided, that from henceforth a whole knights see be
taken but 20. s. and of more, more, and of less, less, after that rate, and
that none shall levy such aid to make his son knight, until the son be 15.
years of age, nor to marry his daughter until she be of the age of 7. years
and of that there shall be mention made in the kings Writs, formed on the same
if any one will demand it, and if it happen that the Father after he had
leavied any such aid of his Tenants, did before he has married his Daughter,
the Executors of the Father shall be bound to the daughter, for so much as the
Father received for the Aid. And if the Fathers goods b^ not sufficient, his
heir shall be charged therewith unto the daughter, and this Heir is so incident,
that although the Lord do confirm unto the Tenant to hold by fealty an^ certain
Rent, and release unto him all other services an^ demands; yet he shall have
the aid to make his elde^^ Son Knight, Anno 40. E. 3. f. 22. Finches book 24.
but the King was not bound by the statute beforementioned, because the King was
not named in that statute, and therefore by the statute 25. E. 3. cap. 11. The
Kings aids were brought to a like value, Seldom fol. 3.30.

The intention of the Law, is, that an heir within the age of 21. years is not
able to do Knight Service, till his full age of 21. years, Littleton lib. 2.
cap 4. f. 22.

But such a presumption of Law does give place to (...) judgment and proof to
the contrary, as Bracton says. Sa^^litur presumptioni donec probetur in
contrarium.

And therefore the King who is the Sovereign and Supreme Judge of Chivalty, has
dubbed him Knight, he by this has judged him able to do him Knight Service,
and all men concluded not to say to the contrary, and therefore such an heir
being made Knight, either in the life of his Father, or afterward during his
minority, shall be out of ward and custody, both for Lands, and for his body,
or marriage, by the ancient common Law; by reason also, that the Honor of
Knighthood is so great, that it is not to be holden under by any: yet if the
King do create any such an Heir within Age, a Duke, or Marquess, Earl. Count,
Viscount, or Baron, by this he shall be out of ward and custody, both for his
Land and for his body, vide ^ook 6 part 74, a.

And therefore it is provided by the statute of Mag^^ ^harta, Cap. 3. Ita tamen
quod si ipse dum infra aetatem fue^^t, fiat miles nihil ominus terra remaneat
in custodia do^inorum suorum. So that although such an heir within age (...)
made a Knight, and thereby to this purpose is estee^ed of full age; yet the Laws
shall remain in the custo^^^ of the Lord till his age of 21. years by the
provision (...) the said Act. Quere, if the son and heir of the Tenant (...)
the King by Knight Service, etc. be made Knight in ^aris by the King of France?
whether he shall be out of ^ardship after the death of his Father or no, for
thereby ^e is a Knight in England, Cook. 7. par. a. 2. E. 4. fo. b. tamen ^ide
Cooks 6. par. 74. b. Mention is only made of Knights, ^ade by the King himself,
or by his Lieutenants in Ire^^nd.

But when the King does make an heir apparent with^^ age of a Tenant by Knights
service, a Knight in the ^se time of his Ancestor, and after the death of his
An^estor, the said heir being within age, shall in this case be (...) of ward,
and shall pay no value for his marriage, neither shall the Lord have the
custody of the Land; for in that case by the making of him Knight in the life
of his Ancestor, he is made of full age: so that when his Ancestor ^yeth, no
Interest in the body nor in the Land shall in^est, but the Knight may tender
his livery, as if he were (...) full age, and in this case the King shall have
primer ^^ism, as if he had bin 21. years old at the time of the de^ease of his
Ancestor, and not otherwise. Cooks 8. part. fol. (...) 71. a. for the statute
of Magna Charta does not extend unto it. For the purpose of it does extend only
when the Heir is in ward, infra etatem is made Knight, then rema neat torra in
Custodia. But when the Heir is in ward, being Knight in the life of his
Ancestor, then the Custod^ cannot remain or continue, which had never any
inception or essence.

Also when the Heir after the death of his Ancestou^ within age is made a
Knight, if after tender made unt^ him, he within Age does marry elsewhere; yet
he shall not pay the Forfeiture of his Marriage: For by the making of him
K^ight, he is out of ward and custody of hi^ Lord; for then he ought to be sui
juris, and may employ himself in Feats of Arms for defense of ths Realm, and
therefore may not be within the Custody or keeping of another, but none shall
pay any Forfeiture, but when after refusal he does marry himself during the
time when he is under the Custody or keeping of his Lord.

And this does appear by the statute of Merton, cap. 6. Si maritaverit sine
licentia Domini sui ut ei auferat, Maritagium suum, etc. Which Words cannot be
understood, when he is out of Ward and Custody, no more then when he is married
after his age of one and twenty years.

Note, hereby may appear that the King may pre^ent his Grant or other Lords of
the double value by Knighthood; yet in such a C^se presently after the Heir is
made Knight, after the Death of his Ancestour, the Lord may have a Writ de
valor Marigii, for the single Cooks 6. part 74. and 75. and note Plowden f.
267.

Also by the ancient Common Law of this Realm, if a Villain be be made a
Knight, he is immediately enfran^ranchized, Olanvile lib. 5. cap. 5. f. 27. and
Bracton, lib. 4. ^ap. 198. b.

Or if a Ribauld or man of base Birth and Condition had ^trucken a Knight he
should by the ancient Laws have ^ost his hand wherewith he offended, Britton 19.
in his ^ppeales.

But in France it was judged anciently, that when a lord of a villain had
Knighted his villain, being a Gentleman, he became Free, and had the Honor
lawfully, ^ut if another Lord had Knighted him, nothing had bin ^rought by it:
For none could mannue him, but the Lord, and till Mannumission or till
Knighthood had ci^ill Freedom for his ground, he was not capable of it, ^xcept
by the King only, vide Seldens Titles of Honor; fol. 318.

It was enacted in Parliament, Anno 6. Ioh. Regis in ^ec verba, Rex vicecom.
etc. Sciatis quod consensum, est cum assensu Archieporum, Commit. Baronium. and
omnium fidelium urum Angl. quod Novem milites per totam Angl. invenient decimum
militem been paratum equis and Armis ^d defensionem Regni nostri vide Cook
before his ninth Book. b.

There has ever bin and still is great use of the service of Knights, even in
civil affairs, and concerning matters of Justice, as in a Writ of right, which
is the highest writ in the law, for the trials of titles touching the
inheritance of lands, the Tenant is at election to have his trial by a grand
assize, or else by battle; if by the great assize, then (...) de magna assiza
Elegenda shall be taken out. And upon the return of that Writ those four
Knights nominated, must appear Gladiis cinctis Dyer, 79. f. 103.

If the Tenant make his election by Battle, each parties are to choose their
Champions, and the Court shall award the Battle, and the Champions shall be a
mainprise, and sworn to perform the Battle at a certain day in the Term, and
idem dies shall be given to the parties, at which day and place, a List shall
be made in an even and plain ground, their Squadrant, that is to say, every
square 60. foot, East, West, North, and South, and the place or Court for the
Justices of the Common Pleas without, and upon the Lists furnished with the
same Cloths, which belong to their Court at Westminster, and a Bar there
shall be made for the Sergeants at Law, and the Robes of the Justices and
Sergeants shall be of Scarlet, with their Coifes, as it was Anno 13. Eliz. and
then was made Proclamation with three O. yes, etc. and the Demandant was first
solemnly demanded, and did not appear: Whereupon the Mainprise of the Champion
was demanded to bring forth the Champion of the Demandant, who came to the
place apparelled with red Sandalls upon his black Armor, bare legged from the
knee downwards, and bare headed, and bare Arms to the Elbowes, being brought in
by a Knight, namely by Sir Jerome Bows, who carried a Red Baston of an Ell
long, typt with horn, and a Yeoman carrying the Target made of double Leather,
and they were brought in at the North side of the Lists, and went about the
sides of the Lists, and then came toward the Bar before the Justices, with
their solemn Congies, and there was he made to stay on the Southside of the
place, being the right side of the Court.

And after that the other Champion was brought in like manner at the South Side
of the lists with like congies, by the hands of Sir Henry Cheney, Knight, and
was placed on the Northside of the Bar, and two Sergeants, being of the
counsel of each party, in the midst between them; this done the Demandant was
solemnly called again, and appeared not, but made defanit, Bucham Serj^ant for
the Tennant prayed the Court to record the non-suite, quod factum fuit, and
then Dyer chief Justice reciting the Writ and Count and issue joined upon the
battle, and the oath of the Champion to perform it, and the prefixion of his
day and place, did give Judgment against the Demandant, and that the Tennant
should have the Land to him, and to his heirs for ever.

And the Demandant, and his pledges, de prosequendo in miserecordia Reginae,
and afterward solemn Proclamation was made, that the Champions, and all other
there present, which were by estimation four thousand persons might depart in
the peace of God, and the Queen, Et sic fecerunt magra clamore, vivat R^gina,
vid. Die. 30.

Also if false Judgment be given in the county in the Sheriffs Court, then
the Writ shall be directed unto the same Sheriff, and the writ shall be thus,
viz. Henricus etc. vic' Lincoln' saltum si Jo: Afec' tunc inpleno Comitat. tuo
recordari fac' loquar: que est in eodem Comitatu tuo per bre' nostri de recto
inter Iohannem a pretend and W. B. tenent' de vno messuagio and centum acres
terrae c^m pertinena' in Com' unde idem Io: acqueritur? falsum sibi factum
suisse Iudicium in eodem and recordo illud litter' coram Iustic' nostris apud
Westm' tali die sub sigillo tuo; et legales milites ejusdem Com' and illis qui
record' illi interfuerunt and som' per bonos somonon' pred' B. quod tunc et ibi
anditurae recordum illud et habeas ibi sun' nostra quatuor militum et hoc bre'
Fitz. H. Not. br' et ibid. and these four must be Knights indeed.

Also the Justices upon consideration of the usual words in every Writ of
Venire facias, which by precipimus eibi quod venire facias ceram, etc. 12 tam
milites quamalios liberos et legales homines. etc. Say that these words, tam
milites were not at the first put into the Writ without effect, Plowden, fol.
^17. b. For it seems that in di^bus illis; some Knights were returned upon
every ^enire facias. By the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 12. It is ordained,
that Assizes of Novell diseisin, and Mors. Dancestor should not be taken any
where, but within the Counties where they happen.

If a Tennant do lay an essoyne, de malo lecti, he may have a Writ out of the
Chancery, to warrant it, by which it shall be commanded to four Knights to
view him, and if they see him sick, then they are to give him day to the end
of a year, and a day, Finches book 87. b. note the Register, fol. 117. b.
quod corceratur non obligatur nisi sit miles, etc. juxea fornam statuti Westminster.
1. cap. 10. and Stamfords pleas, fol. 40.

It is a received opinion, that Knights are excused from attendance at Leets,
Britton, 29. and 36. is cited to prove it; and by a large understanding of the
intent, and meaning of the Statute of Marlbr. cap. 10. For the ancient
Common Law has such respect unto the degree of knighthood, that they or their
eldest sons, were not compellable to find pledges in the Leet, or Law-dayes:
For the Statute of Marlbr. aforesaid, was not introductive legis, For it was
before the Conquest, vide the Lord Chancellors speech, fol. 77. and the
Common Law by this Statute is not alleged; and to that effect, vide Finches
Book, fol. 132. a. and Bro. tit. fol. 39. and to the book called the Mirror
of Justice, mentioned in the Preface to Cooks ninth part: it is said, that
Knights are excepted, and so it appears, that the practice, was as well
before, as immediately after, the making of that Statute of Marlb. and
interpretation practica, a principle way and form of interpretation of Laws.

The Lord Chancellors speech in the case of Post-nati, 34. and in Divinity,
Propter sanctorum est interpretes preceptorum, ibidem 66. But a Knight, and
superiors, and inferiors, are bound by Law to take notice of the proceedings
there: For if a man be outlawed for felony at a County Court, and one of the
same County not knowing of the felony does receive him he is accessory, 13.
and 14. Eliz. Dyer, 355. a. et Stamford 96. et 41. Eliz.

Also when the King does summon to his Parliament, Writs shall be sent to the
Sheriff, to make choice of Knights for every shire; in this form, Rex vlc'
etc. saltim quia (...) nostri Consilii pro quibusdam arduis and urgentibus
negotiis nos statum et defensionem regni nostri Anglia and Ecclesiae Anglicanae
concernen' quoddam Parliamentum nostrum apud civitatem nostram Westminster. 12. d^e
Novembr. prox' futur' teneri ordinavimus et ibidem prefatis magna tibus
Proceribus dom' regni nostri colloquium habere et tractare tibi precipimus
firmiter injungentis quod facta proclamatione in proximo (...) tuo po^t
receptionem hujus litteris nostris tenen l' die and loco praedict' d^os milites
gladiis cinctis magis idoneos, and discret' com' praedict, etc. and electionem
illam in (...) distinct and aperte sub sigillo tuo, and sub sigillis eorum qui
electioni. illi interfuerint nobis in Cancellaria nostra, (...) and locum
certifices indilate; Cromptons Courts, 1. b. vide Stat. de An. 23. H. 6. cap.
15. Where amongst other things it is enacted that the Knights of the Shires for
Parliaments, hereafter to be chosen shall be natural Knights of the same
County, for the which they shall be so chosen, or otherwise such natural
Esquiers or Gentlemen being of the same County as shall be able to be
Knights; vide Plowden, fol. 121.

Peers are by intendment of Law, sufficient of Freehold, and that is one of
the reasons, whereof no capias or exigent lies against him for debt or
trespass; but the Law has not that opinion of the Knights sufficiency of
Freehold, for be may be a Knight Sans terrae; therefore 26. H. 8.7. a. Brook
Exigent 72. and then he is to be returned of any jury or inquest, howsoever
he may be worthy, and sufficient to serve the Commonwealth in Marshall
affairs.

The wives and widows of Knights in legal proceedings and in Courts of
Justice have not the titles of Ladies as the wives or widows of Noblemen
have, but that title by the courteous speech of England.

And if in any action they be not called Ladies, for that cause, the writ shall
not abate for that surplusage, Anno 8. H. 6.10. because Dominae is generally as
men Domini, so women after 14. years of age called Dominae, Ladies or Dames,
and which were anciently navigeable women were called Dominae, and by our
English Poets, Dames; First, Dominae is often for women generally, as special
Honor for that sex, not being out of use with us at this day, nor with the
French; as also amongst the Italians, Dominae for them is familiar, vide
Seldens title of Honor, 1. part fol. 53. But if she be named Countess or
Baroness shall abate the writ 14. H. 6.2. And Cooks 6. part, des reports, 53.
b.

By the statute of Magna charta, cap. 21. Knights are free from cart taking,
that no Demeasne cart of them shall be taken.

By the statute of 1. Iac. cap. 27. It seems, that Knights may keep
Greyhounds, and setting Dogs, or Nets to take Pheasants or Partridges in;
though they cannot dispense 10. l. per annum nor be worth 200. l. For the
express words of that statute are, that all the Sons of Knights are excepted.

Observations concerning a Knight Batchelour.
A Knight Batchelour cannot claim the privilege, that Knights have from
cart-taking, by Magna charta, cap. 21.

A Knight Batchelours Son cannot keep a Greyhound, because he is not within
the statute of, 1. Iac. cap. 27. unless he have 10. l. Lands, etc.

Quars, whether the Knight Batchelours addition, do abate any action, etc.

If one be Knighted in the life time of his Father, it frees him of wardship,
but e contrario of a Knight Batchelour.

Knights are excused from attendance at Leets, but so are not Knights
Batchelours.

Of Esquires.
ALthough by the Civil Law, there be no Gentlemen of title, under Knights,
but all the rest wont under the name of people, yet with us, there are in the
rank who have names of pre-eminence, whereby they are in degree above the
rest; as Esquiers and Gentlemen, all which give ensigns or coats of arms,
and thereby are distingnished from the meaner sort of people, in which respect
(Bartol. Tract. de Insignis) calls Noble, but of a weak Nobility, for it
has no further prerogative in it, then that it makes them differ from the
baser sort of people.

Of these two sort of Gentlemen, with us, the Esquire has the Prerogative
priority, but it seems, if an Esquire be named Gentleman, or a Gentleman be
named Esquire, it is no vice in legal proceedings, Brook additions, 44.

Esquire seems by the Common name, we give him in Latin, to have had his
original, either for that he carried the armor of the King, Duke, or other
great personage, as we see not only in the Scriptures, as Saul and Jonathan
had their armor bearers, but in Poets and other Profane stories, Patroclus
was Achilles his armor bearer, and Clitus great Alexanders, whereupon some
write, that he, whom we call Armiger in Latin, is a Footman, that with a
spear, shield, or head piece follows an armed Knight in battle, or rather
as some others suppose; It is the Footman himself armed in the field; but
howsoever the word be taken, this is sure, those men were of good account in
old time, as those who won themselves credit out of war, and so their
estimation remained unto their posterity; And as those were in time before, so
are these, which are in our days, as descending for the most part from their
worthy Ancestors, and our books of the Common Law do distinguish them thus,
that is to say.

Knighthood is a dignity, but Esquires and Gentlemen are but names of worship,
An. 14. H. 5. And Brook in his Abridgement in that case, Tit nosmer de
dignity, 33. says, to be a Knight est Gradus, but to be an Esquire or
Gentleman est Status. For Gradus continet Statum inse, and non e contrari, vide
Thesoal. 105. concerning this word (worshipful,) read in the printed book,
Master Seldens title of honor, Prima pars fol. 124. and sequentia.

In time past, every Knight had two of these waiting upon him, they carried his
morion and shield, and as inseparable Companions, they stuck close to him
because of the said Knight their Lord, they had certain lands in escuage, like
as had the Knight himself, who held them of the King by Knights service.

The beginning of arms in Europe amongst Christians is supposed from the ^oly
wars, for the Turk paint them not, and so with us a^out H. 3. They became
more hereditarily established, and when the Prince enabled any, he gave them
the parti^ular of his bearing in Blason, Master Seld n in his Preface fol. 5.
where you may also see an example in the Reign of R. 2.

But now adays there are five distinct sorts of these, for those whom I have
spoken already, be now no more in any request, the principal Esquires at this
day, are accounted those, that are elected Esquires for the Princes body. The
next unto them be Knights eldest Sons successively; In a third place are
reputed younger Sons of the eldest Sons of Barons, and of other Nobles of
higher estate; and when such Heirs Males fails, together with them also the
title fails.

In a fourth rank are reckoned those, unto whom the King himself together
with the title gives arms, or creates Esquires by putting about their necks
a silver Collar of S. S. and in former times upon their heels a pair of white
spurs silvered, whereupon at this day in the West part of the Kingdom, they
are called white spurs, and to the first begotten Son only of these does
this title belong.

In a fifth and last place be those ranked, and taken for Esquires, who have any
superior public office in the Commonwealth, or serve the Prince in any
worshipful calling, at the Coronations of Kings and Queens, Knights of the
Bath are made men of worth, and honorable blood, to the end that their
Majesty's may be accompanied in their own honors, every of which Knight
having two Gentlemen to attend him in that Ceremony, who are ever after
enabled by that service to be Esquires during their lives.

But this name of Esquire, which in ancient time was a name of charge and
office only, first crept in amongst other titles of dignity and worship (so
far as ever I could observe) In the reign of R. 2. Camden, fol. 176. vide
Sir Thomas Smith de republica, Anglorum fol. 26. where says he, that the
Esquire is no distinct order of the Commonwealth, and hereof see the statute
of An. 16. R. 2. cap 4. and an. ejusdem Regis, cap. 2.

A Sergeant of the Kitchen in the Kings house, may bear the name and addition
of Cook, or of Esquire, by the opinion of Newton. But Ienny said, that such
officers of the Kings Household would be much agreved, if they should be named
by their trade or occupation: Paston peradventure faith in that case, the writ
may be good, because of the Statute, Anno 1. H. 5. cap 5. For the Statute is,
That he shall be named of the Town, degree, state, condition, or mystery:
And when he was named, Cook he observed the Statute: For he has named him
by his name of mystery, and yet he may be in that case an Esquire, and a
Cook, 14. H. 6. fol. 15.

If a man be an Esquire, or Gentleman only by office, and lose his office, he
then does lose his gentry, also, 26. H. 6. Estopell 47.

Note, Esquire or Gentleman, are but additions to satisfy the said Statute:
But names of dignity are parcel of the name, vide Bro: additions, 58.21. E.
4.71. b. and therefore if a precipe quod reddat be brought against A.B.
yeoman, and Recovery is had, whereas the Tennant was a Gentleman, yet the
Recovery is good: The same Law where a Release is made to A. B. yeoman, who is
a Gentleman, and where addition is given by the Party, where it needs not by
the law (being no dignity) it is void, so if a deed be made to a Gentle man by
the name of a yeoman: For there is a great difference between deeds and writs,
Cooks 6. part. a.

If an Esquire be to be arraigned of high treason, he may and ought to be
tried, Per probos and legales homines that may dispend 40. s. per An. of
freehold, or be a 100. l. in value in goods, and so the Statute that does
speak of men of his condition has always been put in ure, Dyer 99. b.

The King may make an Esquire by Patent in these words, viz. creamus to
Armegerum, etc. Note Mr. Seldom, his Preface to his titles of honor 5. b and
313.

By the Statute of 21. H. 8. cap. 13. It is amongst other things enacted, That
the brethren and sons borne in wed-locke of every Knight, being spiritual
men, may every of them purchase lycense and dispensation, and receive, take,
and keep two parsonages, or benefices with cure of souls.

The son or sons of any Knight is privileged to keep a Gray hound, or
setting doge, or nets to take Peasants, or Patridges in, though he cannot
dispend x.i in his own right, or in his wives right of an estate of
inheritance, or of the value of 30. l. of estate for life, 1. Jac. cap. 17.

The Definition of Gentry, or civil Nobility.
GEnerous seems to be made of two words, the one French, Gentile honestus,
vel honesto natus; the other Saxon (mon) as if you would say, a man well borne,
and under this name are all comprised, that are above yeoman, so that Nobles
are truly called Gentlemen, by the course and custom of England.

Nobility, is either Major, or Minor; Major contains all titles, and degrees
from Knights upwards, Minor from all Barons downwards, Gentlemen have their
beginning, either of blood, as that they are borne of worshipful Parents, or
that they had expedited something worthy in peace or war, whereby they
deserve to have arms, and to be accounted Gentlemen.

But in these days he is a Gentleman, who is so commonly taken, and reputed,
Doctor Ridley 96. And whosoever studieth in the Universities, who professes
the liberal sciences, and to be short, who can live idly, and without manual
labor, and will bear the Port, charge, and countenance of a Gentleman, he
shall be called Master: For that is the title that men give to Esquires, and
other Gentlemen: For true it is with us, as one said; Tanti eris aliis quanti
tibi sueris: and if need be, a King of Heralds shall give him for money arms
newly made, and invented with the Creast and all: the title whereof shall
pretend to have hin found by the said Herald, in the perusing and viewing of
old Registers, where his ancestors in time past had been recorded to bear the
same: or if he will do it more truly, and of better faith, he will write,
that for the merits of, and certain qualities that he does see in him, and for
sundry noble acts which he has performed, he by the authority which he has,
as King of Heralds in his Province, and of arms, gives unto him and his
heirs, these and these heroical bearings in arms, vide Smith de Republic.
Anglorum.

But some men of Judgment make doubt and question, whether this manner of
making Gentlemen is to be allowed or no: and it may seem, that it is not
amiss: For first the Province loses nothing by it, as he should do, if he
were in France. Read Fortescue, fol. 82.

For the Yeoman or Husbandman is no more subject to toil, or tax in England,
then Gentlemen; nay in every payment to the King, the Gentleman is more
charged, which he bears the more gladlier, and dare not gainesay, to save and
keep his honor and reputation, in any show, or muster, or other particular
charge of the Town where he is, he must open his purse wider, and augment his
proportion above others, or else he does diminish his honor, and reputation:
as for their outward show: a Gentleman, if he will be accounted, he must go
like a Gentleman.

And if he be called to the wars, he must, and will whatsoever it cost him,
array himself, and arm his body according to the vocation that he pretends,
he must also show a more manlike courage and tokens of better education;
higher stomach, and bountifuller liberality then others, and keep about him
idle servants, who shall do nothing but wait upon him, so that no man has
hurt by it, but himself, who hereby (perchance) will bear a bigger sail, then
he is well able to maintain.

For as touching the policy and government of the Commonwealth, it is not
those that have to do with it, which will magnify themselves, and go in
higher Buskins then their estate, but they who are to be appointed, are persons
tried and well known.

In 25. Eliz. the case was, that whereas it is required by the Statutes of 1.
H. 5. cap. 5. That in every writ original, etc, in which an exigent shall be
awarded, that additions should be given unto the Defendant of their estate,
and degree, etc. and the case was that one was a yeoman by his birth, and yet
commonly called and reputed a Gentleman; and yet it was adjudged, that a writ
may be brought against him with the addition of Gentleman: For so much as the
intention of the act, is to have such a name given, by which he may be known,
this is sufficient to satisfy the law, and the act of Parliament: For nomen
dicitur a nostendo, quia natitiam facit, Cook. 6. part. 65. and 67. a.

But if a Gentleman be sued by addition of Husbandman he may say he is a
Gentleman, and demand Judgment of the Writ without saying (and not
husbandman:) For a Gentleman may be a husbandman, but he shall be sued by his
addition most worthy, An. 14. H. 6. b. 16. For a Gentleman of what estate
soever he be, although he go to plough, and by common Law, though he have
nothing in his purse; yet is a Gentleman, and shall not be named in legal
proceedings, Labourer Long, 5. E. 4 33.14. H. 6. fol. 15, a. Dyer.

If a Gentleman be bound an aprentice to a Merchant, or else, etc. be has not
thereby lost his degree of Gentry, Estopell 47.

But if a Recovery be had against a Gentleman by the name of yeoman, in which
case no addition is necessary, then it is no error, Brook Cron 83. addition
58. So if any deed or obligation be made unto him by the name of yeoman.

If a Capius go against A. B. yeoman, and if the Sheriff^ take A. B.
Gentleman, an action of false imprisonment lies against the Sheriff, vide An.
21. E. 4. fol. 71. b.

But if a yeoman be indicted: and A.B. Gentleman being the same man be
produced it is good, Kelway 58. b.

Gentlewomen have the same additions. vide Dyer, 88.
IF one be a Gentleman by office, and loses his office, then he does also
lose his gentility, 28. H. 6.2. Estopel 47.

By the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap 4. entitled an act touching diverse orders for
Artificers; Laborers, Servants of husbandry, and apprentices; amongst other
things, It is enacted, that a Gentleman borne, etc. shall not be compelled to
serve in husbandry.

If any Faulcon be lost, and is found, it shall be brought to the Sheriff, who
must make Proclamation, and if the owner come not within four months, then if
the Finder be a simple man, the Sheriff may keep the Hawke, making agreement
with him that took it, but if he be a Gentleman, and of estate to have, and
keep a Faulcon, then the Sheriff ought to deliver unto him the Faulcon,
taking of him reasonable costs, for the time that he had him in custody, An.
34. E. 3. cap. 22. and anno 37. E. 3. cap. 19.

A Commission is made to keep chrildren into Cathedral Churches, where
children be instructed to sing for the furnishing of the Kings Chapel: These
general words by construction of Law have a reasonable intendment, viz. That
such children who be brought up and taught to sing, to seek and sustain their
living by it; Those may be taken for the Kings service, and it shall be a good
preferment unto them to serve the King in his Chapel; but the sons of
Gentlemen, or any other that are taught to sing for their ornament, delight or
recreation, and not thereby to seek their living, may not be taken against
their will, or the consent of their Parents and friends, and so it was resolved
by the two chief Justices, and all the Court of Star Chamber, anno 43. Eliz.
in the case of one Evans, who had by color of such Letters Patents taken the
son of one Clifton a Gentleman of quality in Norfolk, who was taught to sing
for his recreation, which Evans was for the same offense grievously punished,
Cook, 8. Reports, fol. 46.

And to the end, it may withal appear what degrees of Nobility and Gentry
there were in this Realm, before the coming in of the Normans, and by what
merits men might ascend, and be promoted to the same; I will show you the
copy of an English or Saxon antiquity, which you may read in Lamberts
Perambulation of Kent, fol. 3 64. and Englished thus, viz.

It was sometimes in the English Laws, that the people and laws were in
reputation, then were the wisest of the people, worship-worthy in his degree,
Earl and Chorle, Theyne, and under Theyne: and if a Chorle so thrived, that
had fully five hides of land of his own, a Church, and a Kitchen, a Bel-house,
and a Gate, a seat, a several office in the Kings Hall; then was he from
thenceforth the Theines right worthy, and if a Theyne so thrived, that he
served the King on his message, on his journey-ward in his household, if he then
had a Theyne, which him followed, who to the Kings experience had five hides,
and in the Kings Palace his Lord had served, and thrice with his errand had
gone to the King, he might afterward with his foreoath, his Lords part play
at need; and if a Theyne that he became an Earl, then was he from henceforth
the Theynes right worthy; and if a Scholar so thrived through learning, that
he had degree, and served Christ, he was thenceforth of dignity and peace: so
much worthy as thereunto belonged; unless he forfeited, so that he, the use
of his degree ne might, Mils 73. Nobility, Political, and Civil.

It is observeable, that the Saxons out of all these trades of life, which be
conversant in gain admitted to the state of Gentry, such only as increased by
honest husbandry, or plentiful merchandise; of the first of which Cicero
affirms, that there is nothing meeter for a Free borne man; and of the other
that is prayse-worthy also, if at the length being satisfied with gain, as it
has often come from the sea to the haven, so it changes from the havens into
lands and possessions; and therefore, whereas Gervasius Tilburiensis in his
observations of the Exchequer, accounting it an abasing for a Gentleman to
occupy Publicum mercimonium, common buying and selling, it ought to be
referred to the other two parts of merchandise, that is, to negotiation which
is retayling or keeping of an open shop, and to invention which is exercise
mercery, or some call it to play the Chapman, and not to navigation, which (as
you see) is the only laudable part of all buying and selling.

And again, whereas by the Statute of Magna charta, cap 6. and Merton cap. 7.
It was a discouragement for a ward in Chivalry, which in old time, was as much
as to say, a Gentleman to be married to the Daughter of a Burgess, I think
it ought to be restrained to such only as professed handy crafts, or those
baser arts of buying and selling, to get their living by. But this matter I
leave to the Heralds.

And in this place, it may be remembered, that King Hen. 8. thought it no
disparegement unto him, when he took Anne, Daughter of Thomas Bullen,
sometimes Major of London to his wife.

The Statute of Westminster, 2. cap. I. which was made, Anno 13. E. 1. was
procured, especially, and purposely at the desire of Gentlemen for the
preservation of their lands and hereditaments, together with their surnames and
faculties, and therefore, one called this Statute, Gentiliteum municipale, and
the Lawyers call it, Ius taliatum and taliabile.

The children only of Gentlemen were wont to be admitted into the Innes of
Court, and thereby it came to pass, that there was scant any man found within
the Realm skillful and cunning in the Laws except he were a Gentleman borne,
and came of a good house; For they, more then any kind of men, have a special
care to their Nobility, and to the preservation of their honor and same; for
in those Innes of Court are virtue studied, and vices exiled; for that for the
endowment of virtue, and abandoning of vice, Knights and Barons with other
States, and Noblemen of the Realm, place their Children in these Innes, though
they desire not to have them learned in the Laws, nor to live by the practice
thereof, but only upon their Fathers allowance, vide Fortescue de laudibus
Anglorum, cap. 49.

But the Statute of An. 3. Iac. cap. 4. amongst other things it is enacted,
that if any Gentleman or Person of high degree, shall hereafter go or pass
voluntarily out of this Realm to ferve any foreign Prince, State, or
Potentate, before that he or they shall become bounden with two sureties, as
shall be allowed of the Officers, by that act limited to take the said bond
unto the King his Heirs and Successors in the sum of twenty pounds of
current English money at the least, with condition to the effect following; he
shall be a felon, (viz.) That if the within Bounden, etc. shall not at any
time then after be reconciled to the Pope, or Sea of Rome, not shall enter
into, or consent unto any practice, plot, or conspiracy whatsoever against the
Kings Majesty, his Heirs, and Successors, or any of his, or their estate or
estates, Realms and Dominions, but shall within convenient time after
knowledge thereof had, revealed and disclosed to the Kings Majesty, his Heirs
and Successors, or some of the Lords of his, or their Privy Counsel, all such
practices, plots, and conspiracies, and that then the said obligation to be
void, etc.

Of Yeomen.
THe Yeomanry or Common people, for they be called of the Saxon word Zemen,
which does signify Common, who have some lands of their own to live upon; for
a carve of land, or Plow land, was in ancient times of the yearly value of
five Nobles, and this was the living of a sober man, or Yeoman; Cooks 9. part
fol. 124. b. But in our Laws, they are called Legales homines; a word very
familiar in writs and inquests, and by diverse Statutes, it has been enacted,
that none should pass in any inquest, unless they had forty shillings
freehold in yearly revenues, which makes, if the most value were taken to the
proportion of moneys above six pounds of our current money at this present;
Sir Thomas Smith fol. 30. and by the Statute of 27. Eliz. cap. 6. Jurors must
have 4. l. in lands.

In the end of the Statute, 23. H. 6. cap. 15. concerning the election of
Knights for the Parliament, it is expressly provided, that no man shall be
such Knight, which stands in the degree of a Yeoman.

It appears in Lamberts perambulation of Kent, that this Saxon word
Telphinorman was given to the Theine or Gentleman, because his life was valued
at twelve hundred shillings, and in those days, the lives of all sorts of men,
were rated at certain sums of money, Telphinorman, to the Chorle or Yeoman,
because the price of his head was taxed at two hundred shillings; which thing
(if it were expressly set forth in sundry old Laws yet extant,) might well
enough be found in the Etimologie of the words themselves, the one called a
Twelve hund, as if it were a twelfe hundred.

And in this estate, they please themselves, and joy exceedingly, insomuch as a
man may find sundry Yeomen, although otherwise comparable for wealth with many
of the Gentle sort that will not yet for that, change their condition, nor
desire to be apparelled with the title of Gentry. Lamberts estate of Kent,
names the Yeomanry of Kent, when a Yeoman of 10000. l. yearly revenues, and
refused any other superior title, but these are now no more heard of, etc.

By the Common Law as may appear in An. 1. E. 2. De militibus, and in An. 7.
H. 6.15. men that had lands of the yearly value of 28. l. were compellable at
the Kings pleasure to take upon them the order of Knighthood; and upon
summons, there came a Yeoman who might dispend 100. marks per annum, and the
Court was in doubt, how they might put him of; and at last, he was wayved in,
because he did come the second day, An. 7. H. 6. fol. 15. a.

By this sort of men, the trial of causes in the Country proceeds
ordinarily; for of them, there are greater number in England, then in any other
place, and they also of a more plentiful lively hood, and therefore it comes
that men of this Country are more apt and fit to discern in doubtful causes
of great examinations and trialls, then are men wholly given to moyling in the
ground, to whom the rural exercise engenders rudeness of wit and mind, and
many Franklins and Yeomen there are, so near adjoining as you may make a Jury
with little difficulty; For there be many of them, which be able to spend
100. l. a year, vide Fortescue de landibus Anglorum, etc.

As in ancient time, the Senators of Rome, never elected a Censor; and as with
us in conserving of Nobility, respect is had unto the Revenues, by which their
dignity and Nobility may be supported and maintained, Cooks 7. part 33. b. so
the wisdom of this Realm has of ancient provided, that none shall pass
upon Iuries for the trials of any matters real or personal, or upon any
criminal cause, but such as besides their movables have lands of estate for
life, at the least to a competent value, least for need and poverty, such
Jurors might easily be corrupted (...) suborned, Fortescue 56. b.

And in all cases and causes, the L^w (...) ^^^ved a better opinion of those,
that have (...) ^^nements, or otherwise are of worth in trovea^^ goods,
presuming that such will commit, or omit nothing, that any way may be
prejudicial to their estimations, or which may endanger their estates, then
has Laborers, Artificers, Retaylers, or such like, of whom Tully says, Nihil
proficiunt in so ad^^^^^ ^^^iuntur; and by diverse Statutes, certain immunities
are given to men of quality, which are deemed to the vulgar sort of people,
read hereof amongst other in An. 1. Iac. cap. 127.

By the Statute of 2. H. 4. cap. 21. amongst other things, it is enacted that
no Yeoman should take, or wear any livery of any Lord upon pain of
imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom at the Kings will.

FINIS.

