THE GRAND IMPOSTOR Defeated.

By THO. DANGERFIELD.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Janeway. 1682.

THE GRAND IMPOSTOR DEFEATED.
BY the aid of Mr. Gadbury's Astrological Intelligence, I was brought to a most
famous piece of self-commending Eloquence; entitled, The Earl of Castlemain 's
Manifesto; a piece, I must confess, that I never so much as heard of, until
Gadbury mentioned it in the Preface of his Almanac; neither do I much wonder
that I did not, since there are such ways found out to encourage, or at the
least connive at, all sorts of Popish, and the most Villainous Books and
Pamphlets, daily Printed and Published by the Papists, that ever Men or Devils
invented; which cannot be done but with the greatest scandal and reflection upon
the Government imaginable; and yet how are we to expect any better, since
mercinary Ignorants have the perusing of, and liberty to hinder or let pass
what they can get most Money by; and having once passed the Press, there are as
many, who not altogether so much for Gain, as out of Impudence and Ignorance,
voluntarily become the Publishers thereof. And (to speak somewhat modestly of
the man) such a one is Sam. Carr, at the Sign of the King's Head at the West End
of St. Paul's, who was the Publisher of this rare piece of Castlemainisme; which
has not so much of weighty mischef in it, as it has of Scandal, and the most
gross Abuses and Absurdities put upon the Court of King's Bench, in Nature; though
there it was that he escaped the deserved Punishment of a Traitor. But
Gentlemen, notwithstanding all his good-luck, I am still the same; I am
certain, that when I acted Treason, I was not asleep, I know what I said and
did; and I know what others said and did to me; and therefore in spite of
Castlemain's Teeth I do aver, That what I swore against him, was in all
respects undeniably true; Nor is he ever able to make it otherwise to the
Judgment of Impartial men: And I do farther tell ye Gentlemen, That all his
Manifesto is a mere conjumblement either of Lies and Forgeries, or at best, of
pitiful shifts and evasions: Now then, because I am unwilling to tire your
Patience with a long Preamble, I shall take the matter just as it offers it
self, so far as it concerns me; and show you not only wherein he would impose
upon the Government, where the King himself is reflected upon, where the Court
of King's Bench is so grossly abused; and in a word, how he endeavors to impose
upon the whole World a most notorious Lie, which he calls his best Defense; and
indeed so it might have proved, had it been more strong and cunningly
insinuated; but as Liars ought to have good Memories, or as furious Choleric
men are said to be no Conjurers; so either his Lordships Memory failed him, or
else he left his best contrivance in the 30th Page of his Compendium; for
surely had it not been so, he could not but have found out some better way of
Geometrizing his Arguments than that in which they here show themselves. For do
but read page 12, 13, 14. where he tells the World, That one Mrs. Cellier
visiting the Prisons in the beginning of the Troubles, and coming to me about
Charity for the Poor there; I told her, I would not only give her something,
but would allow them Weekly also; and thus my Lords I still do (speaking then
to the Lords of the Privy Council) Upon this account, and the St. Omers
Witnesses, (which I had provided for my own Defense, in case of Trial, and
which I Lodged at her House) she came frequently to me; and (among the News and
Accidents of the Prisons) told me one day, she had taken out of Newgate for 3
l. 10s. a Young man versed a little in the Law, whom she thought very fit to
look after several desperate Debts (to the value of 3 or 4000l.) due to her
Husband, who had formerly been a considerable French Merchant; this Fellow was
it seems Willoughby, now Dangerfield; and him she sent sometimes to my House on
ordinary Errands; but presently he played me as Villainous a Trick as could be
imagined, considering the times we live in: the thing was this; The five
Jesuits being (on the Twentieth of June last) Executed, he came within very few
days after to me, either in my Lady Powis 's Name, or pretending to go to her
afterward, and asked me if I thought it convenient to have their Speeches
Printed; I told him by all means, for why should such Excellent and Loyal
things fall to the Ground? He replied, That it would cost Ten Pounds; Well said
I, if it does, tell my Lady I Will willingly give something toward it; and so he
departed. Not long after, I went to the Tower to see my Lord; and as soon as I
met him, said he, Why did you send a Stranger to me? and besides, what have I
to do with the Jesuits Speeches? Has any body (answered I) been with you in my
Name concerning that affair? Yes, (replied he) one Willoughby, whom I sent away
as he came, as soon as he acquainted me with the Message. This Accident
surprising and troubling me not a little, I took my leave of his Lordship,
assuring him that I never sent the Fellow, and so went straight to Mrs.
Cellier, and I acquainted her what the Spark had done; and also told her, He
was so great a Villain, that if ever he came any more to me, I would order my
Servants to Kick him out of my House, etc.

So my Lord! I dare say you think you have clawed me off now? you will never leave
nibling till you 'r caught in the Trap again; What a piece of Chimerical whim's
here? were there not more of Malice and Mischief forced along with your
insinuation, than either Truth or Honesty, I could not have so much Patience,
as to appear in Print against so great a piece of incoherent Nonsense. But for
public Satisfaction, and in Vindication of the Naked Truth, my King and
Country, and in my own Justification, I shall prove by fact the material parts
of your assertions to be most egregiously false, and mere Fictions contrived on
purpose to impose upon the World the belief of a notorious Lie: And in order to
it, Gentlemen, I crave leave to trouble you with these few remarks, wherein, as
near as possibly I can, with my hand upon my Heart, and in all Sincerity, by
the Grace of God, I shall here declare the Truth for my self, and do his
Lordship all the fair play imaginable; which I leave to the Judgment of every
Impartial Reader.

That one Mrs. Cellier visiting the Prisons, etc. about Charity for the Poor,
etc. I told her I would not only then give her something, but would allow them
Weekly also; Here Is fine Stuff! and here all the World may plainly see that
Mrs. Cellier was employed by the Papists to ransack and rummage the Prisons,
under the pretense of dispersing Charity, to try who she could find out, That
was fit for a bold and daring Enterprise; and the Lord Castlemain it seems, was
willing to put his Hand to the Plough, and make a Weekly Allowance of Money in
that, as he had done in other Affairs of the like nature before.

He goes on: Upon which account, and that of the St. Omers Witnesses, (which I
had provided for my own Defense in Case of Trial, and which I Lodged at Mrs.
Celliers House, she came frequently to me. Here, I think is one of the fairest
Confessions of Fact that can possibly be; for I only charged his Lordship with
instructing of the St. Omers Witnesses what they should testify on the behalf
of Langhorn and the five Jesuits. And he tells us he provided them for his own
Defense, and undoubtedly they were designed to have Testiff'd at his Trial, had
they not been so often baffled, which put his Lordship to find out a better
Expedient, by raising a scruple in the Judges Consciences about the validity of
my Evidence. But will any man of reason believe, that the St. Omers Witnesses
which his Lordship had provided for his own Defense, (as he says) were never
consulted with, to know what they could, or rather were to Testify on the
behalf of his Lordship, in case there had been any such occasion? If so, then
what I have alleged against him must be looked upon as false and Villainous:
But if they will but consider how material, and how common a thing it is, for a
person that is capable of giving Evidence, to be consulted withal, to know what
he can testify, before there is occasion to use him; they cannot but believe
much more care was taken by his Lordship of the St. Omers Witnesses who were to
give a false and forged Testimony, (as its plain they did, and which appeared
as clear as the Sun to the whole Court, upon the Trials of the Five Jesuits and
Langhorn, to which Trials I refer the Reader for his satisfaction) I say then,
I hope there is no body but will believe that the Lord Castlemaine could
otherwise choose, (having provided them for his own Defense) but disburse Money
to buy Clothes, and equip those his Novitiates in Perjury. That he allowed them
so much spending money per Week; and that he paid Mrs. Cellier seven Shillings
per Week a piece for their Lodging and Diet, which could not amount to less
than ten or twelve pounds per week, for there were 15 or 16 of them in number;
all this may rationally be supposed: But that which follows, viz. That his
Lordship did instruct them daily, what they should testify for himself, (which
he calls making Provision for his Defense) and consequently for Langhorn and
the Five Jesuits, in which sense let his Confession be Recorded to Posterity.

He runs on: That she (Mrs. Cellier) told him one day, she had taken out of
Newgate for Three Pounds Ten Shillings, a Young man versed a little in the Law,
whom she thought very fit to look after several desperate Debts (to the value
of 3 or 4000 l. due to her Husband, etc.) How far this Fiction has been
Credited, I know not, but I am sorry to see his Lordship has no better a shift,
than this old one of Mrs. Celliers, which was invented by her for my particular
use; a Story so incongruous and unlikely, that none but a Drowning Lord in a
weak Cause would have laid hold on; which is plainly seen thus. He says Mrs.
Cellier told him, she had taken me out of Newgate for Three Pounds Ten
Shillings; and I say, That before I was discharged out of Prison, and made fit
for their Plotting business, it cost them near Three Hundred Pounds. He says
she thought me very fit to look after desperate Debts, etc. and for that reason
was at Three Pounds Ten Shillings Charge, to take me out of Prison. In answer
to which I say and will prove it by more than one Witness, that she inquired
fore ever she came to me, for a man of a bold and daring Spirit; and receiving
information according to her Enquiry, she then came to me, and did Discourse me
to no other end or purpose, than what my first Narrative makes mention of,
which is far enough from what his Lordship would insinuate. And I do farther,
in the Presence of Almighty God, affirm, That the end of my being taken out of
Prison, to get in her Husbands desperate Debts, is as false and as preposterous
a Lie as ever was told: In a word, it is a thing that never was heard of until
after I had been Committed by the King and Council, for conveying of the
Treasonable Letters into Mr. Mansells Chamber, etc. at which time she Forged
that Excuse, as you may find it in the 52 Page of my first Narrative
(apprehending that she and I should be Examined apart, and therefore she sent
me that Note, wrote by her own hand, to prevent contradictions.) And as for her
Husbands having any such Debts, as could amount to the value of a Groat, much
more to the value of Three or Four Thousand Pounds, I am sure is altogether as
false; and that I may be able to prove that as well as the rest to be a Device,
I do here offer to produce sufficient Testimony, That at that time, (viz.) in
the Year 1678, her Husband was taken by all the Merchants in London, that knew
him, to be many Hundred Pounds worse than nothing. Nay, that I may once more
clear up this great point, upon which those of the Popish party hinge all their
accumulations, I do hereby challenge all the World to say impartially, That I
ever demanded of them or any of them, One Shilling more or less, either in the
Name or for the Use of Mrs. Cellier: Now, I having made this Challenge in Print
two or three times already, and no person has yet come in to contradict it,
one would have thought that no Papist (how silly soever) especially a Lord,
would have had the confidence to make any further use of that Lie; it seems his
Lordship was very hard put to it, that he was forced to borrow Mother Damnables
Threadbare Shams. But because I will yet set the thing more clear, pray do but
consider, if I had been taken out of Prison only to get in Mr. Celliers
desperate Debts, First, how the Lord Castlemain came to be concerned in so
large a Contribution, as Thirty odd Pounds toward my Enlargement, which I can
prove to be certainly true, by the Papers that were taken in Mrs. Celliers
House. Secondly, Whether or no the Lord Castlemain, all the rest of the Popish
Lords in the Tower, Mr. Webb, and Mrs. Jeane at Peterly, Mr. Nevil, alias
Pain, Gadbury, Munson, Kemesh and Knowles the Popish Priests, Donner Rigaut
the Virginia Merchant; nay, and the Lady Powis too, were Mrs. Celliers Debtors,
and what Money I demanded of them in his Name? Thirdly, How I came to be
brought to the Lord Peterborough, from thence to the Duke of York, and from
thence to His Majesty; and whether these were Mrs. Celliers Debtors too or no?
And last of all, how often I waited upon the King, what I said to His Majesty?
etc. and then I hope it may easily be discerned, that I was taken out of Prison
for some other end, than to get in a Bankrupts desperate Debts.

This Fellow was it seems Willoughby, now Dangerfield, and him she sent
sometimes to my House on ordinary Errands, etc. I know not what his Lordship
calls ordinary Errands, but you shall hear how I gained his Esteem for my
Diligence; for let him speak never so contemptibly of me in his Passion, yet he
at that time employed me to get Knox and Lane out of Prison; he ordered me to
employ diverse persons to Write out Letters and Lists of Names, concerning the
Sham-Presbyterian Plot, then set on foot by the Papists. He perused the Papers
with me, wherein was contained the Charge which Knox and Lane were to make good
against Mr. Otes: He was concerned in the drawing up of the false Affidavits
that Lane swore to, before Sir James Butler: And he was angry with me, for that
I had refused the Proposal which the Lords in the Tower had made me; which was
to KILL THE KING, etc. And all this his Lordship calls in terms, a being sent
to him upon ordinary Errands. All which being positive Truths, I am bound to
maintain in the face of the Nation, notwithstanding he escaped the deserved
Punishment of these Crimes.

But presently he played me as Villainous a Trick as could be, (says his
Lordship) considering the times we live in, etc. Why, what was that, pray? The
five Jesuits being Executed, he came to me, and asked if I thought convenient
to have their Speeches Printed; I told him by all means, for why should such
Excellent and Loyal things fall to the Ground? He replied, That it would Cost
Ten Pounds; Well said I, if it does, I Will willingly give something toward it,
etc.

This was pretty well said, but most mischievously intended, as you may find by
his commending the Excellence and Loyalty of those Traiterous Jesuits Speeches,
which cannot but be taken for the most gross, Equivocating Shams that ever were
endeavored to be imposed upon the World. And I am persuaded, let but any man
of Impartial Judgment, who has but heard of the Jesuits Tenets, compare the
Trial of Ireland, and his Dying, alias Lying Speech, with Mr. Jennisons
Depositions, and then compare those and the Five Jesuits Trials, and their
Speeches together, and then sum up the most probable circumstances fairly on
both sides, certainly he cannot but find them the most pernicious Lies that
ever were told, I mean the Speeches he mentions in his Manifesto: And yet that
a Lord should concern himself in the patching up of such Stuff as this, is so
scandalous a thing that -- but what Lord is it? Why a Popish, an Irish Lord,
the Earl of Castlemaine: say ye me so! I thought he and his Compendium had been
too well known, to give out Manifesto's, etc. But all this while, where is the
Villainous Trick he spoke of? Why, Not long after, (says he) I went to the
Tower to see my Lord; and as soon as I met him, said he, Why did you send a
Stranger to me? What have I to do with the Jesuits Speeches? Ay, what indeed?
How shall a man do to know what Lord he means? for ought I can tell he might go
to pay his respects to the Earl of Danby; and to his Lordship I was a Stranger,
and therefore he might well look with an apparent dissatisfaction, and demand,
What he had to do with the Jesuits Speeches? But this I am sure of, had he gone
to any of the other Lords, they could never have said, with any Truth, that I
was such a Stranger to them as his Lordship pretends. And if I mistake not,
they had as much reason to concern themselves about the Excellency and Loyalty
of the Jesuits Speeches as any he could pretend to: Therefore that any one of
them should say, What have I to do with the Jesuits (their God-amighties)
Speeches, is about as likely, as it is for Mr. Otes to have been at St. Omers
and in London at the same time: So that now it is clear, that his Lordship was
willing to make a small wilful mistake, and leave the Argument copious enough,
that so upon occasion he might have recourse to the extravagancy of it for an
Answer. But where is the Villainous Trick all this while? Oh, he would be
understood to be a great admirer of the Jesuits Speeches, and was willing to
have them Printed, but I it seems demanded Ten Pound for the Printing of them,
so here is the Villainous Trick then I suppose! truly it is a very small one, and
I think my Demands were very reasonable; for what man living whose Trade
Printing is (Not. Thompson excepted) would, in his right senses, concern
himself in such a parcel of Lies and Villainies for less than Ten Pounds?

I acquainted her (meaning Mrs. Cellier) what the Spark had done; and also told
her, he was so great a Villain, that if ever he came any more to me, I would
order my Servants to Kick him out of my House. Right or wrong I am to be called
Villain now I find! but why so? Only because I discovered a great many Villains
and their Villainies; for I never heard one word of being Kicked down Stairs,
nor of any dislike that I was under, until I had made my Discovery; and then,
as it has done ever since, I found the Popish Blood boil at me; but before my
Discovery no man was like to me; Gadbury could tell me I was a man fit for a
bold and daring Enterprise, etc. My first Narrative, page 26.
That I was fit to be trusted, etc. Mrs. Jean the Popish Priest at Peterly,
that wrote the Scheme of the Sham-Presbyterian-Plot, could say in his Letters
he had a better Opinion of me than he had of Gifford, notwithstanding he was
one of his own Priestly Function. First Nar. p. 10.
Mrs. Cellier when she brought me to the Lord of Peterborough, gave a most
extraordinary Character of me, and how I had improved my self in the Service of
diverse Foreign Princes, insomuch that I immediately gained the Title of
Captain, First Nar. p. 62.
with a promise for a Troop of Horse, etc. His Royal Highness the first time
that I was brought to him by the Lord Peterborough, desired me to keep up to
the Courageous and Active Character which he had heard of me, etc. And at
another time, My Information to the House of Commons, Tuesday, the 20th. of
October 1680. page 8, and 9.
That I had gained a great Reputation amongst the Catholics, etc. All this is
Truth, undeniably Truth, and were it proper, I could carry it farther; but here
I think are enough to prove how much I was Esteemed of while I did their
Service; but when I Discovered, then 'twas Rogue, Villain, Rascal, Scoundrel,
etc. and all the Tricks and Devices that could be imagined, were used to
invalidate my Testimony, which meeting with some Mercenary helps, soon answered
their End.

And thus (as I told his Lordship, when we were face to face before the King
and Council) I am beholding to him for confirming so great a part of my
Evidence; for however it was carried upon his Trial, yet I am still the same,
and by the Grace of God, will ever maintain what I from the first Charged him
with, viz. His being privy to the Proposal that was made by the Lord Powis,
etc. Now, to let you know what Reply his Lordship made to this Charge, pray
observe this that follows, which is taken out of the 16, 17, and 18 pages of
his Manifesto, where says he, Willoughby affirms this, and I the contrary, viz.
That I never heard of any Proposal made him by the Lords; Then being told by my
Lord Chancellor, that they (the Popish Lords in the Tower) had proposed the
Killing of the King to me. I know nothing of it (replied his Lordship) and
thereupon I asked him when it was, etc. As he was musing a while, and looking
up in a considering Posture; I said, You had need consider well, for the
Question about Time is the thing that will ever confound you, and such as you
are; at last he told me, it was a fortnight or three Weeks after Sir George
Wakemans Trial. Now (replies his Lordship) I have all I desire, having eaught
him in a most Evident Lie and Contradiction; for did he not confess that he
never came to me after his Knavery at the Tower; which was at the least five
Weeks before Sir George Wakemans Trial; and yet now he affirms that my being
angry with him was even a fortnight or three Weeks after the said Trial; This
so much startled him, that he had nothing to say, but that he would show me
Circumstances to prove the Truth of his Allegation; which were, That I was then
Writing the Compendium, a Paragraph of which he read as it lay before me on the
Table: That one Lawson was then in the House, and one Turner a Bookseller.
These (said his Lordship) are vain things, and so far from reconciling your
former contradictions, that they create new ones: For how was it possible for
you to read a Paragraph in a Paper, when I my self was by, and in an angry
humor, and at the very first sight of you? [And here (says his Lordship) I must
with my Readers leave, farther acquaint him, That Dangerfield neither pretended
to have done this by surprise, nor would it have availed him had he said so;
for my Chair and Table in my Study so face the Door, that it is impossible for
any body to come in, and not be presently seen by me, when there.] Now
(continued his Lordship) for the persons you Name, they are easily guessed at,
Lawson being my Solicitor, and consequently most mornings with me; and the
other my Bookseller, who having Orders to bring me still whatsoever was new,
could not but be often at my House, the Press being at that present so
prolifick. He to amuse me and the Board, (for 'twas all this while before the
King and Council) began again with the Compendium, and that he read only a part
of a Paragraph; but the Chancellor telling him, that that was not the present
Question, he was sent out, etc.

Now as to that part which he seems to affirm so strongly, viz. That he never
heard of any Proposal made to me by the Lords in the Tower, etc. I am of his
Opinion, and it is now more than the same Equivocation that I expected he would
make, viz. that he never heard of it at Candia; but that he had heard of it
here in England, nay here in London, and that he was angry with me because I
refused it; it is true, and must pass for Truth, until he can more closely
contradict it. But perhaps those that have a mind to be Partial in their
distinguishing of these niceties, may object and say it is but one man's Oath,
(and he a person that has lived very extravagantly too) against a Person of
Qualitie's Word or Honor. In answer to this I say, let those Judges but be
satisfied whom, and what sort of People they are that I had to deal withal,
viz, the Lords Powis, and Arundel of Wardour, who were the Persons that first
Proposed the Killing of the King to me, in a close Room in the Tower, where
none but themselves and I were present; and likewise that the Lord Castlemaine,
when he had a mind to make me understand his Displeasure for my refusing of
that Proposal, had sent his Servants out of his Study, before he would enter
into any Discourse with me about the thing; why then I say, no reasonable man
can do other than believe what I have sworn to be Truth; and what they have or
may affirm, to be false: For can it be expected that two Bigoted Papists and a
Jesuit, whose best Principles are Blood and Murder, and that had so often
approved of, and engaged so many persons for the Killing of the King, viz.
Pickering, Sir George Wakeman, the four Russians, my Self, and one Lewis, all
which have confessed it themselves, or been Discovered by others; and some
Executed for that very Fact, should at last play the Fool and accuse
themselves. Perhaps had there been another Instrument as I was, present at the
same time when the Proposal was made me, for ought I know (after the Providence
of Heaven had smote him with the Horror of the thing, as I bless God I was) he
might have been as ready to Discover it: But then it may be they will say,
there was Gadbury, the Lady Powis, Mrs. Cellier, Father Sharp at Wild House,
and others whom I had charged with being Privy, more or less, to this
Conspiracy; and yet they all flatly deny it; what then! and what does that
signify? because a Traitor (that knows our Common Proverb, Confess and be
Hanged) denies his Crimes, therefore he is Innocent; an Excellent Argument
indeed! Yet let me tell ye Gentlemen, Gadbury once (when he was in the
Gate House) was willing, and as I have been informed, did make some
considerable Discovery; but no sooner had he obtained his Majesty's most
Gracious Pardon, but as soon his mouth grew Black and Mealy, and so became
silent; and ever after, all that he could tell of, Good Man, was but
Transiently: As for Mother Midwifes part, she did say when the Parliament was
sitting at Westminster, in the Month of October 1680, that she had some
Discovery to make, and accordingly desired to be sent for to the Bar of that
House of Commons; but this Resolution of hers being by some means or other made
known, she was soon Presented either with Money, or a Bill for a Hundred
Pounds, and great Promises of being plentifully supported from that time
forwards, as she has been without doubt ever since; so that when an Honorable
Member of that House went to Newgate to know what she had to say, the best he
could get from her, was but base and abusive Language; so that what likelihood
there is for any of these Conspirators to Discover and Confirm my Discovery,
seeing they are thus tampered with, is but vain, and as yet not to be expected.
Therefore, I hope, Gentlemen, you will be so just, as not to think them ever
the more Innocent for their asserting and affirming of it; nor me ever the less
to be credited for their recriminating and laying to my Charge things that I
call God to Witness, I never was in the least Guilty of: I am sure, and I am
able to prove it, that what they (I mean the Papists) had engaged me in, was of
Nature so much beyond all that I had ever acted or done before, that when some
things were discoursed of amongst our selves, which went down with others as
glib and easy, they have made me Tremble: I hope this being seriously
considered, amongst the many Temptations which I have lain under, together with
my reclaimed and modest Carriage toward all sorts of Persons for this two
Years past, will so much out balance any thing that Popery can object against
me, that I may find some Room in the Opinions of Good and Sober People. But
Gentlemen, if you will but do me the favor to take along with your consideration
the probabilities which attend my Evidence, viz. That I was taken out of Prison
by the Papists, to their Charge near Three Hundred Pounds, before I was capable
of doing them any considerable Service; then the plentiful way of my Living
after that, even to the time of my Discovery; then my being brought acquainted
with the Popish Lords and Ladies in the Tower and elsewhere, and most of the
considerable Priests and Papists then about the Town; then my being brought to
the Duke of York, and from thence to His Majesty; I say do me but the favor to
compare these Probabilities impartially to what I have sworn, and these that
follow, viz. That I never saw the Popish Lords, until I was by their means
released out of Prison, and was sent to the Tower, etc. That I never had the
Honor to wait upon the King or the Duke, until the Papists had procured it:
That I had no other End or Design by my waiting upon His Majesty, but to
endeavor to possess him with the Belief of that Damnable Popish Contrivance, A
Plot amongst the Presbyterians to alter the Government, etc And last of all,
that the Proposal which was made me to Kill the King (whom God for ever
Preserve) was done by those that hold these pernicious Tenets, viz. Deposing of
Kings, Burning (...) Destroying of Heretics, Changing of Governments, etc.
That is to say, the Papists, the worst sort of Papists, the Bigoted,
be-Jesuited Papists, whose Doctrine and their own practices have sufficiently
rendered them notorious to the World; now if these people were, as they pretend
to be, such a sort of harmless, innocent Doves, without Gall, Bitterness, and
the worst of Malice, then indeed there were some reason for the World to
suspect the Accusation which my self and others have charged them with; but on
the contrary, as they are not, and since their Crimes are attended with so many
vigorous and lively Circumstances, I hope no man will be so void of reason to
think, though I am but Singularis Testis, that I have not as great a value for my
Soul and its Eternal Happiness, as e're a Papist of them all can pretend to; or
that I should so often in this, and in other Papers of mine now in Print, call
God to witness a Lie, and yet remain, or have any Being amongst my Fellow
Creatures here upon Earth. So that now the sum of all is this, Either you must
believe that what I have sworn against them is Truth, for which you have the
pledge of a thing more valuable to me than the whole Earth, my Soul. Or else
you must believe what the Conspirators affirm in the denial of it, and
consequently me to be Perjured; a thing I must confess, was never yet laid to
my Charge: for the determination of which, since the Opinions and Tempers of
men are so various and different, I appeal to the Supreme God and Judge of all
Mankind, before whose great Tribunal I Challenge the Conspirators for the Truth
of my whole Charge, upon every individual Papist, or person by me named; more
especially that all-contradicting Gentleman, the Lord Castlemain, whom that you
may know to be a Priest, and of the Order and Society of Jesuits, look into the
19 page of his Manifesto, where he says Mr. Otes accused him of being a Priest,
and that he had said Mass: But that is not all neither, for Turbervile swore the
same; a Man and his Wife swore it also, who were both Papists, and that they
had heard him read Mass at Doway in Flanders: I would not take up any thing of
this kind from bare words and common Report; neither do I, nor would I be
thought to mention any more here than what I am able to prove; because I know I
have to do with a subtle, supplanting sort of Devils in the shape of men, who
care not who they asperse and scandalize by their Paltry Assertions, so they
can but gain a belief, upon the too credulous and good natured, or rather
impose upon the World any thing, though never so false, to serve their own
Villainous Ends.

But now to return to the point, viz. the Proposal to Kill the King, I kn^w
nothing of it (replied his Lordship) and thereupon I asked him when it was,
etc. as he was musing a while and looking up in a considering posture, I said,
you had need consider well; for the Question about Time is the thing that well
ever confound you, etc. Now for the Truth of this, I Humbly make my Appeal to
His Majesty and the whole Council; and also to all that ever heard me deliver
my Evidence in any Court of Judicature, or any other place, Whether or no, at
all times and in all places, I have not Expressed my self as freely, and as
clear from any Hesitation or Musing, as any one whatsoever of my capacity can
be supposed to do in a matter of that great Moment: And likewise, If I have not
as readily answered Questions concerning matter of Fact or Circumstances, as
any the most exquisite of the Papists have been to put them to me. But to allow
his insinuation that very way that he puts it, that is to say, that the whole
matter which I charged him with was false; yet is it likely (supposing me to be
so base and villainous) that I should Study my Charge no better than so, as not
to be able to give an Answer about Time or Place without musing? but it is much
more wonderful, the whole Charge being ipso facto true, that I should not be
able to answer a single Question; and this all persons that know meare able to
contradict. What he means by his saying that the Question about Time and Place
is the thing that will ever confound you, etc. is a Trick I cannot well
understand; unless by some Magic Spell he made me to be at York, when I Swore
I was at his House; which if either he, or any Papist of them all can make out,
upon any part of my Charge given against them, viz. That I accuse Toma-Noaks to
have been here or there when he was not; or that I had Discourse with him about
this or that, and was never in his Company; and this I say, to be proved by
Lawful, Credible and Protestant Witnesses; not St. Omerians, of his, or their
own tutoring, or other Priests or Papists, that have the Knack of Swearing a
man to be at London and Valledolid at one and the same time; why then I say, my
Lord, I Will be bound to give you the Victory, but not till then: And that I may
with more Modesty than you have done with Discretion, show you your mistake,
and how inconsiderately you have accumulated things laid to my Charge as false
as God is true; and that all the World may be able to know the Monster by the
bigness of his Foot, take notice of my reply to that part of your Discourse;
wherein say you, At last he told me it was a fortnight or three Weeks after Sir
George Wakemans Trial. Now (said his Lordship) I have all I desire, having
caught him in a most evident Lie and Contradiction; for did he not confess that
he never came to me after his Knavery in the Tower, which was at least five
Weeks before Sir George Wakemans Trial; and yet now he affirms, That my being
angry with him was even a fortnight or three Weeks after the said Trial. What a
fine way his Lordship has found out to catch a man? here is a Trick with a
Witness! One would think this were a fine way to Dugdalize an Evidence. But
pray my Lord, how does it so happen, that this contradiction which you say
passed in November 1679. was not insisted upon and proved in June 1680. when
you were Arraigned and Tried? This would have been far more considerable than
the Six of the Sixteen Records which you and YOUR Chief Justice made such a
noise with; this might have proved me Perjured, and then I had been for ever
disabled for an Evidence; truly it had been a thing well worth your while, but
I know you are ready with an Excuse for that too; either you could not procure
the Council-minutes time enough, or else you could not prevail upon the Clerks
to bear Testimony upon them, and that is much. But pray my Lord let me ask you
one Question, and don't be Hot or Chollerick; where was it, and before whom did
you catch me in this great Lie and Contradiction? Your Manifesto I know tells
us it was before the King and Council: Was it so? Why then truly you have made
a fine reflection upon His Majesty and the whole Board, which lies thus; either
none of them were so quick of Apprehension as your self to take notice of this
Contradiction, and that is strange, for they took notice of all yours; or else
they did take notice, and were willing to connive at it; So that in plain terms
he charges me with a Perjury committed before the King and Council, and does as
good as say they were all Privy to it, in regard no body took me up for it but
himself; Therefore as clear as the Sun, here is a direct Charge upon the King,
and the whole Council, which is as like his Lordships way of Scandalizing, as
Roger Palmer, Esquire is like the Earl of Castlemaine. But supposing my Lord, that
I should be able to counter-prove this notable affirmation of yours, that is to
say, to prove it a Lie of your own making; what do you think the World will say
then? Why it is but like an exquisite Papist, and there is an end on it. Come on
then for once, I Will try what I can do with it: Your Manifesto tells us, viz. At
last he told me it was a fortnight or three weeks before Sir George Wakemans
Trial; Now I have all I desire, having caught him in a most evident Lie and
Contradiction; for did he not confess that he never came to me after his
Knavery at the Tower, which was at the least five weeks before Sir George
Wakemans Trial; and yet now he affirms that my being angry with him was even a
fortnight or three weeks after the said Trial, etc. and you say this happened
before the King and Council; but who was there besides your own words to prove
this most egregious contradiction, which you with such scrutiny observed upon
the at least five Weeks before Sir George Wakemans Trial? etc. Truly just no
body: But perhaps you will say 'twas proved at your Trial in June 1680. Was it so?
how can that be? how does it appear? why see his own words for it in the
Printed Trial page 60. viz. If you please my Lords, (he then speaking to the
Judges) I would only tell you this, my Lords, you see that these two Witnesses
testify (viz. Mrs. Cellier and Bennet Dowdall) that I was angry with
Dangerfield in June; my Lords I only say this to you my Lords, that when I was
Examined at the Council Board before the King, of this particular, my Lords, my
Lord Chancellor asked him the particulars of it, and he did confess this thing
which I now prove, etc. O most admirable sense this; Psha, sense with a wanyon;
What Madman at this time of day would write sense I wonder? any one but a rash,
hotheaded Popish Lord, or a Conjurer; and they write Nonsense out of a mere
design to amuse the people: Ay, but what was the thing his Lordship proved? Why
'twas, That I had made a complaint to Mrs. Cellier of his Lordships being angry
with me; and that she spoke to Bennet Dowdal (another Papist) to speak to me
not to be troubled at his Lordships anger: But that which is most remarkable
is, That I should make this Complaint a considerable time before the time that
I mentioned in my Evidence, which was in August 1679, but still how does he
prove this? Oh, by the two forementioned Witnesses, Cellier and Dowdal; say
you me so! two special Witnesses indeed, the one an equal Conspiratress with
his Lordship, and the other a most notorious Papist; but however I Am willing to
try how far their Testimony will agree with his Lordships Assertion, and my
counter-Evidence: When the Lord Castlemain had asked Dowdal a Question; wherein
he dictated to him what Answer he was to make to it, (as you may find in Trial
page 58. where says his Lordship, Mr. Dowdal, the Case is this: Mr. Dangerfield
tells me I was angry with him at such a time for a business at my House; was I
not angry with him at Powis House for going to the Lords in the Tower? They
says Dowdal, Mrs. Cellier spoke to me to speak to Mr. Dangerfield, not to be
troubled at your anger. Then Dowdal being asked by the Court when this was?
replied it was after the Jesuits died. In Trial page 66. Dowdal says, viz.
Dangerfield told me his Lordship was angry about his going to the Tower in my
Lords Name unknown to him; then being asked by the Court, Did he acknowledge to
you my Lords Anger in the beginning of July? To which Dowdal replied, it was
within a Week after the Jesuits died: And a little after that, he stands up and
tells the Court it was about the 21 of June. Now let us hear what the Lady of
the Wicket Testified about this business of his Lordships anger: Oh me, she
says positively that This day twelve month (viz. the 23 of June 1679.) He and I
had been employed in Writing Copies of some Letters, The writing of which
Letters is a part of my Charge against his Lordship and against her self, as
you may find in my first Narrative.
and I sent him to my Lord to know if he would go something toward the
Printing them; and he went from him to the Lords in the Tower. In an hour and
half after, my Lord came to me very angry; Mrs. Cellier, said he, I thought you
would not forfeit your Discretion, to send such a Rascal to me; if you send him
to me again, I will bid my Servants Kick him, etc. And at another time I would
have sent him, and said he, pray Madam don't send me thither, I would rather go
an hundred Miles, etc. So now, Gentlemen, my design is fairly to set before you
the sum of these two Testimonies, which for Argument sake I am willing to allow
as such; Dowdal said, That I told him of the Lord Castlemains being angry with
me about the 21 of June, adding that it was a Week after the Execution of the
Five Jesuits; now pray do but observe this contradiction, it is worth your while
to see what a sort of infatuation these silly Bigots are under, when they come
to stretch their Zeal for the Cause. The Five Jesuits were Tried on Friday and
Saturday, being the 13 and 14 of June 1679; after that Langhorn was Tried and
found Guilty; after which they were all Six brought to the Bar together, and
received Judgment to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered; which accordingly was done
upon the Five Jesuits and Priests, on Friday the 20 of June, etc. here is now
visible to all mankind six days mistake, so that had he been upon his Oath, as
he was not; and that about had been left out, for ought I see the transport of
this man's Zeal might have brought him into the Briars of Perjury. Cellier seems
to testify that she heard not of his Lordships Anger till the 23 of June, but
says not one Word of the Week after the Jesuits were Executed, etc. however
there is two days difference between them: I wonder, (not to reflect either upon
the Lord Chief Justice, or the Jury, by whom this good Lord was Tried) what the
World can think of such extraordinary Cases as these are, this not being the
first of that kind neither: And with what Impudence men can, as they do in
their Lying Pamphlets, daily assert the Innocence of such a sort of people as
these, who in their Testimonies even for one another, confess the very Crimes
with which they themselves had been charged, and thus has Mrs. Cellier done,
when she said He and I (meaning me) had been employed in writing Copies of some
Letters, etc. which Copies of Letters are those very ones that were intended to
be conveyed into the Houses of most of the considerable Presbyterians in
England, in order to be seized for the carrying on of that Sham-Plot; I could
give many instances of this kind, but my Design in this being only to confute
his Lordship by such matter of Fact as particularly relates to himself; I am
willing to be confined to that narrow compass, and shall show you what I
brought in Bar to his Lordships Objections, and those incoherent, false, oral
Testimonies (whose Guilt, if possible, was greater than the impudence they
appeared with.) First, the time that I swore his Lordships anger was about the
middle of August 1679. Secondly, one Turner (then a Papist, but some what
honester than the rest) swore that he saw me at the Lord Castlemains House, and
being asked by the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, what Month he could charge
himself to say he saw Dangerfield in the Lord Castlemains Company? Turner made
this Answer, I cannot well tell, I think it might be about July; so that here,
Gentlemen, you have this doubtful point, this great Lie, this most egregious
contradiction that his Lordship has so banged me about with, dissolved in a
word or two. Cellier and Dowdal testifying for the 23 and 21 of the Month of
June, and my self and Turner swearing to the middle of August and the month of
July positively; both of these being long enough after their times, to have (I
think) convinced a man about the Truth of the Charge, though Cellier and
Dowdall had agreed never so well about the time: Therefore it is as clear as the
Sun at Noonday, that I was with his Lordship after the time that he endeavors
to prove his being angry with me; and if you will but do me the favor to take my
Word for it after my Oath, I do in the Presence of an All-seeing God, most
solemnly declare, and upon my Salvation, That I never knew of, that I never
heard of, nor never gave his Lordship any such cause of Anger as he pretends,
unless until the Month of August, which was the time that he so roughly treated
me, for refusing of the Proposal that had been made me by the Lords in the
Tower. Now this great Link of their whole aspersion being broken by Truth and
apparent matter of Fact, I hope no man from hence forwards will either
inconsiderately or out of Zeal to hide the Villainy of Popish Conspiracies, take
upon him to raise an Argument from the Earl of Castlemains Manifesto: Or if he
does, I doubt not but that I may be able to convince him in time of his
obstinate and peevish Error. And now I shall return to the next point, and his
Lordships own words, viz. That he would show me Circumstances to prove the
Truth of his Allegation; which were, that I was then writing the Compendium, a
Paragraph of which he then read as it lay before me on the Table; That one
Lawson was then in the House, and one Turner a Bookseller, etc. For how was it
possible for you to read a Paragraph in a Paper, when I my self was by, and in
an angry humor, and at the very first sight of you? etc. That Dangerfield
neither pretended to have done this by surprise, nor would it have availed him,
had he said so; for my Chair and Table in my Study so face the Door, that it is
impossible for any body to come in, and not be presently seen by me, etc. LOOK
YE GENTLEMEN, here is a Question arises thus, Dangerfield swears his Lordship
was writing the Compendium at that time when his Lordship was angry with him
for refusing the Proposal made him by the Lords in the Tower; and to prove that
he was at his Lordships House at such a time, he names you two persons that saw
him there, Lawson and Turner; the last has Testified that he saw his Lordship
and Dangerfield together, and the first never yet did the contrary, and
consequently cannot refuse the same, if he be, as I hope he is, a Lover of
Truth. In answer to this, you have these surmises stated to render the Question
improbable, viz. How was it possible (says his Lordship) for you to read a
Paragraph in a paper, when I my self was by, and in an angry humor? etc. For my
Chair and Study so face the Door, that it is impossible for any body to come
in, and not be seen by me, etc. Goodly, goodly, why impossible my Lord? Don't
you know your Papers lay loose upon a large Table, and that I stood on the same
side of the Table at which you were writing; and that within a Yard or less of
the Paper wherein I read the part of a Paragraph, which had been so lately
wrote that several of the lower Lines were wet, etc. Pray what impossibility is
there in all this? Can any man alive do other than believe by the lame and
helpless shifts you use for the denial, but that you did write the Compendium,
or at least some part of it; and consequently, that what I have Charged you
with is True, since you only endeavor to prove that to be false by trivial and
forged Circumstances, which otherwise is not to be denied? Had you made a
Declaration upon your Honor (if you have any such thing) that I was not at
your House at that time when I swore I was; had you brought your Solicitor and
Turner, or any others to have proved as much, this had been something like; or
had you declared it to be wrote by any other person, and have brought some body
to own it, or at least some persons of Credit to have proved it; Then I say the
World might have had some reason to doubt my Evidence; But since neither your
Lordship nor Mrs. Cellier, upon neither of your Trials have been able to prove
any one of these kind of contradictions upon me, nor indeed any thing else,
more than by way of recrimination, (which was very lucky to your whole party
that I was so liable) I hope there is no doubt to be made by any Impartial
Opinion, but that you were both Guilty of every individual Crime, by me Charged
upon you.

Now to page 21. where says his Lordship, Many other things I had to urge to
the Council; as their great disesteem and slight of Dangerfields Testimony
against Col. Mansell; his not laying to my Charge any Treasons; for he accused
me not positively of knowing what the Lords in the Tower had proposed to him,
etc. what a sly, but weak insinuation is there compremis'd under these words,
viz. Their great disesteem and slight of Dangerfields Testimony against Col.
Mansell? Pray my Lord how could it be otherwise than a disesteem and slight,
when it was proved as clear as the Sun, not only by my own words, but by diverse
Witnesses; besides many circumstances as strong as could be imagined, That I
was the person that had conveyed the Papers into Mr. Mansells Chamber? but as
for my not charging you with Treason before the King and Council, I cannot well
tell what to say to that, because I don't know whether you think Murder
Treason, or to compass, imagine or contrive the Death of the King, etc. to be a
Crime; this my Lord I am sure of, if you are a right Jesuit, as I have great
reason to believe you are, you are so far from thinking it a Crime, that you
hold it as the highest piece of Merit, and the greatest piece of Service that
can be done to Mother Church, all which is clearly to be understood in your own
words, which you gave in answer to my Lord Chancellor, when he asked you a
Question about your being a Priest, viz. As for my being a Priest, I should
(were I one) be so far from positively denying it, that I would glory in the
Title. But that I did not from the very first, viz. before the King and
Council, Charge you with that which our Laws term Treason, (the Proposal which
was made me by the Lords in the Tower, which was to Kill the King) is utterly
false, and as mere a Fiction as all the rest of your Manifesto; for the proof
of which I refer my self to the Council-minutes, which I had thought to have
inserted here, but in this I missed of my aim; because I could not procure so
many powerful Guineys as your Lordship did, to present those withal, that
gratified your Desires, which if it were done, was privately, and I Am sure,
contrary to the Knowledge either of his Majesty or the Council, to help you to
them; a thing certainly which may be said to be one of the greatest abuses
imaginable, done to the Honor of that Board, that the Copies of their Records
should be bought and sold, when I (who thought I had as great reason to have
had Copies, as any you could pretend to) had so often made application, and
still went without 'em; Nay, when I had most immergent occasion for them too,
when they were to be employed in the Service of the King and Kingdom, and yet I
could not prevail: Now Gentlemen, pray what think you of his Lordships little
piece of Castlemainism? Was ever any thing more full of contradictions, and
falsehoods? surely nothing unless it were his Lordships little History of the
late Wars between the English and the Dutch, or the History of his Travels and
Adventures to Candia, and those indeed were clawed off to purpose with Stories
and Relations as false and inconsistent as ever were mentioned in History; and
let any man but read over those two little Books that ever knew, or that ever
has read or head of any true Relation either of those unhappy Dutch-Wars, or
of the Siege of Candia, and I Will undertake to say he shall soon be convinced,
That neither his Lordships Compendium, his Manifesto, etc. are the first Shams
that he has endeavored to impose upon the World, and appear in Print withal,
a thing he much delights in. Was ever man (Godbury excepted) so mad as this
Lord, to go about to vindicate himself against a charge of so high a nature, by
nothing but Fictions and abuses: Reflections upon the Council, as you may find
in the 21 page of his Manifesto, where says he, I ask the Noble man's Pardon for
saying any thing that offended him or the Board; This Pardon was asked you must
know, after he had received a smart reprimand for his Chollerick and abrupt
behavior before the King and Council; and a'my word 'twas well he had the
manners to apologize. The next is the many abuses which he puts upon his very
Keeper the Lieutenant of the Tower, as you may find in Manifesto page 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27. But that which is most remarkable is, his abusing the man who
of all took most pains to deliver him, viz. The Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, and
the very Lawyers that were of his Council; what Monstrous ingratitude is this?
In a word, there is not a person from the highest to the lowest, whom he has
not in some measure or other abused and reflected upon; but I think it is pretty
well known of what Credit his Lordships Choler is, and therefore I leave him
to the Censure of all unbiased Readers: I had thought to have gone through his
whole Manifesto, and to have made some remarks upon every Page; but I find it
so stuffed with Incoherencies, Tautologies, Repetitions, and what not, that I
was unwilling to trouble the Reader and my self with writing an Answer to that
which in diverse parts answers it self; but more specially a thing which is
supposed for an intended Vindication, and yet without any name of Attestation
to it: it is a Sign his Lordship was somewhat doubtful of what he there
mentioned, or else he could never have sent such a piece of Stuff into the
World without giving some assurance that it was of his own Writing.

By the way, Gentlemen, I cannot but take notice of a passage in his defense,
p. 83. where he calls me a forger of Treasonable letters to entrap the
innocent, and urges my commitment by the Board, upon Mr. Mansell's account, as
an argument to invallidate my Testimony: By which the World may see a very
great weakness and failing in his Lordship, to make that a Crime which he so
cordially managed and promoted. I profess he has hit the Nail of the head. For
says he, Dangerfield was in the same Plot with my self; but Dangerfield fell
off and discovered the design; therefore Dangerfield is not to believed. But
Midwife Cellier, being in the same Plot, and manager of the very letters, being
a Testimony for his Lordship, and continuing true to the cause, was a Witness
without exception. It Is a sign that men read with little consideration, when
such shifts and evasions as these shall be so easily swallowed.

His Lordship goes on with a confession of his faith; a new invention they have
now a days gotten, to usher in a fallacious piece of Cajolrie upon the World:
That it is against the Doctrine of the Romish Church to depose and murder
Princes; than which there never was a more notorious and demonstrable piece of
Hypocrisy broached upon the Earth. For it has not only been the common
practice of the Popes themselves, but a Doctrine openly defended by a numerous
and most authentic part of the Fathers and maintainers of the Popish
Principles. So that if the Protestants were not strangely inclined to favor
their Enemies, how is it possible they should ever give credit to a man that
belys his own Religon? If his Lordship were not so much for deposing the King,
why was he so angry with me for refusing to Kill him? For with his Lordships
leave, I must keep close to my Text, notwithstanding all his Junes and his
July's. Perhaps it may be his Lordships particular opinion that Kings are not
to be deposed; but then they must be Kings of his own making, such as he
accounts real Kings: For to believe be thinks it unlawful to depose that King
to whom he will not swear the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, is
contradictory to common reason. He tells ye, he cannot take the Oath of
Allegiance, unless the King will be pleased to alter some words in it. And as
for the Oath of Supremacy, whatever some of his Religion may have done, that is
no president for him. So that what credit there is to be given to a Loyalty
that refuses the common Ties and Bond of Subjects fidelity to their Prince, I
leave to all Impartial Judges.

As for Dispensations to Lie, Kill, Forswear, and so forth, those he not only
abhors, but protests, he never heard from any Papist, that they are or were
grantable. What a plunge has his Lordship here put himself to? For hereby he
has made himself the most silly, illiterate, ignorant person in the World, or
else the divulger of a most notorious untruth, there being nothing more obvious
to reading, than the justified allowances of these crimes by the most noted
Casuists of his Religion. Now what good such stories as these will do his
Manifesto, is the Question. For my part I believe the Bookseller was out in his
Title; for had he called it, the Legend of the Lord Castlemain, he had done
well. This is ill done to impose upon us a mere Romance, or a second part of
Mandevil's Travels, under the Title of a Manifesto. Only there is this excuse
to be made for his Lordship, that he has told these stories so often, that he now
believes them for Truths, and thinks all the World as ridiculously credulous as
himself. In short, I would desire his Lordship to consider what Mrs. Cellier
his great Crony and fellow-Conspirator, got by publishing her scandalous
Manifesto, though she came off by the same fair means as he did. What Mr. John
Gadbury got by that abusive lying Almanac of his for this present Year 1682.
And what his Lordship will gain by his Manifesto. And it may not be an improper
Question, If the same course were taken with both the last, as was with hers,
whether they might not have as little reason to boast of their English and
Latin Impositions upon the World, they being equally scandalous and
dishonorable to the public Justice of the Nation? And that all such may
receive their so highly merited reward, is the hearty wish of

Thomas Dangerfield.

FINIS.

