THE Preachers Precept OF CONSIDERATION: OR, Englands chief Lesson and Duty In
this sad time of VISITATION.

Wherein is contained, 1. A Catalogue and Collection of all the particular
capital Sins mentioned in Scripture, whereby sometimes Princes, and sometimes
People, have provoked God to inflict this sore Judgment upon a Nation. 2. The
Authors opinion and judgment, for which and why it is, that this unparalled
Visitation is now laid upon us.


Delivered in the Parish Church of St. Katherine Coleman, London, upon the
Monthly Fast-dayes set apart for Humiliation, by His Majesty's special Command.

LONDON: Printed by E. Cotes for the Author, M. DC. LXV.

THE PREACHERS PRECEPT OF Consideration.
ECCLES. VII. 14. In the day of Prosperity be Joyful, but in the day of
Adversity Consider.


It Is the Wisemans observation before, Chap. 3.1. That to every thing there is
a season, and a time to every purpose under the Sun: particularly, verse. 4.
there is (says he) a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
time to dance. And reason good that it should be so; for seeing that man's
present condition is subject to many and frequent alterations: our Life, like
the Sea, ebbing and flowing, and with the Air, being now cloudy, and anon
clear; seeing that Nulla sors longa est, as the Seneca: Thyest.
Tragedian says very truly, Job 14.2.
We continue not long in one state; but Cartwright in Eccles.
Sicut noctis and diei, hyemis and aestatis vicissitudo est; i. e. As the day
has the vicissitude of an evening and morning, and the year of a Winter and
Summer; so Health and Sickness, Peace and War, Prosperity and Adversity
interchangeably succeed each other, in this our earthly pilgrimage: what
therefore is more rational, fit, and natural, than that as our outward
condition is various and mutable, so likewise our inward disposition of mind
should be answerable, and our spiritual frame, be suitable to our temporal
Estate? This I am sure has been the practice of the true children and servants
of God in all ages, who in days of Affliction and public Calamity, always
sought unto God with Prayers and Tears, with Fasting and Humiliation; and after
Deliverance and Restoration, used to set forth the glory of his Name with
Anthems of joy and exultation: they wisely and with due consideration, employed
and exercised their hearts and tongues to utter before God, either Hosanna's or
Hallelujahs, sometimes Prayers, and sometimes Praises, as occasion required.
And as this was the Saints Practice every where and in all ages; so it is the
Wisemans Precept here, In the day of prosperity be joyful, but, etc. Which
latter clause I shall confine my Discourse unto, as containing in few words,
both very much, and very good seasonable advice for this sad time of Visitation.

In the whole sentence, though it may seem that there is not a direct
opposition in words and terms, yet we shall find the expression more emphatical
and didactical, than if it had been so. The Wiseman indeed does not say, In the
time of prosperity be joyful, and in the day of adversity be sorrowful, but
consider: And the reason as I conceive is this, Because outward sorrow may be
worldly and carnal, selfish and hypocritical, yiedling neither honor nor glory
to Gods holy Name, nor yet any advantage or comfort to the party affected
therewith: for men many times are of a sad countenance, and (as our blessed
Savior speaks, Matthew. 6.16.) do disfigure their faces on purpose that they may
appear unto men to be sorry, and there is all. But an inward and serious, a
deep and religious consideration never fails to bring forth the fruits and good
effects that God expects. This is that which makes a man enter into his Closet,
that so he may commune with his own heart, hear his case tried in the Court of
Conscience, humble himself in dust and ashes, and pour forth his soul in
secret to God; Who never fails (as our Savior there shows, verse. 4, 6, 18.)
not only to own and regard, but also to crown and reward all such secret acts
of devotion, openly. Whereas the Wiseman therefore here does not say, Be sad
and sorrowful in the time of adversity, but consider; I conceive it is because
the expression is much more emphatical, comprehensive, and didactical (as I
said before) and does indeed directly point out, and plainly teach us, without
any kind of circumlocution, what is the main duty that God expects and requires
at our hands in times of Affliction and Tribulation, and that is to Consider.
And truly no wonder, for of This it may well be said, That (...); i. e.
virtually it is every good Duty: For as much as we know that Self-examination,
Self-accusation, and Condemnation, Prayer and Supplication, Repentance, Faith
in Gods Promises, Resolutions of new Obedience, etc. they are all the fruits
that spring from this root; they are all conceived (as 'twere) in this Womb;
they are the spiritual brood and offspring; but Consideration is the Alma
Matter, the heavenly Parent and Mother of them. Consideration! it is Spiritus
Sancti quaedam Fabrica vel Officina, i. e. the spiritual shop and workhouse (as
it were) of the Holy Ghost, wherein he secretly forgeth and fashioneth upon the
Anvil of a truly broken and contrite heart, all the pieces of that excellent
armor of proof, that (...), which the Apostle speaks of Ephesians. 6. In a word,
Consideration! it is the Handmaid of spiritual Knowledge, and the Mistress of
all true Devotion; without which no acceptable service can be performed by us
to God. Whereas, if men would but now and then bestow an hour or two in serious
thoughts, and soberly consider how the case stands betwixt Almighty God and
their souls; whether they be in a state of Grace, or of Nature; of Peace with
God, or under Wrath; and, What they must do that they may be saved: doubtless,
they would find themselves better disposed to the service of God, than now they
are: For the truth is, the principal reason that so many persons in the world
are no better, is, because they will not Consider, and seriously meditate on
their spiritual state and condition. The cares and affairs, the profits and
pleasures of this life, do so wholly ingross their hearts and employ their
heads, that the concernments of their immortal precious souls, and the things
of another life, are not regarded. And hence it is that the labors of faithful
Ministers are so unsuccessfull; the good and serious advice of Friends and
Parents is no more followed; and all the Means of Grace, and methods of God for
the reclaiming of sinful Offenders, affect no more, and operate no better;
namely, because they will not consider. Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth,
(says Almighty God himself by the Prophet, Isa. 1.2, 3.) The Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters crib: but Israel does not know, my people does
not not Consider. Yea, hence it is, that though life and death, good and evil,
(as Deuteronomy. 30.15.
Moses speaks) are set before us, and put to our choice; yet the generality of
people in the world, live as persons not at all concerned whether there be a
God or no; an Heaven, or an Hell; eternal Joys, or everlasting Torments. So
that a serious consideration is very good and necessary for us even at all
times: but the most proper season for it (as Solomon tells us) is the time of
affliction; In the time of Adversity Consider.

Whence the point of Doctrine that offers it self to our Consideration is this:

That when Gods Judgments are in the Earth, and the sad tokens of his
displeasure appear against a Person, or a Nation, then it is a proper season for
them seriously to lay things to heart, and wisely to consider.

The guise and custom of all Atheistical Epicures, and graceless Worldlings, is
quite contrary; who when any crosses, disasters, or losses are in judgment
inflicted upon them, do not retire into their Closets, and there enter into a
serious meditation of the matter, communing with their own hearts, and
considering who it is that smites them, and for what: but either with Cursing,
Oaths, and Execrations, they break forth into repining and murmuring against
Gods dispensations toward them, which many times end in Despair; or else they
run to the Tavern or Alehouse, that so in the jovial company of good fellows,
they may drown the sense of all sorrow and care, and thwart and nonplus (if it
be possible) the end and design of God in punishing them. His good end
certainly was to humble them, and reclaim them from their iniquities, but they
listen not to the voice of his Rod, but in laetitiam and luxum prosiliunt,
resolve to take their full swinge in voluptuousness; saying, Wisd. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.
Let us eat and drink, and enjoy the good things of this life; let us Crown our
selves with Rose-buds, and leave tokens of our mirth and jollity in every
place. This is the common deportment and practice of the ungodly in time of
adversity. And this they are either betrayed into by their own deceitful, vile,
carnal hearts; or else they are biased by the great and general custom of the
world; or else they are prompted to it by Satan; who knows full well that a due
and serious Consideration would take them from him, and make them quickly
renounce and abhor all wicked ways: And therefore it is, that he does still
with all his might and subtilty strive to divert and dissuade them from it, as
a most childish, sad, and dumpish melancholy course, which probably may
endanger their health, but can otherwise do them no good. Whereby it appears,
that the more necessary any Duty is, the more opposite Satan and our false
carnal hearts are thereunto: For there is not a more advantageous, useful, and
profitable, nor a more excellent, heavenly and acceptable Duty (as I shall show
more fully hereafter) for a good Christian to be exercised in at all times, and
upon all occasions, in all estates and conditions, especially in the day of
adversity, than this of a serious Consideration. And therefore it is that
Almighty God commends it unto us so much in Scripture, as a singular means to
help and direct us how to steer our courses aright: as Deuteronomy. 32.29. Oh that
they were wise; that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end. Psalm. 4.4. Stand in awe, and sin not, commune with your own hearts,
and be still. Prove. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy ways be
established; and Hag. 1.5, 7. Now therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts,
Consider your ways. In which remarkable place, the Adverb Now, and Conjunction
Therefore, plainly point out the Time and Occasion, when and wherefore God
required them to practice this duty of Consideration. The Children of Israel
being brought home to Jerusalem again, out of their long Captivity in Babylon,
were exceeding backward and negligent in their carrying on the work and
building of the House of the Lord. Forward enough it seems they were to erect
and prepare sumptuous buildings, and neat habitations for themselves; the
Prophet calls them cieled Houses, (v. 4.) but the house of the Lord, they let
that lie waste, pretending (forsooth, v. 2.) that it was not a fit time yet to
do it. This was their Crime. Now the Judgment which God inflicted upon them
for it, was that of Famine, as v. 6, 9, 10, 11. Ye looked for much, and lo, it
came to little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon it: and why, says
the Lord of Hosts? because of mine House that is waste, and ye run every man to
his own house. Therefore the Heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the Earth
is stayed from her fruit: And I called for a drought upon the Land, and upon
the Mountains, and upon the Corn, and upon the new Wine, and upon the Oil, and
upon that which the ground brings forth; and upon Men, and upon Cattle, and
upon all the labor of the hands. Surely a deplorable, sad, and most miserable
state and condition. And what is now the duty that God, the great Physician of
Souls, puts them upon here by the Prophet; and that both in order to a speedy
and through Reformation of themselves, as well as for the happy procuring of his
loving kindness, and gracious reconciliation toward them? Why, it is nothing
but this, Consider your ways. A duty, which the Prophet Haggai seems to look
back upon as an Instar omnium: and therefore it is observable, that he presses
no other duty upon them in the whole Prophecy. Neither does he content himself
to deliver his Message authoritative, with a [(...) etc.] thus says the Lord
of Hosts, as here in this Chapter; but again afterward to enforce the same, he
earnestly prays and entreats them to fall upon the speedy performance of it;
as Chap. 2. v. 15. to 20. Which frequent inculcation of the Precept, serves to
teach us two things by the way:

1. The strange stupidity of the People; in that they were no more affected
with those manifest marks and tokens of Gods indignation; no, though he had
snatched their very Meat out of their mouths. And then, 2. The great necessity
of the Duty in times of distress. So that when Gods Judgments are in the Earth,
and the sad tokens of his displeasure appear against a Person or Nation, then
its a proper season for them seriously to lay things to heart, and wisely to
consider.
In the prosecution of this Point, I do intend to proceed in this method:
Method.


1. By way of Explication, to acquaint you with the Nature of the Duty in
general; as also the Subject matter thereof; touching withal a little upon the
two great Circumstances of most convenient Time and Place.

2. By way of Confirmation, to subjoyn some Reasons for the proof of the Point.

3. To bring all home to our selves in an effectual Application.

1. For the first of these, Consideration in general, It is a deliberate
serious Act of the practical part of man's Understanding, Explication.
whereby he reflects and museth upon both his own Actions, and Gods
Dispensations; and by comparing the one with the other in the Court of
Conscience, and according to the Rule of Gods holy Will revealed in his Word,
he draws up Conclusions against himself, and secretly takes up good Resolutions
to justify God, and to repent and reform himself.

2. As for the Subject matter of it, it may be considered either more
generally, or more specially.

More generally, the subject matter of our Consideration should be the visible
causes and consequences of things; the evident Outgoings of God in the world,
and the present Operations of his hands, and that both more privately as to our
selves, as well as more publicly as to the Church and State where we live; all
things indeed that happen either to our selves or others that we are any way
related unto, whether casually and accidentally, so far as we can see, or by an
apparent hand of Providence.

More specially, in the day of adversity, the time here specified in my Text,
the Subject matter of our Consideration should be these five things following:

1. The Affliction it self, the Evil, Disaster, or Visitation, whatever it be
that is befalne us. 2. The Author and the Dispenser of it. 3. The Ground, or
the procuring and Meritorious Cause of it. 4. The End, or the mind and meaning
of God therein. 5. The good way and means that we are to use, that so it may be
removed from us, or at least we may have it sanctified to us. I content my self
with the bare naming of these things here in the Explication, because I intend
to enlarge my self to the full upon them in the Application.
3. Now the two Circumstances of most convenient Time and Pl^ce follow. And

1. For Place; though it be indifferent in respect of God, whether it be in the
field with Isaac, or in the house with Daniel, at home or abroad, walking or
sitting; yet I conceive that a solitary, and a Place set apart for pious
purposes is the most proper and fit for this Exercise: And such in particular
are our own private Walks and Closets; to which our Savior himself directs us,
Matthew. 6.6. Or else the public House of Gods Worship; which Heb. 10.24, 25.
St. Paul would have us frequent for this purpose, according to the example of
King David, Psalm. 27.4. And then,

2. For Time; the Lords Day in particular is the most proper time in the Week,
and ordinarily calls upon us, as well as those Solemn Days of Fasting and
Humiliation do in extraordinary manner put us in mind of this duty. But though
it must be chiefly intended on those Holy Days, yet it must not be neglected
on other days, but some time convenient must be set apart for this good work
every day. As for the hour, or precise space of time in the day, each man's own
Experience must instruct him, and his Occasions direct him; whether to take the
golden hour of the Morning, when he is most fresh, free from distraction, and
fittest for Meditation; And thus Genesis 28.16.
Jacob did: Or the still hour of the Evening, when he has ended his labors;
which was Genesis 24.63.
Isaacs time: Or the midst of the day; which was Acts 10.9.
St. Peter's: Or else any other part of the day, if not all three; which, as it
appears, were holy David's, and devout Daniels Psalm. 55.19. and Dan. 6.10.
hours of devotion.

I mention here these two Circumstances of Time and Place, because I know them
to be very useful and necessary helps and furtherances for all such as desire
to perform this duty to purpose; I mean, so as to reap benefit and comfort by
it. For, to say nothing of the natural aversness and indisposition of our own
hearts to this good work, nor yet of Satan's subtle suggestions, and secret
opposition whereby he strives to keep us back, or at least interrupt and take
us off from it; such and so great are most men's hindrances and distractions,
so many are the Obstructions and Obstacles that they meet with (partly through
multiplicity of business, their worldly employments at home and abroad; partly
through the mutability of their minds and dispositions, with the instability
of their affections and roving Fancies) that unless some convenient Times and
Places be set a part for the exercise of it, it is very likely to be performed
but slightly and superficially, unconstantly, and unprofitably, nay perhaps
not at all by them. There is (as the Eccl. 3.1.
Wise man tells us) an appointed Time for every thing else; and shall then so
weighty, so concerning a Duty as this have no share in it; which yet might
justly challenge our attendance upon it at all times? And as for some certain
and set place, it is likewise as necessary; because we shall find the least and
fewest Impediments there, where we are most accustomed to draw near to God
either in Reading, Prayer, or Meditation. Our John 18.1, 2. with Luke 22.39, 40.
Savior himself (I am sure) took this course, and also used his Disciples to
it, and then well may we follow his and their example, as an excellent means to
make us both more careful, and constant in the performance of holy duties.

1. I say, careful, as to the manner; (sancte magis quam site, as he Seneca.
says well) in regard we have now placed our selves in the presence of God, and
are come to converse and make our addresses immediately to Him, who is The
searcher of the heart.

2. Constant, as to the Matter; the revolution of time being a certain
Remembrancer of the duty: the wilful, the negligent, or excusatory omission
whereof, when the prefixed time is come, is that which occasions the great
unfitness and indisposition that many complain of.

And so I have done with the Explication: Confirmation.
the Confirmation now follows; and the Reasons of the Point are three.

To lay things seriously to heart, and religiously to consider in the day of
Adversity is the most proper Answer and Echo to Gods correcting angry hand,
and that spiritual improvement which He expects that we should make of His
chastising us. The Lords voice cries unto the City, (says the Micah 6.9.
Prophet) and the man of Wisdom shall see thy Name: hear ye the rod, and who
has appointed it. Whence we may gather, that as God speaks to men by his Word,
even so He seems to call out, and cry to them by the Voice of his Rod: And the
principal end in the first place is, to make them listen, stand still, and
consider what is his mind and meaning thereby. It is observable in that
excellent Prayer of King Solomon's at the Dedication of the Temple, that one
Petition very pertinently to our purpose runs thus, 1 King. 8.37, 38, 39.
If there be in the Land a Famine, if there be Pestilence, etc. whatsoever
Plague, whatsoever Sickness there be; What Prayer and Supplication soever be
made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the
Plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this House: then
hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive, etc. Whence it appears,
that the duty of seeking to Him by Prayer, which cannot be done without
Consideration, is that which God in the first place expects and looks for in
the evil day, before men must think to obtain deliverance. The want whereof he
sorely complains of, as you heard Isa. 1.2, 3.
before: So Amos 4.6, 8, 10, 11. where notwithstanding his hand was against the
children of Israel in diverse respects, Yet have ye not returned unto me, says
the Lord; and Jer. 8.6. I hearkened, and heard, but they spoke not aright: no
man repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Again,

a religious, due, and serious consideration is the most expedite and
compendious way, I, and indeed the only method prescribed in Scripture for the
obtaining of Gods favor and Reconciliation. David first considered his ways
Psalm. 119.59.
before he turned his feet to Gods Testimonies: And the Prodigal Son came first
home Luke 15.17.
to himself, by the consideration of his lewd courses, before he came home back
again to his Father. So that Conversion, true Repentance, and Reformation,
always begin at Consideration, but it still happily ends with the love and
favor of God. For, when once a sinful Person or Nation by a Religious
self-reflexion have learned to renounce all their iniquities and evil deeds,
then Psalm. 103.13.
Like as a Father pitieth his Children, even so the Lord, with that
compassionate Father of the Prodigal, is ready to run to embrace and receive
them, with the sweetest evidences and demonstrations of his love and favor: Is
4.55.7. and Ezekiel. 18.21. Joel 2.12, 13, 14. and Zech. 1.3.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let
him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for
He will abundantly pardon.

Consideration, is an infallible token and evidence of our sincerity; and so
must needs prove an excellent Cordial to cheer us up in the day of adversity.
Hypocrisy may teach men to multiply outside performances, and make them ready
to say to others, as sometime Jehn did to Jehonadab, 2 King, 10.16.
Come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord; for all that such do (as our
Savior shows) is that they may be seen of men. But sincerity draws the heart
inward, and never let us a man be at rest until he have made his peace with
God. For which end, it puts him upon self-examination, self-accusation, hearty
repentance, prayer and supplication, with resolutions of new obedience, and a
serious consideration in general how for the future he may do most good, and
may best lay forth himself for the honor and glory of God. Now when this great
work is done, there is nothing can happen amiss to that man; the inward
testimony of his own Conscience is to Him a Continual Feast, and now he finds
by happy experience, that all things cannot choose but work together for his
good: Christ is his Friend, by Faith in whose merits his peace and
reconciliation is wrought with Almighty God, and then what cares he who is his
Foe? Heaven is his home, and then what cares he what he may suffer by the way?
that 2 Cor. 4.17.
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, he knows will outweigh, and
abundantly compensate all those light and momentany afflictions that may befall
him here upon Earth; nay, he is sure there is no Romans 8.18.
comparison betwixt them. And therefore he resolves to fight a good fight, and
keep the faith, yea though it be with the loss of his life, as being assured
that 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Romans 8.35, 37.
henceforth there is laid up for him a Crown of righteousness.

These are the reasons of the point; by all which it appears, that if we desire
either, 1. To answer Gods expectation, and make a wise and profitable
improvement of His chastising hand upon us; Or, 2. To enjoy the sweet tokens
and evidences of His unspeakable love and favor, Psalm. 63.3.
which is better than life; Or else, 3. Have any comfortable argument of our
sincerity, and so some good ground of joy and comfort in the worst of
calamities, then we must seriously lay things to heart, and religiously
consider in the day of Adversity.

Of Reprehension. Branch 1.
this then justly serves to reprove and condemn those that live in carnal
security, and inconsiderately, I, and perhaps incorrigibly too, still run on in
their vain evil ways, as if they were not at all concerned. They know very
well, or at least have frequently heard from Gods Word Romans 6.23.
that the wages of sin is death: and they have been taught, how Heb. 10.31.
dreadful and fearful a thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God,
who is indeed Heb. 12, 29.
a consuming fire. But yet notwithstanding, as if they had made a Isa. 28.15.
Covenant with death, and with hell were at an agreement, and the loss of Gods
loving kindness and favor were not considerable, they are apt to put from them
the evil day, and think they have still time enough to repent, presuming, that
although the overflowing scourge pass through the City, or the whole Land, yet
it shall not come nigh unto them; and so they run on in their evil courses,
after Romans 2.5.
their hardness and impenitent heart, treasuring up wrath unto themselves
against the most dreadful day of wrath. Now against this sort of men the Isa.
5.11, 12.
Prophet justly denounces a Woe; for the harp, the viol, the tabret and pipe,
and Wine are in their Feasts; but they regard not the work of the Lord, neither
consider the operations of His hands. In that day (says Isa. 22.11, 12, 13.
he very smartly) the Lord God of hosts called to weeping, and to mourning, and
to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth: But behold joy and gladness,
slaying oxen, and killing sheep; eating flesh and drinking wine; Let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we die. And what then follows? It was revealed in mine
ears by the Lord of hosts; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you
till you dye, says the Lord God of hosts. It is a most wretched frame of
spirit for men to grow secure in sin, and not learn righteousness, when as Gods
judgments are in the earth, and his hand of Vengeance is stretched forth, not
with a scourge of Cords but Scorpions, to punish and plague them for their
iniquities. This is a sign of desperate wickedness, and the principal cause I
verily believe, why the judgments of God in this present fore Visitation are
September. 6. 1665.
still so long, and severely executed upon us, and his wrath seems daily still
to wax hotter and hotter against us: The Lord God of heaven be graciously
pleased to touch our hard hearts, and make us sadly reflect upon it: Remember,
I pray you, that terrible Vision of the Prophet Ezekiel concerning Jerusalem;
which both in respect of the cause and effects of Gods indignation, seems too
too applicable at this time to this populous City of London. The cause of Gods
anger you will find was that, which we must now needs confess our selves to be
guilty of, viz. The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah, which was grown
exceeding great, the City being full of perverseness, and practical Atheism:
For they stuck not to say, the Lord has forsaken the Earth; tush, God sees
not. Chap. 9.9. And for the Effects, London and Jerusalem, England and Israel
may shake hands, as v. 10. Quapropter etiam ego, etc. Therefore as for me also,
says the Lord, Mine eyes shall not spare, neither will I have pity; but I will
recompense their way upon their head. And you will find, He did it much in the
same manner, that He does even now amongst us: For the Six Executioners, v. 2.
that He sent forth with slaughtering weapons in their hands, they had a strict
charge and Commission given them, v. 5, 6. to go after the Man Clothed in
Linen, with the Writers Inkhorn by his side, and kill and destroy all before
them; Let not your eye spare, (says he) neither have ye pity, but slay utterly
old and young, both Maids and little Children, and women; and save none but
only those that your Forerunner has marked in their Foreheads: And those were
but a small remnant that did seriously lay things to heart, and sigh and mourn
for all the abominations that were done among them, v. 4. Think I beseech you
upon this sad Vision, and I hope it may be an effectual means to to rouse and
awake you all out of your sinful carnal security, and for the future make you
Consider; consider (I mean) how the Case stands betwixt God and your own Souls;
consider your latter end, and the things that concern your eternal peace, lest
they be hid from your eyes.

And then again, Branch 2.
as it serves to reprove and condemn carnal security on the one hand; So on the
other, to rebuke and correct that undue and dangerous affection of overmuch
fearfulness and despondency, which too too many of both Sexes, but women
especially, are by nature inclinable to. It Is true indeed, our utmost Wisdom
and Discretion, and all possible care is necessary both for the preventing, and
for the avoiding of danger: But I know nothing more unseasonable, nor many
times of more dangerous consequence than a desponding Principle of Fear, and
apprehensive imagination. The effects whereof (as we all find by frequent
experience and observation) strangely sometimes prove destructive and deadly to
those, which otherwise were placed ((...)) out of all probable reach of danger.
Now if you inquire what may be the Cause, and what also the Cure of this
unhappy Infirmity: I answer briefly; The Cause may be either,

1. Causes of fearfulness.
A Natural inclination to Fearfulness: Or else, 2. Want of Faith and
Resolution, because people are not animo praesenti, they do not carry their
lives in their hands, that so they might be ready and willing to lay down the
same, and cheerfully resign them up when God shall please: Or else, 3. A
consciousness to themselves of their unfitness, and unpreparedness at present
to dye, and to appear before God in Heaven: Or else, 4. A dreadful
apprehension of the great pain and terror of death; and that perhaps as to the
Manner and kind of death, as well as the Matter, their corporal dissolution. Or
lastly, 5. A frightfull foresight, and self-condemning Meditation upon that
which ensues after Death, Judgment to come; the Act. 24, 25.
reasoning and discoursing whereof by St. Paul, made Felix tremble. Some or all
these things before mentioned are, I conceive, the causes of this Passion in
People.
Remedies against it.
And now for the perfect and certain Cure and remedy thereof, I know nothing in
the whole world comparable to the due exercise of this great Duty of
Consideration. As

His Providence; which is the great Weight and Plumbet (as it were) that sets
and keeps all the Wheels a going, whether bigger or lesser, in the vast Clock,
the whole Fabric of Nature: Insomuch that nothing is done without it, not so
much as a Mat. 10.29, 30.
sparrow falls on the ground, no nor an hair from any of our heads without it.
Now this one thought and consideration naturally prompts us all to submission,
and self-resignation, and also affords us matter of comfort and consolation.
First, it prompts us all to submission, forasmuch as He is the great Creator
and Governor of all things, the ever blessed and only Potentate, our Lord
Paramount and absolute Sovereign, whose we are by the right of Creation,
Redemption, and Preservation too. And therefore, if it be but civil and
reasonable (as we say) to give men leave to do what they will with their own;
We may well be content to allow the same Privilege to The Almighty, and rest
well satisfied with his good Will and Pleasure in all things, Who knows far
better what is good for us, than we our selves. Thus did David, 2 Samuel 12.18,
20. and likewise old Eli, 1 Samuel 3. Where when he heard what terrible things
were decreed against his house and posterity, enough to make both the ears of
every one that should hear them, to tingle; ( verse. 11.) He neither repined nor
murmured against it, but only said like a meek good Man, Jehovah est; etc.
(...) is the Lord, let Him do what seems him good, verse. 18. And thus lastly
did our Savior, who though as Man, He could not but wish and pray that Mat.
26.39, 42. Luke 22.42.
the bitter cup of his approaching Death and Passion might pass from him, Yet
Non mea, sed fiat voluntas tua: (says He) not my will, but thy blessed will be
done. And then secondly, it also affords us matter of comfort and consolation,
and that in the midst and worst of trials, or evils, that can befall us, or our
Relations; inasmuch as He is through Jesus Christ the Father of mercies, and
has graciously promised Psalm. 145 9.
that all things shall work together for our good, and that he will never leave
us nor forsake us. Love and Mercy (as the Psalmist intimates) is ever more one
Ingredient in all his Dispensations toward us: Insomuch that I dare deliver it
for a certain Truth, though perhaps a seeming Paradox, that many times it is a
mercy that God is pleased to remove and withdraw a mercy from us. For we may be
sure, if he take away one, it is that thereby He may make way for another, a
greater and better to be bestowed upon us. Thus He often withdraws temporal
Comforts, to make room in men's hearts for Spiritual Blessings and Graces; thus
He often denies health to our bodies, to make us mind the welfare of our souls;
yea, thus He often deprives his own dear Children and Servants of a natural life,
that so He may take them unto Himself, and put them into a full and actual
possession of heavenly joys. The Prophet Isaiah averrs what I say; Chap. 57.1,
2. The consideration whereof, I suppose, was that which enabled patient Job so
contentedly to entertain the most sad news of the sudden death of all his
children; Job 1.21.
The Lord gave, etc. This made David so cheerfully say, Psalm. 31.5.
Into thine hands I commit my spirit, etc. And this made Phil. 1.21, 23.
St. Paul desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and to count death his
exceeding gain. Again,

2. Another thought and consideration that may be of very good use to arm and
fortify Believers against the affection of overmuch Fearfulness and
Despondency, Remedy 2.
is to consider what Death is. Some indeed look upon it as Summa Malorum, the
Worst of all evils; Rex terrorum, the King of fears, and fancy it to be a most
terrible fiery Serpent; but the 1 Cor. 15.56, 57.
Sting, we know, is taken away; and then why, I pray you, should it be so
dreadful? In Scripture, I am sure, it is called a sleep, a Job 3.17.
ceasing from trouble; a resting from labors; and so the Grave, a Isai. 57.2.
bed to rest in. Now what more grateful and welcome to Nature, when men are
wearied and tired out with labor, than to betake themselves to their rest?
What more comfortable than a soft Bed? What more desirable and pleasant than
sleep? Nay, for some reasons, in holy Writ, and by the ancient Fathers, it is
very plainly preferred before life: For life (says St. Augustine) is nothing at
all but transitus ad mortem, a passage to death; but Death is introitus in
vitam meliorem, an Entrance into eternal life. This therefore, all things
considered, must needs be better, as tending to a more excellent end. No wonder
then that you hear St. John Rev. 14.13.
pronounce them blessed that dye in the Lord. And good ground it seems had the
Wiseman to say, Eccl. 7.1.
that the day of death is better than the day of ones birth; and Reason He had
Eccl. 4.2.
to praise the dead, which are already dead, more than the living, which are
yet alive. It is observable that the very Heathens were wont to celebrate the
day of their Birth with sadness, seriousness, and sorrow; but of a friends
Death with all mirth, joyfulness, and feasting: So fully and verily were they
persuaded of the truth of that memorable Saying of the Oracle, Optimam non
nasci, proximum mori; i. e. the best and most desirable thing, is not to be
born at all; the next, to die quickly. Let none of us, I beseech you therefore,
fall short of them in point of courage and resolution; forasmuch as our hope is
not confined only to this life; for then indeed 1 Cor. 15.19.
we were of all men most m^serable: But we are assured of unspeakable bliss,
and eternal peace in the life to come; and a joyful Resurrection of our bodies
at the last day. The Wiseman tells us, Eccl. 12.7.
that the Spirit shall return immediately unto God that gave it; and as for the
Body, though it be laid in the dust, and 1 Cor. 15.42, 43.
sown in corruption, yet it shall be raised in incorruption; though sown in
weakness, yet it shall raised in power; though sown in dishonor, yet it shall
be raised in glory. Which Metaphorical phrase of St. Paul gave the holy Fathers
occasion to call the Churchyard, Gods field upon earth: Wherein the graves are
the furrows; the dead Bodies of his Saints are the Seeds sown; and the
Resurrection at the last day, the time of harvest, when God will send forth his
Reapers, i.e. the holy Angels (as Christ himself expressly Mat. 13.39.
calls them) that they may Mat. 24.31.
gather his elect together from the four winds, and from the one end of heaven
to the other, even as wheat into his garner. And then,

3. Another consideration is the impartiality of Death, Remedy 3.
when our appointed time is come, and the natural necessity of it: In regard
whereof the Heathen Horat. Ode 4.
Poet says well, that aequo pede pulsat, pauperum tabernas, regumque turres; i.
e. It boldly knocks at the Palace gates of Princes and Nobles, as well as rings
and raps at the doors of poor Peasants. It balks nor spares none when it is
sent, be they high or low, rich or poor, young or old: For Heb. 9.27.
Statutum est, etc. It is appointed for all men once to dye. Death is the
greatest Monarch, and the most ancient King in the world: For death (says Romans
5.14.
St. Paul) has reigned from Adam to Moses; to which I may add, that it has
reigned from Moses to us, and so shall still reign over all to the end of the
world. Every one without exception must stoop and bow to his Scepter. One 1
Cor. 15.41.
star indeed may differ from another star in glory, i. e. in brightness,
luster, and magnitude; but yet we know that as sure as they have their Rise in
the West, so sure they are to set in the East: Even so, it is true, One man on
earth may differ from another man in glory, i. e. in wisdom, and wealth, or
beauty and honor, etc. but yet notwithstanding as sure as they had a rising in
their Birth, so they shall have a setting in Death: the honor of the greatest,
as well as the meanest, when their appointed time is come, must be laid in the
Dust. For Eccl. 2.15, 16.
one event happens to them all; and how dies the wiseman? even as the fool? Dye
we must? (said the 2 Samuel 14.14.
wise woman of Tekoah) neither does God respect any person. Now seeing it is
thus, that Death is so impartial and unavoidable, what greater folly,
pusillanimity, and meanness of spirit can any man be guilty of than to be
terrified with the thoughts of it? A far better course I am sure it would be to
fit and prepare our selves carefully for it. For then, as it is natural and
necessary for all to dye, so it would be honorable and comfortable to them:
Whereas, an unprofitable Fear of Death serves for no end that I can tell of,
but only to render it dreadful and miserable; and is so far from helping any
ever a whit more to avoid and escape it, that it does but rather hasten it upon
them. But,

4. The last and principal consideration is the thoughts of that most blessed
and advantageous consequence thereof; Remedy 4.
I mean, that Col. 1.2.
inheritance of the Saints in light, that 2 Timothy 4.8.
incorruptible Crown of righteousness; that 2 Cor. 4 17.
far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory, which we hope to be made
partakers of hereafter in Heaven. For 2 Cor. 5.1.
we know (says St. Paul) that when our earthly house of this Tabernacle shall
be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal
in the Heavens. The consideration whereof, one would think should be enough to
quell and suppress all inordinate fears of death, and rather indeed make it
desirable, than terrible to us.

Object. But that which keeps me so much in awe (will some perhaps plead) and
makes my departure hence so terrible, is my unfitness and uncapableness at
present of such a blessed state and condition.

Answ. If you think so, and this be the Cause; Why do you not speedily, and in
good earnest strive to remove it? Ipsa morte nihil certius, etc. that dye we
must, there is nothing more certain; but as for the circumstance of the Time
when; the Place where; and the Manner how; there is nothing in the world more
unknown, and by consequence more uncertain: Why should you then trifle away one
minute more of your precious time, or neglect any good means that may tend to
your Assurance? Consider, I pray, that for this end chiefly it is that God
lends you time, and affords you frequent opportunities here in this world. And
therefore the Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
Apostles Precept is, See that you walk Circumspectly, not as fools, but as
wise, redeeming the time, because the days are evil. And likewise St. Peter's
Exhortation; 2 Pet. 1.10.
Wherefore, the rather ^rethren, give all diligence to make your calling, and
Election sure. And to the same purpose is that most pithy Prayer of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 90.12.
Lord teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
Wisdom: Now,

Do but thus, and then to remove that last ground and Cause of Fear that was
mentioned, viz. The thoughts of Judgment to come, know for your comfort, that
He that is appointed then to be Judge, is your Advocate and Mediator, and will
appear for you as a friend and Compurgatour. Sometimes indeed He is called a
Revel. 5.5.
Lion, and represented to us in Scripture as a Mal. 3.2.
Refiner, nay sometimes as Heb. 12. ult.
a consuming fire in relation to the ungodly; but to the righteous, and true
Believers, he will then be a Lamb, as He is styled (for your comfort) in the
Revel 5.8.
Apocalypse; and as the Prophet Isaiah describes him, he will manifest himself
to them, Isa. 9.6.
as a most wise and wonderful Redeemer, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
of Peace. So that they need not be afraid of that dreadful doom, Math. 25.41.
t Abite a me execrati, etc. Depart from me ye cursed; but may with confident
hopes and assurance expect to hear that sweet Absolution and Invitation, Ibid.
v. 34.
Adeste benedicti patris mei, Come ye blessed Children of my Father, receive
the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World. And so much by
way of Reprehension. Again,

Of Exhortat.
that when Gods judgments are in the Earth, and the sad tokens of his
displeasure appear against a Person or Nation, then its a proper season for
them seriously to lay things to heart, and wisely to consider? I beseech you
then be exhorted to the Duty. And that none of you may be at a stand or loss in
your selves for want of fit matter to meditate upon, I shall here now resume,
and according to my promise, enlarge my self to the full upon those five
forenamed Particulars, The subject-matters of our Consideration.
which I told you before in the Explication are the most proper subject-matters
of our Consideration in the day of adversity.

1. The Affliction it self.
1. The affliction it self, the evil, disaster, or Visitation whatsoever it be,
that is befalne us. This must be seriously thought upon, and considered by us;
that so by consulting Gods holy Word, and by the help of his Grace and Spirit,
we may come at last (as Himself Micah 6.9.
requires) to understand the Voice of Gods Rod, and the mind and meaning of Him
that appointed it. Now the present Affliction, and sore Visitation, which we of
this great and populous City, with the Places adjacent, and diverse eminent
Towns of this Nation do so sadly groan and labor under, is that noysom and
deadly Epidemical disease of the Plague and Pestilence. Concerning which, to
help you a little in your Considerations upon it, I shall briefly subjoyn
something, 1. Touching the Names and Metaphorical Appellations that are
assigned unto it in Scripture. And then 2. I should likewise add something
concerning the Nature of the Disease: But for this I referr you to the
Philosopher and the Physician, whose Art and Profession does oblige them to
search into, and study the Nature both of this, and of all other bodily
Maladies and Distempers. And I do it the rather, because we shall find enough
in the Names to acquaint us with the foul Nature of it; which I heartily wish
(if it be Gods will) that none of you that hear me this day may ever
experimentally find, nor further understand than by the Names and Characters of
it that you hear from others.

Scripture-names of the Plague.
1. The most usual Name is that of Pestis, quasi Perestis (says the Etymologist)
from the Verb Peredo, i. e. to eat through, or utterly to consume and destroy.
And thus it is called (as I conceive) from the contagious and most pernicious
quality and property of it; which sometimes has been so extremely violent,
quick, and diffusive, that we read of above fourteen thousand that once were
destroyed by it in a moment, as you may see plainly, Numb. 16.45, 46, 49. and
of three or four and twenty thousand that dyed of it in the space of a day,
Numb. 25.9. with 1 Cor. 10.8. and afterward of threescore and ten thousand
that perished by it in the space of three days, 2 Samuel 24.15. Nay, of an
hundred fourscore and five thousand, that were swept away by it in the space of
one night, as Isa. 37.30.

2. A second Name is that of Plaga (whence our English word Plague) which in
Latin, we know, properly signifies a Stroke: to intimate to us, that where
it is inflicted, it is as an angry Stroke of Gods wrath and vengeance upon a
sinful People or Nation. And hence it is also sometimes called Number. 11.33.
Percussio, a smiting; sometimes Numb. 16.47. Psalm. 83.15, 16, 17.
Vulneratio and Consternatio; i. e. a Consternation and Wounding. Again,

3. A third Appellation given unto it, is that of Strages, Clades, and Ruina;
i. e. Ruin and Desolation, (as S. Page and other Hebricians render the
Original word in diverse Exodus 12.13. Zech. 14.12.
places) because it so quickly consumes (as the Prophet Zechariah speaks) pulls
down and demolisheth these Earthly Tabernacles of our Bodies: And for the same
respect and reason it is sometimes termed even Ipsa Mors, Very Death, and
Destruction it self, as Psalm. 91.6.

To these I might add those Periphrastical Appellations in the said Psalm, of
a terror by night, and Gods Arrow that flies by day, verse. 5. Where note by
the way, that both for Prevention, and our Preservation too, the Psalmist
directs us to the most safe, and only sure Refuge and Sanctuary, the shadow of
the wings of the Almighty, v. 1, and 4. and prescribes the most sovereign and
only infallible Antidote in the whole world against the infection of the
Plague, viz. Our sole dependence and trust in His great mercy and gracious
protection, v. 9, 10. And therefore I think it a Psalm fit and worthy to be
diligently and daily read over, nay gotten by heart, and hourly meditated upon
by all that hope and desire to escape the contagion. For do but thou make the
Lord thy refuge, and thy Fortress, and his Truth thy shield and buckler, and
then thou need not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the Arrow
that flies by day. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy
right hand; but it shall not come night thee. Because thou have made the Lord,
even the most High, thy habitation, there shall no evil befall thee; neither
shall any Plague come nigh thy dwelling: However, if thou escape not the
Visitation, yet thou shall Gods indignation; Verse. 11.
Who shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways,
whilst thou live in this world; and at last to transport and conveigh thy
Soul into Abraham's bosom.

The destructive and deadly nature of it.
These are the well-known usual Names and Appellations assigned unto this
Disease in Scripture. By which (as I intimated before) you may easily judge of
the destructive, foul Nature of it. But if what has been spoken be not
sufficient to represent that to the full unto you; give me leave then to mind
you of some emphatical Phrases in Scripture, whereby Gods inflicting of this
fore Judgment is expressed by the Holy Ghost. Sometimes it is expressed by
causing his anger and jealousy to smoke against a Person or Nation, and by
separating them unto evil, as Deuteronomy. 29.20, 21, 22. and 2 Chronicles. 34.25.
Sometimes by heaping mischiefs, and spending his arrows upon them, and
devouring them with bitter destruction, as Deuteronomy. 32.23, 24, 25. Sometimes by
laying his hand very heavy upon them, and sending a deadly destruction amongst
them, as 1 Samuel 5.11. Sometimes by making men-drink the wrath of the Almighty,
as Job 21.20. and the Wormwood-wine of trouble and astonishment, as Psalm. 60.3.
2 Chronicles. 29.8. And sometimes by persecuting them with his tempests, and making
them afraid with his storms, as Psalm. 83.15. No wonder then, that Almighty God
reckons this as one of his four most Ezekiel 14.21.
sore judgments, that he sometimes sends upon a rebellions City or Kingdom.
And so much for the first particular subject matter of our Consideration, the
Affliction it self.

2. The Second was the Dispenser and Author of it: 2. The Dispenser of it.
And primarily and principally that still is God, who does it for our good. For
Amos 3.6. Ruth 1.21. Isa. 45.7.
shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? No; Mihi
Vindicta: Vengeance is mine, Deuteronomy. 32.35. Romans 12.19.
I will repay, says the Lord. It was the fault of King Asa, (2 Chronicles. 16.12.)
that in his disease he sought not unto the Lord, but to the Physicians. But we
must acknowledge a Digitus Dei, The finger of God in this present sad
Visitation above and before all other natural and secondary Causes, and look up
especially unto Him; or else we are guilty of the same Crime. Generally, there
is no evil (as Job Job 5.^.
intimates) but it is a spark of Gods wrath. But in this of the Plague, Gods
anger seems to be kindled, as Numb. 25.3.
Moses speaks; and those sparks of his wrath to be blown up, as it were, into a
flame.

3. The third was the ground, 3. The ground and cause of it.
or the procuring and meritorious Cause of it. And for this we must, look into
our own hearts, examine our selves, and consider our ways, as being well
assured and convinced of this one thing in general beforehand, That it is sin,
and nothing but sin that does withhold Jer. 5.25. and chapter 13.22. and chapter 16.10,
11, 12, 13.
good things from us, and which is the Cause of all the Evils, Afflictions, and
Miseries that do befall us. More particularly, the Grounds and Causes of this
most dreadful noysom Disease that we labor under, are of two sorts: Either 1.
Such as rationally are supposed, and probably assigned by the Philosopher, and
bodily Physicion, I mean those external natural Causes, which are briefly
summed up in the seasonable. Exhortation anneked to the Form of Prayer for this
day. Or else, 2. Such as unanimously are agreed on by all, and certainly
determined by the Divine, and Gods holy Word: I mean those internal and
supernatural Causes of our own Sins and Provocations, and Gods just wrath and
indignation thereupon: Both which are mentioned, and laid down by the Psalmist
as the sole Causes of that sudden, Plague which befell the Israelites for their
Idolatry and Fornication with the Midianites: For thus Psalm. 106.29. with Number.
25.3.
they provoked the Almighty to anger with their Inventions, and so the Plague
brake in upon them. And yet it is not so much for Sin in general, as rather for
some heinous and horrid sins in particular, that Gods wrath and anger is thus
kindled against any people. In my recounting and discovering of which, I shall
(God willing) use all faithfulness and impartiality without fear or favor: for
which end, I shall not trust to mine own private judgment, nor yet follow the
partial Opinions, and censorious Fancies of others; who being biased by their
affections and inclinations, their novel and corrupt Principles and
Persuasions, their self-love and interest, are ready hypocritically and
subtly to justify themselves, but politickly and maliciously to cast all the
Odium they can upon others: And hence it is, that you hear some mutter and
murmr, that it is for the Sins of the Court especially, that this fore
Judgment is laid upon us: Others whisper, that the fault is chiefly in the
Bishops and Clergy; who have neither the Way nor Faculty themselves to please
the generality of the people by their Preaching and Divine Service, nor yet
will permit others, whom they could fancy, to exercise their Gifts in their
Churches and Pulpits: And a third sort cry out, that it is because they are
persecuted (as they pretend) and are not suffered as in the late Olivarian
days, to enjoy their beloved Liberty of Conscience, as they call it: I shall
not tread in the steps of these Persons or Parties, and with them positively
and peremptorily conclude and determine, that this or that particular thing,
these or those Persons are the provoking and meritorious Causes of our
unparalled Visitation; but to prevent all mistakes and errors in so nearly
concerning an Inquiry and Discovery, I shall steer my course by the Compass
only of Gods holy Word, and make that alone my Conduct and Pilot until we be
past these most dangerous shelves and quick sands.

In Scripture then, where the sacred Penmen are never found to balk either
themselves or others; but, quite cont^ary to the humor of many in these our
days, that think so highly and well of themselves, are always wont faithfully
to record and reveal, yea even aggravate, rather than conceal and extenuate the
grossest Errors and C^^^^ of those, whether Princes, Prophets, Priests or
People that have provoked the Almighty to wrath (studying it seems most of all
to give due honor and glory to Gods holy Name, howsoever they took shame to
themselves). In Scripture, I say, I find even Kings and Princes themselves
arraigned at the Bar of Gods Justice as well as their Subjects; and sometimes
the blame laid upon the one, and sometimes upon the other ( for Acts 10.34.
He is no respecter of Persons) for provoking the Lord by some special sins to
inflict this sore Judgment upon his People: And yet neither of them pleading
Non-guilty to the Accusation and Charge drawn up against them by the Holy
Ghost, but confessing their Crimes, and humbling themselves in dust and ashes,
that by Prayer and Fasting they might obtain pardon.

The special Sins mentioned in Scripture, Sins of Princes that have occasioned
the Plague.
whereby Kings and Princes have provoked God to pour out the Vials of his wrath
in this manner, they are only two, to my best remembrance, Pride, and Blasphemy.

First, Pride of heart, which was David's Offense, as 2 Samuel 24. with 1 Chronicles.
21.1. where you will find, that through Vain glory, and Satan's instigation,
his heart was lifted up to number Israel: but God was displeased with this
thing (says the Text, v. 7.) and therefore He smote Israel with a violent
Plague, which in three days destroyed threescore and ten thousand. It is
likewise the judgment of St. Jerome, Cyril, and Theodoret (as A Lapide notes)
that to prevent, if not chastise this same dangerous Principle of Pride in King
Hezekiah, which probably he might be inclinable to, and guilty of, upon the
conceit and consideration of that miraculous happy deliverance of Jerusalem
from the force and fury of the King of Assyria; when for his sake, and upon his
effectual Prayers and Tears, there were near upon two hundred thousand of the
Enemies Army Isa. 37.14, to v. 36.
destroyed in one night; their judgment is, that (as sometime a 2 Cor. 12.7.
Thorn in the flesh, the Messenger of Satan was sent to St. Paul, to buffet
him, lest he should have been exalted above measure, through the abundance of
revelations; even so) the Lord was pleased to visit King Hezekiah personally
with this very Sickness; Isai. 38.1, 21. And yet all, it seems, scarely enough:
for afterward (...) and it got vent, though its true upon another occasion,
an^ as he pretended out of civility and courtesy to strangers, rather than any
ostentation in himself, as Chap. 39.1, 2, 4.

Secondly, Blasphemy; and this was the black and provoking Sin of the aforesaid
King of Assyria, Senacherib I mean, and his compliant foul-mouthed Servant and
eloquent Orator, General Rabsh^keh: whose breath so forcibly blew up the coals
of Gods anger, that it presently made his jealousy burn like fire, and consume
so many thousands of their Men in one night. These are the two only special
Sins (as I remember) mentioned in Scripture, whereby Kings and Princes have
provoked God to pour out the vials of his wrath in this manner. But sure I am,
that we of this Nation, have not the least ground or occasion to suspect or
imagine that our Dread Sovereign should be guilty of either of them; Who has
purchased the Name and Reputation abroad in the world, and also approved
Himself here at home, to be both a very wise, and most rarely accomplished
Person, as to his natural Parts and Endowments; and also as to his spiritual
Gifts and Inclinations, a truly religious, meek, and most gracious, merciful
Prince; in short, a good man as well as a great Monarch: And therefore we may
very well acquit and exonerate Him from all guilt, as to these great and
capital Sins; and so by consequence, from the foul Censure of being eminently
accessory to the sore Visitation that we now labor under.

Sins of people that have caused the Plague.
The special and particular Sins mentioned in Scripture, whereby common People,
I mean, the mixed Multitude, and Body Politic of a Nation, have provoked God to
pour out the vials of his wrath in this manner upon them, are diverse: I shall
first name them and set them in order before your eyes, by referring you to
those plain and express portions of Scripture, where I find them recorded; and
then afterward bring home our Discourse in a brief application unto our
selves. They are six in number.

^. Wilful disobedience, and a general Apostasy from the true God, and his holy
Laws and Commandments. This is clear from Deu. 28.15, 20, 21. It shall come to
pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to do all
his Commandments and his Statutes, etc. that then the Lord shall send upon
thee cursing, vexation, and rebuke in all that thou set ^hine hand unto for
to do, until thou be destroyed, and perish quickly; the Lord shall make the
Pestilence cleave unto thee, until He have consumed thee; So Levit. 26.21, 22.
etc. If ye walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken unto me, I will bring
seven times more Plagues upon you, according to your sins, etc. And if ye will
not be reformed by these things, but will still walk contrary unto me, then
will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for
your sins, etc. And when ye are gathered together within your Cities, I will
fend the Pestilence among you.

2. Flat obstinacy, and open rebellion against lawful Magistrates, the higher
Powers, that God has set over us: Which the Apostle tells us is no less than
to Romans 13.2.
resist the Ordinance of God; and they that do so shall hereafter receive to
themselves Damnation: No wonder then, that at present here this dreadful
Judgment of the Plague and Pestilence be threatened by God against all such
children of Disobedience; as indeed it is, Numb. 14.2, 3, 4. with verse. 11, 12.
Where when the Children of Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, and said
unto them, Would God that we had dyed in the land of Egypt, or in this
Wilderness: Wherefore has the Lord brought us unto this land to fall by the
sword, that our ^ives and our children should be a prey? Were it not better for
us to return into Egypt? And they said one to another, Let us make a Captain,
and let us return into Egypt. Hereupon the Lord said unto Moses, How long will
this people provoke me? I will smite them with the Pestilence and will
disinherit them, and will make of thee a greater N^tion, and mightier than
they. And as it was threatened in this Chapter for this seditious murmuring and
conspiracy; so it was actually inflicted upon some in the sixteenth Chapter,
viz. fourteen thousand and seven hundred of those Abetters and Favorers of the
Rebellion of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, as verse. 41. to the end of the Chapter.
For the proof of this I might likewise refer you to Jer. 27.8. with Chap. 21.6,
9. which you may please to peruse at leisure.

3. A pertinacious resistance of those regular and faithful Ministers, those
spiritual Laborers in Christ's Vineyard, which by Gods Providence are sent
amongst them: Peoples slighting, despising, reviling and reproaching of these,
and like the deaf Adder stopping their ears to the voice of these Charmers let
them charm never so wisely: and on the contrary, running after false Prophers,
and because they will not endure sound Doctrine (as the Apostle 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.
Prophecies plainly of them) afeer their own lusts heaping to themselves
teachers of their own (not of Gods I am sure) having itching ears. Now for
this, the Plague and other sore Judgments are threatened by God; as Jer. 29.15,
17, 18, 19. Because ye have said, the Lord has raised us up Prophets in
Babylon: Thus says the Lord of Hosts: Behold I will send upon them the Sword
the Famine, and the Pestilence, and will make them like vile figs that cannot
be eaten they are so evil. And I will persecute them with the Sword, with the
Famine, and with the Pestilence, and will deliver them to be removed to all the
Kingdoms of the earth, to be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and
a reproach among all the Nations, whither I have driven them: Because they have
not hearkened to my words, says the Lord, which I sent unto them by my
servants the Prophets, rising up early, and sending them; but ye would not
hear, says the Lord.

4. The slighting of the Ordinances of God, and particularly the neglect, or at
least profanation of and abusing the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper: Which
St. Paul looks upon as the Cause of the sickness and Visitation that happened
to the Believers at 1 Cor. 11.30.
Corinth. Many it seems were come to that pass (as they are even now in these
days) that they cared not whether they came or no unto that Sacrament; or at
leastwise they came they cared not how. And therefore (says He) for this Cause
many are weak and sickly among you, yea, and many are fallen asleep. And this
is no new thing, says the Right reverend Father in God, Bishop Andrews: Moses
himself suffered for this; His neglect of the Sacrament of Circumcision, to be
administered to his Child (out of compliance with his tenderhearted, or if you
will, peevish Wife Zipporah) made God to meet him in great anger by the way in
the Inn, and it was like to have cost him his life, Exodus 4.24, 25, 26. The
remembrance whereof made him prefer that petition to Pharaoh, Exodus 5.3.
Let us go, we pray thee, three days journey into the Wilderness, and there
sacrifice unto the Lord our God; lest otherwise, if we neglect our own duty,
and slight his due worship and service, He fall upon us with the Pestilence, or
with the Sword: which it seems they might very justly fear, in regard that the
Sacrament of the Pass^over, and the blood of it was the means to save them and
their Families from the Plague of the destroying Angel in Egypt, as you may see
Exodus 12.13.

5. That provoking and unpardonable Sin of Idolatry: as you shall find Ezekiel.
5.11, 12, and 17. As I live, says the Lord God, Surely because thou have
defiled my Sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine
abomin^^^ons; therefore will I also diminish thee, neither shall mine eye
spare, neither will I have pity. A third part of thee shall dye with the
Pestilence, and with Famine shall they be consumed, etc. Thus shall mine anger
be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon thee, etc. For I will
send upon thee Famine, and evil Beasts, and they shall bereave thee, and
Pestilence and Blood shall pass through thee. So again, Chap. 6.5, 6, 7. I will
lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before their Idols, and I will
scatter your bones round about your Altars, etc

6. The last is that beastly Sin of fornication and u^cleanness. For which, as
we sometimes Genesis 19 24.25. with Deuteronomy. 29.23.
read that four eminent Cities were destroyed by Fire and Brimstone from
heaven, v^z. Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim, and the whole plain-Country
turned into a standing stinking Lake, called The Dead Sea to this day; So
afterward, when the Children of Israel joining themselves unto Beal Peor were
grown to that height of wickedness and impudence, as to commit it openly with
the Daughters of Moab and Midian, this grievous judgment of the Plague and
Pestilence was inflicted upon them for it; as you may see, Psalm. 106.28, 29.
and more fully Numb. 25.1, 2, to verse. 10. A proper punishment (says my
Reverend Author) for so heinous a provocation, seeing the foul sin of
fornication commonly ends in sores and ulcers, which are as infections as the
Plague it self.

These six, I think, are all the special and particular Sins mentioned in
Scripture, whereby common People, I mean the mixed Multi^ude and Body Politic
of a Nation have provoked God to pour out the Vials of his wrath and fury in
this manner upon them. Now seeing that Romans 15.4. and 1 Cor. 10.6.
whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning; and
that these things are our examples, to the end that we should not tempt and
provoke God, as others have done, by the commission of these gross sins, to
infflict this most dreadful Judgment upon us: But yet forasmuch as Gods anger
has been of late, and still is stretched out against us this way in an
extraordinary severe manner; We may therefore be sure, that it is for some or
other of the aforesaid iniquities which we of this sinful Nation in general,
and this populous City in particular, epidemically, my meaning is, for the
major part stand guilty of, that this unpa^^llel'd and sore Visitation is laid
upon us. To expiate which, Oh that there were such truly ingenuous, tender, and
honest hearts in every one of us, that in our Confessions and Deprecations we
might deal as faithfully and impartially betwixt God and our own Souls, as the
sacred Penmen of Scriture have done in declaring the sins and provocations of
Gods people, and His severe punishments and Judgments upon them for the same.
For 1 Cor. 10.11.
all those things happened unto the^ for examples; and they are written for our
admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

The Authors opinion, why this sore judgment is now laid upon us.
If any of you expect and desire that I should here now declare my Opinion, for
which of the forementioned sins I conceive it is, that this sore Judgment is
laid upon us; (though I know such desires are commonly made out of design, that
people may know how to affect and fancy the Preacher, yet) I shall not scruple
very briefly, and plainly to give you my judgment, viz. That I do not think
that it is for ends or that one Sin in particular, but rather for them all. As
it is true with St. James, That Jam. 3.2.
in many things we offend all; so here it may also as truly be said, that in
all these things, I mean the forenamed Capital Crimes, we offend too too many.
For which of the six can we instance in, of which there are not many amongst us
that must needs confess themselves guilty? Give me leave to make some short
reflections upon them severally, and then I shall leave you all to judge. Now
in this disquisition I shall observe a retrograde Motion, beginning with that
which I ended with, when I named them before, that so the first may be last,
and the last may be first.

1. In the first place then, for the foul Sin of Fornication and uncleanness;
may not Almighty God bring the same charge against many, very many of this City
and Nation, that He sometimes brought against the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
many of the Jews? Jer. 5, 7, 8, ^.
When I had fed them to the full, they then committed adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in the harlots houses: they were as fed Horses in the
morning, every one neighed after his Neighbors wife. And what then follows?
Now, how shall I pardon thee for this? Shall I not visit for these things,
says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this? And
then

2. Secondly, for that provoking and unpardonable Sin of Idolatry. You must
know it is twofold: either visible and external in reference to the Body, or
else spiritual and internal in reference to the Soul. Now, though I hope and
believe that there are few or none amongst us so notoriously wicked as to be
guilty of the former; I mean, to contrive and make to themselves graven Images,
and then fall down and worship them as Gods, (unless it be some of the most
wretched and grossest sort of Papists) yet I doubt there are too too many
amongst us guilty of the latter, spiritual and internal Idolatry. For you must
note,

1. That that is every man's God or Idol, which his heart is most of all set
upon. Now, if it be not the only true God, but wrong objects, he is ipso facto
guilty of Idolatry. Thus the sottish Winebibber, and gluttonous Epicure may be
justly called Idolaters, because they Phil. 3.19.
make their belly their God; but Isai. 5.12.
they regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider the operations of his
hands. Thus also the wretched Worldling, and covetous Mammonist, who Job 31.24.
makes gold his hope, and trusts in the multitude of his riches, is a plain
Idolater (as the Apostle Col. 3.5.
calls him) because he makes an Idol of his wealth. And thus lastly, He that
trusts in man more than in God, is a mere Idolater and accursed before God,
because he Jer. 17.5.
makes flesh his arm, and his heart departs from the Lord. And then

2. To think amiss, and otherwise of God than He is represented unto us in his
holy Word, this again is Idolatry; Quia sculptile and constatile reor dogmata
esse perversa, quae ab his quibus facta sunt adorantur, Hier.
Because a perverse and wicked opinion of God is no less then a graven Image,
says St. Jerome. And therefore both he and St. Augustine agree, that Usque
hodie in Templo Dei, etc. i. e. even to this very day there are many amongst us
that set up Idols in the Church of God, when men in their hearts and minds
conceive and feign and new, erroneous, and unworthy opinions, especially
concerning the Persons of the blessed Trinity. Now, whether many amongst us may
not be thought guilty of this kind of Idolatry is easy to imagine: And then
let such know, that they cannot clear nor acquit themselves from having a hand
in pulling down this present heavy Judgment upon us.

3. Thirdly, For slighting and contemning the Ordinances of Christ, and
particularly the Neglect, or at least profanation of and abusing the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper: Never was Generation of men professing Christianity, in
any Age or part of the world more guilty of this, than those that still are,
and of late years have been the greatest Pretenders to extraordinary Zeal and
Devotion, strictness and Reformation amongst us. And hence it is, that when
Times and Days are solemnly appointed for the celebration of that Sacrament;
though serious warnings, and earnest Exhortations are used by us the Ministers
of Jesus Christ, to persuade and prepare people for a worthy, a comfortable,
and a frequent participation of the sacred Elements there exhibited, viz. the
blessed Body and Blood of Christ; yet you shall find few or none of that
Faction and party affording their presence: As if they had never read nor heard
of, or at least were resolved not to believe nor regard those words of our
Savior; Joh. 6, 53, 54, 55.
Verily, verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day. For my flesh
is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. Which words, and whole Chapter, I
wonder how they can read without horror and astonishment, when they consider
and call to mind how irregularly they walk, and directly contrary both to the
express Precept of Christ, and also the apparent constant Practice of the
Apostles themselves, and the Saints and Martyrs of the Church in all Ages. And
if such as these, who have gotten the name and reputation of Religious and
strict walk^rs, be thus obstinate, and so exceeding faulty in this point: then
what can be looked for from many others vicious, loose, and profane in their
lives, but that, as we find, they should either plead the others example for
their absence from, and neglect of this Sacrament; or else, as we fear,
presumptuously approach the Lords Table with unprepared and unsanctified hearts
and hands; to the great dishonor and profanation of Gods holy Ordinance, and
the damnation of their own souls? 1 Cor. 11.29. Again,

4. For that pertinacious Resistance of those regular and faithful Ministers,
those spiritual Laborers in Christ's Vin^yard which by Gods Providence are sent
forth; for Peoples slighting, reviling, despising and reproaching of these, and
on the contrary, running after false Prophets, as I said before; that too too
many are guilty of this, may easily be seen every Lord's Day, every Fast, and
Festival-day, when, if it be known (I am ashamed and even tremble to speak it)
that there is like to be nothing at Church but only that which is purely
divine, viz. Gods holy Word distinctly read, and our most excellent public
Prayers and pithy Ejaculations devoutly poured out at the throne of Gods grace,
for our selves, for our Sovereign and his Kingdoms; for Grace, Mercy, and
Pardon of sin, with Peace and Prosperity: Or if it be known, that the Minister
has a Set-form of Prayer, and makes use of his Notes in his preaching; then
you shall scarcely have more of one Party (whose Prejudice and Fancy is above
their Reason, Religion, and Conscience) than Stone-pillars to make their
apperance for that time. But let informat^on and notice be given that some
Stentorean famed Nonconformist, some popular and newly cryed-up Preacher, that
seems to pray without premeditat^on, and preaches without book, never looking
upon Notes nor Bible: One that will neither use himself, nor trouble them with
the Prayers of the Church, but entertain them only with a Psalm, a Prayer of
his own extemporary Effusion, and a pleasing, plausible discourse, concerning a
strict and close walking with God, the illuminations and inward operations of
the Spirit of Grace, an Interest in Christ and the New Covenant, etc. And
withal, in his Application will declaim with a great deal of zeal, affection
and vehemence against those sins which our Superiors in Church and State, or
others in general, that are not of the same strain and opinion with himself,
are usually censured and supposed to be most guilty of, (which is an effectual,
fine subtle way, to beget disaffection, and sow the seeds of sedition in
peoples hearts toward their Governors, as also to beget inward heart-burnings
in them, with censoriousness, divisions, and uncharitableness toward their
brethren:) Let it, I say, be but noysed, nay whispered abroad that such a one
is to teach in this or that place, either Morning or Afternoon; and then though
the Church were as large as St. Paul's, yet it will scarcely find room enough to
receive and contain the disorderly Rabble of his sequacious eager followers.
You all I believe, know and observe this to be true; and many perhaps think it
no crime, but rather commendable, in regard it is so customary and ordinary;
yea the principal Thing that is now in fashion, as to Religion, as being the
chief and only means (this slighting of Prayers, and running after Sermons) to
gain one the Name and Reputation of a Religious, godly Person. But had I time
to discover unto you the mischievous and unhappy Effects and Consequences of
it, and that as well in respect of the Public, as of men's own Souls and
Consciences, in regard it is this that begets heart-burnings and animosities
amongst Christian Neighbors (as I hinted before) with divisions, censurings,
and uncharitableness each unto others; it is this that breeds and feeds, and
foments that causeless discontent and disaffection in peoples Hearts toward
their Superiors; it is this that kindles the first sparks of sedition,
disobedience, and Rebellion against lawful Magistrates, which are ready to
break out into a flame, when opportunity offers it self; it is apparently this
that makes people so unsettled in judgment, and Jam. 1.8.
unstable in all their ways, 2 Timothy 3.7.
ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; in a
word, it is this, that makes many Ibid. v. 2, 3, 4, 5.
in these last perilous times (according to the Apostles prediction) to be
self-lovers, proud, boasters, disobedient to Parents, without natural
affection, false accusers, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, having indeed a form of godliness, but denying the power
thereof; had I but time to demonstrate these things, as it were easy both by
Scripture, plain Reason, Ecclesiastical History, and our own certain Experience
of the like Events from the same Causes, in the late times of Liberty and
Confusion, I should clearly make it appear unto you, That this irregular
itching humor of Curiosity, and affecting of novelties is, though not so
scandalous in the sight of men, yet as heinous in the sight of God, and
mischievous to Peoples Souls as any Crime that they can lightly be guilty of.
For it is by this ( as the Math. 15.6.
grand Tradition of the late Scribes and Elders amongst us) that the
Pharisaical Men of this Generation have made the Commandments and Precepts of
Christ and his Apostles, concerning good Order, Discipline, and Decency in the
Church, concerning Subjection and Obedience to Civil Magistrates, concerning
Affection and due Reverence toward Christ's Ministers, concerning brotherly
Love and Union amongst Christian Neighbors, of none effect. I speak nothing
but what is notoriously known to be Truth, by all uninteressed, judicious,
sober and solid Christians. And therefore no wonder, that Gods anger is waxed
thus hot, and his jealousy burn like fire against such a refractory,
obstinately erroneous, and indeed antichristian a generation as this: Which may
very well (in the Math. 11.16, 17.
words of our Savior) be likened unto Children sitting in the Marketplace,
and calling unto their fellows, and saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have
not danced; We have mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented. For, even so in
this age, we find one party still opposing, countermining, and walking contrary
to another: So that let Christ send what Laborers soever He please into his
harvest, though never so innocent, honest, able, and faithful; though never so
careful to follow His, and His blessed Apostles example, and that in respect
both of Life and Doctrine; though never so conscientious in the performance of
all Ministerial Offices and Duties, according to His express direction, the
infallible and harmonious tenor and Canon of Scripture, to the great comfort
and satisfaction of all humble-minded and honest-hearted persons amongst us;
who therefore 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
esteem them very highly in love, for their works sake, and count 1 Timothy 5.17.
them worthy of double honor: Yet the devout Will-worshippers, and religious 2
Pet. 2.10. with Jude v. 8.
despisers of Government, in these days, who to compass their ends, and carry
on their designs, are not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, preferring Novelty
before Antiquity, a Formal Show above Reality, Self-interest and worldly
Reputation, before Gods Acceptance and Approbation; these will evermore have
one fault or other to find with them, and rather than fail, invent and forge
reproaches and scandals, that so they may have some plausible pretense to Psalm.
2.3.
break their bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from them. Now, what is
this, but in effect to tell our Savior, that they are grown weary of His
Government and Economy, and now will have Luk 19.14.
Him no longer to reign over them, unless He Will accept of a new way of Worship,
according to some mode of their own that is now in fashion: All other Forms,
and traditional Platforms, though never so authentic, and apparently Jure
Divino, are counted by them to be but Idolatrous and Superstitious. And then,

5. For that flat Obstinacy, and open Rebellion against lawful Magistrates,
the Higher Powers that God has set over us: Though I know none at present
actually guilty of it, yet that must be attributed not so much to the happy
change of many men's minds, or any peaceable and truly Christian Principles in
them, as rather to the good Providence of God, and the watchful wisdom, courage
and diligence of those in Authority. Sure I am, there is no want of implacable
Malcontents, and most turbulent-spirited Incendiaries amongst us, to will and
endeavor it; and with as much subtilty, malice, and secrecy as it is
possible. They rise up early and lie down late, and eat the bread of
carefulness; they spare no pains, they stick at no difficulties nor dangers,
but attempt and assay all ways and means; yea, they are ready to compass even
Sea and Land, and all in hopes to compass their end. Nay, rather than fail to
carry on their design, some there are that cunningly can transform themselves
into Angels of Light, to trapann the well-meaning ignorant vulgar unto their
side: For which end, they very forwardly thrust themselves, or steal sliely
into our Pulpits, and there vehemently enough (it is true) inveigh against the
gross scandalous sins of Pride and Profaneness, Gluttony and Drunkenness,
Whoredom, Swearing, and Sabbath-breaking; strongly insinuating, that all but
themselves and those of their Party, are certainly guilty of some of them, and
so are in danger of Hell and Damnation: But the mischief and wickedness of it
is, that whilst they thus openly pretend, that they come only to beat down
sin, and save peoples Souls, by persuading them to a close walking with God,
and strict Obedience to the Gospel of Christ, they secretly withal intend to
talk them out of all their Allegiance, love and duty toward their Superiors
both in Church and State: they name and proclaim themselves indeed, to be the
Messengers of God, and Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; but by their fruits we may
easily judge whose Emissaries they are, in that the main drift and tendency of
their preaching is to dispose and work poor people into a murmuring against, a
slighting of, and disobedience to all humane and Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
let them be never so reasonable, never so religious, and consentaneous to Gods
holy Word. And all (forsooth) under the specious fair pretense, that primarily
all people are the subjects and servants of Jesus Christ, and ought to obey God
rather than Man; as if the Commandments and Institutions, the Ecclesiastical
Discipline and holy Ordinances of Christ himself and his Apostles, being
approved of, and enforced by the authority of those that God has set over us,
must not, ought not then to be obeyed or observed by them, only because they
are re-imposed and required of them by the commendable and good Statutes of
Christian Magistrates. Before this was done, they could not but confess, that
they were binding to the Consciences of all sound Believers; but now they would
rather have the Godly to think, that they are bound in Conscience to contemn
and oppose them. The full persuasion of which destructive and wicked Tenet,
they never leave till they have frighted them into, with the frequent and
terrible threats of Hell and Damnation. And if this be not a most provoking and
crying sin, I know nothing that is. If any here shall object, that I am very
harsh and severe: give me leave to tell them, that I never was their Auditor my
self; but, as a fuller conviction, and a much stronger Vox Populi, vox Dei.
testimony against them, I have always observed by the report and discourse of
many of their seduced followers, that this is the very sense and meaning that
they all pick out of their Sermons; and besides, I have read some of their
plausible printed Papers my self, but know not how to make any other
construction of them. If still they plead the integrity and sincerity of their
own hearts, as perfectly free from, and utterly ignorant and innocent of all
such evil intentions, as I allege and charge upon them; let me tell them in
the words of our Savior, that they Luke 9.55.
know not what manner of spirit they are of; for most of them are as surely
guilty, as he that once said to the Prophet Elisha, 2 King. 8.13.
But what is thy servant a Dog? And this I could very easily evince, and
clearly demonstrate, by referring them to their own, and others Experience
about five or six and twenty years ago: when there were many as sincere and
zealous in their pretenses for a through Reformation, for the CAUSE of Jesus
Christ, as they termed it, for the advancement of Truth and the Gospel, and for
the salvation of Souls, as any possiby can be now; who yet afterward saw, and
confessed, and bewailed themselves, for that they unadvisedly had been too
accessory and instrumental to pull up the Floodgates, and let in a deluge of
Rebellion, Confusion, and desolation that ensued thereupon. Which I earnestly
wish, that all our hot, young Non-Conformists, and their affectionate factious
followers would seriously lay well to heart, lest a worse Judgment than this
of the Plague be inflicted upon us.

6. Lastly, For that wilful Disobedience, and general Apostasy from the true
God, and his holy Laws and Commandments; Never sure were the Children of Israel
more guilty of this, than the People of England are in these days. When,
betwixt a great deal of blind Ignorance, practical Atheism, and open Profaness
on the one hand, and a great deal of Hypocrisy, spiritual Pride, and Obstinacy
in error on the other, the true Fear of God, Love to his Name, and Obedience
to his righteous Laws and Statutes seem to be quite extinguished amongst us. O
the Deluge of Sin and Wickedness that seems to have quite overflowed both City
and Country! Where is the man that with Nathaniel, may well be called an
Israelite indeed, as exercising himself (with St. Paul) to have Act. 24.16.
always a Conscience void of offense both toward God, and toward men? It was
the complaint of Almighty God in ancient time, and his upbraiding expostulation
with the Nation of the Jews; Jer. 2.10, 11, 12, 13.
Pass ye over the Isles of Chittim, and see: send unto Kedar, and consider
diligently, and see if there be such a thing as this in the whole world; Has a
Nation changed their gods, which are yet no Gods? But my people have changed
their glory, for that which does not profit. Be astonished O ye Heavens at
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, says the Lord. For my
people have committed two evils: they have forsaken Me, the Fountain of living
waters, and hewn them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns that can hold no water. And
it may be as justly said and applied to this Nation of ours. Wherefore, as he
speak Jer. 9.12, 13, 14.
after, Who is the wise man that may understand this, and who is he to whom the
mouth of the Lord has spoken, that he may declare it, for what the Land
perishes, and is burnt up like a Wilderness, that none passes through? And to
this the Lord makes answer, and says, Because men have forsaken my Law, which
I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, neither walked therein; but
have walked after the imagination of their own heart, etc.

Thus have I run through the forenamed six particular capital Crimes mentioned
in the Scripture, whereby common people, or the mixed multitude, and Body
politic of a Nation have provoked God to pour out his vials of wrath and fury
in this manner upon them: And have likewise brought home my Discourse, and made
it appear apparently to you, that there are too too many amongst us guilty of
each of them. Not but that I believe we have our tens, our thirties, and our
fifties of good and righteous persons among us: For whose sakes, I hope and
trust that Almighty God will in his due time look down from heaven in mercy
upon us, and heal our Land. Now, for which of the aforesaid sins this sore
judgment is laid upon us, I have given you mine Opinion already, and shall say
no more, but (as I said) leave you all to judge: but judge, I would have you,
your selves chiefly rather than others. Charity toward them, and fervent
Prayers for them would be very good and commendable in you, but faithfulness
and impartiality toward your selves is very necessary, and will be most
profitable for you. And wherein any of you find your selves guilty, I beseech
you repent, forsake your sins, and turn unto God by prayers, and tears, and
firm resolutions; and then He will turn from the fierceness of his wrath. When
every one sweeps before his own door, the streets you know, will quickly be
clean; so let every one take but care to get the plague of his own heart cured,
and then this sad judgment of the Plague and Pestilence, shall be as quickly
removed us. And so I have done with the third particular Subjectmatter of our
consideration in the day of adversity.

4. The end of it.
4. The fourth is, the end of it, or the mind and meaning of God therein. And
that may be either 1. For the trial, the fatherly chastisement and correction
of some, viz. the righteous, his own true Children and Servants. For Prove.
3.12. and Heb. 12.6, 7, etc.
whom the Lord loves, he corrects; even as a Father the Son in whom he
delights. And therefore St. Peter's good counsel is, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13.
Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you,
as though some strange thing happened unto you: But rejoice, inasmuch as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings. Or else 2. For the just punishment and
destruction of others, viz the wicked and ungodly; according to that of Job,
Job 31.3. and Prove. 1.24, etc. and Isa 1.19, 20.
Is not destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity? Or 3. lastly, generally and certainly for the amendment and
Instruction of all. The Apostle observes, that when the Father of Spirits
afflicts and corrects the children of men, It is Heb. 12.10.
for their profit, that so they may be partakers of his holiness: And the
Prophet tells us, That Isa. 26.9.
when Gods judgments are in the earth, the end thereof is, that the
inhabitants of the world may learn righteousness. And hence it is that God in
Scripture is sometimes compared to a Quod iguis auro, hoc animabus est
afflictio.
Refiner, Mal. 3.3. and sometimes to a Thresher, Hab. 3.12. Whose fan is in his
hand, that he may thoroughly purge his floor, but gather his wheat into his
garner.

5. The way to have it removed.
5. The last is, the good way and means that we are to use, that so it may be
removed from us, or at least we may have it sanctified to us. And for this I
refer you for full satisfaction to the useful and seasonable Exhortation, set
forth by the Church, and approved by Authority. And so here at present it shall
suffice briefly to tell you, that the ways and means are of two sorts in
general. 1. Moral and natural; such as our own discretion and reason prompt us
unto; or the experience, and more mature knowledge of others direct us unto. 2.
Spiritual and Theological; and such are patience and contentation, humble
submission and self-resignation; earnest prayer and supplications, with
a-Amendment of life, and a real Reformation. I shall but barely name these
things, because I desire to subjoyn something by way of Motive to enforce the
duty of Consideration now in this dismal day of Adversity: As,

1. There is nothing more proper and seasonable for the present juncture of
time; Mot. 1.
so much the Spirit of God here assures us. Now it is the Wisemans well known
comparison, Prove 25.11.
Verbum opportune dictum, etc. A word fitly spoken is like Apples of Gold in
pictures of Silver. And if words (which we say are but wind) only because they
are pertinent and seasonable, be thus excellent, beautiful, and amiable in the
esteems of rational men: surely then, Opus opportune factum, a good work and
duty seasonably, seriously and well done and performed by us, is no less
valuable in the account of Almighty God. It Is very true, as the heathen Orator
long since observed, (...): Isocr.
That what is out of season, and out of fashion, seldom meets with peoples good
liking and approbation: but on the contrary, Eccl. 3.11.
Solomon tells us, that God has made every thing beautiful in it is time. Such
therefore is the Duty enjoined here in this text; and that very strongly
commends it to us.

2. There is nothing more excellent and commendable as to the work and duty it
self. Consideration! Mot. 2.
it is the searcher of the heart, the Manure of the Soul, the fosterer of zeal,
the remedy against security, the improvement of Christianity, the ladder of
heaven, and the key of Paradise. Consideration! it is as watering to Plants, as
blowing to the Fire, as Oil to stiff joints, as Physic to the sick: It urges
to repentance, quickens to Prayer, confirms Faith, kindles Love,
encourages in well-doing, and refreshes with heavenly consolations.

3. There is nothing more well-pleasing and acceptable to God. Enoch for this
was rewarded with a Genesis 5.24.
glorious translation. Mot. 3.
And indeed for what end has God given us the great things of his Law,
committed to us his sacred Oracles, caused the Scriptures to be written for our
learning, sent his Prophets to declare his good will and pleasure to us; yea,
sent forth his Son to reveal his thoughts, which are thoughts of mercy, love
and peace to usward? Certainly, not that all these things should be slighted by
us, but pondered upon in our hearts, and well improved by a due and serious
Consideration. And the more we do so, the more without doubt we shall please
him; this being the best way to honor him, and to express our thankfulness to
him for them.

4. There is nothing more necessary, Mot. 4.
nothing more advantageous and profitable to our own souls, as was showed you
before in the Page 3, 4.
Introduction. Wherefore to conclude, would thou be blessed in all thy
Enterprises and Concernments with the blessings of God? would thou have thy
understanding enlightened with the knowledge of God? thine affections inflamed
with the love of God, thine heart established with the Promises of God, thy
solitariness cheared up with the fellowship of God, thy afflictions sweetened
and mitigated with the comforts of God, and all thy thoughts, words, and
actions regulated by the Commands of God? then let thy daily practice be to
Pray and Consider. For, in the day of adversity, there is nothing then more
proper and seasonable, nothing then more excellent and commendable, nothing
then more well-pleasing and acceptable, nothing then (no nor indeed at any time
else) more advantageous, necessary and profitable. Consider therefore then
especially, and well and wisely weigh with thy self, 1. The evil, disaster, or
visitation it self, whatsoever it be, that is befalne thee. 2. The Dispenser
and Author of it. 3. The ground, or the procuring and meritorious cause of it.
4. The End, or the mind and meaning of God therein: and 5. The good way and
means that is to be used, that so it may be removed from thee, or else may be
sanctisted to thee.

To which five particulars, give me leave here to add, in the close of all,
one Object more, which you may do well to exercise your Consideration upon;
Consider the Poor, the afflicted members of Jesus Christ: Whose wants, and
whose number are very much increased since this sad time of Visitation; and
whose condition you may easily imagine must needs be so exceeding helpless and
deplorable, (since all trading and employments are almost quite dead and gone)
that there never was more reason for the Rich to consider the Poor: And for
your encouragement know, Prove. 19.17.
That he that has pity upon the Poor, lends unto the Lord, and that which he
has given will he pay him again. Neither shall it go without a Blessing in
this world, as an Overplus; for, Psalm. 41.1, 2.
Blessed is the man that considers the poor; the Lord will deliver him in the
time of trouble: Yea, the Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he
shall be blessed upon the Earth. I, and for a further encouragement still, I
pass my word and promise to you beforehand, That what you shall give shall not go
out of the Parish, but shall be expended and bestowed upon our own Poor; for so,
I am sure, the Receiver General appointed by his Majesty, the candid and
untainted Right Reverend Bishop of this Diocese, will be well-pleased that
October. 4. 1665.
henceforth it should be disposed of.

FINIS.

