DON QUIXOT Redivivus Encountering A BARNS-DOOR, OR AN Exact Narrative OF THE
RARE EXPLOITS Of Captain Brains in a Dangerous Expedition against a Certain
BARN in a Town on the other Side of the River ANNE in the Land of Little Ease,
and Less Justice.

UNDER THE COMMAND Of Tom Coxcomb Signifer, an Overgrown Tapster, and
Principle-Member of the Disloyal Society of the Vitiosi, and of the Corruption
of the said Town, and Sometime a Justler of the Peace there.

As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear: so is a wicked ruler over the poor
people. Prove. 28. 15.

I saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that wickedness was there: and the
place of righteousness, that iniquity was there. Eccles. 3. 16.

I said in my heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked, etc. Ver.
17. And that God might manifest them, that they might see that they themselves
are beasts.

Printed for the Company of INFORMERS.

AD LECTOREM.
HAve you er'e seen Sir Bacchus in his Fits,
Belch out his Rage as one berest o's Wits?
Or have you seen him at his Bacchinall's?
When drawn with Tigers at his Festivalls
Attended on, with Lenae, Thyades,
With Menades, and old Bassarides,
With Satyr Priests, and's jolly Women too,
With Furies, and the rest of's Drunken Crew?
Servants so fit, as that they never were
Fitter attendance on so rude a Bear:
Just so I saw proud Tombo's fury Swell,
Huffing and raging as if none could tell
From whence he might derive his Pedigree,
Unless from Bacchus, or such Bruits as he,
Cut, slash with Sword, shoot, kill, he cried,
I Will bear you out, am not I quallified?
I Am Master of the Revells, am not I?
I say my Prayers in Sack and Claret high:
I Am for the Church, and for my Sovereign,
I Will ram and dam, and sink each Puritan.
Then Swells, and foams, and Spitteth fire,
Ranging the Streets, Smites any in his Ire:
There need no Harpies, no nor Furies by,
Nor Demons to amaze the standers nigh:
This Ragamuffin when with Dire he comes,
His words a Larrum, but hark, to hear his Drums
Had there been any Scythian Women here,
He would have caused them all to disappear:
Men prate and talk (quoth he) of Heaven and Hell,
Such Scare-Crows Children serve, Sure I cannot tell
That there a God or Devil is; I fear them not,
March on I say, but I do fear my Throat;
His word's a Law, poor Captain must obey,
He calls for's Imps, who dare to say him nay?
He is the Ignis Fatuus of the Place,
Which way he turns each Justice turns his Face;
Their Zeal's inflamed by him, in him will fade
At last, and find themselves in the mire to wade,
Phanaticks, Traitors all, and Rebels too
Are such as will not like to this Madman do:
None but the Topers that come often to's Cell,
Shall be his Neighbors, or shall near him dwell;
His Panch brim full of Sack, and Pasty-Crust,
And Swelled with Pride, no doubt e'relong will burst.
Applause he seeks, but breath will not in that Air,
Until he is mounted into Hamans Chair:
Ascend the wrongs he may into a higher place,
His Valor and his worth is all in's Face.
Have you not seen the Mountains Swell for Birth?
And then a little Mouse creep out of the Earth.
Have you not seen the Potter vaunt that he
Turning the Wheel an Amphora here will be?
But yet for all his have a little Urn
That must content him, that must serve his turn;
Just so Swelled Tombo's braggs (...)
All men shall see that I (...)
O that Phanaticks all had but one Neck,
I Would give them such a Blow I Would make them keck;
Or all that good I know, on them I Would vent
My Malice that ab inferis is sent:
And let some Honor dignifie my Pate,
O dub me Knight of the Post; it was read my Fate:
Religion I Will Reform? yea and my King
Shall find his Hand and Seal a trifling thing.
Great pity it was that er'e the Bible saw
The English Tongue I Will make a Law
That Latin it shall be: though I cannot Spell
My Psalter scarce, I Will make a shift to go to Hell.
Laws against Drunkenness, and Profanation
Of the Sabbath are my provocation.
I will Repeal them all, or make you know
Their true intent and meaning is not so.
At most they do concern but poorer Sort
That little Money have, and cannot Sport
With Malago, Canary, Rhenish Wine,
The Richer Sort may be as drunk as Swine.
Such Wind this Bladder fills, but yet we see
Parturiant montes something; less does he.
DON QVIXOT Redivivus ENCOUNTERING A Barns-Door,
Section 1.
ON the Lords Day being the Seventh day of September in the Fore-noon, some of
the Inhabitants of the Town of Andover, and other Places adjacent in the County
of Southampton being assembled together in the solemn Worship of God (in a
Place assigned them for that end and purpose by his Majesty's most gracious
License (in a quiet and peacable manner: Mr. S. S. then Preaching from Luke 16.
25. Capt. Brains Esquire; Captain of the Train-band of the In-hundred of Andover,
and Tomas Coxcomb Innkeeper Ensign of the said Band, arose out of their places
in the Church, commanding others to their Aid (making a great noise and
disturbance there,) and among the rest charged Lieutenant B. to assist them,
who said he should do nothing without a Warrant from a Justice of Peace: The
said I. Coxcomb (being then a Justice of the Town) went out of the Church
swearing, and wrote a Warrant (such a one as it was) in the Churchyard upon a
Tombstone, to command the Lieutenants assistance in breaking up the Meeting
aforesaid, who then went accorningly with them.

Section 2.
The said Officers calling some of the Train-band together, came with Swords,
Muskets charged, (by command from the Captain) Drums beating, and other weapons
of War unto the door of the House where the aforesaid were assembled; as soon
as this violent assault was perceived by the Minister, he desired the people to
be quiet, and sit still in their places, without making the least resistance,
which accordingly was performed.

Section 3.
The Captain and T. Coxcomb enter in all imaginable rage and fury pulling and
haling the poor people, roaring out, Constables, Constables; (which he thought
had been there) ran up into the Gallery, down again ranging and bellowing like
a mad Bull let loose, and then calls out keep the Peace, keep the Kings peace;
answer was made that none brake it but himself. Mr. S. said, pray Sir be
civil, we have been treating of Heaven and Hell (quoth Tom, what do you tell
me of Heaven and hell?) I came not to talk of Heaven and hell: pull him down;
and pressed to come to the Pulpit, but could not for the throng of people who
kept their standing, and would not move from their places; the Captain and T.
W. fall a dragging out the people themselves, and having no Constables there,
command in one of the Bailiffs Sergeants, and thrusts him in upon the people,
who scrabled a little at them, and whiningly said, what shall I do? what shall
I do? I do not know what to do with them, shifts into the multitude, and hides
himself, then slipped out at another door, and ran away; They command in their
Soldiers, one of which cockt his Musket charged, and presented into the house;
others fall in with their Officers upon the people; at last they dragged out one
person standing at the door, punching him and striking him many blows after he
was out with their naked Swords; whereupon Mr. S. said, here is apparent
violence offered to us, we will dismiss the Assembly, which he accordingly did,
and desired all persons to depart to their respective Habitations.

Section 4.
The Ministers immediately came forth, the people following them: the Court
before the house was full of Soldiers, and other people gathered from the
Church and streets to behold the Fray: the Captain and Ensign laid about them
with might and main with their naked Swords on the people, beating many without
any regard who, or how they struck; (the soft-headed Captain dreaming that he
was engaged in a very dangerous fight, though neither sword, staff, nor hand
was lifted up against him;) one that had been at Church left his devotion to
see what was like to become of his Neighbors, was soundly bastinadoed by the
Captain with the naked Sword. These two Officers Captain K. and T. W. and their
two beagles the Informers did so basely abuse the people, that their patience
and forbearance was to admiration,

Section 5.
The Lieutenant without a Sword, only a staff in his hand, stood in the Court
endeavoring to his utmost (by his sober and prudent managemenr of his Office)
to keep Peace, and hinder mischief, and through Gods mercy in all likelihood
was an Instrument to prevent effusion of blood.

Section 6.
The said Captain and Ensign seeing the Ministers come forth, commands the
Soldiers to seize those Persons, and came immediately themselves and seized
them with Swords drawn in their hands; the Ministers are had away Prisoners,
multitudes of people following and thronging from all parts of the Town (as is
usual in such uproares) in the street at some distance from the Meeting place:
one of the Informers (a Sergeant) flung about his Holbert in the throng of
people in a dangerous manner, and struck diverse therewith; thereupon his heels
was struck up, and was thrown in the dirt, whereupon some stir was made by the
Soldiers, one threatening to discharge his musket among the people, whereat
Boys and young people beginning to be exasperated, and at the abuses of the
Informers, (who went along provoking the people) flung some dirt at them, some
of which (it is likely) or from the trampling of the People might fly as they
said into the Captains face, which accident was highly aggravated by the
Captain, and his master the Ensign afterward, the Ensign saying that it was a
Rebellion, and a Justice of Peace should not dare to walk the streets without
danger of having his throat cut.

section 7.
The Prisoners are commaned by the Ensign into Mr. Bailiffs house, (he being at
Church,) and a Guard set upon them in the Hall, many people assembled in the
street, and at the door, but desired by the Prisoners to depart, and many did.
Lieutenant B. also stayed in the street, and preserved quietness, there being
some need thereof; the Informers vapouring up and down among the people,
running at some, and striking others with Holberts, and other Instruments,
especially if any called them Informers, which all the World cannot hinder
Boys and Youths from: Informers being always a hateful sort of Cattle to all
People.

Section 8.
While the said Prisoners were secured under a file of Musqueteirs in Mr.
Bailiffs Hall in Squares, Ensign Tom attended with the Yeomen of his Guard
Captain John, Mr. To. Captain of the Boys, one D. and W. T. Town-Clark, the
said Ensign wallowed about like a great Porpus huffiing and sweating, and
pulling up his Belt, drawing out, and putting up his Sword, saying that there
had been a Rebellion in Andover, that there was danger of cutting of Throats,
sputtering much of such frothy Language. I will send away Post (says he) for a
Troop of Horse to suppress this Insurrection. Mr. R. drawd up an Order
immediately to the Captain of such a Troop to come away, and suppress a
Rebellion in Andover, being not able to suppress it our selves, the said W. K.
an officious Servant to Tom Tapster puts Pen to Paper accordingly, Mr. Bailiff
at length arriving from Church, (the Sacrament having been that day) the
Captain and Ensign offer him this Writing to sign, and who considered of it,
and told them there was no need of any such thing, for he saw no Rebellion, or
danger of any, but he would undertake himself to secure the Peace of the Town,
at which Tom's ire was exceedingly kindled, looking upon such a reply as no
small reflection on his prowess and policy, told the Bailiff the Prisoners were
prisoners of War, and that he would secure those Heads of the Rebellion, and
would send for a Troop of Horse for that end and purpose: Well says the
Lieutenant, write your Warrant to send them whither you will, I will give 500
l. Bond to deliver them there my self without a Soldier: no says Tom I will
have a greater force to secure them, and went forth in a great rage.
Accordingly they say he sent for this Troop which lay at Hampton; but the
Officers were wiser then to observe Tom. W. Commands, and return him (as they
say) this answer, That they were not to wait upon every Fools Arse.

Section 9.
Next a great Counsel of Officers is held and concluded; That two Drums should
beat through the Town, to assemble the rest of the Company: who when called
together, they draw forth a file of Musketeers under a Sergeant to Guard Mr.
Informer M. Commissionated to nail up the Barns doors, the aforesaid place of
Meeting in New-street. He marches up most valiently, armed with hammer, nails,
and gimlet, charge the door, and it must stand; the Combitant encounters it,
makes a Pass with his Gimlet, bores on, reckons the day his own; at last comes
a stone (they know not from whence) and struck this Goliath upon the Thumb, down
goes the hammer and gimlet; and up goes the Thumb; look you here Gentlemen
(quoth he,) do you see what they have done, they have broken my Thumb, and
swore it was not possible to be done; but seeing the Wound was not mortal, he
plucks up his Spirits, and with a trembling heart, and shaking hand, attempts
this great enterprise once more, and makes the second Pass; when immediately
another stone came and gave him a second gentle Patt, which put them all to a
total rout: Away they retreat to the body of the Army, as a Forlorn-Hope half
slain, and give an account to the Officers of the great hazard and danger of
this Achievement, and that it could not be accomplished without greater Force.

Section 10.
Whereupon Captain Courageous animates his Soldiers, and marches up his Band
with Drums beating, and Colors flying, and draws up against this Invincible
Giant (Barns-door,) and when drawn forth into Battalia, a Combitant is sought
for with a Workmans hammer to strike through the Temples of it; dreadful
Polyphomus, none dares stand forth, till at last a pitiful runagade Smith (a
man of desperate fortune) undertakes to nail the door as fast as a
Horse-shooe, or else loose his hammer; and after the Outworks were cleared of
the Boys their so feared enemies, out marches the Champion, the Army opening
to the right and left, and desperately drives six whole nails into the door. A
Knavish Smith standing by, undertook to defy that Gyant-like Vulcan, saying
ha! I have a pair of Pinchers at home can draw these Nails. Now the other door
must be secured by the same hand, which furiously set upon, as notably
withstood the assault, for they shutting within side, could not now be nailed
without drawing the Nails drove into the first door, whereby they might enter
the House, so that they stand securing the House still by their Locks to the
right Owner; and seeing there was no more to be done, and in vain to attempt
any further, it is well enough says the Captain. Come let us march Gentlemen,
March.

Section 11.
Tantara, Tantara, triumphantly they march with Drums beating and Colors
flying; Tom W. and his Captain looking as bigg as Don Quixot, ready to charge
all the Wind-mills in the Land, commanding his Soldiers as they marched to
fire upon the Children in the street for calling the Doegs by the names of
Informers, roaring give fire upon them, shoot them, kill them, and rare work
there had been, had the Soldiers been altogether as brainsick, and mad as
these two Commanders in chief.

Section 12.
A Counsel of War is held, and the next grand matter under Debate was the
disposal of those dangerous Prisoners into safer Custody for the security of
the Peace of the Nation; at last Lieutenant B. is sent to the Prisoners (under
strict Guard in Mr. Bailiffs house, and there civilly treated by him) to give
them to understand that it was the Captains pleasure they should be removed to
the White Swan an Inn over against the Market house: Presently the
inconsiderably formidable Tom of Andover appears wadling before his Band of
Soldiers with Drums and Colous, sputtering and foaming like a great Boar,
commanding his Soldiers to fire (as abovesaid) at the people, who stood forth
to behold this Wonderful sight.

section 13.
Lieutenant B. (carrying himself still most civilly, like a Gentleman in all
his behavior) looking forth at the Window, and seeing the Elephant so rampant
in the street, adventnred down to command this justice Ensign, and said, march
on Gentlemen, and draw up in the Marketplace: I will deliver the Prisoners
safe at the Swan; they march on; the Lieutenant brings the Prisoners after, and
at Swan gate delivers them to Justice Tom, and departs: which said Justice
commands them along with him, has them into the Inn, stumbles upon a
civility, and calls for the best room in the house for those Gentlemen,
charge his Soldiers with them, sets Four for a Guard at the Chamber door,
and a Court of Guard in the Town. Hall for relief to the other every hour, and
for the Security of the Town: this was after about five hours imprisonment in
Mr. Bailiffs house.

Section 14.
And now in this place at the White Swan, and state of Inprisonment, the two
Ministers continue from Sunday about five a clock at night, till Monday about
nine a c^ock at Night: during which space of time this malicious bubble appears
as follows: sets his Court of Guard, appoints a Captain of it, roars and
dominers in the Hall, and about the streets as if all the Tapsters in England
were inconsiderable trifles to him: Orders his Tattooes and Revallois to be
beaten up in the Night, as if all the Nation were flaming with fire and sword.
So great a noise there was at the door with the rudeness and ranting of
Soldiers, as in the Street, and Market-house, that the poor Prisoners could
not get half an hour of good rest all night. The next morning comes Ensign Tom
bellowing to his Guard in the Market-house. and there keeps a Court-marshall,
having taken a Boy upon some complaint of his Imps the Informers, for some
Affront put upon them; first he condemus him to lie neck and heels, next
reverseth that Sentence, and commands him to be hung up by the heels three
hours.

Section 15.
This heing the day for the election of the new Bailiff, and the Exit of this
Justler of the Peace, growing on to the great joy of the Inhabitants of the
Town of Andover, (P. B. and W. R, only excepted, the two great Admirers of his
Valor and Zeal for the Church;) our Gentleman Proteus like, changes his
shape, (but not his Nature) appears in another Garb, he that was yesterday
Gladiator, is now Cogatus, instead of a set of Drums, has a set of Fiddlers
pace before him for the honor of his Greatness and Corruption of Andover
Chonorariums that he and his Guest were always most acquainted with his
Acchievements, having been still most renowned in the Field of Bacchus:) his
Brethren of the Corporation all wait upon his Excellency in their Robes, but
all of them Ciphers, he the only Figure that signified any thing in this three
days Government of the Town by Sword and Drum: And now brings them to choose
their Bailiff, and Magistrates, and other Officers under his Court of Guard, a
very unusual thing till Tom became Keeper of the Liberties of Andover, and
King P. was put beside his Regallity.

^ection 16.
But the worst is, Mr. Justice comes a Pegg lower, and returns in Primam
materiam, falls back to the Rear, and becomes the rump of Corruption: but the
smell of the approaching good Cheer bore up his Spirits from sinking. And truly
the Town had a marveilous intervale of Quietness whilst this Cerberus was held
by the Chops with a Crust; but having filled his Panch with Venison, Pasly, and
Sack, and his Spirits elevated, he thought himself to be some body, and would
have the Town to know that he was something more then non nihil, and therefore
going from the old Bailiff, to the Bailiff Elects Banquet with his Brethren, he
is pleased to cast up an eye as he goes along to the Prison windows, and
(beholding his Prisoners, and diverse others accompanying them, looking upon
that transient fidling pomp) the Gentleman fancied he was laughed at by some of
the Beholders, and it was well he had so much wit to think so. (for never was a
more ridiculous Baffoon that wore Sword, or Gown.) he roars out in the street
to the Imprisoned Spectators, well done, weli done, I will be with you anon,
and give you a Glass of Sack.

Section 17.
Before the Banquet, it had been Debated betwixt the Civil and Uncivil
Officers what to do with the Prisoners, Captain John beginning to have some
increase of his Wits by reason of the addition of the Spirit of Wine, and began
to consider the keeping of these Soldiers, and paying them might fall to his
share, that Tom had the honor, but possibly he should pay the shot; and though
he might make a pretty good shift to feed them well that day from the Bailiffs
Table (as indeed they were too high, for falling out about a piece of Pasty, or
such a thing, they drew, and one was dangerously wounded in the Arm,) he might
find it more chargeable to keep up such a Guard much longer upon two poor
unarmed men, that he thought the Bailiff could keep Prisoners at an easier rate.

Section 18.
After Debate, Three Proposals were sent to the Prisoners to choose, 1. Either
to remain Prisoners under Tom Coxcomb's Court of Guard; or 2. to pay the money
to the Worshipful their Informers; or 3. to give Sureties to appear at the next
Sessions, to answer to what Fellonies, Murders, Treasons, and Rebellions
insignificant Tom should lay to their Charge. The Prisoners soon resolved, and
of the Three ev^lls of punishment chose the last and least: This Answer is
returned to the Bailiff, and accepted by him; he acquaints General Tom, and his
Clerk W. K. with the choice of the Prisoners; at which his Indignation is
raised, thinking that he had so worried and terrifi^d them, with Drums,
Prisons, and high swelling words of Treason, Rebellion, etc. that they would
have chosen rather to have given his Setting-Doggs a breakfast, then to have
hazarded their Necks upon his high Impeachments: he therefore in a Rage
resolves not to deliver up his Prisoners to the Bailiff, unless he might have
bond of Indemnity for what was past; and this was also Mr. Town-Clarks safe
Advice, (being perfectly Toms Creature) to his Masters; but it seems Mr.
Bailiff thought this Counsel not good at this time.

Section 19.
Whereupon this Master of Mis-rule returns to the Barel-head swelled like a
Toad; contrives how to reak his further malice upon the Prisoners, and how the
Poison was vented, the ensuing Narration will fully make manifest.

Section 20.
On the said Monday night about nine of the Clock, the Prisoners were sitting
in their prison-chamber under Guard in the White Swan, with diverse Friends, Men
and Women who came in to Visit them, and some taking a Pipe of Tobacco with
them, and in discourse and expectation of enlargement that night; all on a
sudden, (none there having the least intimation. or suspicion of any such
thing) in flies Bacchus triumphant, metamorphos'd into Mars rampant into the
Prisoners Chamber with his naked Sword advanced in his paw, roaring (and
ranting as if he had been at his Sondayes Devotion) where is S. and C. his
Sword hanging in his eyes that he could not see them; Here, here say they,
what is the business now? along with me, away with me, come along, else I will
make you; (all People being amazed at the sudden of this surprising, Outrage,)
down stairs he has them, brandishing his cold Iron; and as he passed along the
dark Entry leading to the street, made some Passes at those that were in his
way:) One had unavoidably been run into the belly by him, had he not by the
Glimpse of a Candle seen the Glittering of his Sword coming at him; whereat he
nimbly with his hand put by his Thrust: When he came into the Street Mr.
Bailiff, and his Brethren, and the Captain then going up Street from the
Bailiff Elects banquet, calls out what is the matter there? seeing the hubbub
and confusion in the street. Tom return^ Mr. Bailiff come over, I charge you to
my Assistance; and then where is C. here quoth he am I, along, along quoth Tom,
you are my Soldier, my Soldier: No, no (says C.) you are mistaken Sir, I am
none of your Soldier, My Prisoner, my Prisoner quoth Mr. Coxcomb, Mr. Bailiff
says, Mr. C. I pray keep the Peace; whereupon he caused Proclamation of the
Peace to be made. Captain K. (...) ran over, (having been in the Bailiffs
company,) and said, I pray what is the meaning of this Mr. Coxcomb? I know
(quoth he) what is the meaning of it; Whither will you have them (quoth the
Captain?) I know whither I will have them quoth Tom. One of the Prisoners said
to the Captain, do you know the reason of this strange acting? Says the
Captain they have been talking of something they cannot agree on, So! Says the
Prisoners, guessing right what that was; but is not this Fellow drunk quoth the
Prisoners? No sure says the Captain, I think not: We will go any where quoth
the Prisoners where you will command us, but let us not be at this Fellows
disposal, pray let us not go to his house; which Tom over-hearing said, No, my
House shall not be your prison, I have another place provided for you.

Section 21.
The breaking loose of this Bear, who indeed is never Sober, but a Guzling
Swearing Bruit at all times; but when acted by that evil Spirit his Zeal for
the Church, is raving mad, and will Swear all manner of Oaths, and commit all
manner of Insolences, might have been of dangerous Consequence at this time of
Night, he running with his Sword at some, and threatening others; the people
flocking together, and their blood sufficiently boiling at these horrid
Cowardly provocations of his, whereby it appears to the World that the Town is
not so inclinable to Insurrection, if it had been an easy thing to have put an
end to Tom's Swaggering, and cut him of the Simples maugre his Sword or
Soldiers; but Conscience toward God, Loyalty to his Majesty, and Love of the
Nations peace, has restrained people, and kept them in their Wits, whilst this
mad Man ranged the streets.

Section 22.
Down the Street marches Tom with his Spit advanced, driving the Prisoners
before, calling to them along, along, Swearing sometimes at them, and sometimes
at the people coming after, ever and anon turning back, and presenting the
point at them, threatening if any of them came near, he would run them through,
and then to the prisoners; what you can make Tricks at me, (meaning as was
supposed a Gentlewoman that looked out at the prison window, and bowed to his
extinct Worship as he past by,) I will have you quoth he where you shall hear
what Parliament Men say.

Section 23.
Arriving at the Hart-gate, he leaves the prisoners there with the Captain, who
waited upon his Ensigus Excellency so far to know his pleasure, runs in
Sputtering into his Court, and calls to some Guests that Lodged there that
Night, Parliament Men he said, in his wonted rude Dialect; Come ye down there
Gentlemen, Come ye down I say; at which Call appeared Three Gallants periwig'd
to the middle, and stood in the Gate, one of which opened his mouth and spoke,
and said, Gentlemen there is an Act of Parliament, and we conceive Mr. Coxcomb
does but his Duty; Another said, Yes it is so, but we would not abett his
overmuch Zeal, or to that purpose: So the Speeches ended, and good Night
^entlemen. Now says our Jailer Tom, you hear what Parliament men say, Come
away, come away, along, along, along, and hurries away the poor prisoners
toward the Goal, who patiently vampt along before him in the street in the
dark and dirt, smiling to themselves at the Fellows madness; I will put you in
says he, see if Mr. Bailiff will fetch you out, and blundering something past
the prison door, calls out come ye back, what do ye not know this place Mr. C.
Yes Sir quoth he, very well I thank you for it, having been fetched out of his
House Illegally once by that Fellow when he was Churchwarden, and committed
thither by D. K. without Mittimus, or cause why: Tom Commands that the
prisondoors be opened, and that the prisoners enter: Sir quoth one of them, you
will Write something will you not? meaning a Mittimus, which he was not capable
of making being no Justice, and therefore made his Sword his Mittimus: No quoth
he, I will not keep them Close prisoners and let none come at them without
Orders from the Captain or Bailiff, immediately sets a Guard of Soldiers upon
the prison, and gives them the like charge, which Guard was hourly relived from
his Court of Guard, and kept upon the prison till the Prisoners enlargement
from thence. some of which Guard were very rude and uncivil, turning out
Visiters, watching the prisoners in the Chamber, searched the Victuals sent in,
and a very Close-stool, which one kept out and said it was a Trunk, and might
have arms in it, but searched it at least, and let it pass; its pity, he found
not something for his better resentment.

Section 23.
All this reaked malice quite contrary to the Adversaries intentions, proved
for the better comfort of the Prisoners, who in the other place were even quite
sick for want of Rest by reason of the rudeness of the Soldiers, and their
Spirits tired by many Visitors, and were glad they were retired to a place more
remote from Tumultuous noise and company, and immediately an honest Neighbor
bringing them into a good bed, and clean sheets, went to bed, and through mercy
had very quiet refreshment.

Section 24.
The next day about Eight of the Clock News is brought in, that the Prisoners
must away to Winchester in half an hour, and upon that the Band was called
together, and Tom mustering of them all in a readiness to secure the prisoners
thither; at which News the Prisoners were further rejoiced, hoping that ere
long God would some way or other deliver them from Bruits, and bring them into
the hands of men, and therefore blessed God for this News also, only Mr. S.
being weak and lame, sent Word that he could not go such a Journey on foot,
desired he might have a Horse; answer was brought that he might ride, but then
must have his Legs tied; content says the Good man: The Prisoners p^epare for
their Journey, dispose of all their prison Household Stuff, and sing the 146
Psalm, and are in expectation of the Word of Command, but found that their
Counsel proves Abortive, Tom being happily quit of his Justices place the day
before, and could by no means procure a Mittimus signed by any other Justice.

Section 25.
When the Prisoners came into the Prison, they found a young Man that had layn
there a Week, and committed by Mr. Popins Bale, and Mr. P. B. and T. W. for
saying there goes the Informer; Another grave honest man P. B. Committed the
next day for saying to one of the Informers passing by him, Solomon thou have
served the Devil all thy days, what will thou serve him still? the Rogue
tells the Justice that he said the Service of the King was the Service of the
Devil: Soldiers instead of Officers were sent up and down to pull men out of
their Houses and shops, and hale them before the Justices, the Town still all
in a Hubbub with beating of Drums, marching of Soldiers, setting some by the
heels, threatening of others, Peter Bl. taking his measures from Tom W. was and
continues to be his most humble and dutiful Servant. And mightily offended
were these Zealous Gentlemen at the Lieutenant that he was not so mad as they;
on Sunday they rebuked him highly for not wearing his Sword when they drew
theirs; he told them he could do as much with the Staff in his hand as would be
needful: On Tuesday having his Sword by his side, Tom Coxcomb the Ensign, and
Capt. K. sets upon him to take his Sword from him, which he thought good not to
part with.

Section 26.
On Tuesday about five of the Clock in the Afternoon, a Guard of Soldiers
fetched the Prisoners up from the prion to Mr. Bailiffs house before Captain K.
Mr. Bailiff and his Brethren, with whom ^ate the Honorable the Lady Sands, the
Worshipful Sir Kinsmell Lucy, and Mr. Whitebread, Captain K. desiring some
course might be taken for the prisoners that the Soldiers might be discharged:
These Persons of Honor and Worship Treated the prisoners with much Candor and
Civillity, seeming to commisserate their Condition, and wishing Mr. Bailiff
that some Expedient might be found out for their enlargement; Yes I pray says
the Captain let it be done, that the Soldiers may be discharged; finding that
it would be more chargeable keeping them after the Bailiffs Feast. Mr. Bailiff
requires them to pay their Conviction money to their Informers, which truly the
prisoners could not yield to, knowing they had committed no Offense that
deserved such a penalty; they told them they could justify the Imprisoning
them till they had paid the Mulct; the prisoners said, they much questioned
it, the Law having provided another way, viz. by Distress for the Raising of
the money if refused. The Justices would know then whether they would show
their Goods, and suffer themselves to be Distrain'd: They Replied they would
make no Resistance, but would do their best to Secure their Goods; At last
after long Discourse of this nature, among a great crowd of people, Mr. Bailiff
assigns a House in Town for their Prison, and calls two Neighbors to be bound
in 100 l. Bond apiece for the Surrendry of the Prisoners at that place upon a
certain Warning given; which thing (the prisoners tired and wearied from place
to place by Toms Abuses, and his Soldiers Rudeness,) In considerately yielded,
and found it an Inconvenience afterward, and would have been much more had
their Obligation been legal.

Section 28.
Now after all this noise that the Inhabitants of the Town and places adjacent
were sufficiently disturbed with, but not affrighted at, likewise people
knowing it to be but the froth of a Sack pot: At last this wonderful Hector
appears before those persons of Quality before mentioned, with his Accusations
against the prisoners, and but against one neither, and says Gentlemen, this
Fellow (pointing at C.) is the worst person in England; Why: Mr. Coxcomb quoth
he. T. W. answers, he goes about from House to House, and tells the people they
must obey the Laws of God, they need not care a pin for the Laws of men: Who
will say so quoth C. or Swear so bring your Witness. I will Swear so my self
quoth Tom; That Is a likely thing quoth C. that I should speak it in your
hearing: The Gentlemen looked upon him and said nothing, but without doubt
admired at the Impudency of the Beast.

Section 29.
Another Accusation he brought against the same party was, that he should look
out of a Window toward the street on the people standing in the street, and
say, you that are mine depart. Mr. S. replied, you mistake Sir, for the nearest
to that expression was spoken by him Mr. S. who said to the people standing in
the streets, I pray Friends if you have any Respect for us, go into your
Houses, and where is the Treason or Rebellion in that, and here you see how the
K. of Fr. with 30000 men went up a Hill, and so came down again.

Section 30.
But yet Tom is not satisfied, the Informers his Jackall's has got no money
all this while, he having promised them great Rewards; and therefore Tom hunts
for them, takes Captain J. along with him, and away to Captain A. their great
Confident, (a Gentleman that keeps many a Couple of Beagles, Spiritual and
Temporal, and now and then runs down a Carriers Horse; sometimes a Non C. and
catches most of the poor People by the Belly in this Count^y,) to him they
bring a Certificate from the Bailiff of Andover, that he may send out his
Warrants to Distrain those out of the Liberties of Andover, and withal Consult
(Tom being a special Friend to the Liberties of the Town) to Present Mr. S.
Mr. C. the Lieutenant, and about Twenty more for a Riot at the County
Quarter Sessions at winchester, and send their Informers to Swear it, which
accordingly was done; It Is very probable they would have put in this
Presentment at Andover, where it was as right to be judged, but that all the
Town (where the Offense was charged) can witness, that Tom, the Captain, and
the Crew were the Ryoters if there were any, and that Mr. S. M. C. and the
Lieutenant were the persons used all possible means to prevent all Opposition,
or resistance from the poor people so abused by them, and their Informers; and
this hundreds of people can testi^^e on Oath, if they be called to it.

Section 31.
And now for the perpetual honor of the present Governors of Andover, we must
not forget (till they repent in dust and ashes) their unwearied care,
diligence, and industry to vex, perplex, and persecute the good people of the
said Town for the service of the living God. Mr. J. P. Bailiff, P. B. and Tom
Coxcomb Justices, W. T. alias R. Town-Clark, making it their great business to
stir up, and animate Informers, (which otherwise never had been in the Town of
Andover) offering money, or promising it to divert to undertake the Service; at
last hardly prevailing, with two pitiful poor lewd, dissolute Fellows, R. M.
and S. H. Searge-weavers, the last of which they were exceedingly beholding to
lately, but this Summer for abusing the whole Government, in setting up a
Mock-Court, and personating the Bailiff, Justices, and all Officers himself,
taking a Recorders place, something above W, R. deriding the several
Infirmities of body, and judicial proceedings (as the World knows they have
very many of the last) who being discovered to them, they bound over S. to the
Quarter Sessions, and many of his Comrades; but at Midsummer Sessions last,
upon Examination finding him to be a person of such hidden Worth, and so able
to manage Public Affairs, they thought him a very fit and well-qualified
person to undertake the Rule of themselves, and the whole Town, and accordingly
courted him to undertake the high Dignity of an Informer, and Suprovisor*Geneal
of the Rule and Government.

Section 30.
Accordingly this Squire Solomon taking into Commission with himself the
judicious and crackt-brain'd Gentleman R. M. begin to address unto the
aforesaid Public Service; but these being not yet flesht, (though they had a
good mind to the Prey,) could not tell how to fasten, and therefore for a while
beat about, came on, and went off again, smelled upon the Moush, but would not
venture to fasten.

Section 31.
Their Masters (for so I call them in pursuit) cries ha low, ha low, here,
here, here, Winds the Horn, claps them on the back, and finding that they still
started when they came to fasten, not knowing a Hare very well, but taking him
to be a Wolf when they came to see him; the Masters I say considered they were
but young Dogs, and not yet well flesht, consulted together that they would
for once play a little foul play, and set a Purse not at a Moush, and take the
Hare and give him to their Dogs that they might Suck the blood of him, and be
animated to go on to their work with more courage the next time.

Section 23.
Therefore on August 10. 1673. they send out those Curs a beating, they beat
very near the moush, and there make a stand, finding the Court-door shut of the
House where the people met; one that stood there went to open them: no say they
do not open the door, we were sent to Inform, but are not willing, we will go
back and say the door is shut; They return to T. W. and his Brethren, (being at
the public Rubric Devotion at Church, and the Vicar an old Sheep-biter
preaching from 2 Timothy 3. 12. yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution, Insisted much on the Word Shall, and therefore no
doubt pressed his Hearers to Persecute as their duty.) T: W. raises himself like
a Puttock to the Prey, and yelps; Up rises the other two Sparrow-Hawks, and W.
K. the Faukner, and away they march, in they come toward the end of the
morning Exercise in the time of Singing the last Psalm; Mr. Bailiff standing
very uneasily, and T. W. unquietly during the said time, the people being not
at all moved by the formidable presence, but Singing on without Interruption,
though T. W. thought every body would be frighted with his face, having been up
all Night before potting, gaming, and swearing; Now he thought God and all
Religion must fly before him, he puts on his Hat, and pulls it off, and puts it
on again, runs out to W. R. and bids him read the Orders: I will read no Orders
quoth W. they know the Orders already; In he goes again, bids Mr. Bailiff
disturb them, for says he they will Sing all day; but Mr. Bailiff was so
Civil as to think it was in vain for him to talk while they were Singing: The
Psalm being ended, Mr: S. concluded with a Blessing. Then Mr. Bailiff opened
his mouth and said, Gentlemen, we understand you have a Tumultuous Assembly
here. Mr: C. answered, you see Sir what it is: After this T: VV: bubbled, and
P. B. uttered some Impertinencies, (the people hasting out being dismissed) Mr.
B. charged them to desist, and meet no more, or to that purpose; To which Mr:
C. replied, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken to you more then
unto God judge ye: so they departed.

Section 33.
In the Afternoon the people assembling after their wonted manner, and Mr: C,
Preaching, the same Justices with J. K. Captain of the Train-band entered the
Meeting the second time, ushering their Informers with them; When they stood
awhile, the said Minister going on with his Sermon, at last says Captain J we
must Interupt them, Mr. Bailiff pray do it: Accordingly Mr. Bailiff said, That
their Meeting was contrary to Law, Seditious, etc. Mr. S. pleaded the Kings
gracious License: T. W. said, the King had no power to give any such License,
and made a pish at it: Mr: C. pleaded that they were not Trangressors of the
Act, being not Seditious, or Disloyal, and that they Worshipped God according
to the practice of the Church of England, by Preaching, Praying, Singing of
Psalms, and reading the Scriptures, and therefore were not liable to the
Penalty thereof; After which Debate they departed, leaving their Informers to
take Names: And now the Informers begin to take a Smatch of the Business, and
the next Week come in to Swear before the Grand Three; They give them Oath, and
when taken, they could not tell who to Name well, either by reason of the
multitude, and not knowing whether they might offend in naming some Relations
of the Justices, etc. but the Justices seeing them something sparing, and
modest, and naming but few, they helped them: Did you not see (say they) Such
an one there, and such a one, and named whom they were most willing to have in
the Scrape; To which the Informers Swore very roundly, and this was the first
Conviction: the Sums whereof are as follows:

l. s. d. On Mr. C. the Preacher 20 00 00 On the Supposed Owners of the House
20 00 00 On Mr. S. and 13 others as Hearers apiece 03 10 00 On the
Churchwardens, and one Constable 5 l. a piece for not Informing 15 00 00

Section 34.
These Edomites having once Informed, Children and Youths as they went along
the Streets would call them Informers; which they taking now as a term of
Disgrace, and dis-reputation among their Neighbors, they Address themselves
with great complaint to Mr. Bailiff how they were abused: Mr: Bailiff honors
them with his Attendance down the Street, calling at the shops as he went along
in great Rage, threatening the Apprentices, and saying he would not have the
Kings Officers (so he called the Informers) abused, and if any called them
Informers, he would bind them to the good behavior, or send them to Prison,
etc. The People pleaded it was the Name of their Profession, and that Name the
Parliament was pleased to give them, and therefore were not much moved any more
then unto Laughter at such Ridiculous Actings of a Person of his Authority, and
supposed judiciousness.

Section 45.
Hence upon further Complaint of the Informers, of the Peoples Saluting them
still by that Title, Mr. Bailiff assembles his Oracles, P: B. T: W. J. K. and
S: H. and passes a Vote, That no Man or Woman should dare to call the Edomites
Informers, and supposed the Parliament did not so well consider the Ill
Consequences of such a Title; accordingly Sit in judgment upon all Affronts of
them, has the Boys Convened before them, and finding one guilty of saying
there goes the Informer (as the Youth denied not, but acknowledged when he was
asked,) Mr. Bailiff requires Sureties for the Good-Behaviour of him, which he
refusing, he sent him to the Town Prison, where he remained a Prisoner a full
week.

Section 6.
On the Lords day the 7th. of Sept. above named, when the great Violence was
offered to the said Meeters as is above rehearsed at large, the Informers came
not into the Meeting any further then the Yard, (though Captain J. called
vigorously for them, saying where is the Informers, the Informers, though about
a W^ek before he passed the street in great Rage at the Boys for calling them
Informers, and Instigated the Justices to punish them,) they are busied in
pulling, haling, and beating the People by the Captains, and T's Command and
Example, but yet bring in Information, and Conviction is made by the Grand
Three Persecutors as follows.

l. s. d. Mr: S. For Preaching Conventicles 20 00 00 The Supposed Owner of the
Barn 20 00 00 11 Hearers a Second Conviction 05 10 00 On 18 more a first
Conviction 04 10 00

This Conviction and Warrant for Distress T: VV. Signed and Sealed when no
Justice.

Section 7.
Among the Persons that these Informers had Swore against, there were Two that
had not been at the Meeting that day, of which there was abundant Evidence, and
therefore at the Town Sessions held at Andover October the Ninth, a Bill of
Indictment was preferred to the Grand Jury against the said Informers for
Perjury, Justice P. B. tells the Witnesses, that if they went to prove the
Informers perjurers they must Swear high, calls the Witnesses after they had
been with the Grand Jury; and endeavors to entrap them, and confound the
Evidence, perverted their Evidence, and said, he would take his Oath they said
one thing, when they said another; and when they have Evidence, point blank
said it was nothing. T: Coxcomb (though no Justice) sat Controller of the
Court, and said there was a Knot o^ them, and told the Bailiff there would need
two or three Files of Musketeers to Guard home the Justices, swelling and
sputtering out a great deal of Foam and Folly. The Grand Jury (by reason of one
J: G. Linen Draper, and A: M. Clothier, two persons of the same Kidney with T.
W. and the Informers,) could not agree to Find the Bill, Eleven or Twelve being
for finding it, but these Two resolved never to yield upon any Evidence; said
the Persons that gave Evidence were such as went to the Barn, and therefore
were not to be believed, with other such Impertinent put offs whereby they
detained and wearied the Jury, and Court, being hacked also by P. B. and T: W.
Mr. ^ayliff adjourns the Court till Monday Sevenight after.

Section 38.
When the Prosecutors of the said Informers (seeing such obstructions to the
Current of Justice,) thought meet to procure a Counsel to appear (an
universal thing in Preferring a Bill to a Grand Jury) to see fair play: A
Counsel appears, overlooks the Bill, und finds it naught, amends it, and the
Witnesses all new Sworn to prove that those Persons were not at the Meeting at
that time; Mr: P. B. also Supaena'd to give Evidence that the Informers had
Sworn against the said Persons; He said he could not Swear unless he saw his
Hand and Seal; The Constable is called for to bring in the Warrant with the
Three Justices hands to it; who appearing, Tom Coxcomb demands the Warrant
again and again; the Constable simply delivers it to him, who takes it and
shows P. B. his hand, whispers to him, and immediately runs out of the Court
with it. P. B. is urged to give Evidence to the Grand Jury, refuses to do it:
The Jury come and say, they had sufficient Evidence that the said persons were
not at the Meeting; but not that the Informers had Sworn against them, though
several Witnesses were Sworn, who heard one of the Justices (Mr. P. then sick
of the Gout, and therefore could not appear in the Court) say that the
Informers had Sworn against these persons before all Three of them, and their
Names were on the Warrant, and one of them Distrained by the Officers, W. R. T.
C. tells with might and main they had no Evidence that the Informers had Sworn
against those Persons, and therefore could not Find the Bill. The Counsel
calls for the Convictions to be produced in Court as the Act requires, and told
them the hazard of not doing it, viz. their Forfeiting their 100 l. a piece,
(the saving of which they still pretended to be the reason of their fierce
acting against the people) notwithstanding all, they refused to produce the
said Conviction, choosing rather to hazard that penalty, then to do any thing
that might endanger the cropping off the Dogs ears.

Section 39.
The Counsel seeing them so Peremptorily resolved to stop Justice against
their own Creatures, said he saw it was in vain to press there any further,
Justice must be sought for elsewhere, withdrew the Bill, and departed the
Court, and said he had been in many Courts, but never saw the like of this.

Section 40.
And that none need question T. VV. to be a true Potestant, hear the Confession
of his Faith; he said, There are so many Judgments and Divisions, and People
are come to so much Knowledge, that it is pity the Bible was ever put into
English; The other Articles of his Faith are in the Alchoran, and in the Quart
Pot.

Section 41.
And that the World may be quite out of doubt of the Integrity, justice, and
honesty of the aforesaid Justice P. B. take this short Addition to the
Premises. Being Complained to, that the Officers had found Tom. Coxcomb, VV. R.
and D. H. Tippling together at the Heart on the Sunday, and let them alone so
doing. Mr. P. B. answered, he did believe the Law did not intend the punishing
such Persons who were of the Richer Sort, but the Poorer that were not so well
able to spend their money; and for the rest of his Religion, it was pricked up
long ago on the point of his Rapier, and abandoned with a Health upon his
Knees, and ever since he has had a Chiver-Leather'd Conscience, and the Rule
that he has walked by has been Lesbian, or the Ell and the Yard.

Section 42.
Now though this Narrative look so much like a Fiction, or Trage-Comedy; Yet be
it Known unto all, That the Things declared therein, are a true and exact
History of Things not done in a Corner, but before the Sun, in the sight and
hearing of Multitudes of People; And if any question the truth of any Thing
herein Declared for matter of Fact, he may have in Andover many Witnesses to
attest the Truth (if lawfully called thereto) upon Oath; and as for any thing
else besides History, it is but some Characters according to Fact, and calling a
Spade a Spade.

Section 43.
Lastly, Let the World judge whether such Courses and Practices as these, be
the right way of Promoting and Establishing the Protestant Religion in England;
and whether there be any more then a pair of Sheers between Papists, and such
Protestants that are so sick of the overflowing of the Gall? And that if ever
England should come to flame with Fire and Faggot again, (which God forbid ever
it should,) whether it does not abundantly appear by what has been said, that
(however other places speed) there may be found Bloud*Hounds enough in Andover
to pursue the Game? I might Querie other Things, but choose to End with the
Liturgy, and say; From Bloody Papists, and Cruel Plundering Protestants, Good
Lord deliver Us.

FINIS.

