THE DOCTORS LAST VVIL AND TESTAMENT, BEING A MOST PLEASANT DIALOGUE BETWEEN
DOCTOR COUSIN and a Fellow of his own College, desiring him to resign his
Mastership.



Printed in the year, 1641.

THE DOCTORS LAST WILL AND TESTAMENT.
Fell. REverend Doctor, both the president, and all the rest of the Fellows,
Scholars, and Students in our College, humbly remembering and presenting their
service unto you even unto the final event, do beseech you to resign the
Mastership that the College may neither suffer detriments, nor the Collegiates
disgrace by your immature death.


Cous. Sir, I congratulate your presence together with your message, I will
fully answer your expectation therein, but you shall first permit me to
transcurre some circumstances, which I would gladly have resolved unto me.


Fell. Ask and require what you please, it is your servants duty to submit, and
he will resolve you to the utmost of his intelligence.


Cous. What? Does the Chapel retain its former Ornaments.


Fell, But few of them as yet are erected.


Cous. It argues then that some are neglected; and I pray thee what are those
few. Does not the Cross stand still: I hope they have not rejected the
Crucifix, have they.


Fell. Sir, that remains, and have long expected your coming, although
frustrated thereof.


Cous. My desires have been ardent, and my affection fervent to have come
diverse times to visit my Daughter, but these shackles (a pox on the inventor
of them) have drawn me back; but if it remains, do they not worship it
still, as in time past, when I was Patron over it?


Fell. Some red-hot Zelots like your self do observe the ceremonial rights,
and ecclesiastical innovations, and will not omit the least Canonical duty,
but do still bow as popishly to it, as ever you did your self present.


Cous. I do extol them with a meritorious collaudation.


Fell. But some others whose devotion is more pious and religious, do despise it
with a detestable contempt.


Cous. Why do you not punish them by restriction, and castigation, O why do
ye not compel them by coerrion.


Fell. It Is vanity for any man to command Arminianise to be observed by them
whose consciences cannot digest it.


Cous. You say true indeed, for had not I commanded things contrary to men's
consciences, I had never been sensible of this misery, to which now I am
subjected. But what of the other ceremonies, do the Pictures and graven Images
still remain.


Fell. Those likewise as yet are not abolished.


Cous. That does somewhat relate the ambiguity of my thoughts; but do they
worship them too.


Fell. Some have not the conscience to look upon them, and I have heard some
say that they had rather see you hanged there then the pictures in your room.


Cou. What audacious impudence is this? why do you not compel them by more
restriction; but does the Altar remain still, and have ye not yet forgot to
burn incense thereto, as in my time, wherein you were very diligent?


Fell. Pardon the insolent arrogancy of my too remiss tongue; I have heard
some wish that you were sacrificed herein.


Cou. Oh! what audacity is this.


Fell. Suffer not passion to conquer thus thy captive thoughts, for it is a
custom in the world, to promulgate whatsoever their conceit nourishes.


Cou. Well, let that pass, Does the Triple Crown which I built in S. Mary's,
retain its splendent structure.


Fell. But I beseech you permit me to evacuate what my greedy mind desires to
disgorge unto you; I have heard many pray, that your head may be erected there
to make up an even number.


Cou. This transcends humane patience, for although I have been patient in
many things, yet I remember that Apophthegmatical sentence, Laesa patientia fit
furor.


Fell. By the same patience, to which you have compelled many to subject
themselves in your Pontificiall and Romish innouations, by the same patience I
beseech you to eleuate your depressed thoughts.


Cou, Since I see there is no remedy but patience, J must embrace that; but how
fares the Fellows of St. Peter's College, what do they judge of me.


Fell, Sir, they think that your Masterships Canons will requoile, and their
opinion is, that they ought to be new cast, for their Founders miscarry.


Cou. There are many will perform that office for me; therefore I shall not
need to solicit my self in that point; But does the College flourish in
Scholars, are many Fresh-men admitted since my departure.


Fell. We have not one Scholar admitted this twelvemonth, and God knows
whether, we shall have ever again, as long as you bear the title of their
Master, therefore the College did desire me in all their behalfes to exhibit
their supplication, beseeching you to resign your Mastership to some
deservable man.


Cou. I will grant your petition, with retribution of many thanks, that they
are so careful and indulgent of the Colleges prosperity.


Fell. You have spoken with a magnanimous spirit; excuse my insolence herein,
Pray have you no hopes of recovering your imprisonment and restitution of your
former fortunes.


Cou. Troth but very little, all men are so maliciously incensed against me,
that I despair of that.


Fell. But do you think they will deprive you of your life.


Cous. That is ambiguous, but if I had had but thus much intelligence
heretofore, I could have followed my good friend Finch over the Ocean.


Fell. I commend him for it, for if he had stayed any longer, he would have been
put in a Cage; but thou might have escapen with Windebancke.


Cou. There was such a tempestuous storm, that I durst not venture.


Fell. I fear it will arise more tempestuous yet.


Cou. But I will not detain thy negotiating mind with any longer ambages, let
this suffice thee, and solace the College, with an express investigation of
comfort that I do with as great alacrity and cheerfulness of mind resign
my place to him who you shall most iudiciously elect as ever I assumed that
Title first.

But one thing I shall desire thee to put in execution for me with all
expedition, I will precurre the Breviary of my last will and Testament, which I
will make.


Fell. Sir I highly commend the aspiring sublimit of your magnanimous mind, and
for your benefactions which you shall bequeath to the Universitie, the
resounding Echo of your benevelous will shall redound and propagate to late
posterity.


Cous. Imprimis my true Divinity Books (of which I have but very few) I
bequeath to the Universitie Library that it may for ever flourish in the
prosperous palm of Religion, and may never be more polluted with the
contagious infection of Popery, as in my days it has been now too much, God
now avert it.


Fell. This benignity God will recompense for your good will and affection bent
to the famous Universitie.


Cous. Item, my Mass, Popish, and Romish books, of which I have many Volumes,
I bequeath partly to the poor, that they may warm their fingers this
following Winter by them on the Market hill, partly to Tobacconists and
Grocers, with the like of that profession.


Fell. I likewise comend thy charitable deeds to the poor.


Cous. Item, my pictures and Images I devote freely, and withal I divide,
partly to the Apple-mongers, partly to Husbandmen, that they may be hanged up to
scare Crows.


Fell. Sir, I think in my conscience that you will perform more commendable
and laudable deeds at your departure in your will, then ever you did in your
life time.


Cou. Item, I bequeath my liberty to the Miter, Crossekeyes, and the Popes head
in Cambridge, for I did so often frequent those three places, that no Scholar
dare come but he should find me there, wherefore now I set them (...) liberty
in this my Testament.


(...). For that act you shall incur the prayers of many.


Cous. Item, I bequeath my honesty to all the women in Cambridge, for their
children are so ingenious, that their Husbands are persuaded that they are not
their own.


Fell. Oh what blessings will the good men accumulate upon you for that benefit
in giving chastity to their wives, for I have oftentimes heard that Scholars
would sometimes dispute with them in Folio.


Cou. Item, I devove understanding to the Mayor, for he imployes himself so
earnestly to the Plough and Cart, that he cannot understand the height of his
office.


Fell. It Is the best gem that thou could have adorned him with; for riches or
Authority without understanding is like a precious Jewel in a swines snowt.


Cou. Item, my Bible in Folio, with a Comment, I bequeath to the Doctors,
desiring them from my heart, that they would make truer use of it then ever I
did.


Fell. That likewise is a meritorious deed.


Cou. Item, my Latin tongue I bequeath partly to the Beadles, that they may
learn to speak true Latin, partly to Trinity Hall to the Lawyers, that they
may write true Latin, and not break Priseans head so often as they do.


Fell. They have both just cause to elevate thy judicious understanding above
the Poles, for that thou have given them the greatest benefit that could have
been wished for, whose way have been too long obrubilated in obscurity, but
thou have reduced them from that error into the bright and irradiating path of
wisdom.


Cou. Lastly, I have three lives to bequeath, one life I devove to the Doctors
and Bishops, that they may live to see the Church in a true Reformation. The
second life I bequeath to Clare Hall in Cambride, that they may live to see
their College built; the third and last life I (...) willingly bequeath to my
self, that I might live and (...) these things performed.


Fell. I never heard a more ingenious Will composed, that thou should leave
thy self so rare a benefit, but I fea^ thy last wish will scarce be granted,
thou should have foreseen that before, for now, alas, I fear it will be too
late, and thou may well expound the Apologation of that sentence to thy self.
Sero sapiunt Phryges.


Cou. I leave that to the ambiguous rotation of doubtful Fortune, whose
certainty is never more sound then in her own uncertainty: But for thy part
labor with sedulous diligence, and diligent sedulitie, to avoid those
pernicious enormities, which I have fallen into.


Fell. By Gods divine providence and omnipotent assistance I will always
extirpate evil seeds out of the Church.


Cou. Well, I will now contract my self in brief: I beseech thee see my Will
performed in diligent execution, and remember me in my last breath to the whole
University, desiring their pardon, and to the College, desiring them at their
pleasure to elect a new Master, for I resign my title therein.


Fell. Let God Almighty with his heavenly power,
Thus all The Enemies of the Church devour.
And let him Pontificians all defame,
To propagate the Gospel of his name,
And we of thee a Master as we crave,
So a religious Doctor let us have:
Who will confirm the truth, and firmly stand
From all false doctrine that infects this land.
A Reformation let us now possess,
And true Religion let us all profess.

FINIS.

