THE ANTIQUITY AND POWER OF Parliaments in ENGLAND.

Written by Mr. Justice Doddridge and several other Learned Antiquaries.

LONDON, Printed for William Leake, and John Leake, at the Crown in
Fleetstreet, between the two Temple-Gates, 1679.

The PREFACE.
Courteous Reader,
I Here present thee with a few Sheets of the Discourses of very grave,
reverend and learned Men in their times, one of them being a most honored
relation of my own: they fell into my hands very lately upon the death of a
worthy Friend; and upon perusal I judged them fit for public view; they are
indeed Magnum in parvo; short, but full of weighty matter, and treat of the
Antiquity and just Power of our ancient and free Parliaments of England. Give
me leave to discourse a little of the honor and privileges of this most high
Court; a learned Lawyer of our own, says of the Parliament, that it is a Court
of very great honor and justice, whereof none ought to imagine any thing that
is dishonorable; and that the makers of Laws, that is, Parliament Men, do
always intend justice and verity: such was the high Opinion and esteem of this
great and eminent Court in former times; and it has been the Opinion of our
Ancestors, Exact Collection, page 655, 723, 724.
that to a Parliament rightly constituted, there ought to be a lawful Summons,
a free Election, a true Return, liberty of Admission into the House, and a
quiet Session there, with a just freedom of speech and debate without fear or
disturbance; these they accounted as the Essentials of a Parliament: if there
be an error in any of these, it soon declines, and loses its true vigor and
authority. As for privileges of Parliament, they esteemed them to be of that
absolute necessity, that if they were denied or interrupted, it cannot act
properly as a Parliament, no more then the Body without the Soul; Privilege of
Parliament being indeed the very forma quae dat esse, the Life and Soul of it.
Sometimes this most honorable Court is called by Bracton, Co. lib. 8. f. 20.
and lib. 9. in epist. f. 5.
Communis reipublicae sponsio; as in the entrance of his Book, where he writes
in this manner: Lex vigorem habet quicquid de consilio and de consensu
magnatum, and reipublicae communi sponsione, authoritate Regis sive principis
precedente just fuerit definitum and approbatum: sometimes he calls it,
Magna curia, as in the second Chapter of his first Book, where thus of new
cases, whereof at this present there is no Law extant, be says, Si autem talia
nunquam evenerint and obscurum and deficile sit eorum judicium, tunc ponantur
judicia in respectu usque ad magnam curiam, ut ibi per consilium curiae
terminentur. In the Register, in the form of all such writs as are grounded
upon Statutes, N. ^. 55. d. 208. H.
it is called, commune consilium regni, as in the writs of wast and cessavit.

It is said to be likewise the most high Court the King has. Henry Huntington
seems to call it, Magnum placitum; for thus he writes: Fuit in nativitate
sanctae Mariae magnum placitum apud Northampton, in quo congregatis omnibus
principibus Angliae, deliberatum est quod filia sua rediretur viro suo comiti
Andegaviae. In the Books of Law there is no Original mention made of the first
Ordinance or Erection of the Parliament; 33 H. 6.18. 7 H. 7.16. a 19. H. 6.63.
but the Laws of this Land esteem it as a thing most ancient, and do refer the
Original thereof to time before any memory or certainty known; and hence is it
that they say in 35 H. 6.26. a. that a custom may have his Original by act of
Parliament: of which saying ensues, That for as much as customs are to have
their Commencements time out of mind, so likewise Parliaments in this Land have
been before any memory thereof extant when they first began.

The personal attendance of such as are Members of the Parliament, is so
necessary, that they ought not for any business be absent; and no one may be
well missed, because he is a necessary Member; and for that reason, 26 H 8.60.
a. Pl. 19. Dyer. Trewinnards case.
if one dye during the Parliament, another shall be chosen in his room, so that
the whole number ought not to fail; whereof it ensues, that the person of
every such Member ought to be privileged of Arrest at the suit of any private
person during the time that he is employed about the affairs of the Realm; and
such privilege has been always granted by the King to the Commons at the
request of the Speaker, the first day of the Parliament.

And as this privilege is that they shall not be arrested, 38 H. 8.60. a. Pl.
19. Dyer. 2 E. 4.8. a.
so likewise shall they which are already arrested before the Parliament, have
a writ of privilege to the Sheriff, to set them at liberty; yea, although they
are imprisoned upon an Execution; and the said Execution shall be suspended
during the continuance of the Parliament, and then after they shall be taken
again and imprisoned as before: and if the said Sheriff do disobey such writ or
messenger as a Sergeant at arms sent for such prisoner, he is in danger of
perjury, and also of imprisonment of his body, and ransom at the will of the
King: and this was in ure in the Parliament holden 35 H. 8. against Rowland
Hill and Stukely, Sheriffs of London, who were committed to the Tower for their
contempt, for that they would not suffer to be at large George Ferrers, when
the Sergeant at arms came for him: which Ferrers was imprisoned upon an
Execution.

This privilege is notified diversely, sometime by their public Minister and
Sergeant at arms, sometimes by writ, where if the Parliament be clear that the
privilege lies, they send their writ of privilege, for otherwise the writ
shall be a Habeas corpus cum causa, which writ is often granted before the
Justices be agreed whether the privilege do lie in the case or no; and if they
find it is not grantable in the case, then they remand the matter with a
Procedendo.

In the Parliament holden the 28 Eliz. which began 27. one Mr. Martin a
Burgess of the house of Commons, was arrested in London twenty days before the
said Session began: whereupon these questions were there debated: 1. Whether he
should have the privilege. 2. If so, then whether he should be absolutely
freed of the arrest; on after that Session ended, whether he should be under
arrest gain. 3. Whether he that did arrest him were punishable or not.

For the time, how long before the Parliament, and how long after, persons
attendant should have their privileges, it was thought by the whole house that
it should be referred to the discretion of the house: for to put certainty
therein, would breed inconvenience; for said Egerton Solicitor, If a Burgess
coming to the Parliament, or in the Parliament time be arrested, and by
privilege be discharged; after the Session ends, then he is again arrested,
and presently comes another Session, then must he be discharged again; and so
continue perhaps eight or ten years, and the debtor cannot come by his debt:
what course should be taken? for the debtors presence is still of Record in the
said house: and in the former case the said Martin was discharged.

In the Parliament, Anno 27. Eliz. one Kerle was brought into the house of
Commons for serving a Sub-poena out of the Starchamber upon a Burgess; he was
awarded to pay five Marks for his charges, and he absolutely dismissed.

Sir Robert Brandling made an assault in the North upon one Witherington of the
house of Commons, in the Country before his coming to the Parliament: Sir
Robert was sent for up by the house, and committed to the Tower.

One Gardener a Burgess of the Parliament committed to the Fleet by my Lord
Keeper, was delivered, putting in bond that he should after the Parliament
apper.

A Bargesse of Parliament a little before the end of the Parliament fell sick,
28 Eliz.
and six weeks after the Parliament ended, when he was recovered, and to go
into his Country, he was arrested; and yet notwithstanding he had his
privilege. Quaere.

That not only the Burgesses and Knights shall have privilege, but also their
attendant Servants. 28 Eliz.
One Mr. Hall a Burgess had his man in Execution for debt, and was delivered.

The said liberty for Servants is mentioned in the Statute of 8 H. 6. chap. 1.
where it is ordained, 34 H. 6.26 a.
that such as shall be called to the Convocation by the Kings Writ, and their
Servants and Familiars, shall for ever hereafter fully use and enjoy such
liberty, or defense, in coming, tarrying, and going, as the great Men and
Commonalty of the Realm of England, called or to be called to the Kings
Parliament. One Richard Chedder, Esquire, which came to the Parliament with Sir
Thomas Brook one of the Knights of the Parliament for Somerset; 8 H. 4.13.20. 9
H. 4.1. Parliament 5 H. 4.
and the said Thomas his menial Servant, was wounded and beaten by one John
Savage; this being done in the Parliament time, he made a Fine and Ransom to
the Kings will.

Touching the choice, place and votes of Members of Parliament, I shall give
you a brief account out of our Books of Law. Place is given to Knights in
Parliaments, because they do import the presence of all the Freeholders of the
several Shires for which they are chosen; and hereof see the Book in 2 R. 3.12.
a. Ireland is not bound touching Land by the Statutes of England, Quia non hic
habent milites in Parliamento. Farther by Martin the reason why ancient demesne
is not bound and made privy to diverse Statutes, is, because they are not
contributary to the expenses of Knights and Burgesses, 7 H. 6.35. Fitz.
Jurisdict. 4.

And further by Nele it is plainly expressed, that the cause why Acts of
Parliament are public, is, 21 E. 4.59. a.
for that every Man has his Attorney in Parliament; to wit, the Knights of the
Shire for the Country, and the Burgesses for the Cities and Borroughs.

It seems that in ancient time, there was but one Knight for a Shire: for the
Statute of Staple made 27 E. 3. Staple 9. has these words; Whereas good
deliberation had with the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons and great Men of the
Counties, that is to say, of every County one for all the Counties, and of the
Commons of Cities and Borroughs.

None shall be chosen Knights of the Parliament, unless they be resiant within
the Shire where they shall be chosen the day of the date of the writ of the
Summons of the Parliament; and that the Knights and Esquires, 1 H. 5. cap. 1.
and others which shall be chusers of the Knights of the Shires, be also
resiant within the same Shires, in manner and form as is aforesaid: and by the
same Statute it is ordained and established, that the Citizens and Burgesses of
the Cities and Borroughts be chosen men, Citizens and Burgesses resiant,
abiding, and free in the same Cities and Boroughs, and none other in any wise.

The manner of Election of the Knights of the Parliament, is declared by
Authority of Parliament as follows, that is to say, at the next County to be
holden after the delivery of the writ of the Parliament, proclamation shall be
made in the full County of the day and the place of the Parliament; and that
all they that be then present, as well Suitors duly summoned for the same
cause, as others, shall attend to the Election of their Knights for the
Parliament; and then in the full County they shall proceed to the Election
freely and indifferently, notwithstanding any Prayer or Commandment to the
contrary: and after that they be chosen, the names of the Persons so chosen, be
they present or absent, 7 H. 4. cap. 15.
shall be written in an Indenture under the seals of all them that did choose
them, and tacked to the said writ of the Parliament; which Indenture so sealed
and tacked, shall be holden for the Sheriffs return of the said Writ, touching
the Knights of the Shires, 7 H. 4. cap. 15. 7 H. 4. cap. 15.
And the Election shall be in every County of the Realm of England by people
dwelling and resiant in the same Counties, whereof every one shall have free
Land or Tenements to the value of forty shillings by the year at the least,
above all charges; and that they that shall be so chosen, shall be abiding and
resiant within the same Counties; and such as have the greatest number, of them
that may expend forty shillings by the year and above, as aforesaid, shall be
returned by the Sheriff of every County, Knights for the Parliament, by
Indentures sealed betwixt the said Sheriffs, and the said Chusers, so to be
made; and every Sheriff of the Realm of England shall have power by the said
authority to examine upon the Evangelist every such Chuser how much he may
expend by the year, 8 H. 6. cap. 7.
etc. Provided always, that he that may not expend forty shillings by the year,
as aforesaid, shall in no wise be Chuser of the Knights for the Parliament, 8
H. 6. cap. 7.
8 H 6. cap. 7.

Which Act of Parliament was afterward expounded, that the Knights of all the
Counties within the Realm of England, to be chosen to come to the Parliament
hereafter to be holden, shall be chosen in every County by people dwelling and
resiant in the same, whereof every man shall have Freehold to the value of
forty shillings by the year at the least, above all charges, within the same
County where any such Chuser will meddle with any such Election, 10. H. 6. cap.
2.

Against the Parliament holden Anno 27. and 28 Eliz. a Writ issued to the
Sheriff of Norfolk, 27 and 28 Eliz.
for choosing of Knights and Burgesses; they elected one Mr. Tresham and Mr.
Fermour for the Knights: after issued out another Writ of Election out of the
Chancery, and they elected the said Mr. Tresham and Mr. Heyden: both writs were
returned; and which of them should be Knights, was the Question: the matter was
long debated, and at length resolved, that the first Writ should stand, and the
last void.

Having showed thus briefly of the Manner of Election, only a Word more of the
continuance of their Authority being thus chosen and returned, namely, that as
long as the same Parliament continues, they shall still remain Knights of the
Parliament; but being once dissolved, their power is thoroughly determined: for
in a new Parliament, the Knights of the former Parliament cannot sit as Knights
therein, except they be again to that end new elected, 4 E. 4.44. b. by
Catesby. Wherefore it is by him said there, That if a Parliament be summoned,
and the Members of both Houses appear, 4 E. 4.44. b
and sit; during which their sitting, if the Parliament dissolve, by demise of
the King, the new King shall make a new Election.

The second day of the Parliament, Philip Courtney being returned for one of
the Knights of Devon, came before the King in Parliament; and for that he was
accused of sundry heinous matters, prayed to be discharged until he were
purged: the which the King granted, and on Monday after, at the request of the
Commons, the King restored him to his place and good name, for that he had
submitted himself to reasonable arbitrament, 16 R. 2. n. 6.

I thought to have discoursed briefly touching the Fees of Knights and
Burgesses of Parliament, and in what manner, and by what writ they are to be
levied, and what Lands are chargeable or to be discharged thereof; but I omit
this, in regard the levying of those wages has been so long time out of use.
Now I shall touch very lightly upon the manner of proceeding upon Bills in the
House of Commons, and upon the manner of Attaynder in Parliament, and the
manner of proceeding upon writs of error in Parliament. Causes in the House of
Commons are proceeded upon in two sorts; the one, If any man whatsoever do
feel or do know the Commonwealth to be grieved with any Enormity, and be
desirous for the Weal of his Country to have the same reformed, he may exhibit
privately unto the Speaker a Bill made and framed in the manner of Law, with
Preamble, purview and proviso, containing the said grief, and manner how he
would have it redressed: which Bill the Speaker shall afterward cause the
Clerk of the Parliament openly to read in the same house, and after expound the
same himself to the House, and then upon the matter to fall to disceptation and
debating.

The other way is by motion made of the grievance, whereupon the House may
commit the matter to such persons as shall frame a Bill thereof; and so the
matter likewise to come to debating: the reason of which speech there by
motion, is grounded on the Writ of Summons of the Parliament, and because all
men in the House have not the skill aptly to frame a Bill.

But to propound any matter in the House by way of Question concerning their
Opinions in any thing, it is not usual, but utterly to be rejected. And
therefore in the Parliament, 31 Eliz. one Mr. Damport offered unto the House
certain Questions to be considered of; which were then refused, and the House
resolved upon the former orders.

In the Parliament holden 27 Eliz. when as a Bill concerning fraudulent gifts
was dashed and rejected because of imperfections therein, nevertheless upon a
motion made by Mr. Morish of the middle Temple, the House considered of the
matter a new, and committed it to have a new Bill drawn: which was done, and
the same passed; and is the same Act now in print touching that matter.

In Parliament, 15 E. 4.2. a.
if the greater part of Knights and Burgesses assent to the making of an Act of
Parliament, and the lesser part will not agree to that Act; yet shall it be a
good Act to dure in perpetuity: which greater number of voices in the Higher
House may easily be known, in that they are severally demanded, and the Clerk
of the House does number them; but of the House of Commons, otherwise it is,
Pl. Com. Rice Thomas and Bulkly. 126. a.
for there the assent is tried by the sounding of voices, all at one time; and
therefore if the assent there be issuable, the party that so pleads it, shall
say it was agreed by the greater number generally.

But ere they do proceed to the Question, it is asked them, if they will so do:
then is it said by the Speaker to this effect: Such as will affirm the Bill,
say, I; and such as will not, say, No: the one or other being known by the
greatness of the sound of the voice, the matter is held so determined: and this
may be done upon the first reading of a Bill; for in the Parliament holden in
31 Eliz. there was an Act exhibited, that the issue in tail might be charged
in debt as heir; and upon the first reading was debated on both sides, and at
length rejected by like sound of voices. If the Bill be first exhibited in the
House of Commons, and there twice read, 33 H. 6.17. b. 18. a. 7 H. 7.16. b.
then is it engrossed, and so read again the third time: and if after upon
disputation thereof they do proceed to the Question, and so agree by the
greater number of voices to pass as an Act, then is it indorsed in this manner,
Soit bail as Seigniors: which Bill if it also be agreed upon by the Lords, it
is likewise indorsed, Les Seigniors ont assentus; and so waits it only the
assent of the Monarch to make it an Act of Parliament: but if the Lords will
alter the same, that may be done in two sorts, either by such means as does
include and stand with the doings of the Commons, as if the Commons grant
Poundage for four years, and the Lords do grant it but for two years, this Bill
shall not be redelivered unto the Commons, for that it stands with their
grant; but if the agreement of the Lords do not stand with the agreement of the
Commons, then it is sent again to the Commons to be reviewed, and again to be
debated, 33 H. 6.17. b.

Attainder by Parliament.
Concerning Attaynder by Parliament, the party which is to be attainted by
Parliament ought first to be be indicted in some other Court, having
Jurisdiction to receive the same; which enditement ought to be sent into the
higher House of Parliament, by virtue of a Certiorari; upon which indictment
the party shall be called to answer before the Lord Stewards of England, and
other the Barons: but because the Archbishops and Bishops, being the Lords
Spiritual, cannot assent unto the death of any person, therefore they shall by
their Proxy, make their Procurator, and depart the House: the party indicted
shall be put to plead to the indictment; whereunto if he plead Not guilty, he
shall be thereof tried by his Peers: and first the most puisne Baron, shall be
examined of his verdict by the Lord Steward, and so in order until all they,
man by man, have delivered their Opinion of the matter, either in convicting
the person standing accused before them, or by clearing and acquitting him of
the crime; if by their verdicts he be thought guilty of the offense, thereof is
made an Act, which when it has the consent of the King, it is then esteemed a
Judgment, and the Offender thereby is attainted. Herein is to be noted, that
this verdict of the Lords is not upon their Oaths, but upon their Honor; for
persons of so high degree should have so great care for the preservation of
their Honor, as themselves or any other have for the Safeguard of their
Souls: which is admitted in that, and in all other Attaynders per Pares, by the
Peers, as well for that they are in that place not only as Triers of the Fact,
but also Judges appointed over the fault; and never was it used that Judges
should verify their sentence upon attestation thereof upon their Oaths.
Secondly, in this manner of trial they must think that the bread which is
broken unto others by them, may by the just Judgment of God in like measure be
broken unto themselves, in that he whom they censure was in equal degree unto
themselves. Thirdly, also for that where the Law requires at the hands of
other persons an Oath, it ordains that Barons should regard their Honors.

Secondly, it is to be noted, that the party so arraigned in Parliament, ought
to be called to answer for himself: for the Law of England is not so
unreasonable to condemn any that will defend himself; and it has heretofore
been noted as an error in the judgment of the Parliament, 21 E. 3.46. b.
when they have given a judgment in the cause of any private person, he being
not called thereunto; and that in a civil matter of much less moment then is
the cause of life and death: wherefore if the party may be had, and do not
willingly and wilfully absent himself, he is thereunto called to answer; and
therefore the Parliament in 37 and 38 H. 8. was freed of fault herein upon the
Attainder of the Duke of Norfolk, he then being in the Tower, for that it was
signified by the Lord Burghley, Lord Treasurer, in the Starchamber, when as
Philip the last Earl of Arundel was called to answer in the Starchamber, to an
undutiful Letter written by him to her Majesty, that the said Duke was sent
unto, and would not come to the Parliament: and the said Lord Treasurer
affirmed that he then being of the lower House, was sent thither with others:
see for this, 1 Mar. Dyer, 93. p. 24.

The Lord high Steward gives the Judgment upon Attaynder of treason, 1 H.
4.1. a. 13 H. 8.12. a.
as appears by the Judgment given in Parliament, 21 R. 2. n. 15, 16.

The Bills of Attaynder in Parliament, are entitled, Placita Coronae coram
Domino Rege, in Parliamento suo.

Errors in Parliament reversed.
Now touching the manner how errors in the Kings Courts committed, are reversed
in Parliament, I shall be very brief.

First, the parties that are grieved through any erroneous judgment given
against them, 22 E. 3.3. a. 12 Ass. p. 22. 2 H. 7.19.
ought to make their petition un-the King or Monarch, that it would please him
to permit that erroneous judgment as is given against them in such Courts,
from whence they cannot further appeal, may be in Parliament, reviewed and
reversed. This their Petition ought to contain the effect of their grief, and
ought to be endorsed, Let right be done unto the parties; In this manner, Soit
Droit fait as Parties.

Hereupon the Lord Chancellor of England shall make a Writ of error, 1 H. 7.19.
n.
directed unto the Judges of such Courts where the error was committed, and now
to be reversed by the Parliament; by virtue of which writ, the Lord chief
Justice of England shall in person bring before the Lords in the higher House,
the said Petition, the said Writ of error, and the Rolls wherein is contained
the judgment and process wherein error is supposed, H. 7.19. 2 E. 3.3.
and shall there leave the same petition, writ, and the transcript of the said
Record, but not the Record it self, with the Clerk of the Parliament, for that
the Record it self shall be brought back again into the said Court, for these
Reasons: 8 H. 5. f. Error 88. 23 Eliz Die. 375.
First, because these Rolls do concern other matter. Secondly, because if
judgment should be there affirmed, then the inferior Court may have Record
whereupon to a ward Execution. And lastly, for that it is a Rule, that when a
Record is sent from an inferior Court to a higher Court, it is never remanded;
so that if the former judgment should be affirmed in the Parliament, and the
Parliament after dissolved, the party plaintiff should be without remedy;
wherefore the record is brought back again, as aforesaid. 1 H. 7.20.
And thus the said Petition indorsed, the Writ of Error and the Transcript
remaining in the hands of the Clerk of the Parliament, the matter shall be
signified unto the Lord Steward, by whom, together with the other Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, 22 E. 3.3. a.
and with the Judges, the same shall be determined; or otherwise the King may
appoint out a Commission, and thereby assign certain Earls and Barons, who
together with the Judges shall determine the same; but the Commons shall not
intermeddle therewith: moreover, after that the Transcript is examined with the
Record, and that the Record is sent back to the former Court, the party
plaintiff ought to assign his Error in writing; and thereupon shall have a
Scire facias against the defendant, ad audiendum errores; which writ shall be
returned the next Parliament ensuing, for that the common day of a Scire facias
is forty days; but because it is uncertain whether the Parliament shall be
dissolved or no, before that time, therefore the said writ shall be returned
the next Parliament; 8 H 5. f. tit. Error 88.
but if the writ be sued forth at a Session, of Parliament, the same shall be
returned the next Session after the said errors assigned; and the Scire facias
pursued, the plaintiff shall not enter into Recognisance to satisfy the
judgment, 1 H. 7.20.
if it shall happen to be given against him, or to render his body to prison,
in such manner as is done in a writ of error in the upper Bench sued upon an
erroneous judgment given in the Common place; but he shall still remain in
prison: for if the party plaintiff should be at large upon such recognisance
acknowledged in Parliament, then if the Parliament be dissolved, the party is
at large, and the other without remedy.

If the King upon such Petition do appoint Commissioners for the determining of
the Errors, and upon the Scire facias the parties do appear, 22 E. 3.3.
if the Parliament be dissolved before the cause determined, the Commissioners
after the Parliament is ended cannot proceed to the determination of the
matter, or do any thing therein: but they must expect a new Session of
Parliament.

If judgment be given in Parliament, and that also happen to be erroneous,
there is no Court that can redress this Error, but the Parliament it self; for
as much as it is the highest Court of the land: and there is no higher Court in
which he may have remedy, 7 H. 6.29 a.

As touching the Courts, whose judgments are to be rereversed in Parliament:
First, it is to be noted, That all erroneous judgments given in the Kings Bench
touching matter and substance of Law or matter in fact, were by the course of
the common Law to be reversed in Parliament, 7 H. 6.28. because it was before
the King himself; and therefore it was ordained by several Statutes made to
avoid delay of suits, 36 E. 3. cap. 10. 50 E. 3. 1 R. 2. 2 R. 2.
that once every year a Parliament should be holden. But now by a Statute made
in the twenty seveth year of Queen Elizabeth, it is ordained in the eighth
Chapter, that all erroneous judgments in matters in Law, shall be considered
and reversed by the Justices of the Common Place, 27 Eliz cap. 8.
and the Barons of the Exchequer, or by six of them: but if the error in the
Kings Bench be in matter of Process, or proceeding, 7 H. 6.28. 2 R. 3.22. 27 H.
8.16. 3 Eliz. Dyer, 19 b. p. 93
the same might always have been reversed in the said Court of the Kings
Bench, although if judgment be there given upon a plea, which is before
discontinued, the same cannot be reversed but by Parliament.

In all cases in the Chancery, wherein the Lord Chancellor is to adjudge
according to the common Law, 16 E. 3. fitz tit. brief. 651. Com. 393. 18 E.
3.25. 17 Ass. p. 24. 42 Ass. p. 22. 27 H. 8.16. b.
as in the repeal of Patents, actions against privileged persons, Audita
Querela upon Statutes, etc. There if erroneous judgments be given, the same is
to be reversed in the Kings Bench, 14 Eliz. Dyer, 315. P. 100. although some
opinions in other Books have been to the contrary, 37 H. 6.14. a. but in matter
of conscience, their decrees are reversible by themselves.

Thus have I briefly touched upon several things, which upon some other
occasion I shall enlarge. Touching such matters as are proper for the
Parliament, you shall see in an Excellent Book lately printed, being an exact
Abridgement of the Records in the Tower of London, from the Reign of King
Edward the second, unto King Richard the third, of all the Parliaments holden
in each Kings Reign, and the several Acts in every Parliament; Collected by the
learned payns of Sir Robert Cotton, and revised and published by the unwearied
labors of William Prynne of Lincolns-Inne, Esquire: a Book worthy of the Study
of all the learned Gentlemen of this Nation. I conclude with my humble prayer,
that the all-wise God would grant to this Nation, a settled Government, and a
quiet State, that our English Parliaments may recover and enjoy their ancient
honor and luster.

John Doddridge.
From my Chamber in the middle Temple, the third of Dec. 1657.
The several Opinions of sundry Antiquaries, touching the Antiquity, Power,
Order, State, Manner, Persons, and proceedings of the high Court of Parliament
in England.
THere is no king in the world, nor any subjects of any king, that have a
greater and more binding, and yet a more free Council, then this in our
Parliament in England: whose general Acts since all men must take knowledge of,
it may be profitable to every man to understand the Dignity, Order, and
Antiquity thereof.

Sovereignty, the highest degree of Honor, is imported in the very Summons:
For the king himself (jure Regio) as a Flower of the Crown, has the absolute
power of calling and dissolving it.

Order it self stands represented, when the Court is sitting: such is the
Majesty of the Prince, the Gravity of the persons, and their State in
proceeding. But this being often seen, and so best known; and the other unknown
to many that sit, and often see the order of this Court: therefore we will
treat principally of the Antiquity, Nature, Power and Jurisdiction of this high
Court of Parliament.

And first, of the Appellation, the word Parliament. Some derive it from Peers,
a potiore part, quasi parium Conventum, or as others say, quasi parium
lament': others more probably, from the French word parler; or that of the
Greek, (...), to treat and confer freely. The French Histories say, that this
Name, in this sense, began at the Assembly of the Peers of France, anno Dom.
1200. but it appears to be more ancient with us, then of that time: for
Ingulphus, who died 1009. says, In publico nostro Parliamento, etc. taking it
there for a Meeting or Chapter of the Abbot. Ingelo King of Polonia, in the
Polish State, calls the Assembly Generale Parliamentum. This may raise a
doubt of the former etymology of it from the French word parler. But no doubt
the word was brought into the Realm by the French Monks, and after applied by
the Statists, in the time of H. 1. to the General Council of the Kingdom.

But the like Assemblies as Parliaments are, (being much more ancient then the
Parliament) underwent these names of old times. The Britains called them
Kyfrithin, because Laws were therein made by the English Saxons in their
English Graduisis, a Council sometimes (Wittena Mota) a Meeting of wise men.
Sometimes of the Greek word Synodos. The Latin Authors of that Age call it
Consilium Magnatum, Curiae altissima, praesentia Regis, Prelatorum, Procerumque
Collectorum; as appears by the Charter of Withlasias, anno 833. and of King
Edgar, anno 966.

And now to step a Nomine ad Rem; before the time of Sovereignty, Natures law
directed men to the love of Society, and care to preserve it; and gained free
consent even of lawless men, to admit of certain Customs as Laws, from hence
framing matter of Form for a Commonwealth. But new springing mischiefs standing
remediless by the elder Customs, caused, for remedy thereof, the calling of
yearly Councils, the original no doubt of our after-Parliaments. And it shall
appear, that our Kingdom, from as grounded Authority as any other Nation, can
prove of old the practice of these great Assemblies, then called Counsels, now
Parliaments. Those Sages, the Druides, most proper to this Isle, had yearly
Conventions of their noblest and best people, in a middle consecrated Plot of
this Kingdom; punishing with proscription from their Sacrifices, whosoever obeyed
not those general designs. Before the Romans arrived in this Island,
Causibulan, who before, (Communi Consilio) Chieftain of the Britains forces,
Summa enim imperii, Bellique Administrandi, Communi Consilio, permissa est
Causibulano. The Ancient Laws of the Britains, which (to the honor of our
common Laws) have their use to this day, were composed in their common
Counsels: the multitude at that time, (as possessed of nothing) had neither
voice, nor place; Usury, Tribute, and greatness, having made them servile to
their betters. And thus stood the State, till by conquest it was made a
Province. So before our Britains learned the Laws of their Victours, they held
their common Counsels. Tacitus seems to ascribe much to the prosperous
proceedings of the Romans against the Britains, quod non in Communi
Consuluerunt. After the entry of the Romans, who with their people brought
their Laws, their Counsels were Comitia, as Parliaments compounded of the three
degrees (Senatores, Equestres, and Plebei,) and termed either Curiata,
Centuriata, or Tributa: so called, for that the people were divided per Curias:
in which Assembly, Populus Suffragia tenebat, distinguished by Seats, summoned
by the Lictour, held in the City, had power to consult of Peace and War, and to
dispose of lesser public Offices. Romulus was founder hereof, and called it
lex Curiata, and Centuriata; for the nobler people were divided per Centurias:
for this the Counsel fore-sent by Edict, Quis Dies, Comitiis Centuriatis
futurus est, summoned per Corniciem, Assembled in Campo Martio, because all in
Arms. In this were disposed the greater Magistracies and affairs: of that
Hostilius was the institutor. Tully gloried, in that he was called lege
Centuriata Tributa. For in this the people Assembled by their Tribunes; much
ageeing with that of Curiata: And the leges peculiares were general, Jussu
populi, (regnante Magistratu) but not in force as Laws, until their
Promulgation: for which cause the Country-Tribunes repaired to certain Faires,
where Proclamation was made of their new Laws; and holding it aequum ut
quisquam non obligaretur ad id quod sine culpa, sua ignorant. But these freedoms
of the people expited and vanished, as the Empire grew obsolete: And when the
State declined, we (as other enfranchised Countries,) began to give Laws unto
our selves. Therefore the Britains told Augustine, Se non posse absque suorum
Consensu and licentia priscis abdicare moribus. And thus it stood in Britain
until the coming in of the Saxons.

Now that substance, and form of Parliamentary Assemblies went all along the
Saxon age, held during the Incursion of the Danes, and was continued by the
Conqueror in part: and when the Assembly of the three Estates formed the
Parliament (as now we keep it) it shall by clear proof and presidents appear.
The story of the Saxons and their Laws do show, that they were of the same
mind transplanted hither, as Tacitus says the Germans were: Nec Regibus
infinita potestas; de Minoribus Rebus principes consultant, de majoribus omnes:
Rex Edwinus, says Beda, lib. 2. cap. 13. quod antequam fidem susciperit dixit,
secum amicis, principibus, and Consiliariis suis collaturum.

In a Charter of king Etheldred, it appears, Hist Esiensis, Lib. 2.
quod ad synodale Consilium apud Cirenchester universi Optimates simul
convenerunt, and Affricum Majestatem rerum, affectantem de hac patria profugum
expulerunt. Bertulphius held a Council at Knisbury (pro Regni Negotiis
Congregat') to the which the West Saxon King and people sent their Legate.
Ingulphus has many places of clear proof; but I will move but one: In festo
nativitatis beatae Mariae, cum universi Magnates Regni, per Regium edictum
summoniti tam Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, Abbates, and Clerici, quam totius Regni
Proceres, and Optimates London convenerunt, ad tractandum de negotiis publicis
totius Regni consummatis omnibus, Rex Eldredus, coram Universis, Domino
Turketillo, Abbati, Monachisque suis Accersitis, dedit Monasterium de Crowland,
etc.

Here you may see the sampler of our Parliament.

But to come nearer: when King Jua established his Laws, he says, I Jua, King
of the West Saxons, have called all my Fatherhood, Aldermen, and my wisest
Commons, with the godly men of my Kingdom, to consult of great and weighty
Matters. Here is represented in King Jua, the Kings Royal person: The
Fatherhood in those ancient days, were those whom we call Bishops, and
therefore were termed Reverend Fathers: By Aldermen, the Nobility is meant: so
honorable was the word Alderman of old times, that only Noble Men were called
Aldermen. By the Wisest Commons, is signified the Knights and Burgesses; and so
is the Kings Writ at this day, De discretioribus, and majus sufficientibus. By
godly Men is meant the Convocation-house; for that it only eonsisteth of
Religious men. To consult of great and weighty Matters, so is the Kings Writ at
this day, Pro quibusdam arduis, and urgentibus negotiis, nos Statum and
defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae Concernentibus. The
like was in King Alphreds days, where the King, sancta Episcopi, and sapientes
laici Statuerunt leges: Calling the Statute-books libri synodales: All their
Laws going by way of Suffrage general, according to the Right of our
Parliament. Wherefore King Offa having gathered Consilia sapientum, and viewing
the best Laws of Jua, Alured, and Etheldred, would not publish them until such
time as the Text says, ostendenda haec omnibus sapientibus nostris, and
dixerunt omnes placet Custodire ea.

But howsoever the government was by sundry Kings, and they continually attent
to war; The Saxon time held hardly one Form of this great Assembly, or
Council; yet in Canutus his days, he having Conquered all, and reduced that
Heptarchie into a Monarchy, so that he could say, Sub Uno Rege, and sub Unae
lege Universum Angliae Regnum regeretur; It is plain that he held a Parliament,
though not then so styled, yet truly so to be accounted: and since that it has
all parts of our Parliament, we might rightly call it so. In the Preamble to
his Laws, thus he says, Convocato Itaque Communi procerum comitatu, and
Episcoporum, Abbatum, and ceterorum Nobilium, Nec non, and ceterae Nobilitatis
sapientiaeque totius Angliae concilio satagebat communia decreta, ut in quantum
humana ratio Voluit stabiliret. After this Pious King, Edward the Confessor in
a Charter made to Westminster Abbey, sealed and signed the same at a
Parliament; for thus he says, Hanc Igitur Chartam Donationis, and libertatis
in Dedicatione predictae Ecclesiae recitare jussi Coram Episcopis, Abbatibus,
Comitibus, and omnibus Optimatibus Angliae omnique populo audiente, and vidente.

But now to come to the Normans time after the Conquest; The two first Kings,
the Conqueror and his son, William Rufus, reigned with their swords in their
hands, absolutely of themselves, not admitting the former general Assemblies of
the States, but permitting only Provincial-Synods of the Clergy, for
compounding of the Ecclesiastical causes; where nevertheless they sat as
Presidents: and the Conqueror himself did not challenge to himself so absolute
a conquest; but the Laws that he made have this Title: Hic Intimatur, quod
Gulielmus Rex, cum principibus suit Constitutam: And in giving Laws to this
Nation, fecit summoniri per universos Consultatus Angliae Anglos nobiles, and
sapientes sua lege eruditos, ut eorum and jura, and Consuetudines ab ipsis
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis audiret: And often does he, and his Son William,
call together Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, Barons,
Vicecomites, cum suis Militibus ad Consulendum: And likewise oftentimes
afterward until the time of Henry first, we find that there was Conventus
Episcoporum, Abbatum, and Procerum Regni, Londini in Palatio Regis. Wherefore
Polydore Virgil and Paladine are much deceived, if they thought that Henry the
first held the first Parliament within this Realm.

Neither do they seem to be of that Opinion, their words being, that Regis ante
tempora Henrici primi, non Consue verunt populi conventum Consultandi causa,
nisi pro raro facere. Therefore they might hold some, though not so often as
did their successors: or agreeing with the Manuscript of Canterbury, that the
first Parliament wherein the Commons were called as well as the Peers and
Nobles, was 16 H. 1. For it is true, that after the Conquest, until this time,
the Commons were not called; and so at this time, they will have it first
called by the name of a Parliament. Indeed if the policy of the time be noted,
that may yield some difference: The Conqueror, and his Son William, being
strangers, had no way to make permanent their victory, but by adding other
Laws, and plucking up the old Roots of Families they found, and to plant them
in themselves, as in new grounds: So for that age it was their Wisdom, to
Rule, and not to advise with the people. But Henry the first, a new bud of the
old stock, being a natural Englishman himself, born at Selly in Lincolnshire;
in love of the English Nation, by whom he sought his strength: The Normans at
that time standing at terms of revolt from him, in savor of his Brother
Robert, Duke of Normandy, he well understanding the love of his people, called
them to those great Counsels; and settling the Authority of his Court of
Parliament, so established his Throne, that neither Britain, Dane, nor Saxon,
could ever after, till this day, disturb either him or his posterity from the
possession of this Land: The making of his Laws were by Act of Parliament: The
Marriage of his Daughter Mawde, and the entayling of the Crown to her, were
done by Act of Parliament: The accord between Stephen and him, was made by
Parliament; And consequently all the succeeding Kings since, have ever
concluded grandia Regni, only in the Parliament. Yet all the times since, have
not kept the said Form of the Assembling of the three Estates: for sometimes
the Principal of the Nobility were only called; and they at the end of the
Parliament, were to impart to the other Barons, and their Country, what was
done in the Parliament: Afterward King John ordained that all the Barons of
England should come in their proper persons to the Parliament, being Summoned:
20 Knights Fees, after 20 l. a Fee, going to the value of an entire County; 15
Knights Fees, making an entire Baron, by which they sat: But King H. 3. after
that he had smarted by the tumultuation of the Barons, their multitudes
bringing confusion; ordained that those Earls and Barons only to whom he
directed his Writs should come unto the Parliament, and none else: And this
which Hen. 3. began, his son Edw. 1. the Founder of our civil estate, calling
the Barons, and appointing the Knights and Burgesses to be elected, and of the
Barons selected the wisest and such as pleased him, and did omit them and their
children which did not equal them and their parents in wisdom and virtue: so
held it on until the time of Edward the Third; there being a Writ then in use
de Admittendo fide dignas ad Colloquium. Some also at that time being called,
as William Earl of Nottingham, to attend upon the King with one hundred and
twenty men at arms; Lawrence de Hastings, Earl of Pembrook, with fifty men at
arms; and William Clinton, Earl of Huntington, with sixty men at arms: and so
diverse others. The calling was with distinction: The Bishops and Barons de
Negotiis tractaturum, and Consilium impensuri; The Knights and Burgesses ad
faciendum and Consentiendum. Those times had certain Ordinances besides
Estatutes; for whatsoever the Lords and Commons agreed upon, was presently an
Ordinance; and whatsoever the King gave his Royal Assent unto, it then became
an Estatute: But if after the Parliament the King did Assent unto any
Ordinance, it then became an Estatute: for the Kings answer is no more, but le
Roy le veult, ou le Roy se avisera: And before the Printing of Acts was used,
they were always engrossed, and sealed with the great Seal of England, and
proclaimed in every Shire: which use was continued from the time of H. 3. until
H. 7. his days; and the form was thus: The King, by the advice of his Lords,
Spiritual and Temporal, at the special instance of the Commons Assembled in
Parliament, has made and established these Ordinances and Statutes, to the
honor of God, the good of the King, and Realm. In which words you may observe a
summary of this great Counsel: First, the Persons, the three Estates. Secondly,
the Ends, for which the Parliament was called, (viz.) for the honor of God,
etc. Thirdly, the Means, by Counsel, and consent. Each duty of the three
degrees, is insinuated in these three things (viz.) Request of the Commons,
Advise of the Lords, and Establishment of the King.

The first expressing the suitours: for the Royal Assent is never prayed by the
Lords, but by the Speaker, the Mouth of the Commons.

The second distinguishing the house; The King hearing the causes debated only
by the Lords.

The third intimating that no Bill receives life, until the Royal Assent be
given.

So by looking back, it is easy to see the great Antiquity of this high Court,
delivered as you see, from before the Romans; but never so dignified, as since
Queen Elizabeth's time. Now for the Nature of a Parliament, it is Consilium, and
it is Curia; the power of it in matters hereditary, and personal; the
proceedings of it in causes criminal and civil; the privileges of it
sedentibus, and servientibus: The Offices, Officers, and Order, we leave to a
further discourse: thus much only touching the Antiquity of Parliaments in
England.

Temps Edw. le Confessor le sommons doit estre 40. Jours devant le session.
THe Summons of the Clergy, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and Priours, that
hold by a County, or a Barony, are summoned by Writ to come to the Parliament,
and the King bears their expenses of their remaining, and abode; and all the
other Deanes, Archdeacons, and Persons, are summoned to appear by two
sufficient Proctors, which come with a duplicate of their Procurations, whereof
one part remains with the Clerk of the Parliament, and the other with the
Proctors.

2. The summons of the Laity, as Earls, Barons, and their Peers, which hold
Lands and rents to the value of a County, or of a Barony (viz.) 20. Knights
Fees, every Fee being accounted at 20. l. per annum, which make 400. l. or 23.
Knights Fees and a half, which makes 400. Marks per annum: and none of the
Laity of lesser condition, are namely and particularly called by Writ, except
their presence be necessary for some special and extraordionary cause.

3. Next the King sends his Writs to the Cinque Ports, to choose Barons to
answer, allege, and do for their Baronies, as if all were present: a Writ
under the great Seal for the Warden, for their expenses 20. s.

4. Next the King sends his Writs to the Sheriff of every Shire, to choose
two Knights of every Shire: a Mark for their expenses.

5. Then the King sends his Writs to the Cities of London and York, or other
Cities that are Counties, to choose two grave Citizens: and they must also have
a Mark for their expenses.

6. And then the Kings Writ goes to the Bailiffs of Boroughs to choose two
Burgesses.

There must be two principal Clerks of the Parliament, and they must sit in the
midst of the Justices, to enrole all the Pleas, and businesses of the
Parliament; not being Clerks to the Justices; for there is no Justice in
England has any power or Jurisdiction in the Parliament, but that the King
calls them thither to assist the Lords, and to hear and determine petitions:
for the two Clerks are immediately subject to the King, except the King assign
some of the Justices to examine their Rolls. These Clerks enrole all the
Judgments given in the Parliament; and before the end of the Parliament, they
deliver them over to the Treasurer, keeping a Transcript or Counter-roll to
themselves, their wages a Mark a day.

Other Clerks were assigned by the King, to the Bishops, and others to the
Proctours of the Clergy; another to the Earls, and Barons; another to the
Knights; another also to the Citizens, and Burgesses: these set down all doubts
and answers, and are present in their Counsels; and being at leisure, they
assist the two principal Clerks to enrole the Acts of Parliament.

If a matter of difficulty, either concerning Peace or War, be moved in
Parliament, the King will enjoin all the several degrees or tribes of the
Parliament, the Bishops, the Proctours, the Barons, etc. to go apart into
several places; and the case is to be delivered to their several Clerks:
whereupon they are to debate amongst themselves, and to advise; and if all, or
the greatest part do not agree, then the Lord Steward, the Lord Constable, and
the Lord Marshal, are to choose thirty five out of the number, two Bishops,
three Proctors, two Earls, three Barons, five Knights, five Citizens, and five
Burgesses: and these thirty five men may choose twelve, and these may descend to
six, and these six to three, and these three to two, and these two to one; and
so one person may determine a cause, except the King gainsay it; which he may
do, during the Parliament: otherwise nor.

There be three Degrees of businesses in the Parliament.

1. Wars, or matters touching the Kings person, the Queen, and the Kings
children.

2. The public businesses of the Commonwealth.

3. The private, and particular matters: yet these are to be handled, as the
Bills come in by priority.

The principal Crier of the Parliament, the Chancellor, Treasurer, and Barons
of the Exchequer, shall record the defaults of all those that are summoned.

A Sermon before the Parliament must be provided by the Archbishop in whose
diocese it is holden.

Proclamation must be made in the Hall, or Monastery where it is holden, and in
the City or Town, that all men by a certain day bring in their petitions, etc.

The Chancellor, or the chief Justice of England, is to declare the cause of
the Summons of the Parliament.

The King in state ever to be present in the Parliament, if he be not sick; if
he be sick, to send for twelve persons of the house to see his person, and to
satisfy the house of the cause of his absence.

For the session the King sits alone. The Archbishop of Canterbury on his
right hand, York on his left hand; and so every man in his degree: and the
Lord Steward is to see that every man sit amongst his Peers.

The Ushers of the Parliament stand within the door of the house, and the Crier
stands without the door; and the Kings guard stands a good way without the
door, to keep tumults, and crowds of people from about the door.

All sit, except he that speaks, who must stand to speak, that all may hear.

None is to go in or out of the house, but at one door only.

The King never requires aid, but for war; or to make his Son a Knight, or to
marry his Daughter; and that in full Parliament.

Two Knights of the Shire are greater then any one Earl, or Baron; and two
Proctours then any one Archbishop or Bishop: and the King can hold his
Parliament without any Archbishop, Bishop, Earl, or Baron, with the Commons
alone: for there was a Parliament before there was any Barons: but if the
Commons do not appear, there can be no Parliament, though all the great Peers
of the Realm were present with the King: for the Proctours, Knights. Citizens,
and Burgesses of the Realm, do represent the whole Commons of the Realm; but
the great Peers of the Realm, are present only for themselves, and for no
others.

The Parliament ought not to be dissolved as long as any Bill remains
undiscussed; if it be, the King is perjured: and public Proclamation is to be
made in the Parliament; and in the Palace, that if any have any petition, he
ought to come in; and if no answer be made, it is to be intended, that all men
are satisfied.

Any man that will, may have a Transcript or Copy of the Acts before they be
printed, paying for the same 10. l. 5. s. (or 10 l. 08 s. 01 d.) And the
Parliament may be holden in any place where it shall please the King (viz.) at
Oxford, at Kennelworth, at Marlborough, at Gloucester, at Acton-Burnel, at
Leicester, at the Blackfryers, etc. 14 H. 8.

DODDRIDGE.

Of the Antiquity of the Parliament of England.
THe Ancient, and first Parliament that I have read of, is that in Polydore
Virgil, in the reign of H. 1. in the 16 year, which was about the year of our
Lord, 1116. And this was held at Salisbury, (as he says) where were assembled
with the King, all the Prelates, Nobles, and Commons, to consult for the
public Weal; and (as he thinks) before that day, the King never called the
people to consult and make Laws: and he deriveth the name from the French word
(Parler.) There is an ancient Roll in some men's hands which describes the
whole State and order of the Parliament; and the Title of it is, De modo
tenendi Parliamentum. And it is further described Parliamentum Regis Angliae,
and Angles summoneri tenebatur temporibus Regis Edwardi filii Ethelredi, qui
modus. Recitatus fuit, Coram Willielmo Duce Normaniae Conquestore Rege Angliae,
and per ipsum approbatum.

By this it should seem that Parliaments (as they are described in that Roll)
were held in the time of Edward the holy, for he was the Son of Etheldred; for
Edward the elder, was the Son of Alphred: and this Edward the holy lived about
the year 1043. And by this it should also seem, that the Conqueror held a
Parliament: In this it is first set down what Clergymen were called, which
were not only Bishops, but Abbots, and Priors that held per Baroniam: by which
I gather, that they came not to that place as they were spiritual men; but by
reason of the temporal honors they enjoy in the Commonwealth; for they have a
place in the convocation-house, in respect of their spiritual function, and in
that also they are a part in the Court of Parliament.

We read of a Parliament in 35 E. 1. in which were sixteen Abbots, and eight
Priors; but how many of those were of the higher house I dare not define, or
rather were of the house ingeneral: for I know it is not clear, that there was
not then a distinction of houses.

The first Title is, De Clericis, the second De Laicis, the third de Militibus,
the fourth De Civibus, the fifth De Burgensibus: all other circumstances of
place, times, orders, and such like are recited, which I omit to remember
particularly, because I know it is a thing well know to all; and that it
differs from the order of that Court now used.

The Court of Parliament has a double power; the one to consult by way of
deliberation for the good Government of the Commonwealth, and so it is
Consilium, non Curia; another power it has as a Court, in Administration of
Justice.

The principal purpose of that Assembly seems to be for Consultation; for the
Writs are ( ad Consultandum and deliberandum: but being Assembled, they may
hold Plea of causes.

But this difference I find, that in criminal causes, both the upper house and
lower house intermedleth therewith, as in Attainders only; and the spiritual
Lords do all go out of the house, and give their assents by Proxy, 10 E. 4.6.

But in civil causes, as in Writs of Error sued there out of the Kings Bench,
the upper house only medleth, as is well described in the case 1 Hen. 7.19,
20. in a Writ of Error sued by one Flowerdue, on a Replevin, wherein Judgment
was given against him in the Kings Bench.

But we have an express Authority in the 4 H. 7.18. That in a criminal cause,
the Commons must assent; for there the King and Lords did attaint one, and
nothing was said of the Commons; therefore by the Opinion of the Justices, the
Act was held void, and the party restored.

The Peers of Scotland were wont to come to our Parliament: for in 39 E. 3.35.
in a Writ of ravishment, de Guard against Gilbert Umfrevil, he demanded
Judgment of the Writ, because he was Earl of Anguish; and not so named in the
Writ: Anguish (says the Plaintiff) is out of the Realm. I, but said the
Defendant, I am summoned to Parliament by that name; and the Writ was abated:
this proves that the Peers of Scotland came to our Parliament for Justice:
but Littleton says, 20 E. 4.6. that we shall implead an Earl, or Duke of
France, by the name of Knight only.

I need not dilate of the nature of the Parliament, that it is a body
politic, or of what parts and members it consists, for that is very well
understood of all learned men; neither of the order of it at this day, for most
know that of their own experience: the privileges of it are great, and may
more safely be discussed what they are without the house, in regard of others,
then what they are in the house for their liberties there.

Of the Antiquity of Parliament.
THat which we in English call Parliament, I suppose, and know, to have taken
the name from the French, or Norman tongue, sounding upon the word Parle, or
Parler, to speak, or discourse: In Latin I find that it was called before the
Conquest by two names, the one called Synodus, taken from the Greek, which is
used most for the Assembly of spiritual men, to treat of Divine causes; and so
was practiced when Augustine came to Canterbury, where the King of Kent,
(called Ethelbert) gathered his Nobles, and people to understand the message,
and preaching of Augustine; and again it is termed Consiliatio, as hereafter I
shall set down, and hereafter in that sense, in Anno Dom. 833. Withlasias Dux
Wiviorum, a great Lord or Peer amongst those of the Frennes, called Girrii, or
Girrogii, in his Chapter for the foundation of the Abbey of Ramsey, in which he
terms Egberte King, and Ahelwolf his son, to be Dominos suos: he dateth his
said Charter thus, Datum apud Londini Civitatem ubi omnes Congregati sumus pro
Consilio Capiendo Contra Danicos piratos littora Angliae assidue infestantes:
This mentions Ingulphus: so as it appears, when any imminent peril drew
near for the hurt of the Commonwealth, that then there were called the Nobility
and wisemen (called in the History of Eli,) Duces, Principes, Satrapae,
Rhetores, and Causidici; also Convenerunt Agelinum, Aldermanum, and Episcopos,
Oswynum, and omnes meliores Concionatores de Com. etc. And the same Author
shows, that Brithmothus, a most Noble Duke of Northumberland, was called
Alderman, idest senior vel Dux qui synodo magna Constantia restituit Regem
Edgarem, and alios Monachos dicens nequaquam se far posse, ut Monachi
ejicerentur de Regno, qui omnem Religionem tenuerunt, and coluerunt in Regno.

King Offa, in his Charter granted to the Abbey of Chertsey, has these words:
Hanc libertatem, and omnia praedicta, and praefatum Monasterium pertinentia in
synodali conventu in loco qui nominatur Aeccleate, and testes consistentes
concensi, and subscripsi, etc. in historia Chertsey penes me remanen.

Canutus the Dane, beginning his Laws, shows plain, that he made the same by
the Advice and Council of a Parliament; and beginning thus, Haec est
Consiliatio quam Canutus Rex meditatione vel decreto suarum sapientum
consiliatus est cum suis sapientibus apud Wintoniam, etc. When I observe an old
written Copy, with a Comment thereupon, they are expounded thus, Consiliatio
id est Institutio multorum facta Consilio, Idem Constitutionem pro
Institutione, ponit, ut inuit haec non instituta fuisse suo proprio Arbitrio,
sed multorum Consilio. And the said King Canutus, in the Preamble of his said
Laws, shows, that he decreed his said Laws in this manner, Convocato itaque
Comitum Procerumque Conventu, ut Episcoporum Abbatum, and caeterorum Nobilium,
nec non and caeteris nobilitatis sapientiaeque totius Angliae Consilio
satagebat communi decreto ut in quantum humana ratio valuit, ea quae justa
fuerant stabiliret, etc. And in the said Preamble, is set down, that before his
time, Synodes, or Assemblies for the Commonwealth, were very rare, saving
Ecclesiasticae institutiones synodorumque conventus apud Anglos Inusitati adhuc
fuerunt: And the reason I suppose, was, that before Canutus, the Realm was
governed by sundry Kings: but he having conquered them all, and reduced them
into one Monarchy, alleges in his Preamble, Sicut sub uno Rege ita and una
lege Universum Angliae Regnum regeretur: so as I conclude in this point, that
before Canutus, there were no Parliaments in England: the reason I have showed
before, which was the diversity and continual interwar between the Heptarchy,
by him reduced to a Monarchy.

Since his time, I find that Edward the Confessor, in his Charter made to
Westminster-Abbey, did seal and sign the same at a Parliament: for thus he
says, Hant Igitur donationis, and libertatis chartam in Die dedicationis
praedictae Ecclesiae recitari jussi Coram Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, and
omnibus optimatibus Angliae, and omni populo audiente, and vidente: where note
these words, Omnibus optimatibus Angliae, and omni populi audiente, and
vidente; which cannot be but in a general Assembly by Summons: and that is
proved by the number and diversity of the witnesses, being Bishops, Abbots,
Knights, Chancellors, Kings, Chaplains, Dukes, Earls, Ministri, Milites, etc.

And William the Conqueror, in his Charter of the Ratification of the liberties
of that Church, after he has subscribed the cross with his name; and besides
him a great number of others of the Clergy and Nobility; in stead of Cummultis
aliis, has these words, Multis praeterea illustrissimis virorum personis, and
Regum principibus diversi ordinis omissis qui similiter huic Confirmationi
piissimo affectu^, testes and fautores fuerunt, Hii etiam illo tempore a Regia
potestate e diversis provinciis and urbibus ad Universalem Synodum pro causis
Cujuslibet. Sanctae Ecclesiae audiendis and tractandis ad praescriptum
celiberrimum Caenobium quod Westmonasterium dicitur Convocati, etc.

And in another Charter of his, to the said Abbey, are these words, Anno
Incarnationis Dom. 1081. regni etiam praenonominati gloriosi Regis Willielmi
iv. Convenientibus in unum cunctis primis primatibus in nativitate. D.N. I. C.

I read not in Rufus time of any Parliament.

But it appears in the Red Book of the Exchequet, that H. 1. before the
Constitution, or making of his Laws, sets down, Quae Communi Consilio and
assensu Baronum Regni Angliae, etc. And then proceeds Omnes malas
consuetudines quibus Regnum Angliae opprimebatur, inde aufero quas ex part
suppono, Testibus Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Baronibus, Comitibus,
Vicecomitibus, and optimatibus Regni Angliae apud Westimonaster' quando
Coronatus fui.

The marriage of his daugter Mawde, and the entayling of the Crown to her, and
her heirs, was done by Parliament: the Accord also between him and Stephen, was
done by Parliament; and so consequently all matters of Importance were done and
concluded in Parliament: and of such force is an Act of Parliament here in the
governance of the State of the Realm, as it is deemed as an Oracle from Heaven,
and rests only in the Kings and Queens power to qualify and mitigate the
severity thereof.

And thus much of the Antiquity.

I leave to others to discourse of the manner how they that are to treat
therein, are to be called; and of their privileges: and so I end.

AGAR.

Of the Antiquity of Parliaments.
THe diligent observers of the Antiquities of this Realm, do very well know,
that Acts of Parliament are of so high a nature, that they do not only tie the
Inheritance of every man; but what is there ordained, every subject of the Land
is bound to take notice of, at his peril; and because no man that should desire
to inform himself therein, should be ignorant what was done in Parliament, as
now we use printing of the Acts; so before printing, all the Ordinances
affirmed by royal assent were recorded, and then published under the great Seal
of England, with a general preface, and proclaimed in every Shire: this you may
see continued from the time of H. 3. till about H. 7. his days; and ordinarily
the form was thus: The King such a day, and such a place, as at Westminster,
the 20 day of April, in the second year of the reign of King H. 6. by the
advice of his Lords, spiritual and temporal, and at the special instance, and
request of the Commons Assembled in Parliament, has made and established these
Ordinances, Acts, and Statutes, to the honor of God, the good of the King and
Realm, in form following; and then sets forth every Act in particular Chapters.

Here you may see the persons assembled, the end of their meeting, and the
means to make it effectual: the persons which meet at the Parliament are the
three Estates of the Realm: first the King: Secondly the Nobles, spiritual and
temporal: Thirdly the Commons of the Land. The end of the meeting is to do
something to Gods glory, the Kings good, and the benefit of the whole Land: and
the means to effect the same, is by consultation and consent.

The particular duty of each of these three, seems to be insinuated in these
words; first, the request of Commons; secondly, the advice of the Lords;
thirdly, the establishment of the King: the Commons being most in number, and
such as live in all the parts and places of the Land, are like to have most and
best notice of such things as are most likely and meet to be provided for; and
being weak in power, and most subject to feel such inconveniences, as greatness
may lay upon them; and therefore are fittest, either first to lay open their
griefs, and pray Reformation; or though they be not able at the first with
Judgment, to foresee ensuing dangers; yet the same being once proposed, and
instantly apprehended, they may with instance importune allowance of such Laws,
as may turn to their good: and our own experience teaches us, that the Royal
Assent is never prayed by the Lords, but by the Speaker, who is the mouth of
the Commons.

In the presence of a prince, a common person will scarce have the audacity to
speak, but when necessity makes him crave help; and therefore it is properly
said, That the King advised with the Lords; because he hears the causes
debated with them only, the Commons being separated from consultation what were
fit to propose in some other place.

Whatsoever the Lords and the Commons agree upon, is an Ordinance presently,
though it be never engrossed, and sealed with the great Seal, and proclaimed in
the counties, as the common course was: but it took not effect as a Statute,
till the King declared his Royal Assent; which he might very well do by Writ
after the Parliament, as well as during the Parliament, per. 29. E. 3. f. 4. b.
39 E. 3 f. 7. For the Kings answer is no more, but that he will be advised,
whether he will assent or no; and if he assent not till after, it is some doubt
whether it be an Act of Parliament from the first day of the Parliament, or but
from the time of the Royal Assent given.

The general Assent of the Realm to make Ordinances, and Laws, the ancient
writers called Consilium, Commune Consilium, Magnum Consilium,
Placitumgenerale, Curia altissima, and Parliamentum generale, seu altissimum.

The Saxons called it Genote, Pirena, cor Pirena, Gemore, Ealpa, Zemots,
Synodus. I find not the word Parliament before the beginning of E. 1. fully in
use amongst us. But the Assembly of the three Estates to consult for the
affairs of the Commonwealth, is as ancient as the Britains, and continued here
in the time of the Saxons, Danes, and Normans.

I ground my opinion for the Britains from no express authority, but by
inference out of diverse: 1 E. 1. Caes. Com. lib. 5. cap. 5. says, Summa
Imperii, Bellique administrandi Communi Consilio, Comissa est Cassibulano. So
that here we have the name: and if you think that the Commons were not called
to this consultation, hear what Sothilius says of the Britains: Apud hos,
Populus Magna ex part primatum tenet: exclude them of these general counsels,
and you deprive them of this right. Vitus in histororum. Britanorum, lib. 8.
fol. 11. says that Arthurus victor cum Regio splendore, Londinum ingreditur,
eaque urbe Convocatis Clericis, Principibusque suae quidem potestatis, omnibus,
Consilium, quid optime factu opus sit, capit Beda lib. 2. cap. 2. says the
Britains told Augustine, se non posse absque suorum Concensu, and licentia
priscis abdicare Moribus: Beda lib. 2. cap. 13. Rex Edwinus antequam fidem
Christianum susciperit, dixit se cum amicis, Principibus, and Consiliariis suis
Collaturum, and habito cum sapientibu^ Consilio, etc.

The story of the Saxons, and their Laws make evident proof, that they were
still of the same mind transplanted hither, as Tacitus says the Germans were;
Nec Regibus infinita potestas. De Minoribus Rebus Principes Consultant, de
Majoribus vero omnes.

Historia Eliensis lib. 2. de Dunelme, mortuo Rege Edgaro, Lessius, (vel
lepsius) a Deo ac sancto Petro abstulit cum Rapina Burch, and vendales, and
Cateringas postea, antea Elicibatur, generale placitum, apud Londinum, ad quod
dum Duces, Principes, Satrapae, Rectores, and Causidici, ex omni part
confluxerunt, beatus Ethelwaldus Lessium in Jus protraxit, coram cunctis
Injuriam patefecit, and been aperta discussa, ea omnes Ethelwaldo per Judicium
rediderunt, Burch, and vendales, and Katheringas.

Abendon Lanboke, fol. 91. in Charta Regis Etheldredi Affricum cognomento puer
Pronbroche Willemetrantum, and Syrene, a quadam vidua Eadfield appellata,
violenter abstraxit, and quia cum Ducatusico contra Regem Etheldredum reus
extitit omnes possessiones ejus Regis dictioni subastae sunt, quod ad Synodale
consilium ad Cirencester universi Optimates mei simul in unum convenerint, ad
eundem Affricum, Majestatis reum, de hac patria profugum expulerunt.

Ingulphus has many places to the like purpose, but I will use but one:
Infesto Nativitatis beatae Mariae cum universi Magnates Regni per Regium
edictum summoniti tam Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and Abbates, quam caeteri totius
Regni proceres, and optimates Londini Convenerunt, ad tractandum, de Negotiis
publicis totius Regni, Consummatis, omnibus coram universis, Domino Turketillo
Abbati, Monacisque suis accersitis, Rex Eldredus dedit Monasterium de Croyland,
etc.

Polydore Virgil and Paladine are therefore much deceived, if they thought that
H. 1. was the first that held any Parliament within this Realm: neither do they
seem to be of that Opinion, their words are these, Regis ante tempora H. 1. non
Consueverunt Populi Conventum, consultandi causa nisi pro raro facere: Yet I
think their successors held Parliaments oftener then they did; yet nevertheless
they held some, and William the Conqueror challenged not so absolute a Conquest
of this Land; but the Laws he made, have this Title, Hic intimatur quid
Gulielmus Rex cum principibus suis constituit, etc. And I think all Kings may
yield to consult with their people for that reason which Alphred used in the
preface to his Laws: Temeritatis videatur ex suis ipsius decretis quanquam
plura literarum Monamenta consignari, cum in certum sit qualem habet apud
posteros vel habitura sint fidem; quae nos Magni facimus. I have not seen
Arthur Halls Book, whereby he disalloweth the Commons to have any voice in
Parliament; and for which he is disabled to be of the same house for ever: but
I think he mistaketh some writers meaning, which spoke only of Barons, or
Magnates: but words are not much to be regarded, insomuch as whatsoever the
Parliament allows, it binds as a Law, though it be set forth only in the
Kings name; as the Statute of Glouc', and Magna Charta; or in the name of the
Commons only.

In the Kings Oath, the word Populus extends to the greatest subjects, and so
does it also in the Recognizance of the peace, or good behavior, quod been se
gerat erga Populum cunctum: If therefore he strike, or misdemean himself
toward a Baron, the Recognizance is forfeited.

There is an express Authority, that proves, that the word Magnates,
comprehends the people. Hoveden says Anno 1170. Rex celebrabat Magnum
Consilium Londini cum Principibus, and Magnatibus terrae, de Coronatione A.
filii sui, and D. in sequent' Clerico, and populis Consentientibus, fecit ipse
filium suum coronari.

FRANCIS TATE.

Of the Antiquity of Parliaments.
THat there were such like Assemblies as Parliaments now are, before the Romans
arrival here, some gather by the words of Caesar, lib. 5. de Bello Gallico
summa imperii, Bellique administrandi, communi Consilio permissae est
Cassibulano. And for not such due holding of such common Counsels, Tacitus
seems to refer the the happy proceedings of the Romans against the Britains,
Quod in Communi non Consuluerunt. These two Parliament-like Assemblies, the
Britains do call Kifrithin, because Laws therein were enacted.

The English Saxons, as soon as they had settled themselves, held also the like
Assemblies, which they called in their ancient English tongue Gereduysis, or a
Counsel; sometimes Wittena Mota, as a meeting of wise men; and sometimes by the
Greek word Synoth: The Latin Authors of that age, did call it Consilium,
Magnatum Conventus, and Praesentia Regis, Praelatorum, Procerumque Collectorum,
as appears by the Charter of King Edgar, to the Abbey of Crowland, in the
year 961. At which time it seems by the subsigning, that Abbesses had their
voices there, and consents as well as the Prelates and Nobles of the Land.

After the Norman Conquest, the two first Kings reigned with their swords in
their hands, absolutely of themselves (viz.) the Conqueror, and William Rufus
his Son, not admitting of themselves any general Assemblies of the States of
the Realm, but permitting only provincial Synodes of the Clergy; for the
composing of Ecclesiastical controversies, as some write: wherein they
themselves sat, nevertheless, as Presidents; yet in their meetings (as it is
in Hovedon, where he sets down the Lands of William the Conqueror, he did
set them down: And by the Counsels of the Barons, fecit summoniri per universos
Consultatus Angliae, Anglos, nobiles, and sapientes, and sua lege eruditos, ut
eorum and jura and Consuetudines ab ipsis audiret: Electi igitur de singulis
totius Patriae Comitatibus viri Duodecem Jurejurando Confirmaverunt, primo ut
quoad possint, recto tramite, neque ad dextram, neque ad sinistram partem
divertentes, legem suarum Consuetudinem and sanctitatem patefecerint, nil
praetermittentes; nil addentes, nil praevaricando Mutantes.

And oftentimes he and his son William called together the Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, Barons,
Vicecomites, cum suis militibus: and in the time following, we find that there
was conventum omnium Episcoporum, Abbatum, Florentius Vigorniensis.
and procerum Regni Londini in palatio Regis. But an old Manuscript Book says,
That the first Parliament, wherein the Commons were called as well as the
Prelates and Nobles, Liber Cantuarmu.
was in the sixteenth year of H. 1. and then was first called by the name of
Parliament, as some say from the Peers, a potiore part, quasi parium
Conventus: some derive it from the Peers ridiculously, quast Parium lamentum:
others more probably derive it from the French word Parler, as that of the
Greek (...), that is to treat and to confer together.

Some of the French Historians, write, that this name, in this sense, began at
an Assembly of the Peers of France, about the year of Christ, 1200. But I find
the word to have bin in use with us in this Realm long before: for Ingulphus,
who died in the year 1109. used the word for the meeting or Chapter of the
Abbot and Covent, writing thus: Concessimus etiam tunc seriantiam nostrae
Ecclesiae, semiano de Leke, qui veniens coram conventu in publico Parliamento
nostra similiter Juramentum praestitit, quod fidus and fidelis nobis existerit.
Neither do I doubt but that the word was brought into this Realm by the French
Monks, and first used by the Statists, in the time of H. 1. and since that time
the authority of this Court has stood settled; and the Communalty has had
their voice; which the said H. 1. granted unto them, being a natural Englishman
himself; and in love of the English Nation, when at that time the Normans were
on the terms of revolt from him, in favor of Robert his Brother, Duke of
Normandy.

Now for the form of Assembling of these three sorts of Estates, in this high
Court, I find no certainty till the time of King John.

It is apparent by a Petition, exhibited by the Lord Fitzhugh, in a Parliament
holden at Leicester, 2 H. 1. that the principal Nobility were only called; and
they after the end of the Parliament to impart unto the Barons and their
country what was done in the Parliament: Afterward King John ordained, that
all the Barons of England should come in their proper persons to the Parliament
whenever they were summoned. The form I will deliver out of the words of the
petition.

Ipse Dominus Rex generalis summonitiones, vicecomitibus cujuslibet Comitatus
diligeret, ipsos injungendo, quod omnes Comites, and Barons, quorum nomina
infra scripta fuerunt, and infra suas balivas residentes, ipsi summonirent, ad
veniendum ad Parliamentum Regis: and hoc non omittatur quacunque ex causa, sub
paend Magni Contemptus: at which time, as it is in the Book entitled, Modus
tenendi Parliamentum, all Earls which have Lands, Tenements, and Revenues, to
the value of an entire County, at twenty Knights Fees, after twenty pound a
Fee, or the value of an entire Barony, which is fifteen Knights Fees and a
half, came to the Parliament: but when so great a multitude coul not but breed
tumultuous confusion, King Henry the third, after he had smarted by these
confused multitudes of Barons, ordained that those Earls, and Barons, unto whom
he directed his Writs, should only come to the Parliament: so in the
ancientest Summons that I have seen, which were in 49 H. 3. there were called
besides the Earls only 17 Barons. This which King H. 3. began, was fully
perfected by King Edward the first his Son, who elected the wisest and such as
pleased him; and likewise omitted them and their children in their summons, if
they did not equal their Parents in wisdom, and other good parts and offices of
valor and government: so we see in that time Hilton, Corbet, Point, Leyburne,
Vavasour, etc. and such other like, were summoned once or twice in Parliaments,
and their posterity wholly omitted afterward: The Barons and Bishops were
called, De Negotiis tractaturi, and Consilium impensuri: The Knights and
Burgesses, ad faciendum, and consentiendum iis quae ibidem de communi Consilio
dicti Regni nostri favente Deo contigerit ordinari super Negotiis antedictis:
And in the same words were the Clergy called, ad faciendum, and consentiendum:
so as it seems they had as much to do in Parliament then, as Knights of
Shires, and Burgesses.

WILLIAM CAMDEN.

Of the Antiquity of Parliaments in England.
I Find in many ancient Histories, that the Kings of this Land did use to call
together the Nobility and Estates of the Realm to confer with them, especially
about matters of War, when any necessary occasion did move them thereunto: But
it is thought by Holinshead in his Chronicle, that the first use of the
Parliament did begin in the 17 year of H. 1. which since that time has
remained in force, and is frequented unto our times; insomuch as when any thing
is to be decreed appertaining to the State of the Commonwealth, it shall not be
received as a Law until by the Authority of that Assembly, it shall be
established.

And because the house of Parliament should not be overcharged with multitudes,
E. 1. did order that none of his Barons and Nobility should come unto this
Assembly, but such as it should please the King to call by his Writ; and the
rest to be chosen by voice of the Burgesses and Freeholders of the Shire where
they did dwell, as Mr. Camden (Clarencieulx) in his Britannia has very well
remembered.

It is recorded amongst the Summons of Parliament, 35 E. 3. that there is no
Writ, de admittendo fide dignos ad Colloquium: and amongst the Earls and Barons
there is returned Mary Countess de Norff. Alienor Countess de Ormond,
Phillippa Countess de March, Agnes Countess de Pembrook, and Katherine
Countess of Athel.

Upon the Parliament-Roll, Anno 14. (or 15.) E. 3. there are diverse Writs
directed to sundry Earls and Barons, de veniendo ad Regem: whereof the first is
directed to William Earl of Southamton, to attend the King with 120 men at
arms; William de Clinton, Earl of Huntington, with 60 men at arms; Lawrence
de Hastinges, Earl of Pembrook, with 50 men at arms; and so likewise there
were diverse directed to others: and these several kinds of Summons, because I
find them recorded amongst the Parliament-Rolls, I thought good to remember
them to you.

I will conclude upon the Etymology of the word, which is Parliament, which is
to speak, and deliver a man's mind freely, in that Assembly; whereof the boldest
speech, that ever I did read of to be spoken in the Kings presence, was spoken
by Roger Bigod, Earl Marshal of England, unto King Edward the first, in the
Parliament House at Salisbury, where the King would have had him to go into
Gascoyne for him with an Army: but when the Earl excused himself, saying, He
would be be ready to go, if the King went himself; the King then in a chafe,
said, By God, Sr. Earl, thou shall either go, or hang: and I (said the Earl)
swear the same Oath, that, I will neither go, not hang: and so departed from
the King without taking leave.

JOSEPH HOLLAND.

The Antiqutty of Parliament. The two Synewes of the Commonwealth are
Punishment and Reward.
AS touching the nature of the high Court of Parliament, it is nothing else but
the Kings great Counsel, which he does Assemble together upon occasion of
interpretings, or abrogating old Laws, and making of new, as ill manners shall
deserve; or, for the punishment of evil doers, or the reward of the virtuous;
wherein these four things are to be considered,

1. Whereof this Court is composed. 2. What matters are proper for it. 3. To
what end it is ordained.
1. As for the thing it self, it is composed of an Head and a Body. The Head is
the King, the Body are the Members of the Parliament. This Body again is
subdivided into two parts: the upper house is divided partly of the Nobility
Temporal, who are hereditary Counselors to the high Court of Parliament, by
the honor of their Creation, and Lands; and partly of the Bishops, spiritual
men, who are likewise by virtue of their dignity, and ad vitam, of this Court.
The other house is composed of Knights of the Shire, and Burgesses for the
Towns: but because the number would be infinite for all Knights, Gentlemen, and
Burgesses, to be present at every Parliament; therefore a certain number is
selected out of that great Body, serving for that great Parliament, where their
persons are the representations of that Body.

2. For the matters they ought to treat of, they ought therefore to be general,
and rather of such matters, as cannot well be performed without the Assembly of
that general Body; and no more of the generals neither then necessity shall
require: for as in Corruptissima Republica plurimae sunt leges, so does the
life and strength of the Law consist not in heaping of infinite and confused
numbers of Laws; but in the right interpretation, and due execution of good,
and wholesome Laws.

3. The end for which the Parliament is ordained, being only for the
advancement of Gods glory, and establishment of the Weal of the King, and his
people; it is no place for particular men to utter their private conceits for
satisfaction of their curiosities, or to make show of their Eloquence, by
spending the time with long studied, and Eloquent Orations; for the reverence
of God, their King and their Country being well settled in their hearts, will
make them ashamed of such toys, and remember that they are there as sworn
Counselors to their King, to give their best advice for the furtherance of his
service, and flourishing Weal of this Sat.

4. And lastly, to consider the means how to bring all your labors to a good
end, you must remember that you are Assembled by your lawful King, to give him
your best advice in matters proposed by him unto you, being of so high a
nature, as beforesaid: wherein you are gravely to deliberate; and upon your
consciences, plainly to determine how far those things propounded do agree with
the Weal, both of your King, and the Country; whose VVeals cannot be separated.

FINIS.
There is lately come forth, an exact Abridgment of the Records in the Tower of
London, from the reign of King Edward the Second, unto King Richard the Third,
of all the Parliaments holden in each Kings reign, and the several Acts in
every Parliament. Together with the names and titles of all the Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, and Barons, summoned to every of the said
Parliaments. Collected by Sr. Robert Cotton, Knight and Baronet. And are to be
sold by William Leake, at the Crown in Fleetstreet, between the two
Temple-Gates.

Books printed or sold by William Leak, at the sign of the Crown in
Fleet Street, between the two Temple-Gates.
YOrks Heraldry. fol. A Bible of a very fair large Roman Letter. 4. Orlando
Furioso. fol. Perkins on the Laws of England. 8. Wilkinsons Office of Sheriffs.
8. Persons Law. 8. Mirror of Justice. 8. Topics in the Laws of England. 8.
Delamains use of the Horizontal Quadrant. Wilby's second set of Music, three,
four, five and six parts. 4. Malthus Artificial Fireworks. Corderias in
english. 8. Dr. Fulks Meteors, with Observations. 8. Nyes Gunnery and
Fireworks. Cato Major with Annotations. Mel. Heliconium: by Alexander Rosse. 8.
Nosce teipsum, by Sir John Davis. 8. Animadversions on Lillies Grammar. 8. The
History of Vienna and Paris. 4. The posing of the Accidence. The History of
Lazarillo de Tormes, the witty Spaniard. Hero and Leander: by George Chapman,
and Christopher Marlow. Guillims Heraldry. fol. Herberts Travels. fol. Man
become guilty, by John Francis Senault; and englished by Henry Earl of
Monmouth. Aula Lucis, or the house of Light. Christ's Passion, a Tragedy: by the
most learned Hugo Grotius. Mathematical Recreations, with the Horizontal dyal,
by William Oughtred. 8. The Garden of Eden, or an accurate description of
Flowers and Fruits, by Sir Hugh Plat. 8. Solitary Divotions, with man in Glory,
by the Archbishop of Canterbury. 12. The Idiot, in four Books. The Life and
Reign of Henry the eighth, by the Lord Herbert. fol. Sken de Significatione
verborum. 4. The Fort Royal of holy Scriptures, by J. H. the third Edition. 8.
Callis learned readings on the Stat. 21. of Henry 8. chap. 5. of Sewers. France
painted to the life, in four Books, the second Edition. Willet on Genesis and
Exodus. Adams on Peter. fol. Book of Martyrs. fol. The Rights of the people
concerning Impositions stated in a learned Argument, by a late eminent Judge of
this Nation.
Plays.
Maids Tragedy. Phylaster. King and no King. Othello the Moor of Venice. The
grateful Servant. The Weding. The Hollander. The Merchant of Venice. The
Strange discovery.

