A TREATISE Concerning the LAWFULNESS OF Instrumental MUSIC IN Holy Offices.

By Henry Dodwell, M. A.

To which is prefixed, a Preface in Vindication of Mr. Newte's Sermon,
concerning the Lawfulness and Use of Organs in the Christian Church, etc. From
the Exceptions of an Anonymous Letter to a Friend in the Country, concerning
the Use of Instrumental Music in the Worship of God, etc.

The Second Edition, with large Additions.

LONDON, Printed for William Haws, at the Rose in Ludgatestreet, MDCC.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Learned Author of the folfowing Treatise, having read a Sermon, Preached
at Tiverton, in the County of Devon, Concerning the Lawfulness and Use of
Organs in the Christian Church, occasioned by the late Erecting of an Organ in
the Church of that Parish; and the Answer to it, set forth by an unknown
Author, entitled A Letter to a Friend in the Country, concerning the Use of
Instrumental Music, in the Worship of God, etc. Wherein he found this Practice
of our Church, after a popular manner represented as Jewish and Popish,
inconsistent with the Purity and Sincerity of the Gospel Worship, and
introduced without sufficient Warrant, either from the Scripture, Apostolical
Practice, or present Authority, etc.

He was concerned at the Abuse and Misrepresentation, having a just esteem for
the Reformation, and for the English Constitution, which is by far the best
Part of it, and so approved of, by the most eminent Foreign Divines, as will
appear by their Opinions concerning it in the following Discourse.

As to its being a perverse Imitation of the Jewish Practice, and inconsistent
with the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel Worship: He has so fully and
closely Answered the Allegations of the Adversary, that 'twill be a vain
Attempt to make a Reply to him. But from so silly, as well as false and
groundless an Aspersion, as its being Popish, he thought it not worth the while
to Write any thing in its Vindication, since it is no other than an old base and
scandalous Objection, against the innocent Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
of England, which has been Answered over and over again, to the Confusion,
though not Silence of a restless Party.

However, since he was pleased to favor me with a Copy of his Treatise, which,
it seems, partly through my Occasion and Request, but more through the
Importunity and Solicitation of some Friends, he has obliged the World with,
with Liberty to prefix a Preface to it, in Vindication of that Sermon, from the
Aspersions and Mistakes, as well as Misrepresentations of the Answerer. I shall
beg leave of the Reader, to detain him a little, from his perusing the Treatise
it self, while I briefly Reply to his most material Objections, and rectify
some Mistakes and Abuses which will be found therein, in Defense of this
innocent and useful Practice of our Church. But I shall not think my self
obliged to follow him in every needless Excursion from the Subject in Hand,
into the whole Controversy between us and the Diffenters; or throw away so
much Time as it would take up, to Reply to every trifling or contemptible
Remark, or those captious Questions which are made in it.

The Answer seems so Artificially to be formed, that it may be read without
consulting the Sermon, or comparing them together, otherwise some imperfect
Citations, and other abusive Reflections there in would be too apparent.

And it is to be observed, That it supposes all along a Separation of
Instrumental from Vocal Music in the Service of God; whereas, the drift of the
Sermon, is to join them together, and to show, That the one is more Orderly and
Harmonious and Beneficial for the other. And after all the tedious Harangue is
made, there is no tolerable Reason given, why, if we do allow of Vocal Music,
we should not also allow Instrumental, which does so very much improve the
same, and mainly conduce to cheer the Mind, to excite the Aflections, to help
out and assist the Voices, and to keep them from the greater Discord in our
Devotion.

But to be more particular, the Answerer Ans. p. 2.
begins with a fly but false Suggestion, to make it a little the more popular,
That the Organ was Erected at a time when the Poor were ready to Starve, and
when there was a stop put to Trade by the Prohibition of Clipped Money, etc.

Now in that very Year, when the Anno. 1696.
Organ was Erected, the Poor had the most ample Provision made for them in the
Parish of Tiverton, that ever they had. The Poors Book at that time amounting
to 946 l. 14 s. 4 d., which was above 100 l. more than ever they had before in
one Year: Besides, in public standing Donations Yearly, they have about 400 l.
more, and in private Charities very considerable to my own knowledge.

Neither was the Erecting the Organ Ans. p. 66.
any Expense at all to the Parish, as it is insinuated; for the far greater part
of the Money risen to defray its Expense, was by Subscriptions; and the
remaining part was taken out of Money in Arrears due for Church Rents, which
without Sacrilege could not be employed but for the Churches use; and that
being a very decent one, and needing but little reparations, the Parishioners
thought fit to employ a part of the Surplusage toward the Erecting of the
Organ, which had been Sacrilegiously pulled down before.

So likewise the Sallery of 30 l. per Annum for the Organist, goes Yearly out
of certain Rents and Dues belonging to the Church, without being a burden to
the Parish.

What the Answerer says concerning Ans. p. 3. 4.
the Dedication to the Bishop of Exon, is very trifling, and needs no Reply.

And his several times accusing the Author of the want of Charity, and making
many spightful Reflections upon Protestant Ans. p. 24.
Dissenters, is very groundless, for he cannot find any such thing throughout
his Sermon, nor such Instances of the eructation of his Gall, nor of the
stiring up of his Spleen, in the Course of his Life, as he would insinuate.

But methinks it should be very strange that the Answerer should accuse the
Author of the want of Charity, or any one else, when his Pamphlet from the
beginning to the end, has so very little of it, it is scarce any thing else but
a malicious Invective against the Church of England; and a scandalous
Intimation, which is another way of accusing her, as being Popishly affected,
and that her Rites and Ceremonies partake of the Innovations and Superstitions
of the corrupt Church of Rome. Abundance of this sort of Dirt is thrown upon
her at every turn; but it is easily rubbed off. And though there is really nothing
in the Accusation, nor any tolerable ground for such a Report, however it comes
to pass, that among the unthinking, injudicious and deluded Multitude, it is
frequently given cut as a popular Argument against any thing in the Service of
our Church, which our Adversaries dislike, or rather, which they would seem to
be offended at, more out of a pretense to keep up a Separation, than that any
Offense can be justly taken at the things themselves.

And that this is no uncharitable or groundless surmise, is evident from their
Aversion to Alterations, in the time of the Sessions of the last Convocation,
as they were before in that of 1660. And the Conference at the Savoy, when they
might have been satisfied in any thing, could they have agreed in what would
have satisfied them; besides a total Subversion of the English Constitution,
which is at this time in an especial manner, and always has been since the
Reformation, the greatest Bullwark of the Protestant Religion against Popery,
of any in the whole Christian World. And 'twas sadly apparent what great
advances Popery made in the late times of Anarchy and Confusion, when this
excellent Constitution was subverted, and through the Policy of the Church of
Rome, her most Zealous and Religious Defenders were traduced as Popishly
affected, and by their Instigation cut off, because in truth they were the most
irreconcilable Enemies to the Tyranny and Corruption of that Church, as any
People whatsoever: Witness, besides the Royal Martyr himself, the incomparable
Archbishop Laud, Called by Mr. Long the Papists Scourge and Horror.
who; if Times would have favored him, had Zeal and Courage, and Learning, and
Interest enough to have driven Popery out of any Kingdom in Christendom: And
for certain the return of it in this Kingdom, will for ever be prevented,
whatever is pretended by ill designing Men, if the Doctrine and Discipline of
our Church be but maintained with a like Resolution and Christian Bravery, as
he maintained them, when he adorned the Sea of Canterbury.

The sticking close to which, is the readiest Course that can be taken to keep
out Popery, and nothing else will be able to do it. For notwithstanding the
Outcry of Popery be at every turn made against our Church Service, (which is
one of the grossest and foulest Slanders that ever was invented or credited,
and could proceed from nothing so much as an ill Design against her, Nothing
can make an honest Man suspect our Church of Popery but his Ignorance what
Popery is. London Cases. p. 493.
or from great Ignorance of what Popery is) were this excellent Constitution
destroyed, Popery in all probability would soon destroy the Protestant Religion
quite, and we should be clearly overrun with the Tyranny, as well as
Superstition of that corrupt Church, which at present domineers over so great a
part of Christendom, and threatens Ruin and Desolation to all the rest.

We see too much what would be our own Case, by the barbarous Persecution of
the Protestants in France, Savoy, etc. notwithstanding the Edicts, and Oaths,
and Declarations of those Princes to the contrary, if we should through the
subtilty of the Court of Rome, be persuaded by any of our Dissenters to alter
our English Constitution, or so much as admit of the desired Comprehension,
under the plausible pretense of Union; but in truth it would be a means of
dividing and weakening us the more among our selves, than we could hope to win
from abroad. It Is plain we might gratify our Enemies thereby, but we should
never oblige our Friends, nor strengthen our Interest, nor one jot the less be
calumniated as Popish.

But that the Church of England is free from any such Imputation of Popery, is
so clearly and heartily evinced by the learned Dr. Hooper, the present Dean of
Canterbury, in his excellent Treatise on that Subject, at the end of the London
Cases, that it will be needless for any one to say more to it; for those that
will not be convinced of the contrary by his Reasons, do but expose their
Ignorance to the World, or what is worse, their Prejudice or ill Design.

Among other things, which some of those who dissent from us dislike, and
against all Honesty and Reason make to be a part of Popery, is the Practice of
Instrumental Music in our Church Service: But it is a very ridiculous Argument
to say so, because the Church of Rome uses it, and very uncharitable and
unjust; while the generality of Protestant Churches abroad (as well as ours at
home) which are any where established, have the use of it, as well as that, and
have had so ever since the Reformation. Our first Reformers were certainly
wiser than to account that for Popish, and to be quite abolished, which was as
useful then in the Christian Church as before, and which they did Reform where
they found it grossly abused, but did never think fit to abolish the use of it,
or account it a piece of Popery to be cast off.

Those excellent Men were not possessed with such a Spirit of Opposition, as
against all Sense and Reason to run away from every thing in Divine Worship,
which the Papists did use or allow; this would be bad indeed, and a much
greater Error than that which they pretend to avoid; for then they must disown
God, and his Son our Savior Jesus Christ, because the Papists believe them;
then they must lay aside the Hierarchy, because the Papists maintain it; and
have no Places, nor Times set a part for divine Worship, nor set Forms of
Prayer to address themselves by to the great God of Heaven and Earth, because
the Papists have them; nor indeed have any Decency or Comeliness in the House of
God, because such are to be seen in the Church of Rome.

No, it is the Corruptions and Superstitions of the Church of Rome we are
Reformed from, and it is not requisite we should be still a Reforming what is
thought Decent, Regular, Primitive and Edifying in our Church.

And I Challenge any, even the most Bigoted Dissenters from the Church of
England, to show any one Superstitious Rite, or corrupt Doctrine of the Church
of Rome, which is allowed or maintained in our established Church.

They may accuse the Surplice for being such, but with what show of Reason to
satisfy an unprejudiced Man? Why, they may as well account a Black Gown to be
Popish, or a Judges Scarlet, being the Grab of the Whore of Babylon; or Rev.
17. 4.
a gray Cloak, because it is worn by some of the Friars. And so for the This
Sign, both Tertullian and St. Cyprian, allow was used from the time of the
Apostles, and continued in use in the time of Constantine the Great, and
therefore could not be an Invention of the Papists. Opus. p. 326. Mr. Long's
Calv. Redivivus, p. 72.
Cross after Baptism, for there is no such in it, the Ministers making that
Sign as a significant Ceremony, that in Token hereafter, the Child which is
Baptized, shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith of Christ crucified, etc.
is no more Popish than the speaking those Words is Popish; nor those decent and
significant Rites and Ceremonies, which our Church Governors have thought fit
to appoint, for the more orderly and solemn Performing the Service of God in
his Church, are no more Popish than the Time and Place of Prayer, nor the
kneeling at it; nor that very Form of Prayer which our Savior taught his
Disciples. And the use of Instrumental Music is no more Popish than the use of
Vocal is, since they are both made use of in the Protestant, as well as Popish
Churches, and both for the same excellent Ends, namely, for the more lively and
affectionate Praising of the Goodness of God, and the more effectual raising
their Minds in Devotion toward him, as well as to regulate the Voices of the
People, and to make them the more Harmonious.

And nothing is more evident, than that the generality of Protestant Churches
abroad, as well as ours at home, do use Instrumental as well as Vocal Music in
the Worship of God. I give Instances in Sermon. p. 13.
the Lutheran, as most of the Foreign are, which are planted in Germany, such
as the Dominions of the Elector of Saxony, the Duke of Brandenburg, the House
of Lunenburg, and many imperial Cities, in the large Territories of Denmark,
Sweden, Poland, Russia, etc. Also in the few Churches which were Reformed
according to Calvin's Model, in part of Switzerland and Holland. The Reformed
in France I do not mention, because they have been all along so kept under, as
not to be able to obtain an Establishment according to Primitive usage and
their own Desire, otherwise they would have had the Hierarchy, and I Question
not a like Decency in their Church Service, as other Reformed have.

This they Zealously Petitioned for in the time of Cardinal Richlieus
Administration. The judgment of the Foreign Reformed, etc, p. 47.
But that great Minister was too Politic to admit of their Petition for an
Hierarchy, foreseeing that such an Apostolical Institution, and those Decencies
in Divine Worship, would make their Church too Beautiful and Regular, and soon
draw many from the Romish Establishment to their Communion.

Now this use of Instrumental Music so universally obtaining in most, if not
all National Protestant Churches, being a proper help to excite and enliven
Men's Minds in Devotion, as well as to regulate their Voices, as most
unprejudiced People find; it is no great matter if some few of singular
Humors, and unreasonable Scrupulus est formido Temeraria, and sine fundamento,
atque adeo nou petest obligare. Amesius de Consc. l. 1. 1. 6.
Scruples are dissatisfied about it, and dislike such a Practice. For it is
impossible to please every Body in any one established Church whatsoever.

The Rules for Decency, however Innocent and Instructive, will not meet with
such an universal Approbation but some will be prejudiced against them, and
then it is much, if through the Craft of others, they be not easily brought to
dissent from them. There is scarce any one part of our Church Service, though
never so excellent and edifying, but some or other dislike it, and some dislike
all; shall we therefore lay aside our Book of Common Prayer? It Is very
unreasonable surely, unless there were a better substituted in its room; and
such a one I believe, neither this Age nor the next will be able to produce.

But to please whom shall we be persuaded to lay aside or alter our Church
Service? Why, some few, who will not otherwise join with us therein. I am well
satisfied could that heal or remove the Schism that is among us, it would have
been done a long while since. But our Church Governors know too well, that the
Spirit and Genius of the dissent, is of such a Nature, that nothing will
satisfy that Medly of People, and the different Parties concerned in it,
otherwise their Charity is so great, that they would have condescended to the
Satisfaction of the meanest Party. But then again, their Prudence does direct
them to consider, there is a far greater number of People, which make a more
considerable Body of the Catholic Church, which would be offended if that
Service, and this excellent Constitution were laid aside; and who then should
be rather satisfied? Those who are for a regular and decent Church Service,
according to the Primitive Pattern, as that of the Church of England is, or
those who being Biassed by some unreasonable Scruples oppose the same, and are
really for no such thing.

And what does it matter if some few inharmonious Souls do dislike the Organs
in our Church, as some others through Prejudice dislike our Church Service; and
both through extreme Ignorance, or an ill Design, account them Popery. Will it
be reasonable to expect our Governors should so far neglect their Duty to the
Church, and their regard to the most considerable Body of Protestants, to
gratify these few, by altering the one, and laying aside of the other? When at
the same time, by such a silly Objection of Popery, (which is given by many as
a common Term of Reproach to any thing which they do not like in the Church)
they must also accuse all Foreign Churches of the same Guilt, while all of them
well approve of our Church Service, and of Instrumental Music too. And it is
very little to the purpose to Object against the universality of this
Approbation, as the Answerer does. Because some very considerable Ans. p. 37.
Dutch Churches have no Organs in them, as that at Leyden for Instance, and
some others, though they may be supposed to be of Ability to procure them. But
I am credibly informed, that there are Eight Churches in that City, and only
one without Organs. Why, there are none in the Popes Chapel at Rome, and yet
this is no Argument that they are not approved of by the Pope in the Romish
Church.

All this Outcry of Popery is nothing else but Artifice and Design against our
Church, without any tolerable Reason, or justifiable Grounds to support the
Imputation, chiefly raised and fomented and encouraged by the Papists
themselves, that they may by means of that, Slander, Distract and Divide us,
and make us become an easier Prey to them. This is so very evident, that in
that little Tract, called Foxes and Firebrands, set forth by Dr. Nalson, it is
undeniably so. Anno 1680.
It being a Specimen of the Danger and Harmony of Popery and Separation;
wherein is proved from undeniable matter of Fact and Reason, that Separation
from the Church of England, is in the judgment of Papists, and by sad
Experience, found the most Compendious way to introduce Popery, and to ruin the
Protestant Religion.

By this means Popery does by degrees continually get Ground, and our
Protestants not uniting among themselves, for want of joining in our excellent
Church Service, will not be able to hinder the Progress of it for the future.

And to speak freely, an ungrateful but certain Truth, I concur with some
worthy Men in believing, I have seen a MSS bearing that Title, which fully
proves the matter of Fact, and it is hoped will shortly see the light.
The Imputation of Popery may be clearly laid at the Dissenters Door, and we
have no reason to account any thing Popery in the Kingdom, nor to fear any
Danger of it, but from those few who are professed Papists themselves, or such
as too near agree with them in Principles and Practices, Another MSS written in
the time of Q. Eliz, called a dutiful Advertisement to beware of the Puritans
by the Papists, and of the Papists by the Puritans; discovering the great
Coherence and agreement between both the Sects, in manifold and diverse
regardable both erroneous and perilous Positions, etc. See this at large,
proved in the Compendious History of all the Popish and Fantical Plots and
Conspiracies against the established Government in Church and State, in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the First of Queen Elizabeth, to 1684. By
the Reverend Mr. Tho. Long of Exon.
and who are, and always have been their prime Agents and Instruments, I mean
the several Sects among us, which dissent from the Church of England.

Which Church is by far the greatest, if not the only Support of the Protestant
Religion and Interest, and consequently the greatest Enemy the Church of Rome
has in the World. It Is looked upon to be so, by those of that Communion, and
therefore is it become the Object of its greatest Fury and Envy; to destroy
which is its greatest aim, and if by any means it can be effected, they may
truly think they have done the business of the Reformation.

This Church had beyond others of the Protestant Profession, a great advantage
in the Reformation, for when Luther, who first began to reform the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome, and to separate from it, had made a great
step that way; he notwithstanding left a great many things unreformed, which
were offensive and could not be justified by Primitive Anquity, such as the two
great number of Ceremonies, and almost all the external Worship in the Church
of Rome; Auricular Confession, the use of Crucifixes The use of the Crucifix
allowed by Mr. Baxter and called, Causa Motiva, etc.
in Devotion, but without Adoration; the absurd Pictures of the Trinity, and
the Doctrine of Consubstantiation, determining the Mode of the real Presence,
instead of the absurder Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation.

Afterward Calvin carried on the Reformation Care of Chapter Div.
at Geneva, to which Place he was invited by the Citizens, A. D. 1536. when
they had expelled their Popish Bishop, who was also their Temporal Lord, and
refused to re-admit him, unless he would disclaim Popery, upon whose refusal
they took the Government of Church and State into their own Hands, which soon
occasioned great Disorders and Confusions. And upon this, to gratify the
Magistrates, See Mr. Longs Calv. Redivivus, p. 10, etc.
and yet to keep the Authority of the Church; he suits his Model of Government
to the exigence of the Times, and upon this account, was in a manner
necessarily obliged to make a direct opposition to Popery, the great Measure of
his Reformation, for which Reason he laid aside the Hierarchy, notwithstanding
its being Primitive and Apostolical, because he must not come near the Popish
Government.

But yet he plainly approves of it, and Calvinus in Libro de necess. Reform.
Ecclesiae.
very sharply rebuked those English Men who did dissent from it. If any (says
he) be found, that do not reverence such an Hierarchy, (i. e. such as is in
England) and subject themselves to the same with the lowest Obedience, I
confess there is no Anathema, whereof he is not worthy.

However his Model was never received in the Church of England, nor suited to
it, and his assistance was not accepted by Archbishop Cranmer, who with Bishop
Latimer, Bishop Ridly, Dr. Tailor, and our other worthy Reformers, had the
Honor of Martyrdom, for the sake of that transcendent Part of the Reformation,
which they had established among us.

This was so admirably well contrived as to be in the moderate way between that
of Luther, and the other of Calvin. They did not carry matters so high, as this
latter, by running from one extreme to the other, That because the Church of
Rome was overrun with Abuses from the Hierarchy; and its Service burdened with
a vast number of Ceremonies, and the outward Ornaments of the Church, being so
extravagant, had almost destroyed the inward Beauty of it, and turned its
Worship into Show and Appearance, and made to affect more the outward Senses of
the People than their Hearts and Minds; therefore he did not seek to reform
those Abuses so much, as to destroy the Ancient Government of the Church, and
utterly to abolish all its Rites and Ornaments.

Which, says the Learned Puffendorf, In his Introduction to History, p. 406.
proved a main Obstacle to the increase of the Protestant Religion, and caused
an aversion and Animosity in the common People against that sort of Reformers,
and increased their Zeal for that Religion which they had received from their
Ancestors.

Neither did our Reformers fall so low in their establishing the Reformation,
as Luther at first did, by retaining too much of the Popish Service, and making
very little Alterations in outward Matters. But they kept an excellent Mean,
and a regular Disposition of the whole Constitution, according to Primitive
usage, before Popery had Corrupted it. Their Business was to Reform the
Christian Church from Popish Superstition and Error, and not to fashion it
according to their own Humor and Fancies, or for the pleasing of others, to
make a direct Opposition to Popery the measure of the Reformation. But the
Method they took, was by Examining into what was most agreeable to the Sense of
the Scriptures, and the Opinion of the Primitive Church, concerning those Rules
for Deceny, Order and Edification, which these only recommended in general to
the Governors of the Church: But the particular appointment of such things,
was left to their Prudence and Care, so as to fit particular People and
Nations, only they were to be careful so to manage the Affairs of the Church,
as not to do any thing in contradiction to those general Rules of the Apostle:
Let all things be done unto edifying. And Let all things be 1 Cor. xiv. 26. 40.
done Decently and in Order.

Agreeable to which, those excellent Men our English Reformers, settling the
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship of our Church, did not fly so high, as not to
allow the Papists to be right in any thing, nor go so low as to comply with
them in any one Superstition and Corruption, which two Extremes the other
Reformers fell into, but ours keeping the middle way between them, did by their
moderate and discreet Proceeding, produce our incomparable Establishment, which
we are now blessed withal, beyond any other Protestant Church.

For which Reason, ours is looked upon as the Center of Union, and Harmony of
all the Protestant Churches in the World. And so accounted by the most eminent
Foreign Divines, whose Judgment and Opinion of it, I should here set down, but
lest I be too tedious, I will mostly Refer to them in the Margin.

Casaubon, a very learned French Man, His Letter to King James the First.
says, The Church of England comes nearer the Form of the flourishing Christian
Church of old, than any other. It has taken a middle way betwixt those
Churches which are amiss, either through Excess or Defect. If my Judgment does
not deceive me, the most sound part of the whole Reformation is in England. And
by its being in Epist. 40. ad. Clem. Salin.
England, he means plainly that part of the Reformation which is Established by
Law in the Church of England. This I quoted in the Sermon, but Sermon. p. 14.
Ans. p. 39.
it is strangely wrested by the Answerer to a contrary meaning.

His learned Countryman the famous Bochart, who was the Glory of the French
Reformed, speaks very great things in the Praise of the Church of England, not
Epist. to Bp. Morley.
only as his own Opinion, but of all the Pastors of the Reformed Religion in
France.

To the same effect speaks Peter du In the Preface to his Fathers Answer to
Perr^n.
Moulin. See also what Characters of Commendation are given of it in those
three Letters written to the Bishop of London, by Monsieur le Moyne, Monsieur
l'Angle, and Mr. Claude, concerning the Nature of our present Differences, and
the unlawfulness of Separation from the Church of England, Published by Dr.
Stilling fleet, in the latter end of his History of Separation.

Monsieur le Moyne, in his Letter to In his View of the Government and public
Worship of God in the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, and showing their
Agreement and Conformity with the established Church of England, p. 91, 92.
Dr. Brevint, and Published by Dr. Durel and Dr. Durel himself.

To which I will add, what Monsieur Ronee a French Ambassador in England, once
told King James I. when he saw our solemn Rites and Services: That if the
Reformed Church of France had kept the same Order among them, which we have, be
was assured, that there would have been many Thousands of Protestants more than
now there are.

If we look farther abroad, and take the Opinions of the Learned from Geneva.
In the first place, Calvin gives a very ample Testimony in Commendation of the
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship in the Church of England At large set forth by
Mr. Long in his Calvinus Redivivus.
.

Next to him Beza, in his Letter to Archbishop Whitgift. Spanhemius, Professor
at Geneva, in his Letter to Archbishop Usher, A. D. 1638. And his Successor
John Diodate, in his Answer to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, when
they desired his Opinion about their Proceedings.

If we look into Holland, we have the two famous Vossius's, the two Junius's,
Grotius, and other excellent Men, giving the like Testimony. And these are the
Men of the greatest Note, who have been of Calvin's Reformation.

Then for the Lutheran Churches, they See the Letter to a Member of the House
of Commons, showing the judgment of Foreign Reformed Churches, concerning the
Rites and Offices of the Church of England, 1690.
are all for us, we have their Approbation and Agreement in Discipline and
Worship, as Denmark, Norway, Sweedland, etc.

So that we may well say with Archbishop P. 494 of his Works.
Bramhal, All Protestants, both Lutherans and Calvinists, did give unto the
English Church the Right Hand of Fellowship. But yet no Luther, no Calvin, Sir
Edwin Sandys.
was the square of our Faith, etc.

And is it not now very strange, That this excellent Church, so great an
Ornament to the Reformation, and so much applauded and commended by all Foreign
Divines, whose Articles and Canons, and Homilies, and Rubricks, so plainly
directing, its being truly Orthodox in Doctrine, Government and Worship, and so
expressly declaring against the Superstitions and Corruptions of the Church of
Rome, from which it is so well Reformed, should by the Artifice, and Design and
Persuasions of that corrupt Church, be notwithstanding represented as Popish,
and by some Ignorant, and other Hypocritical designing Men, be looked upon as
such? This is strange indeed, and what amazes all sincere Protestants, both at
home and abroad to consider of it London Cases, p. 493. Folio.
.

So much I have thought fit to say in a general Vindication of our Churches
Rites and Service, and the use of Instrumental Music, from the Imputation of
Popery, because these things are many times hinted as suspected of it in the
Answer. But I shall now attend to what it says more particularly.

Several Pages are taken up with Remarks and Observations upon the Argument for
this Practice, from the Light Sermon. p. 6.
of Nature, or the natural fitness of the thing: And for saying, The early and
general use of Instrumental Music, seems to argue such a way of Worship to
proceed from the Dictates of natural Religion. But methinks this obvious
distinction will be able to Vindicate that Particular from so great a Clamor;
and show Ans. p. 11.
the Instance is brought by the Answerer out of Dr. Tailors Ductor Dub. to be
little to the purpose. That by the Light of Nature, or the Dictates of a
natural Religion, I do not mean such a Primary, and Necessitous Preceptive
Dictate, as is perpetually Obligatory upon all People, and upon all Occasions,
Necessitate Precepti, as the Phrase is; but that it is Secondarily so, and
directive to all Nations: The natural fitness of Music prompting them to the
use of it, at least to a general Assent and Approbation, as the effect
abundantly shows that it does.

And to this agree the Writers which I have met with upon this Subject, Dr.
Hammond mentions how early it was used by Moses, Miriam and the Prophets,
Annot. in Ps. 150.
upon a Religious account. And as to the Heathen Practice, he quotes Homer,
giving an account of the Greeks usage of Music in the Praise of their Gods,
etc. And just before he has these Words. The universal usage of Instrumental
Music, among all Nations that we read of, gives Cause much rather, to assign
it a Place in the natural Religion, which the common Light of Reason directed
all Civilized Nations to, in attributing Honor to God, than to number it among
the Ceremonies of the Mosaical Law.

Dr. Wetennal, Bishop of Cork speaks much to the same effect. To these I Duty
of singing, Chapter 2d. 3d, and 4th.
add two others, Mr. Baxter calls it an Help partly Natural, and partly
Artificial, And Dr. Hickman, in his Sermon at the Anniversary Feast of the
Lovers of Music, On St. Caecilias Day 1695. in Ps. 100. 1. p. 11, 12.
says, That God is to be Worshipped with solemn Music, is so ancient and so
universal an Opinion, that it may well be looked upon, as one of the Prime
Notions of a rational Soul, one of the fundamental Laws of Nature, which like
the Worship of God it self, we receive not by Imitation, but by Instinct. It
was not inculcated into us by Education, but we sucked it in at our very Birth,
or rather it was infused into us at our Creation. And as the Opinion, so the
Practice of it is universal too, and therefore the Psalmist directs his Precept
not to the peculiar Church of God, but to All Lands, to serve the Lord with
gladness, and to come before his Presence with a Song.

To which I will add the Words of a very eminently Learned Man, who speaking of
Instrumental Music, says, It has the Advantages of being Recommended by
Natural Religion, and of having See Origin Sacr. p. 159.
been required by Divine positive Institution, etc

I suppose I need not seek for better Authorities to justify the drawing an
Argument from the Light of Nature, for this Practice in the Christian Church.
However, I can by no means allow the Case of Sacrifices, Dancing, and
Circumcision, Ans. p. ^.
to be of a like validity in point of Argument, as he pretends: For, to his
first Instance, in the Case of Sacrifices, I Reply, That though Sacrifices be
discontinued in the Times of the Gospel, because the use of them is abolished;
and the reason of their being abolished, is because of the great Sacrifice of
our Savior on the Cross, of which they were but so many Types and Figures.
This Substance being come into the World, leaves no Reason for those things,
which were but the Shadows of him to continue. The same Reason cannot hold as
to Instrumental Music; which is granted by our Adversary, to have been
established in the Worship of God under the Law. But we cannot find either any
Reason for its discontiuance in the Times of the Gospel, or where the use of it
is Abolished, or spoken against by our Savior, or his Apostles, to warrant its
being unlawful now: They all Communicated in the Jewish Church, where that was
used. And as long as the use and expediency of it holds good, as it will do in
all Ages, being an allowed proper Help to raise the Spirits in Devotion; it is
altogether as reasonable it should be continued in the Times of the Gospel, as
well as it was under the Law. Dr. Sherlocks Sermon at St. Paul's, Novem. 22.
1699.
There being such a Sympathy between Sounds and Passions, as are by Turns the
Natural Effects and Causes of each other: And if so, then true Devotional
Music will excite or heighten our Devotional Passions, and for that Reason is
to be continued still, while Sacrifices losing their proper use, are Abolished.

His 2d. Argument, to invalidate the use of Instrumental Music, is by making
it as lawful to justify Dancing in the Ans. p. 9.
Worship of God, as that. And the Reason he draws from the Antiquity of the
one, as well as the other, because Miriam Ex. xv. 20.
and the Women Danced, as well as played with Timbrels in the Service of God.
And David Danced before the Ark, and 9 Sam. 6, 14, Psalm. 149. 3. 150. 4.
devout Men among Gods own People did Praise him in the Dance, etc.

They did so in their Processions, when they welcomed the Ark, which did
signify Gods Presence among them, at its being removed from one Place to
another. And as they went to meet Saul, when they had the additional Honor of
being admitted among the Prophets.

And since the Modes and Circumstances of Reverence in Devotion are alterable,
so as they may serve particular Occasions, Where would the Absurdity lie, if
now, on some Solemnities, a Grave, Sober and Religious Dance was instituted and
allowed by good Authority? Truly I do not see, neither does the Answerer
advance any thing to prove it absurd, but by styling it a Capering Devotion, as
among the Corybantes of old. And although he adds a Confidence of saying: That no
Man of Thought will allow such a Conclusion to pass for Warrantable: He may
find the Author of the following Treatise, who perhaps has as close and
consistent Thoughts as any Man in the Kingdom, is of another Opinion, and gives
such a Reason for it, as I presume he will not be able to Confute.

His 3d Argument is by making Circumcision as allowable now, as Instrumental
Music, because of its Antiquity, and the general Consent of Nations for it. To
which I reply, That though all or most Nations did use the Rite of Circumcision
heretofore; and the Jews most particularly, having an express Command from God
for it. As before Abraham Levit. xii. 3. Genesis xvii.
the Father of the Faithful was enjoined in it in token of the Covenant between
God and his Seed; yet this was painful to the Flesh, far from being adapted to
their Natural Tempers, as Music was, only to be observed by a Temporary
Command, and to last no longer than the Jewish State was to last.

The Institution of which, was to give Admission to the Jewish Proselytes, and
to distinguish them from other Nations, in imitation of which, the Egyptians,
Phaenicians, Syrians, Arabians, AEthiopians, and other Gentiles, might take up
the same Practice, and yet be no Argument for its continuance still, neither
does any one say, that I know, That consent of Nations is an Argument of
validity, when it is nothing else but Imitation, and therefore the refutation
of Mr. N. from Dr. Tailors Duct. Dub. lib. Ans. p. 11.
2. p. 371. is very needless. For the Instituted Rite of Circumcision among the
Jews, which might be imitated by the Gentiles, was to cease of course in the
times of the Gospel, when another initiating Rite, viz. that of Baptism was
appointed to succeed in its Place: But Instrumental Music was not to cease,
nor to have any other Rite to succeed it; neither was it made use of at that
time in the Jewish State, or Heathen, nor since in the Christian, merely
because of the consent of Nations for it: But because it had the Institution of
God at first, the prescriptions of all Ages since; no where forbidden; and by
Experience found to be a great help to Devotion, being adapted to the Tempers
of Men, and to which they have a natural Inclination; wherefore it may be as
useful and fit for the times of the Gospel as before; and being plainly
practiced by the generality of all Nations, Christian and Heathen, may without
any false Logic be admitted as an Argument for an universal Practice, and for
better Reasons to be observed than Circumcision.

The 2d Argument made use of, in Defense of the Organ, needs no Vindication
from the Exceptions of the Answerer; neither do I see an Absurdity in saying,
That the inspired Prophets introduced into the Church among the Jews, the use
of such Instruments as were thought fit by them, being so Divinely Inspired,
Sermon. p. 9.
to raise the Spirit of Devotion among the People, etc. Being so Divinely
Inspired, shows sufficiently it was a Direction from God; and therefore he
needed not have Carped at the Expression; [As were thought fit by them] had he
not left out the following Words [being so Divinely Inspired].

But then for a sure Retreat, he says, Ans. p. 12.
Show as a Command in the Gospel, for the use of Organs in public Worship. So
say the Anabaptists, Shows us a Text to command the Baptizing of Infants in the
New Testament. And a Man who Marries one too near of Kin to him, may say the
same thing, Show me a Text in the New Testament against it. But I conceive a
few Words will take off the edge of the Objection, and show there is no need of
a Text directly to command either of them. For the Reason of a Law continuing,
and that Law being no where forbidden, either directly, or by necessary
Consequence, it is still in force, and then the Conscience is bound to the
observation of it, according to a known Rule of the Canonists, Ratio Legis est
nexus Conscientiae. This is agreeable to the Practice of the Church in those
several Instances, as well as that concerning Instrumental Music. The
admitting Infants into the Jewish Genesis 17. 7. 9. Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Mat. 28.
19. Acts 2. 39.
Covenant by Circumcision, was a positive Law of the Old Testament, and for the
same Reason, Infants not being forbidden to be admitted into the New Testament
Covenant by Baptism, are as capable of receiving the Sacrament of Baptism now,
as they were of Circumcision then; the Reason of it being still the same. And
if this way of arguing from Scripture by just and necessary Consequence be not
allowed, then Infants are in a worse Condition since the coming of Christ, than
they were before; and the Gospel Privileges are now straiter and narrower to
them than before, which is very absurd to affirm. So the State of Marriage
within the Degrees and Limitations of Lev. 18, etc. is not expressly Commanded
in the New Testament, yet is of force still, and the Reason of it is taken from
the Old Test. because it remains still the same, the Old Testment, as to Moral
Precepts, being as much the Object of our Faith and Practice as the New: it is
both together, and not one singly makes the Rule we are to walk by.

In like manner Instrumental Music in 1 Chronicles. 15. 16. 4. 25. 6. 2 Chronicles. 29.
25. Psalm. 149. 3. 150. 4.
the Worship of God, being expressly Commanded in the Old Testament, and not
being forbidden in the New, and there being still the same Reason for its
continuance, does show the Lawfulness and Expediency of it now, although there be
no express Text for it in the New Testament. To exact a particular Command or
Precept in Scripture for a Practice of this Nature, is as reasonable (says the
Bishop of Cork) as to require Duty of Singing, p. 403.
a Text for having convenient Churches, or decent Places to assemble in, for
having Seats in Churches, or Cushions to kneel or lean upon, or for any such
useful accommodation, and honest Advantage of Divine Worship. So if we do not
allow Mr. Burket of Infant Baptism, p. 8.
Scripture Consequences; * How shall we prove Women ought to receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper? or that the Sabbath is to be changed from the
Seventh to the first Day of the Week, etc.

But then it is said, That Organs or Instruments of Music were permitted the
Jews, for the sake of their Weakness, to In Loc.
stir up their Minds to perform their external Worship with some Delight; and
for this St. Chrysostom is Quoted, and the Author of the Questions and Answers;
in Ans. p. 21, 22.
Justin Martyrs Works, for saying this use was to Persons in a State of
Childhood, after the manner of the Law. To the same effect Isidore Pelusiota,
Clem. Alexand. etc. And in the Reign of David, it is intimated, That God suited
such means Ans. p. 77.
to the Infant State of the Church. To which it may be Answered, That these
Fathers do not by their Allegorizing the 150 Psalm, argue against the use of
Instrumental Music Absolutely, but show rather the true use of it is, because
of the Imperfection and Weakness of Humane Nature, and that God condescending
to a regard of the same, did not only permit and allow Instrumental Music in
his Solemn Worship, but expressly commanded it.

And though the Command was delivered by David and the Contemporary Prophets to
the Nation of the Jews, yet it is obligatory still, (at least by way of
Direction to the Governors of the Church) in like State of Affairs, through all
Ages and People, because the Reasons hereof are not Temporary, but likely to
last as long as the World does. So we may make our Appeal to what St.
Chrysostom says as the In Psalm. 150.
Reason of it, with which agrees Clem. Alexandrinus, that it was Instituted and
Paedag l. 2. c. 4.
Commanded rather than permitted, for the sake of Men's Weakness, to stir up
their Minds to perform their external Worship with some Delight --. And as he
goes on, For that God had a Mind to bring them to a great deal of Diligence by
such Allurements. For God considering their Sordidness, and Sloth, and
grovelling Nature, contrived by this means to awaken them, mixing with the
labor of Attendance the pleasingness of Melody. Much like this speaks St.
Basil, and from such Authorities as these it was Basil Homil. in Psalm 1. Ser.
p. 9. 10.
urged, to be as useful under the State of Christians as of the Jews, because
they have sometimes the same Deadness and Dullness, and spiritual Indisposition
in the Service of God which the Jews had, which lack to be shaken off. And
since the Members of the Christian Church, in the performance of their Worship,
labor under the same defects of these sorts, therefore they stand in need of
some such Helps and Assistances to move their Affections, to raise their
Devotion, to shake of their Drowsiness, and to inspire their Thoughts with
Cheerfulness and Zeal, with Love and Veneration when they make their Addresses
unto him in Prayer and Thanksgiving.

Neither does this use for those Reasons, in the least reflect upon the Wisdom
of our Savior, by not enjoining of it, as it is not very handsomely insinuated.
Ans. p. 14. p. 83.
For our Savior himself, and his Apostles, did not disallow of, nor speak
against the Practice of Instrumental Music, when they Communicated with the
Jews who used it in the Temple; as certainly they would have done if they had
disliked it, or thought it improper for Christian Worship. Neither did the
Primitive Christians declare their dislike of it, or judge it unlawful. But the
State of the Church did not admit of it at that time, when Christianity was
under Persecution, nor Instrumental Music, as the Answerer Mistakes Ans. p. 18.
me, no more than the Jewish did, when under the Babylonish Captivity, they
hung up their Harps upon the Willows, and Psalm 137.
refused to Sing the Songs of Sion in a strange Land, to those who carried them
away Captives.

And it is no wonder, that in the Primitive Times of Christianity, there should
be a discontinuance of it. For we know the outward Modes and Circumstances of
Divine Worship, must give way to the exigencies of the Times, and have been
ever Modelled and altered according to the outward State of the Church. And
this is the Reason why Instrumental Duty of singing. p. 464.
Music so slowly came into the Church, both Jewish and Christian. At first the
State of neither would admit it, when the Jewish Church arrived at a settled
Estate, it came in thereto by Gods appointment. The Christian Church remained
longer under Persecution and in an unsettled Condition; and hence it comes to
pass, that as the Primitive Christians took up only the most simple way of
Singing, such as their Condition would admit, so the advances to Art were more
leisarely, and came on by such gradations, as Providence has given way and
occasion for.

And therefore I said, To the Been esse and Flourishing State of the Church,
the Sermon. p. 15.
use of the Organ, with respect to the suitableness of the Times, and
usefulness of the Thing, does abundantly conduce. The latter part of the
Sentence the Answerer Ans. p. 41.
leaves out, and then he takes occasion most notably to descant upon his own
Fancy. I shall not speak of the Fathers Allegorical Expositions of Ps. 150.
without the Literal meaning sometimes, which the Answerer mentions in three
Pages, because their Sentiments and p. 20, 21, 22.
Mistakes in this Matter are Discoursed in the Treatise following. Clem.
Alexandrinus particularly is observed somewhere, to have spoken against Church
Music, but he does it not in pursuance of the Principles of the Christian, but
of a Philosophical Religion then in Vogue; somewhat like that of the Quietists,
or of our Philadelphians, who are for a mental Religion, abstracted from all
that is external or sensible.

I come now to the next thing to be taken notice of, which is, The Antiquity of
Instrumental Music in the Christian Church. To say when, or by whom it was
introduced therein at first, is not certainly known, and for that Reason it is
thought to be the more Ancient and more Early received, for it being generally
used in Divine Worship by Jew and Gentile, it passed insensibly into the
Practice of Christians, as many other innocent Customs, in which they were bred
up, ordinarily did. But to make it savor of Popery, the Answerer likes those
Authors who allege it was introduced into the Christian Church by Pope
Vitalian, about the Year 656, or rather, that it may not want the Mark of the
Beast in the Revelations, it was say the Magdeburg Centuriators, A. C. 666.

He is well pleased if it can be thought to be of Popish Extraction, therefore
he mentions it twice, but yet confesses Some think that this sort of Music was
Ans. p. 17. and p. 32
not of so early an use in the Christian Church. It Is no great matter who is of
this Opinion, but there be Authors of good Credit, who make it to be of a much
ancienter use by several Centuries of Years. The present Subdean of the Chapel
Royal, has these Words, We Dr. Battle in his Sermon. of the Lawfulness and
Expediency of Church music, p. 9.
may and ought to look upon it, as the necessity of the first Christians,
rather than their choice, and that they had not wherewithal to be at the Charge
of those Aids and Ornaments to their Religious Worship, rather than that they
witheld the Expense because they thought it unlawful, or unbecoming their
Assemblies.

For no sooner did the Church begin to Flourish, but they grew into Use and
Esteem: And we read of St. Ambrose, who lived about the latter end of the
Fourth Century, soon after Constantines Time, that he A. C. 373.
joined Instruments of Music with the public Service in the Cathedral Church
of Millan, where he was then Bishop; which Example of his was so well approved
of, that by degrees it became the general Practice of other Churches
thereabout, and has since obtained in almost all the Christian World besides.

Others have referred this to another Cause namely, that as Inspiration in
singing Psalms, (which was doubtless an extraordinary Gift common to the
primitive Christians) began to cease, Instruments and Skill were brought in its
Room, even as Learning and ordinary Means took place instead of those
extraordinary Gifts.

The Bishop of Cork says, St. Ambrose Chap. 2. p. 298.
took up a more Artificial and Melodious way of Singing from the Easterlings.
And Dan. 3. 5. will inform us that the Eastern Practice, had the Sound of the
Cornet, Flute, Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer and all kinds of Musiick in
the Worship of their Idol Gods.

In the time of St. Ambrose flourished St. Basil and St. Chrysostom, who both
mention the use of Instrumental Music as Advantages to the Weak in Devotion,
regarding humane Infirmity. And St. Augustine being a Contemporary of St. *
Lib. Conf. 9. c. 6.
Ambrose, and who as some say, joined with him in Composing the Te Deum, which
at this day is sung in ourChurches, might in all probability be so much moved,
as he says he was with the melodious Hymns in the Church, of St. Ambroses It Is
said he Composed 37 or more. And St. Hilary, St. Gregory and St. Bernard did
Compose! many others for the Service of the Church.
Composing and Improvement.

Justin Martyr, or whoever was the Author of the famous Questions and Answers
Bound up with his Works, Quoted by De emend. Temp. l. 7. p. 684.
Scaliger and Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 7. H. Isid. Pelus l. 1. c. 90.
Eusebius, mentions the use of Instrumental Music in the Church for the same
Reason which St. Chrysostom and St. Basil did before; which Book is Confessed
by all to be very Ancient, and to be Writ, some say, in the Fourth Century, the
Bishop of Cork says in the beginning of the Third. These Authorities must needs
show that Instrumental Music was much earlier in the Churches Service than
Pope Vitalianes Time, and so could not be introduced by him.

However, it is not to be expected we should find this Religious use in the very
Primitive Times: But that can be no Objection against such an use of them now,
for Christianity was not got then to that Height and Grandeur as to admit of
such an Ornament, and we need not stand much upon the early Use of it, since
its sober use is of so great an Advantage in Christian Assemblies, now the Art
is brought to a greater Perfection than formerly,. And since some Men of great
Estates are at a vast Charge to adorn their Houses, and to have the helps of
Music for civil Purposes, it is somewhat unreasonable they should judge the
Expense Burdensome in Sacred ones.

Whenever, or by whomsoever this Advantage was at first Introduced into the
Christian Church, and made use of inter Sacra, it was certainly done out of a
great deal of Wisdom, Zeal and Devotion. And they did therein, but that for
which they had so good a President as David, who did the like in the Jewish
Church, and what greatly tends to Edification.

For Music may be such, and of that Efficacy, as to carry the Mind as it were
into Ecstasies, filling it with heavenly Joy for the Time, and in a manner
severing it from the Body (as says our judicious Mr. Hooker) the Harmony of
Sounds, if we Ecol. Pol. c. 5. p. 37.
lay aside the Consideration of Ditty, and Matter framed in due sort, and
carried from the Ear to the Spiritual Faculties of our Souls is by a native
Puissance and Efficacy, greatly available to bring to a perfect Temper
whatsoever is there troubled, apt as well to quicken the Spirits, as to allay
that which is too eager, sovereign against Melancholy and Despair, forcible to
draw out Tears of Devotion. The Prophet David, having therefore singular
Knowledge not in Poetry alone, but in Music also, judged them both to be most
necessary for the House of God, and left behind him to that purpose, a number
of Divinely Indicted Poems, and farther added Melody both Vocal and
Instrumental, for the raising up Men's Hearts, and sweetning their Affections
toward God, etc.

And why may it not be still an Ornament to Gods Service, and an help to our
Devotion, while it makes our Church an Emblem of the Heavenly Quire, which is
represented as praising God after this manner, compare Rev. 14. 2, 3. with 1 Chronicles. 16. 5, 42. It cannot be presumed we should have read in Holy Writ of
Citharists and Harpers in Heaven, if such Instruments of Music were offensive
to God on Earth; or say there is no Music in Heaven: Yet as one well observes,
thereis a kind of Heaven in Music, and such as raises the Soul to Angelical
Exaltations.

If the Temple Worship, (says the Sermon. Nov. 22. 1699. p. 12. Is. 6. 1, 2, 3.
Reverend Dean of St. Paul's, speaking of Isaiahs Vision just before) be a fit
precedent for the Worship of Angels, why may it not be a precedent for the
Worship of Christians, whose Worship as pure and as Spiritual as it is, falls
vastly short of Angelical Worship, etc.

But yet observe what he said before; Music whatever it be, or how well soever
performed, is of no use or value in Religion, but as it serves the true ends of
Devotion -- And again, All true Christian Worship, whatever the externals of it
are, is the Worship of the Mind and Spirit. It is the Mind only that can praise
God, though the Tongue must Sing his Praises. The best composed Hymns, the most
musical Instruments, the most charming Voices, are but lifeless mechanical
Sounds, till they are animated and inspired by the Devotion of the Heart -- As
far as the Harmony of Voices, or Musical Instruments serve this end, of moving
the Affections of the Mind toward God; they are excellent helps to Devotion;
and it is only their subserviency to the Devotion of the Mind, which gives them
any value, or allows them any place in Religious Worship.

So that we may speak against Vocal, as well as Instrumental Music in the
Service of God, if it does not help us in Devotion. And it is but a foolish
Fancy, to think that Organical Music is a part of Popery, for it is no more
such than Singing is.

And, notwithstanding the Scofts and Reflections are made on the Men of that
Employment, by the Enemies of Church Music, we are told, that Dr. Burnet's
Hist. of the Refor, mation, Pt. 1. p. 526. Fox's Acts and Monuments. p. 1104 2.
60. p. 1107. 2. 70.
Robert Testwood, and John Marbeck, two Singing-Men at Windsor, were as early
Protestants as any, and as constant and hearty in the Reformation; the one
suffered Martyrdom for it, and the other was Condemned to be Burnt, but
obtained his Pardon for his great Industry and Ingeniousness, in being the
first who Composed an English Concordance.

Having now given some account of the early use of Instrumental Music in the
Christian Churches, and shown, That it can neither be Popish nor Jewish, tho
used in the Jewish and Popish Worship. It was used in the Christian Church,
before Popery had currupted it, and before the Reformation, and since, in
almost all Nations and Countries. It came first into the Temple Worship by
Divine Institution, and into the Christian Church, upon just and reasonable
Grounds, as being a proper Help to Devotion, and a great Ornament to Christian
Worship. It was no part of the Mosaical Law, to be abrogated by the coming of
our Savior. It is very advantageous for the stirring up the Affections, and
raising in the People a more Heavenly Temper of Mind, when they are about the
sacred Offices of Prayer and Praise to Almighty God. It will strike a Reverence
and Awe upon their Spirits, and keep their Minds in a grave and serious Temper.
It will both raise and calm our Passions, as occasion requires. Dr. Sherlock's
Sermon. p. 7.
True Devotional Music, will excite or heighten our Devotional Passions; Why
then should any Man think it improper for the Worship of God? etc.

Homily in Ps. 150.
St. Crysostom is of Opinion, That Organs, or Instruments of Music, were to
stir up men's Minds to perform their external Worship with some Delight.

In the Old Testament it served to stir up the Spirit of Prophecy, as in the
Case of Saul, When the Prophets came 1 Samuel 10. v. 5.
down from the high place, with a Psaltery, and a Tabret, and a Pipe, and an
Harp before them, and they Prophesyed. i. e. Their Minds (says the Bishop of
Cork) being hereby quickened, and their Intentions raised toward God, the
inspired Principle in them began to move in the Divine Praise. It is
remarkable, That Instrumental Music alone, is there made use of, as a means to
awaken their inspired Souls, etc.

Where you find that Learned Man, makes use of the same Expression in a manner,
which is so much Carped at by the Answerer, when also to raise the greater p.
59.
Cavil, he makes a notable Remark of false Grammar, of [these] instead of
[this] But it is to be observed, he first leaves out the remote Antecedent, viz.
Instruments of Music, to which [these] in the Sentence plainly refers. So also
to show his Criticisms, he finds fault p. 50.
with this Expression, In the use of Instrumental Music, that it will regulate
untuneable Voices. For the same Reason he may excuse the unprofitable Servant
in the Gospel. But this is trisling with a Word.

Notwithstanding, there may be many other uses of Instrumental Music, which it
might be proper to mention here; for it singly, and without Voice or Psalms
joined thereto, served for raising the Soul toward God, for quieting
tumultuous Passions, and begetting a sedate serious Temper, fit to receive
Divine Impressions, as in the Case of Elisha, ^^n. 3. 13.
being Consulted by the wicked King Jehoram, who being discomposed thereat, and
afterward importuned by him and Jehoshaphat together, he changed his Mind, and
for the composing it when disturbed with Passion, said; But now bring me a
Minstrel; and it came to pass 16.
when the Minstrel played, that the Hand of the Lord came upon him, i. e. the
Spirit of Prophecy, or the inspired Principle of his Soul was stirred up in
him. Josephus says, being Inspired at the Voice of the Music. He directs a
miraculous Course for their Relief, on which Words the Learned Munster thus
speaks; Assertemihi Psalten, qui Sc. Instrumenti Melodi i auferat
perturbationem animi and tumultuarios in me sedat Cogitationes quae Prophetiae
non a imittunt Speritum.
Bring me a Musician, who by the sweetness of his Instrument, may remove this
perturbation of Mind, and appease these tumultuous Thoughts of mine, which
suffer not the Spirit of Prophecy to move in me. This is directly contrary to
what the Answerer has thought sit to deliver as his Opinion, p. 59. where he
flatly denis that Instrumental Music in the alleged Case, was made use of to
stir up the Spirit of Prophecy in the Person mentioned.

At other times, it generally served for the raising of men's Aflections in the
Service of God, for the quickening of Devotion, and preparing their Minds for
it, as now it is used in the Christian Churches, Protestant and Popish, Foreign
and Domestic. It Is much abused in the Popish Churches, but regulated by the
Reformation in the Protestant, and if we will be but consistent with our
selves, the regulating this and other Abuses, is the proper end of Reformation,
and not quite to abolish the use of it, because it has been abused, if so, I
wonder what we should retain.

Luther's Opinion was doubtless for Instrumental Music, but he did not
expressly declare for it at that very juncture, when he began to separate from
the Church of Rome, and wrote his Formula miss. and commun. pro Ecclesia
Wittenberg, because he was not then clear, what in such outward Decencies he
would have settled.

But he then professes, He never designed to abolish the whole Order of Worship
then in use in the Roman Church, but to Purge it from the vile Additions, with
which it was corrupted, and to show its Godly use --

It Is very plain in that Treatise, he never designed to Condemn Church Music
and Organs, but as they were abused by the Papists, for he allows much more of
Music in the Communion Service than we do, though not so much as the Papists use.

And whereas the Answerer says, He is inclined to believe, that he never
approved, Ans. p. 33.
but disliked it. The Reason of which is, from his Quoting H. Eckard, who was
one of his Followers, and Superintendent of the Church of Schwattzburg, for
saying, In his Fasciculus Controvers. Theol.
That Luther numbers Instrumental Music amongst the Badges of Baal, which
looks as if he was no Friend to this sort of Music. But had he Quoted this
Disciple of Luthers more fairly in this matter, and not left out what follows,
I am inclined to believe, he might have been of another Opinion: For, Luther
having reckoned up a large Catalogue of Abuses in the Communion Service, etc.
calls Churches, and Altars, and Fonts, and Chalices, and Organs, etc. The
Ensigns of Baal, but upon what account? He does not call them simply so, Sed si
singularis aliquis Cultus illis affingatur: But if there be any singular
Worship ascribed to them, this quite alters the Case, and for the same Reason
he may speak against Churches, Altars, Fonts, etc. as well as against Organs,
and so would any one, should they be made Idols of, and not as we say, only
Utensils for the more orderly, comely and devout Worshipping of God. To which I
will add what Sethus Calvisius Quotes him for, in Epist. ad Senselium Musicum.
Plane judico, nec pudet asserere post Theologiam Bp. of Cork p. 434.
esse nullam Artem quae possit Musicae aequari.

So for Calvin's inconsistency in this matter; It Is apparent, that he sometimes
speaks favorably for it, when he says, Com. in 1 Cor. 14.
He doubted not at all, but the Christians from the very beginning, Imitated
the Jewish Custom in Singing Psalms. Now that we know was with Instruments. And
in his Comment on Col. 3. he says, Psalmus est in quo Concinendo, adhibetur
Musicum aliquod Instrumentum praeter Linguam.
That it is the Nature of a Psalm, that in the Singing thereof, some Musical
Instruments be joined with the Voice.

At other times he speaks against it, and reckons Instrumental Music among the
number of the legal Ceremonies, introduced into the Christian Church through
inconsiderate Zeal, etc. This certainly is an inconsistency with himself. And
from his Temper and Practice, it may without contempt be truly Comment. in Ps.
33. 2.
said, That he was a Man of an intemperate Heat and Passion, however great he
was as to his Learning and Zeal, in carrying on the Work of the Reformation.

And notwithstanding his Opinion, the primitive Christians in the main were of
another, and did not think Instrumental Music peculiar to the Jewish Economy,
and so might well be revived under Christianity.

Now the Followers of Luther and Calvin, who in all probability, may be
supposed to understand their Master's meaning best, have the general use of
Instrumental Music in their established Churches, as in Germany, Poland,
Swedeland, Denmark, Switzerland, Holland, and others of the Helvetick
Confession; as well as in England.

And though it cannot be supposed, that every Parish Church in those Countries,
should be able to have so great an Advantage in the Worship of God; yet their
Approbation and Desire of it, is sufficiently shown by their union with the
chief Towns and Cities, where in their respective Countries, their Abilities
are great enough to procure it. View of the Government etc. p. 39.
Mr. Durel says, The Reformed Hungarian and Transilvanian Churches have them;
and likewise Trumpets sounding at the Church-doors.

If they have not in those in Piedmont and France, the Reason of it is, This is
flatly denied by the Ans. p. 43.
their unhappiness, being suppressed and kept under by the Papal Power.

Than that it was not in Scotland, is no more to be wondered at now, than it
was not in England in the long Rebellion; none I suppose, will take a President
from them in Devotion, who have now a third time since the Reformation, cast of
almost all Decencies in Divine Worship, and for about ten Years last past, have
changed their Glory, from being an uniform Christian Church, (according to the
Primitive and Apostolical Pattern) into the Novelty of a National Conventicle.
They have not it is true, like the Ans. p. 37.
French Nimrod, Dragooned the Episcopal established Church, into a
Nonconformity, but they have done almost as bad. See Ravil Redivivus. Letters
from the Borders.


But that new Establishment may not be designed to stand long, being Built upon
a bad Foundation: And I have been credibly Informed; though the Cameronian Party
have carried the Day, and got Presbytery to be for the present in the Nature of
an Establishment; yet throughout the whole Kingdom, there is not one in Five
approves of it, or one in Three is a Presbyterian; and among the civilized
Parts of it, not one in Ten; and of Persons of the best Quality and Education,
not one in Thirteen. I shall conclude this Digression, in the Words of See the
Judgment of the Foreign Reformed, etc. in a Letter to a Member of the House of
Diodate to the Assembly of Divines at Westminster; when they had done the same
thing in England, and desired his Opinion of it. What a sad Spectacle is it, to
see that Church trodden under Foot! An horrid Commons' p. 46.
thing ye have done, and never before heard of amongst the Reformed Churches!
We are struck with Horror at the change of the glorious Face of that Church!
May God restore it to its high Estate and pitch of Holiness and Glory again.
And give true Repentance to the Abettors and Promoters of that Change, which is
so Monstrously for the worse, that they may in time make what Satisfaction and
Restitution they can, though not fully, yet to the utmost of their Power, for the
manifold Injuries they have done.

And though I must confess, I am not of Age enough to remember the Transactions
of those Times in England, which the Answerer says go to the Tune of p. 45.
Forty one, yet I utterly deny any Falsity in the Paragraph of the Sermon, p.
16. Relating the Miseries of them; some of which I have felt: My much Honored
The Reveverend Mr. Richard Newte, Rector of Tiverton.
Father being forced to remove his Family seven times, because of that
unnatural War, his Sequestrators threatening to throw his Children out into the
Highway: But being all now gone to their proper Place, without making a
suitable Repentance, or offering a Satisfaction, I shall leave them to
Judgment, without mentioning their infamous Names.

And to return, I know not what Reason the Answerer has, for saying, That Ans.
p. 43.
all the Reformed Churches in Germany, Worship God without Organs.

Many of them it is true, are so suppressed and kept under, that they can no
more have the benefit of them, than they can of the Hierarchy; nor than the
French Protestants could of both, before they were unmercifully Banished out of
the Kingdom: But these are in the Churches at Hamburg, Munster, * Durel's View,
etc. p. 38. 39.
Hessen, Cassel, Dort, Heidelberg, and several other great Places, where
Peoples Abilities, and their Governors will give them leave. So likewise they
are in Helvetia, as at Bazil, Bern, etc. But that they should be any where in
the Greek Churches is much, since they are generally very Poor; for which
Reason, in the Eastern Asiatick, they cannot be expected, because they are much
Poorer.

I will not here omit, what my Bp. of Cork*
Author speaks of, Zanchy particularly, (because he is Quoted by the Answerer,
Ans. p. 56.
against this sort of Church-Musick) and Diodate, two Followers of Calvin.

The former says; On Col. 3. 16. Multiplex and Magnus est usus hujus Musicae,
etc.
Manifold and great is the use of this Music, 1st. That the Glory of God may
thereby be made more Illustrious and August. 2dly. The mind of Man is after a
marvelous sort affected therewith. 3dly. Our Heart being by this Music made
the more Cheerful, the Grace of God dwelling in us, is stirred up.

The same is the Judgment of Diodate, and many of the later Calvinists, who,
though it was the Fate of some, of them, to be necessitated to be without Organs
in their Churches, have declared their Desire of them. And from this Consent of
their Doctors, undoubtedly it is, that Organs are at this Day in use in most
Places of the Belgic Churches, and long Time have been, is as evident by the
Decrees of their Synods, forbidding this use of them upon Political and Common
occasions, out of Divine Worship, and Commanding they should sound nothing but
Psalms and the Praises of God. And not only they, but several of the Pastors of
the Reformed French Churches, who live in Places where they can conveniently
have Organs, have also introduced them, as the worthy Vind. Eccles. Angl. c. 27
Dr. Durel testifies touching the Reverend Rochfort, Pastor of the French
Church at Rotterdam, and others.

And now with what Confidence can the Answerer say, that the Hungarian, Ans. p.
43.
Transilvanian, Helvetian, and all the Reformed Churches in Germany, are those
that do Worship God without the use of Organs) When the direct contrary is as
notoriously evident, as any thing can be. So true it is, that all Sermon. p. 16.
the best established Churches in the whole Christian World do concur with us
herein, who are of Ability to make so great Provision for the better carrying
on the Worship of God in the Assemblies of his People. That except our
Dissenting Congregations, and their Brethren in Scotland, there is scarce any
where any considerable Number of Christians Dissent from us, so as not to
approve of Instrumental Music in their Devotion, though many be so unhappy as
not to have it.

But now our Adversaries being pressed with this plain matter of Fact, cannot
with any Color of Truth, deny the frequent use of them in the Churches under
the Helvetick, as well as others of the Auspurg Confession, (which Calvin
Signed as well as Luther, though they would make the Distance between them to be
ir-reconcilably great) they would seek to evade the chief Design and use of
them, by saying, That although Ans. p. 37.
the Dutch have Organs in their Churches; (...) they pretend not, (as the
Author of the Sermon does) that they are to exalt their Devotion, and the more
to excite their Affections; but they use them to regulate the Voices of the
People, and to direct them in the Tune of the Psalm they are to Sing.

In Answer to which, three things will evidence the quite contrary to be true.
1st. Ex Confesso, he grants in Ans. p. 5^
the Case of Elisha, That this sort of Music was enjoined then, for the
quickening of Devotion. And again, Instrumental Music was Commanded by God
then and Blessed for the exciting of Men's Affections in his Service now; if so
it is very absurd to turn off the stress of the Argument upon the Divine Command
as he does there, whereas it is as clear as the Sun, that the quickening of Men's
Devotions, was by the means, and therefore the Design of Instrumental Music,
and not by the Divine Command which enjoins it.

2dly. The Nature of the thing is always the same; if it had that Efficacy
under the Law, to quicken and excite Men's Affections in Devotion, as it is
certain it had, and for that Reason was enjoined by the Divine Command, it has
not altered its Nature since. And though it be granted, there is no express
Command for it now, while there is none against it, and the Reason and use of
the thing still continuing, it may very well be allowed and approved of, as
serviceable for the same end.

But, 3dly. Matter of Fact is directly against this Allegation of the Answerer.
For, to show that the Design of the Organ in the Dutch Churches, is to raise
Men's minds, and to quicken their Affections for Devotion, and not solely to
regulate the Voices of the People, and to direct them in the Tune of the Psalm.
It is notoriously evident, as I have an Account from some who have Lived and
Conversed among the Dutch, and their Neighbors for several Years, and found it
to be their Practice. For the Organs to Play their Voluntaries for an Hour
commonly before the Service begins, and while the Congregation is filling; and
then afterward when the Organ stops, the People Sing a Psalm, and the Organ
does not Play all that while to regulate their Voices, but did before to raise
their Affections, and to cheer their Minds for Devotion: This is done
particularly at the Hague, at Amsterdam, Dr. Durel nforms, us p. 38.
at Hambourg, etc. At Hassen, they have a peculiar kind of alternation in
Singing their Psalms. The Precentor, or Master of the Music with his Scholars,
who are like our Singing-Boys and Choristers, Sing out the first Verse, with
all the People; then the Organs Play the second. The Musicians and People sing
the Third Verse as the First, the Organs Play the Fourth as the Second, Some
such way they have at Bremen, Cassel, etc.

In many of the Dutch Churches, for the Reasons aforesaid, is the Music upon
their Bells; where they have Forty or Fifty in a Steeple, upon which they play
some taking ravishing Tunes for an Hour or more together, before the Church
Service begins, not so much for the calling the People together to their
Devotion, because they are to be heard but a little way, being small and well
tuned for variety of Parts, to play several Lessons upon, according to the
occasions of the Solemnity and the Seasons of the Year; but the better to fit
them for their Devotion, and to strike a reverential awe upon them when they
come to Church, to raise the Passions of Joy or Grief, to enliven their minds
when dull and heavy, and to compose them when vain and roving, etc.

Next he says, It deserves Consideration, That Organs were introduced into the
Dutch Churches by some Magistrates against the consent of the Ministers. If so,
they showed a better regard to the welfare of the Churches than the Ministers
did, and deserve Commendation for it. But doubtless the Dutch Ministers, would
never have Communicated with the Dutch Magistrates in their Churches, where
Instrumental Music was generally used, if they had thought the use of it
unlawful in the Christian Church; neither can we well suppose their
Ecclesiastical Synods would ever have suffered it to continue so long as it has
done, had they had any interest among their Magistrates or any Authority left
in their own Churches, if they had not thought it Expedient also and useful, as
well as Lawful in Holy offices, whatever is pretended by our Adversary to the
contrary, to favor his dislike of the Dutch Magistrates, for their Adhering to
so advantageous a practice, as he Says against the consent of the Ministers.

I need not now, as the Answer would Ans. p. 39.
lead me, prove the Discipline of the Church of England exceeds that of the
French Protestants Churches, the Dutch, Scot's, etc. than I need prove the Sun
shines at Noon day. And then touching the holiness of its Members in Life and
Conversation. He seems very partial by insinuating as if the vast number of
Debauched, Profane and Atheistical Sots, were of that Communion, and not among
the Dissenters. Truly these are a great Scandal to any Party whatsoever, who
profess so holy a Religion as the Christian: And I believe all Parties among us
need a great Reformation on that account, and have too little cause to upbraid
each other. But yet I knew a very noted old Nonconformist Preacher in the
West, who having sufficiently experienced the Practices of his own Party for
along time, did some short time before his Death, advise his Children rather to
trust a Church of England Man in Dealing than a Dissenter from it.

The preceding Discourse I suppose sufficiently Vindicates the Sermon from the
Exceptions of the Anonymous Letter written against it. I have answered the main
Objections in the Argumentative part, and rectified several Misrepresentations
and partial Quotations which are found therein. Should I have followed the
Answerer in all his Excursions and needless Repetitions, I should have drawn
this Reply to a much greater length; I fear it is too long already. The
Arguments and Authorities I have brought together, do I hope, abundantly
justify the Lawfulness of Instrumental Music in divine Offices to all
unprejudiced Readers, and for others it is in vain to go about to persuade.

And if my Adversary cannot close with As he says Ans. p. 43.
the judgment of his beloved Mr. Baxter in this Matter (who offers the same
Arguments I do but with more Strength he says, p. 12. But why with more
Strength? Had he spoken these things it might have been perhaps with a greater
Tone; but surely the reason is the same when fairly quoted, and at large in the
very same Words) I cannot suppose he will close with the Judgment of such great
Worthies of our Church as the Judicious Mr. Hooker, Dr. Hammond, Bishop
Stillingfleet, Bishop Wetenhall, Dr. Comber, etc. quoted by the Author whose
Authorities and Opinions he thought not fit to take any notice of. But by some
means or other, the Separation must be kept up, and besure there will never be
wanting pretenses enough for that purpose.

To which I shall subjoin what Dr. Comber The forth and following v^rses of
that Psalm. are directed to the Gentiles, to all People in
says in his Comment on Psalm 98. Since the Glory of God is manifested to all
Lands, they ought all to join in Praising his holy Name, nnd that by all due
means which the Christian Church.
may express an hearty Joy, particularly by all sorts of Music, by stringed
Instruments, and Voices, and by Wind Instruments also; for Music is the Gift
of God, and tends not only to express, but to beget the Affection of Joy; it
does compose the Thoughts, calm the Mind, and put the Soul into a posture of
grateful Seriousness, and therefore we shall find it of as early use in Divine
Worship as any where else; and since all Ages have used it so, we may use it in
more solemn Places, and on more extraordinary Occasions without just offense to
any unprejudiced Persons, especially being Commanded in this and other places
of Holy Scriptures.

And also the Judgment of Dr. Gauden Bishop of Exon. I know, says that Reverend
Prelate, In his Considerations touching the Liturgy of the Church of England,
p. 35.
some have been more at discord with the Liturgy, because they find in
Cathedrals, and other great Churches, the use of Music both Vocal and
Organical, have been applied to some parts of it; which certainly is as Lawful
as any Meeter, Psalmody, Hymnology, or singing to Tunes; which was never
questioned by learned and godly Men for lawful in the Worship of God, public
or private, especially that of Praising and giving Thanks: Nay, there is no
scruple but that even in Prayer, and the deepest notes of that, viz.
Penitentials, both Music of Voice and Instruments may be so gravely and
solemnly applied, as may very much fit the temper of Men's Spirits, and the
Spirits of that Duty; when either sad and solemn with Grief, or cheerful and
exalted with Joy: Who doubts but David and the whole Church of the Jews served
God in Spirit and in Truth, amidst those joyful and Harmonious Noises, they
used with Singers and Musical Instruments? The Gift and use of Music is so
sweet, so Angelical, so Heavenly and Divine, that it is pity God should not
have the Glory and Honor of it in his Service, and the Church an holy
Comfortable use of it. That such an Orient Pearl may not be used only in civil
Conventions, or abused in wanton Carols and vain Effusions, which is to put a
Jewel in a Swines Snout: Certainly the Christian Church has more cause to
rejoice than the Jews had, and we see the Angels at Christ's Nativity began the
Church Music with the heavenly Quire. And having given his Judgment for some
discreet Regulations of Church-Musick in the next Paragraph, he concludes, It
was only fit for those Men's rudeness to abandon Church-Musick, who intended to
fill all things with the Alarms of War and Cries of Confusion.

But in requital for the Citation of Mr. Baxter and the Assembly of Divines for
Instrumental Music, he brings two Churchmen directly against it, as he says.
The one Mr. Maxwel a Scottish Divine, and the other Bishop Tailor. I have not
seen the Book * he quotes of Ans. p. 49. Entitled the Excellency of the Chapter of
England above that of Geneva.
Mr. Maxwel, and so can say but little to it; only I cannot imagine what those
Reformed Divines are which he agrees with, that should say, Instrumental-Musick
is neither a help to, nor a part of Divine or Ecclesiastical Worship. For I am
sure, I have Impartially shown in the foregoing Discourse, the most eminent and
learned Reformed Divines, both Foreign and Domestic to be of another Opinion,
and therefore I may doubt of the fairness of the Quotation; or well suppose,
without prejudice to the subject in Hand, that every individual Person of Note
and Learning, may not have the same Sentiments and good Opinion of it which the
generality have.

And as for Bishop Tailor, Duct. Dub. l. 3. p. 670. Fourth Edition.
He is not directly against it, because he allows Instrumental-Musick may add
some little advantages to Singing, and in the same Page says, I cannot Condemn
it, if it be used as an help to Psalmody. (But then indeed he says) It is more
apt to change Religion into Air and Fancies, etc. i. e. When it is not used as
it ought be, and therefore against the abuse of Church Music, and preferring
that of the Voice before Instruments, which most People doubtless do; he finds
fault when it is made so acurate and curious that none can join in it but
Musicians, who do not sing and express the Words so plainly, that they which
Hear do understand, and by this means the greatest benefit and use of
Edification is lost.

I shall not enlarge this Discourse by bringing more Authorities in
Justification of the lawfulness of Instrumental-Musick in Christian Worship.
And I think there needs nothing more be said in Vindication of the use and
advantages of it: For I do not find what is written against those mentioned in
the Sermon do at all lessen their Expediency. Neither shall I need farther to
trouble my self with Answers to the Objections, which I also there mentioned,
as commonly brought against Church Music.

But in Vindication of this Practice of our Holy Mother, the Church of England,
Non habet Deum Patrem qui non habet Ecclesiam Matrem. Cypr.
from those Four popular Objections which are made against it by the Ans. p.
82, 83, and 84.
Answerer. I shall give a brief, and I hope a full and satisfactory Reply, and
so conclude.

One of these we are Threatened with before, and here at first reading being
proposed with an Air of Considence in an Argumentative way, may deceive the
unwary Reader, if he takes them upon Trust; but when examined into, will be
found to be very fallacious, and to carry more of Popularity than Truth and
Weight in them.

The 1st. of them is, That the use of Obj. 1.
Organs in Christian Assemblies for Divine Worship, is Condemned as unlawful by
the Book of Homilies. Now that it is so, is so far from being most plain, as he
says, p. 82. That scarce any thing can be plainer to any one that heedfully
reads that Homily of the Time and Place of Prayer, Part II. (out of which the
Objection is made) but must see the true use of Organs in Divine Worship is not
at all Condemned therein; but only the great Abuse and Superstitious use of
them, as supposed in the Times of of Popery, against which the Homily is mainly
bent.

This Abuse and Superstition, the Church of England is now sufficiently
Reformed from; and being so, as it is plainly expressed in the Homily, it is
very evident, that the use of Organs among other things there mentioned, is so
far from being Abolished by the Reformation, or disliked by the Composers of
the Book of Homilies, that they are by the very same Homily, which is Quoted by
our Adversary, adjudged Decently to be retainedin the Church, as things that
God is either Honored with, orhis People Edified by, which I hope, if made
good, will clearly overthrow this the most formidable Objection against the use
of Organs in the Church of England.

Let us then attend the Place of the Homily, which is toward the latter end of
it, and there we shall find, That after it has inveighed very severely against
the many Corrupt, Superstitious and Idolatrous Practices in the Church Service
before the Reformation; as against the Images and Idols, and numbers of Altars,
with an infinite number of Toys and Trifles, to make a goodly outward Show,
etc. which it rightly accounts, a Mocking and Blaspheming of Gods holy
Ordinance: It comes at length to blame those who refused to frequent the
Parish-Churches, because they were scoured of such Gay gazing Sights, as their
gross Fantasy was delighted with, because they see the false Religion
abandoned, and the true restored. This it does under the Representation of a
Woman thus Discoursing her Neighbor on that occasion. Alas Gossip, what shall
we now do at Church, since all the Saints are taken away, since all the goodly
Sights we were wont to have are gone, since we cannot hear the like Piping,
Singing, Chaunting, and Playing upon the Organs that we could before.

To which the Reply is, But, (dearly beloved) we ought greatly to Rejoice, and
give God thanks that our Churches are delivered out of all those things which
displeased God so sore, and filthily defiled his holy House and his Place of
Prayer.

Where, observe, the Complaint of the Person, who refused to come to the
Parish Church, was not among other things, that there simply was no Playing
upon the Organs there, as the Answerer Ans. p. 82.
would insinuate, but expressly that there was not the Like Playing upon the
Organs. The Words are; Sense we cannot hear the like Piping, Singing, Chanting,
and Playing upon the Organs that we could before. Where the Word [Like] being
Craftily left out, the Sense and Meaning of the Homily is quite inverted. For
the Like use of Singing, and Playing upon the Organs, most apparently refers to
the superstitious Use, and abominable Abuse of these things, which by the
Reformation was clearly taken away; but the Discreet and Sober use of these in
God's Service, was never absolutely Abolished, or ever accounted justly so to
be; neither was it ever the Opinion of the Church of England in the Days of
Queen Elizabeth, (or since) That Organs in Churches are displeasing to God, and
filthily defiling his House, as it is untruly mentioned by the Answerer in two
Places.

For 1st. In the Days of Queen Elizabeth, when these Homilies were Composed,
Ans. p. 82. 83.
and ordered to be read in Churches, it is to be Noted, that the use of the
Organ was allowed and approved of every where; and was in most Parish Churches
in England, not only in the greater Towns, but in abundance of lesser ones, in
some very small Parish-Churches, where either pious Benefactors, or Peoples
Abilities did reach to Maintain them; and this continued so, throughout her
long and happy Reign; and afterward, in the Reigns of King James I. and King
Charles I. which Practice is so manifest, that it cannot be denied with any
degree of Truth; which certainly no body could suppose would have been, if it
were the meaning of the Homily to Condemn them, and to account them as
Displeasing to God, and filthily defiling his House.

II. It is also to be considered, That if we allow this Reasoning of the
Answerer, from the Homily against the use of Organs, by the same we must argue
against Singing too, for that is expressly mentioned with it. Since we cannot
hear the like Piping, Singing, Chaunting, and Playing upon the Organs, that we
could before. Where the superstitious and corrupt Use of either Singing or
Playing upon the Organs, is only adjudged by the Church to be taken away and
not the use of either, or both of them to be Abolished. And indeed I think not
only from thence, but well nigh as much may be Objected on other accounts
against Vocal, as against Instrumental-Musick in the Church, since both are
equally capable of Abuse: But yet both of them may be of excellent use, if
Grave, Discreet, and Regular, and of singular advantage for the promoting the
Praise of God, and the Edification of his People, when skilfully joined
together.

And then III. The Opinion of the Church of England is the same as to this
matter, with what I have said above, as will appear by consulting the
subsequent Words of the Homily, which are these -- This ought we greatly to
Praise God for, That such Superstitious and Idolatrous manners, as were utterly
naught and defaced God's Glory, are utterly Abolished, as they most justly
deserved: And yet, those things that either God was Honored with, or his
People Edified, are decently retained, and in our Churches comely Practiced.

Among which things, our Church does reckon the use of the Organ, wherewith God
is honored, and his People edified, and for those Reasons, was it decently
retained, and in our Churches comely Practiced, both at the Reformation, and in
Queen Elizabeth's time, when it Flourished as much as ever, and ever since when
it did. It Is very strange now, that the Church Practice, which is so clear in
this matter, should be so strangely misconstrued and misrepresented, as if it
spoke against the same thing, which it so decently retains and allows, and
finds so great Benefit by.

But to show farther, That it cannot be the professed Judgment of our Church to
Condemn the use of Organs in it, as the Answerer positively avers it is, from
the Homily, although the obsolete expression of its being delivered from
Superstition and abuse in the Place of Prayer, seems repugnant to its constant
Practice: Take this short Story, The Lord Chief Justice Cook, was made a
Sheriff by King James 1st. with a design of Displeasure, and upon account of
his being of the Republican Party. He to excuse himself insisted on a
particular of the Sheriff's Oath not then repealed, and perhaps not yet,
whereby he was obliged to Prosecute the Lollards for Heresy. Will the Adversary
therefore conclude that he was obliged to Prosecute the Protestants under a
Protestant Govenment, and after so many Laws made in favor of Protestancy,
only because this particular had escaped their observation and was not actually
repealed? Could he think his not Prosecuting the Protestants prevaricating with
the design of the Legislators, who had signified their sense by so many more
and clearer Laws than were to the contrary? or could he think, that the sense
of the Legislators of the past Age were to overruled the sense of the
Legislators of the present Age in a case of Contradiction?

His 2d. Objection is, That if the Obj. II.
Praising of God with Organs be thus Lawful in the Worship of God, then will it
for the same Reason be Lawful to introduce other Musical Instruments, in the
Worship of God, as Harps, Trumpets, etc. The consequence of which is very true;
and at present in some Organs, there are such Stops, as represent Drums,
Trumpets, and diverse other sorts of Music. And where is the Fault, that so
useful an Art is now much improved beyond what it has been?

In his View of the Government and public worship of God etc. p. 39.
Dr. Durel informs us, That at Hessen they Sing Anthems, not only with Organs,
but with loud Instruments, and Violins too. At Bern they have Cornets, and
Sacbuts, which Play in the Churches when they Sing the Psalms. Upon Festival
Days they have also Trumpets in Hungaria and Transylvania, which Play at the
Church Door, etc.

And what if our Church Governors think fitting to introduce other Rites too?
They may do so, keeping within the Apostles general Rules of Decency, Order,
and Edification, and yet not at all Act repugnant to the Nature of the Gospel
Worship. For these Modes or 1 Cor. 14. 26. 40.
Circumstances of Worship being variable, may be altered with respectto
different Times and Places.

But yet I will not call their Piety See the Preface to the Book of
Common Prayer, writ
and Prudence in Question; or be so uncharitable to think, they will ever
suffer the Church Service to be burdened with by Bp. Sanderson. And of
Ceremonies, why some be abolished and some retained. Obj. III.
such a numerous Company of Ceremonies, as shall be rather an Hinderance than
an Help to our Devotion.

His 3d. Objection against Instrumental-Musick, is a Syllogism, wherein the
minor Proposition, upon which he lays the stress of his Argument is utterly
false, and so being denied, will let the whole fall to the ground. For, The
granting Instrumental-Musick to be the most proper means to quicken our Hearts,
and to raise our Affections, and to make us the more Devout in the Worshipping
of God. Will not in the least impeach Christ and his Apostles of the want of
Wisdom in making provision for the Edification of the Church. Although we grant
that they have not Instituted Instrumental-Musick in the Service of God, for
the raising Men's Affections, and quickening Ans. p. 8^.
their Devotion: And it is a gross Mistake to say, That they did Institute Vocal
Music, as the Answerer supposes most certainly they did, and that Mistake will
destroy his Argument.

For the Institution of Vocal Music, as well as Instrumental, was long before
the Writing of the New Testament, and perhaps before the Writing of the Old. We
read indeed of no particular Time, when either of them was first Instituted,
though we may when they were first used. Singing seeming to be as Ancient and
Natural as public Worship.

And Instruments must be owned to be helpful to Singing, where an unreasonable
Prejudice does not hinder the Understanding. Both were in use before the Law
was given; as the Song of Moses, and the Practice of Miriam do testify; but we
have no Reason to think this was the first beginning of them, when the one
Sung, and the other Played.

And both being of eternal use, for the raising of Peoples Affections, and
quickening their Devotion, where conveniently they may be had; does not reflect
upon the Wisdom of Christ and his Apostles, or the primitive Christians in not
having them; but, if he will, it may upon their Poverty, and the Afflicted
State of the Church in their Days, when it was constantly under Persecution,
this denied those Advantages in the Primitive times, which some Prosperous
after Ages had. Ephesians. 6. 19.


The Apostles Admonition, To speak See the Critics. Proprie Refertur ad
Instrumenta, notatque modulationes
to one another in Psalms and Hymns, etc. does not exclude Instruments, but
allows them where they may be had; and then they may well exalt their
Affections in Devotion, according to the Mind of Artificiosas certiscae^uris
and numeris incisas -- Psalmos olim ad Harpam h. e. (...) vel (...) decantatos
fui^^e. Cui rei and Patres Astipulantur, Hilarious, Augustinus and alij. Qui
quomodo Mysticum etiam in hoc Instrumento quaesiverint Concentum, iu Ipsorum
Scripti^ videre est Gualtperus in Loc.
Christ and his Apostles.

I do not here account, and I see no reason I should, that Devotion consists
more in Singing alone, than it does with Instruments; neither is one more
Ceremonious than the other. Devotion properly consists in neither, not in the
Voice or Music, not in speaking or Singing, but in the Heart and Mind; the
Affections of which are hereby raised, sometimes by Vocal sometimes by
Instrumental Music, and most likely by both together, when meet Instruments
are added to make up Bp. of Cork p. 443.
the Harmony, the Efficacy is much greater, and to Minds in any indifferent
aptitude well nigh irresistible.

True devotional Music will excite or heighten Dr. Sherlock.
our devotional Passions; and make us more or less ardent and affectionate, as
our Souls and Tempers are disposed, by being more or less freed from, or
disturbed with contrary Humors and Passions.

His Fourth and last Objection has little Object. 4.
of weight in it, but because he has a mind to ask the Author of the Sermon
this Question; Whether according to the Act of Uniformity, and the Constitution
of the Church of England, the particular Pastor of a Parochial Church is
allowed to introduce new Rites or Modes of Worship into his Parish Church, over
and above what are appointed, etc.

I will give him this short and plain Answer, That I believe he has not: But
then I must needs say the Question is nothing to the Purpose, unless he can
prove that the erecting of an Organ in a Parish Church where one formerly
stood, and never was pulled down by lawful Authority, is the introducing a new
Rite or Mode of Worship, which I believe will be an hard task to do.

It Is certainly a very old Rite which is of more than a Thousand Years standing
in the Christan Church. And how long in the Church of England I cannot tell,
but we are sure it was a long time before the Reformation, and has continued so
ever since, while the Church stood.

And the Prescription of so many Years, for such an use is a sufficient warrant
for the doing of it, especially with the consent and approbation, and
encouragement of the Diocaesan, which is very agreeable to the Constitution of
the Church of England. The allowance of which, is as Authentic altogether as
the Singing our Psalms in Meeter. And I heartily wish, when the expense of the
War is over, that other Parishes who are of ability would follow so good an
Example. I am very confident they will have the like Authority to countenance
and encourage them, in so pious and Charitable a Design, which none I suppose
will distrust the sufficiency of for their so doing. And I Question not but the
benefit and advantage of it will abundantly recompense them for their Charges
and Experience in procuring and maintaining it. Our Experience herein must
oblige us to acknowledge so clear a Truth. And I can with the greatst
satisfaction say, That I verily believe since the late erecting of the Organ in
our Parish Church of Tiverton, and much by the means of it, we have as Regular
and decent, and I hope as Devout a Congregation as any in the whole Diocese.
And for Psalmody, I may be bold to say, much beyond any that I have been
informed of.

And now, I may presume the Reader will be convinced that though as the Answer
says Something more has been said against the use of Organs in Sacris, than
what is Ans. p. 84.
to be found among the Objections in the Author's Sermon; yet a very mean Reply
which has been given by one, will show that what has been farther and more
closely Objected by the Answerer, does not at all invalidate the Lawfulness,
Use and Advantages of them in the Christian Church.

After all, I have one thing to Advertise the Reader, that to avoid prolixity
as much as I well could, writing not a complete Tract, but only a Preface to
one; I have frequently in quoting the Answerer and other Authors not set down
their words at large, but the Sense in brief, referring to them in the Margin;
and that without any the least design of Unfairness or Partiality. And in the
whole I hope my unknown Adversary cannot say but I have treated him with all
becoming Candor and Civility; I wish the Reader could say so too, having kept
him so long from the following Treatise.

John Newte.

The Contents.
I. THe Apostles Communicated with Instrumental Music after their declaring
against the obligation of the Mosaic Law on Gentile Proselytes: and therefore
could not thereby intend to Condemn it as unlawful. p. 1. II. Sodid the
Gentiles also as far as it was in the Power of the Apostles to permit them. p.
5. III. The Apostles reasoned from the Law to the Gospel otherwise than our
Adversaries do now. p. 7. IV. And indeed were to be presumed most likely to do
so considering their Education. p. 10. V. The chief new, Revelation made to the
Apostles, was that the Gentiles might be admitted into the new Peculium,
Immediately without Circumcision. p. 13. VI. This was Consequently a repeal of
the Mosaical dispensation, so far as it was inconsistent with it. p. 16. VII.
Those particulars were indeed inconsistent which are supposed unlawful in the
N. T. p. 20. VIII. This inconsistency cannot be pretended in the case of
Instrumental Music. p. 21. IX. The Apostles Argue even in Abrogated instances
from the Law to the Gospel so far as the Parity of Reason holds. p. 25. X. The
same Reasons which made Instrumental Music fit for Sacrifices in the Apostles
Days, make it fit still. p. 28. XI. The Benefit of Music in holy Offices
thought Natural, and and not ascribed to any Extraordinary Providence. p. 32.
XII. The Influences of good and evil Spirits upon Man, such as may be promoted
or obstructed by Instrumental Music. p. 36. XIII. Such a notion of the
Spiritualness, of our Religion, as makes incapable of Sensible Assistants, as
is fundamentally inconstent with the Doctrine of the Apostolical Age. p. 47.
XIV. The same Reasons that proved bodily worship useful in the Mosaic
discipline, prove it so still. p. 52. XV. The worship of God in Spirit not
opposed to that which is sensible and Corporeal, but to the literal sense of
the Law of Moses. p. 55. XVI. Nothing therefore can be objected to Instrumental
Music that is inconsistent with the Spiritual Nature and worship of the
Gospel. p. 61. XVII. Pomp and Magnificence of the External worship is not
inconsistent with the desigen of the Gospel. p. 65. XVIII. Magnificence not
Repugnant to the simplicity of the Gospel. p. 70. XIX. Sacred Dances not
unlawful, but not therefore necessary to be Restored if Instrumental Music be
so. p. 71. XX. The Jewish Circumcision contrary to the design of the Gospel,
the Gentiles nothing to our adversaries purpose, the Case of neither of them
like that of Instrumental Music. p. 77. XXI. No Bloody Sacrifices whatsoever
were sit for the design of the Christian Sacrifices. p. 80. XXII. No Reason for
opposing the first Imposition whilst Lawful, for fear of Rigours afterward. p.
87. XXIII. The Ceasing of Instrumental Music. Rev. 18. 22. describes a great
Calamity, but does not prove its unlawfulness. p. 93. XXIV. Dr. Lightfoot's
observation that the Temple worship was wholly ceremonious, and the Synagogue
worship wholly Moral, is not true. p. 97. XXV. The Instrumental Music had been
a Shadow of the Organical worship of our bodies under the Gospel, that would
not prove it inconsistent with it, yet that it was a Shadow of it cannot be
easily proved. p. 105. XXVI. All Symbols of those times did not foretell any
future innovations which should abolish them. Instrumental Music could not be
abrogated by the Organical worship of the body being a Shadow of it. p. 108.
XXVII. The Harping in Heaven could not by the Reasoning of that Age, be taken
for a Shadow. p. 112. XXVIII. Incense might have been used by the Apostles
after the destruction of the Temple. p. 120. XIX. The Reasonings of the Fathers
produced by our Adversary in this Cause, are quite different from those of the
Apostolical Age it self. p. 125. XXX. The next Age to the Apostles seems to
have discontinued Instrumental Music, without any dislike of it. The true
design of the Reasoning from the estate of Childhood and weak and Beggarly
Elements, Explained. p. 128. XXXI. So Explained They conclude nothing to the
purpose of those Fathers, or our Adversaries. p. 137.
Errata in the Preface.
PAge 12. l. 4. Popish r. Popery. l. 28. give r. gave Instances, p. 26. l. 13.
Persuasions, r. Pensions p. 31. l. 9. when they had r. when he had, p. 32. l.
13. enjoined in it, blot in, p. 55. l. 27. blot out them, r. That it is, l. 28.
r. Then that it was not, p. 59. l 19. this r. the.

ERRATA.
PAge 9. l. 1. propagating. p. 33. Leaprosy. p. 44. l. 24. (...) l. 25. (...).
ib. (...). l. 26. (...). p. 46. l. 18. a Comma after directly. p. 58. marg.
(...). p. 63. l. 7. divided. p. 63. l. 21. it is. p. 66. l. 15. Testament. p.
70. l. 19. disproved. But. l. 22. [after] Scriptures [add] now also to have
produced the Scriptures. p. 71. l. 12. (...). l. 19. (...). l. 20. (...). l.
24. Bounteousness. p. 73. l. 4. sacred Dancing. p. 74. marg. (...) the rest of
that Testimony of Ignatius is omitted, or false printed. It should be thus,
(...), etc. Ep. ad Ephesians. N. 4. This is continued afterward p. 75. marg. where
it should be blotted out. p. 75. l. 6. Apocryphal. l. 10, 11. Clemens mentions.
l. 15. notoriously. l. 18. improbable. p. 76. l. 13. Instrumental. l. 17.
accompanied. p. 77. l. 12, 13. practiced. p. 82. l. 28. (...). p. 84. l. 19.
[after] to [add] be. p. 87. l. 1. particular. l. 8. Heavenly. p. 88. l. 8.
peace. p. 90. l. antep. Deference. p. 91. l. 26. Deference. p. 97. l 7. and the
voice of the Bride, shall. l. 18. Festivityes, p. 99. l. 4. was l. 25. del.
often. p. 100. l. 16. granted r. grounded. p. 102. l. 4. Antecedent. l. 5.
indeed. l. 12. must. l. 20. of the Divine displeasure. l. 21, 22. Action. p.
104. l. 11, 12. Writings. p 108. l. 23. of those del. it is twice. p. 116. l.
24. elsewhere. p. 118 l. 15. the things l. 25. Communion. p. 119. l. 2. del. y.
p. 120. l. 18. Israelitish. l. 27, 28. joined. p. 122. l. 24, 25. Collector. p.
123. l. 8. indeed. l. 11. Christians. p. 126. l. 1. (...). p. 127. l. 6.
Revelations. p. 128. l. 7. (...).

Concerning the LAWFULNESS OF Instrumental MUSIC IN Holy Offices.
FOR proving the Lawfulness of I. The Apostles communicated with
Instrumental-Musick after their declaring against the obligation of the Mosaic
Law on Gentile Proselytes; and therefore could not thereby intend to condemn it
as unlawful.
Church Music now, I desire no more than what is notoriously true in Fact, and
not denied by our Adversaries themselves, that it was actually practiced among
the Jews, at least in the Temple Worship, with their Sacrifices and Sacrifical
Hymns. Hence I infer, That none who communicated in their Sacrifices and in
Hymns Sung on those Occasions, could avoid Communicating with the Instrumental
Music, to which those Hymns were Sung; and therefore that the Apostles could
not avoid it. For the Apostles, who were all made before it was thought lawful
to receive any into the new Peculium besides Jews, or Proselytes of Justice,
(who are reckoned as Jews by Nation upon that Proselytism) must therefore have
been Jews by Nation, and therefore obliged upon a National Account to appear
Personally before the Lord in the Temple, as all Males were on the three annual
Festivals of the Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles, and to communicate in the
Sacrifices and Sacrifical Hymns, Sung to the Instruments appointed for that
Service. But this they would not have done, if they had known of any new
Revelation forbidding it under the new Peculium. Yet certainly they did it long
after they had declared against the Imposition of the Law on Gentile
Proselytes; and therefore could not possibly have been understood to have
condemned Instrumental Music by those Declarations. St. Paul himself Acts xx.
16.
usually contrived to be at Jerusalem at those annual Solemnities, not only to
bring the Alms of his Nation, which were to be laid out on those who were then
assembled in obedience to the Law, but also to show that himself walked
orderly, Acts xxi. 20, 21, 24.
according to the Law. The last Act mentioned of him in the Acts before his
Imprisonment, and his being sent as a Prisoner to Rome, was his offering the
Sacrifice of a Nazarite, purposely to satisfy the many Myriads, who, as St.
James told him, were zealous for the Law, and to clear himself from the Scandal
of teaching an Apostasy from the Law, and to convince them that he as, a Jew,
thought himself obliged by the Law of the Temple upon the Jewish Nation. It was
therefore impossible that he could, in his former Preaching, have condemned
that as sinful, which he hereby owned himself as obliged to, on account of his
Jewish Extraction. So far he was from condemning Instrumental Music as
unlawful, as that he could not condemn the Sacrifices themselves in Jews by
extraction. If therefore our Adversaries will prove even Sacrifices unlawful
for Jews by Extraction, they must do it by Testimonies later than this Practice
of St. Paul. It must on the contrary appear that all their Testimonies for this
purpose, drawn from his Epistles, written before this time, were manifest
misunderstandings of his Words, when drawn to a Sense, in which it is
impossible that he could intend them, without contradiction to his own
Practice. Indeed they can produce nothing to this purpose, even from the latest
of the N. T. Writings. The Christians in the Acts had separated before that
time from the Synagogue Worship in many Places. But we find nothing there, nor
in any of the N. T. History, that they ever attempted it with relation to the
worship of the Temple. St. James the Just, the Bishop of Jerusalem, the Bishop
of the Apostles, frequented the Temple Worship, not only then when he advised
St. Paul to do so, but also afterward, if we may believe Hegesippus and
Josephus. For he was Martyred there, and the Church of Jerusalem is represented
in the Revelations as having Harpers playing to Hymns. The Archetypal Church in
all likelihood, after the way of Prophetic Visions, according to the Customs
of the Ectypal. And rather the Christian Archetypal than the Jewish, because
there is no mention of bloody Sacrifices, but such as became the new Peculium,
when the Temple was destroyed. Nay, Justin Martyr, admits Dialog. cum. Tryphon.
even in his time, that Jews by Extraction might observe the Law of Moses in
their own Persons; on Condition that they would not impose it on the Gentiles.
So far St. Hierom's Observation is from being true, that the Rites of the Law
were mortiferous after the destruction of the Temple. Thus far therefore it was
impossible, that there could have been any Revelation to the Apostles,
concerning the unlawfulness of Instrumental Music.

BUT perhaps our Adversaries may say, II. So did the Gentiles also, as far as
it was in the Power of the Apostles to permit them.
That the Apostles might allow it to the Jews, such as themselves were; and yet
believe it unlawful for the Gentiles, such as we are now. Indeed the Gentiles
were, by the Discipline of the Temple, excluded from the Sacrifices themselves,
and the Sacrifical Hymns, and consequently from the Instrumental Music, to
which these Hymns were Sung. They were not permitted to come into that Holier
part of the Temple, where the Sacrifices were offered. All Jerusalem was
alarmed by it, when they thought St. Paul had brought an Ephesian Gentile into
that part of the Temple. But the Apostles were so far from adding to the
severity of that Discipline, that they not only permitted, but obliged, Gentile
Christians to partake of that Music, as far as it was in their Power to do so,
whilst the Discipline of the Temple was kept up by such Jews as were by
Principles professed Enemies to the Christian Religion. They admitted Gentiles
indeed into the new Peculium, without the Proselytism of Justice by
Circumcision. But plainly on such Terms as obliged them to depend on the Terms
of Judaism, for the benefits of the Peculium. They were obliged to be one Body
with the Apostles, to be built and superstructed on them, if they could pretend
to any share in the corner Stone. They obliged them to be grafted into the
natural Olive, if they would have any of the Sap and Fatness of it. This gave a
Prerogative and Precedence to the Jews so long as this engrafting lasted,
acknowledged by the Apostle himself, when on this account he reckons the Jews
first, then the Gentile. For what can that Fatness and Sap of the natural Olive
be, but the Mystical benefits of their Sacrifices, and their Temple
Solemnities? The Gentiles therefore, as obliged to Communicate with the
Apostles, must also have Communicated with the Sacrifices and other Solemnities
of the Temple, in order to the obtaining those Mystical Benefits, of which the
Jews were made partakers by those Solemnities, among others, by their Hymns,
seconded with Music, not only Vocal, but Instrumental. How so, if that
Instrumental Music had been unlawful, even to the Gentiles?

A Doctrine, in it self so incredible, III. The Apostles reasoned from the Law
to the Gospel otherwise than our Adversaries do now.
ought in Reason to have very evident Proof before it be received. And what
Proof can our Adversaries pretend to that can be thought so evident? Have they
any express Testimonies of the N. T. that Musical Instruments in the Service of
God are unlawful, sufficient to countervail that notoriety of Fact, avowedly
practiced to the contrary? If this cannot be pretended, have they at least any
evident Prohibition of it, that might make it unlawful for the future, when
this dependence of the Christian Church on the Jewish Establishment was to
expire? I know no Evidence of either kind that themselves pretend to, Well
then, will they pretend to any evident Proof of any other Proposition, from
whence this must necessarily follow? They tell us indeed, that all the Jewish
Law, that was not Moral or Judicial, was in course not only to cease to be
obliging, but also to begin to be unlawful, from the Promulgation of the
Gospel. But what Proof can they produce for this Proposition, so crudely and so
generally expressed? No plain Testimony of the N. T. that I know of. Can they
therefore say, that it is at least supposed in the Reasonings of the N. T?
Where do they find that the Apostles argue, that any thing was to be antiquated
under the New Testament for no other Reason, but because it was prescribed
under the Old? So far from that, that we have many Examples of the Apostles,
and Apostolical Writers, Reasoning from the Old Testament to the New. The
Adversaries of Tithes pretend that Tithes are not to be paid to the Ministers
of the Gospel now, because they were imposed as a Duty to the Levitical
Priesthood. St. Paul argues directly contrary, that 1 Cor. ix. 13. 14.
because the Levitical Priests lived by the Altar then, therefore they, who
Preach the Gospel now, should also live by the Gospel. He reasons the same way
when 1 Cor. ix. 9. 10. 1 Timothy v. 17. 18.
he proves, that because the Law required that the Ox's Mouth should not be
muzled when he trod out their Corn, (that was the ancientest way of Threshing,
in imitation, as it should seem, of their Treading out their Vintage) therefore
the Clergy shoul partake of the Contributions of the Church, which themselves
laid out for the use of the Poor, who were maintained by those Contributions.
So he allows the Reasoning against Christians Marrying Persons of another
Communion, from the Jews Obligation not to Marry Persons of another Nation, in
order to their Propogating a holy Seed. So he also Reasons himself, that, as
the Jews 1 Cor. vii. 14.
did allow that the holiness of one Parent was sufficient to entitle their
common Offspring to the Foederal holiness of Circumcision; so the holiness of
one Parent, by the Rules of Christianity, was also sufficient to entitle the
Children of such Marriages to the Foederal holiness of Christianity by Baptism.
This he supposes, when he thence infers, that the Believer was under no
Obligation of breaking such a Matrimonial Contract, on account of that
Objection insisted on for doing so, that is, of the holiness of the Seed, with
which such Marriages were conceived inconsistent. For himself had Circumcised
Acts xvi. 1.
St. Timothy on account of his Mother who was a Jewess, though his Father was a
Heathen. No doubt, on account of the received allowed practice of the Jews,
whom he designed to gratify by doing so. On the same Topic his Fellow Laborer
Clem. Romans ep. ad. Corin.
St. Clement concludes the Sacredness of the Gospel Ministry, from all the ways
God had used for asserting the inviolable Sanctity of the Levitical Priesthood
against Laical encroachments. How contrary is this whole way of Reasoning, to
that used by our Adversaries, on many others as well as this Occasion?

And yet it was indeed no other than IV. And indeed were to be presumed most
likely to do so, considering their Education.
what was to be expected in their Circumstances, considering the History of
those Times. Our Adversaries may be pleased to remember, that when those
Scriptures were Written, (on which they ground their contrary way of Reasoning)
the whole Church was Governed by the Apostles, whose place of Residence, as of
a Body, was at Jerusalem. They may remember farther, that the Apostles
themselves, as Jews, were possessed with the same prejudices of Education as
the rest of their Nation, in favor of their present Establishment, and against
unnecessary Innovations. St. Paul had Persecuted the Church on account of his
Zeal. And St. Simeon for the same Reason had got the Surname of Zealot. And St.
Peter's concern for the Law he had been bred in, appeared on all occasions. His
Hunger could not make him eat what his Education had obliged him to believe
common and unclean. And he avoided eating with the Gentiles, that he might
avoid offense of the Jews which came from Jerusalem. It also thence appeared
how cautious the Apostles themselves were obliged to be, in admitting
Innovations, if they would maintain the good Opinion they were possessed of,
with their own Charge of Jerusalem, who were also, as St. James assures us,
Zealous of the Law. We have therefore reason to believe, that they would not
admit of any Revelation that was not very clear against the then received
Opinions. Whatever their own private Opinions might have been, yet we have
reason to believe that they would not have ventured to publish and practice
Opinions in favor of Innovation, without such Evidence as as might satisfy
others as well as themselves, if they would preserve the good Opinion of the
Zealots mentioned by St. James, and keep them with their Zeal from Apostatizing
from the Christian Religion, notwithstanding Innovations so contrary to the
Opinions they had been bred in. But where can our Adversaries find any
Testimony so express in the Writings of the N. T. that all the Ritual and
Ceremonial Precepts of the Law were to be abrogated upon the promulgation of
the Gospel, that even the Jews by extraction should be discharged from the
Obligation, under which they had been formerly, of observing them? Whence can
they prove that thenceforward it must have been unlawful by the Law of
Christianity for them to observe them, though with no regard to the former divine
Legislation, which had imposed those ceremonial Precepts on the whole Peculium,
but, on account of the humane Authority, whereby particular Churches may
provide for their Bodies, without imposing on other Churches of equal Authority
with themselves? Whence can they prove, that even Gentile Churches, who never
were obliged by the ceremonial Law, whilst they continued Gentiles, might not
by the Authority of their particular Bodies, resume any of those Rights if they
should judge them edifying in their own Circumstances, without any regard to
the Legislative Power, by which they had been formerly imposed? I know very
well, our Adversaries of the Separation are possessed of Opinions very contrary
to what I have now discoursed. But if they will be pleased to examine them
impartially, they will find no better Authority for them, than the modern
Systems since, and the Schoolmen before, the Reformation, and the Reasonings
of some Fathers, not near to, nor acquainted with, the Originals of
Christianity. But these are Authorities by which they are unwilling to be
concluded in other Cases. If therefore they will be true to their Principles,
they will do well to lay aside these Prejudices, and see what they can find for
those Opinions in the Scriptures themselves, which are the only Authorities
they pretend to follow. But when these Prejudices are laid aside, they will not
find those things so clearly decided there as they have been used to believe.
No, nor in the Writings of the first and purest Originals of the Christian
Religion.

AND yet I do not deny but that several V. The chief new Revelation made to the
Apostles, was that the Gentiles might be admitted into the new Peculium
immediately without Circumcision.
of the Mosaical Precepts were indeed abrogated by the Gospel, and so
abrogated, as that it is now unlawful to insist on them as they were then
imposed. What I design, is only to show that the general way of Reasoning used
by our Adversaries, neither has, nor can have, the least Countenance in the
Writings of the New Testament. This alone will suffice to show, that before
they can make Application to our Case of Instrumental Music, they should first
show upon what Consequence it comes to pass, that any of the Mosaic Rites are
made unlawful by the Establishments of the Gospel; and then, that this
particular of Instrumental Music is concerned in that Consequence. This has
not been, that I know, attempted by them, though absolutely necessary, if they
will reason acurately. For this purpose, I shall desire them to remember, that
the great dispute of the Apostolical Age, was concerning the Coalition of the
Jews and the uncircumsised Gentiles into one Society and Communion of Gods
peculiar People, in order to the partaking of the same public Worship on
Earth, and their being thereby entitled to the Spiritual benefits promised by
God, as his part of the Covenant, to that peculiar People, which he was pleased
to own as his, and to receive into his Covenant. For the Principal thing
designed in those new Revelations made to the Apostles in the Acts, was to show
that the Gentiles were to be admitted into the new Peculium, without any
Obligation to observe the Law of Moses, as it had been particularly imposed on
the Jewish Nation. That is, without any Obligation to incorporate themselves
into the particular Nation of the Jews. This God showed by his effusion Acts x.
44.
of his Holy Spirit on Cornelius and his Companions, though uncircumsised,
purposely to let St. Peter know that they were not to be reputed as common and
unclean, and incapable of joining in Holy Offices on the Terms of the new
Peculium, on that account alone of their not being Circumcised, as St. Peter
has thought before, when he saw the Vision of the unclean Beasts and Reptiles.
The design of this, was not to assert their actual Holiness, or being actually
of the new Peculium without Baptism, as many of our separating Adversaries have
understood it. That was no Dispute at that time; but it was only to let St.
Peter know that they were capable of being admitted into the new Peculium
immediately by Baptism, without being Circumcised. So St. Peter understood it,
who took care they should be Baptized, though he did not insist upon their being
Circumcised, which he would never have done, if he had thought them as much
excused thereby from Baptism as from Circumcision. This Revelation to St.
Peter, was that which satisfied the rest of the Apostles, when they
Expostulated with him concerning his freer Conversation with Cornelius than was
allowable Acts xi. 18.
by their former Opinions. Afterward they were farther Confirmed by the
miraculous effusions of the Spirit on the Gentiles Converted by St. Paul and
St. Acts xiv. 2^. xv. 4. 12.
Barnabas, without any Circumcision that might qualify them for it. But most of
all, by those ordinary Manifestations of the Spirit then accompanying their
Baptisms, even of Persons uncircumsised; nay, which Circumcised Persons could
not pretend to, till they were also Baptized. It being the peculiar Prerogative
of our blessed Savior's Baptism, that it was not only of Water but also of the
Spirit. Thence St. Paul argues to the Gal. iii. 2.
Galatians, as a thing very notorious, that they had not received the Spirit by
any ritual Observances of the Law, but by the Obedience of Faith. And very
solidly, even according to the Notions of those times. For the Holy Spirit
being owned for the Principle of Consecration of the holy People, I mean of the
Mystical, which was also owned for the only true Consecration; it thence
appeared that Baptism alone, without Circumcision, was sufficient for admitting
a Person into the Holy People, which was one of the proper Titles of the
peculiar People, which were in immediate Covenant with the Supreme Being.

NOW this Constitution of the new Peculium VI. This was consequently a repeal
of the Mosaical dispensation, so far as it was inconsistent with it.
was perfectly inconsistent with the Old one. The Old one admitted none to
their Sacrifices, by which Gods Covenant with them was transacted, but only
Circumcised Persons. No Gentiles therefore could be admitted into it till they
were first Circumcised, that is, Incorporated into the Jewish Nation, and
thereby made liable to all the Impositions on that Nation: And that by the
express Command of God, who had excluded all uncircumsised Persons from
partaking of those Sacrifices of the Jewish Temple, and consequently from the
Archetypal Heavenly Sacrifices represented by them, and from all the Mystical
Benefits of the Archetypal Sacrifices which were applied to the Communicants in
the external Sacrifices, as well as represented by them. By the new Covenant
grounded on these new Revelations, the Gentiles were admitted into the new
Peculium by Baptism immediately, without any Obligation to Circumcision, or to
Incorporation into the Jewish Nation. Both of them therefore being confessedly
divine establishments, were to be received as far as they were consistent with
each other. The first was to take Place confessedly till the second was
introduced, because so long it had no Rival that might pretend equal Authority
with its self. Afterward it was to give way on account of that general
Authority every Legislative Power has to repeal its own Sanctions, and on the
general account that where the repeal is not express, the latter Sanction is to
take Place, in Case of inconsistency, as being the Sense of the Legislative
Power, at least from that time forwards. This could not have been Disputed, if
the Jews had granted, that their own Establishment was designed only for a
time. But observing in the Old Testament, frequent mention of an everlasting
Covenant, it was very natural for them to apply it to that of which they were
already possessed, and of which their Education had given them so great an
Opinion. And when this Opinion had obtained, it was then very natural for them
to gather farther, that God had thereby declared that their present
Constitution should last for ever: and that therefore whosoever should pretend
to repeal it, either wholly, or in any part, was for that reason to be presumed
not to be from God, because it was in their Opinion so contrary to his former
express Declarations against any future Innovation. This Mistake therefore, the
Christians of that Apostolical Age Dispute against. They observe in those
Writings of the Old Testament, express mention not of one alone, as the Jews
conceived, but of two Covenants, an old one which then obtained, and a new one
which was to succeed Gal. iv. 24. Heb. viii. 6, 8. xii. 24.
upon the abrogation of the first. Then they prove that it was only the latter
of these that could be intended to be everlasting. That the former could not be
so, because Heb. viii. 7.
if it had been so, there could have been no Place for the latter. There could
have been no second if the first had lasted for ever. Besides, because the
first Covenant is called Old, and that which is Old is ready to vanish away,
Heb. viii. 13. And because the Tabernacle of Moses was made in imitation of
another Pattern, which had been showed him in the Mount. This was observed as
well by Philo as St. Paul. Understanding therefore by the Tabernacle, the whole
Mosaical Dispensation, they thence inferred, that all the efficacy of that was
derived from this other latter Dispensation, as from that which was Principal
in Gods Design, though latter in Execution, and in order of time. Hence it
followed in this Mystical way of Reasoning, (which was indeed the properest way
of Reasoning in explaining Prophecies) that the latter Covenant was to take
place of the former, and to be taken so far as a Repeal of it, as a practice of
both of them were mutually inconsistent. And this way of Reasoning will suffice
for abrogating all that part of the Mosaical Establishment, which is supposed
to be abrogated in the Reasonings of the N. T. and of the Apostolical Age. I
mean with reference to the Design of those Reasonings, that is, as Impositions
on the new Peculium.

THENCE it appeared that Circumcision VII. Those Particulars were indeed
inconsistent which are supposed unlawful in the N. T,
as a Condition of being reckoned of the new Peculium, that is, as imposed on
Gentiles by extraction, must necessarily be taken away before it was possible
that Gentiles, not yet Incorporated into the Jewish Nation, could be counted as
Foederally Holy, according to those new Revelations of the Gospel, of which I
have already spoken. So also it was necessary that the Peculium must no longer
depend on the Temple Sacrifices. For those were not in the Power of the
Apostles, nor could they admit whom they pleased to them. They were perfectly
at the disposal of the Jewish Sanhedrin, who were professed Enemies to our
Savior, and would admit no uncircumsised Person to partake in them, nor could
do otherwise whilst they disowned the new Revelations of the Gospel by the
Apostle. So also that Ceremonial Holiness of abstaining from certain sorts of
Meats, could no longer be required in order to the Holiness of the Peculium.
For those had never been required from any Nation besides that of the Jews, and
therefore could not be expected from the Gentiles, when they were no longer
obliged to an Incorporation into the Jewish Nation, in order to their being
entit'led to the highest Benefits of the Peculium. Nor could the Jews insist on
these things as requisite for their communicating with the uncircumcised
Gentiles in Holy Offices, if themselves would partake of the mystical Benefits
of the new Peculium, on its own Terms. Their doing so made the Wall of
Partition, mentioned by the Apostle; and made it impossible for them to
coalesce into one Body with the uncircumsised, as the new Revelation of the
Gospel requires. It were easy by this Reasoning to account for all the
particulars of the old Mosaical Institution, that are supposed unlawful in the
Gospel.

IF this which I have given be the VIII. This inconsistency cannot be pretended
in the Case of Instrumental Music.
true Original how it came to pass that some Mosaic Rites have been abrogated
by the Gospel; there will thence follow no pretense for condemning them as
universally unlawful now, for no other reason but because they were Duties then
upon positive, as well as upon Moral and universally obliging, Reasons. All
that will follow from this Topic will be, That only those Particulars of the
Mosaic Institution will be thus affected, that are inconsistent with the
Gentiles free admission to the highest Privileges of the new Peculium,
immediately without Circumcision or Proselytism of Justice; and which being
admitted would have made that breach of Communion which was principally
disputed against by the Apostles and Writers of the Apostolical Age. Those
could not be things wherein the uncircumsised Gentiles were already agreed, as
they were in the use of Instrumental Music, in their Sacrifical Hymns, and in
their public Solemnities. How could that have made a breach between them,
wherein they did not differ? How could that have excluded Gentiles from the new
Peculium, without submitting to the whole Law of Moses, which was already
practiced by the Gentiles, before they concerned themselves to know what had
been required by Moses? How could that have been taken for an Imposition which
they had freely taken upon themselves, without any regard to the practice of
the Jews? Then all that Dispute was concerning what might be lawfully imposed
on the Gentiles, not concerning what may be lawfully practiced by the Jews by
Nation. This is so certain, that even the most indisputably abrogated instance
of Circumcision, and the Temple Sacrifices were used by the Apostles
themselves, as being Jews by Extraction; by St. Paul himself, the most zealous
Acts xxi. 26
Opposer of those very same Rites, as imposed on the Gentiles; and that after
he had said and done so many things against their Imposition. If therefore even
these Particulars, neither were, nor could be thought unlawful, How can our
Adversaries gather it concerning those many other things against which they can
pretend no other Exception but their originally Mosaic Imposition? The Apostle
himself rather implys that some of the Mosaic Institutions did, and ought to,
remain according to the design of the Gospel. What else can he mean? when
applying that Passage of Haggai, concerning the state of the Gospel, that That
God would shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven, he subjoins the event of
that shaking, and tells us, that it signified the removing of those things that
are shaken, as of things that are made, that Hebr. xil. 26, 27.
those things which cannot be shaken may remain. What this shaking means may
easily be understood from what I have already Discoursed. That Convulsion
depended on the inconsistency of the Doctrine of the Gospel, by which the
Gentiles were admitted into the new Peculium without any Incorporation into the
Jewish Nation, with the Mosaic Establishment, whereby the Peculium was by God
himself confined to the Jewish Nation, and could not be Communicated to the
Gentiles on any other Condition than Proselytism of Justice and Incorporation.
This new Establishment must in course remove all these Mosaical Constitutions,
which either supposed or caused this confinement. But all those other Mosaic
Constitutions as well Positive as Moral, which were consistent with this
enlargement of the Peculium, could not therefore be thought shaken or removed
by it. If therefore they were not shaken, what can hinder by the Apostles
reasoning, why they should not still remain? Possibly not as to the obligation
which they had received from the Mosaic Sanction; yet so, at least, as to
continue in their own native indifferency, which may qualify them for a new
Ecclesiastical Sanction by the Power of the Church. Such an Ecclesiastical
Sanction would plainly suppose no antecedent Obligation from the Law of Moses,
and therefore could be no Imposition on the liberty of the Gentiles, whilst it
pretended to no other right of Obligation than what it received from their own
Act. Nor is there any thing in this Obligation inconsistent with this true
notion of the new Peculium, nor repugnant to the union of Jews and
uncircumsised Gentiles in one Body, on the terms of the new Peculium. Of this
nature is the Subject of our present Dispute, I mean Instrumental Music, as
imposed not by a Mosaical but an Ecclesiastical Authority. I cannot for my
part, foresee any solid Consequence from this way of Reasoning of the Apostles,
that can possibly affect it.

SO far the Apostles were from admitting IX. The Apostles argue even in
abrogated Instances from the Law to the Gospel, so far as the parity of reason
still holds.
this way of reasoning used by our Adversaries, of making even indifferent
things unlawful, upon no other account but that of their former Imposition, in
things unconcerned in the change made by the Gospel; that even where there had
been inconsistency, and therefore a change was really made, they yet allow a
reasoning from the abolished Constitution of the Law, to that which answered it
under the Gospel, as far as the Case might be proved equal. Circumcision had
been appropriated to the old Peculium, and had therefore Baptism substituted
instead of it, of which the uncircumsised Gentiles were as capable as the
native Circumcised Jews. Yet I have shown the Apostle argues from the Holiness
of the Seed in Circumcised, to the Holiness of the Seed of Baptized Persons. So
the Gospel Priesthood was not confined to the Tribe of Levi, or the Family of
Aaron, as that was instead of which it was substituted. Yet in other things I
have given instances of Arguments from the Levitical to the Evangelical
Priesthood, allowed by the Apostles and Apostolical Persons. So the
Eucharistical Sacrifice, in which Gentiles also might Communicate, succeeded
the bloody Sacrifices of the Temple, which had been appropriated to the Jews
alone: Yet even here also St. Paul reasons from one to the other, 1 Cor. x. 18.
and St. Clemens also in his unquestionable Epistle to the Corinthians. None can
doubt but the precept of not muzzling the Mouth of the Ox that trod out the
Corn was Levitical and Temporary. Yet the Apostle argues thence also, that the
Presbyters also should partake in the Ecclesiastical Alms which they ministered
to those who were to be maintained by them. If this way of arguing be designed
to prove a Duty in a matter so arbitrary as this is, concerning the Persons who
were to partake of the public Contributions; it will follow that even in these
abrogated Particulars, they still judged it to be the Divine Pleasure that the
old Sanction should still continue, where the Reason holds the same. Had the
Reasons been, without any regard to the Legislator, drawn from the nature of
the things themselves; such might have proved the things rather Prudent than
Obliging, and rather fit to be made Laws than to have had any Sanction from the
former Legislation. But the Reasoning here insisted on, why the Ox should not
be muzzled when he trod out the Corn, is to show the Sense of the Legislator.
Does God take care 1 Cor. ix. 9. 10.
for Oxen? Or says he it not for our sakes? Why so, if God had not been to
have been regarded in the Duty here insisted on? If as a Lawmakers, then even
the Sanction will continue, by which such Laws as these obliged formerly: So
they will still oblige as Laws, whilst the same reason continues for which God
was at first pleased to impose them. If as an infallible Judge of Reason, still
it will follow, that whilst the Reason holds, they will be so far from being
made unlawful, in such particulars wherein the Reason does indeed hold, that
their performance will still be acceptable to God, though not commanded by him.
Either way of Explication is sufficient to overthrow this whole way of
reasoning, as managed by our Adversaries.

BUT what if we should turn this way of reasoning, used by the Apostles,
against X. The same Reasons which made Instrumental Music fit for Sacrifices
in the apostles days, make it fit still.
our Adversaries? What if we should conclude, That because Instrumental Music
was used then in their Temple Sacrifices, therefore it should still be at least
fit and acceptable in our present Eucharistical Sacrifices? I cannot foresee
what they could say, why we should not have reasoned as the Apostles did; or
how the Apostles could blame us for doing so; or why our Adversaries should
blame us, who profess themselves such Enemies of Impositions, if they did not
impose upon us more than the Apostles, in so easily condemning matters of this
nature as unlawful. They can pretend no more condemnation in other places of
the Writings of the Apostles in this Case, than in those others wherein the
Apostles themselves allow this way of Arguing. And I know no reason from the
natures of the things themselves, that even our Adversaries can pretend to be
Temporary, or that will not make Instrumental Music as suitable to our present
Worship, as it was to that of the Apostles. No sort of Sacrifices were more
proper for Hymns than those that are Eucharistical, and such all ours are now,
but were not so in the Days of the Apostles. And the use of Hymns neither is,
nor can be denied by our Adversaries, as well in the private Synaxes of the
Apostolical Christians, as in the Worship of the Temple. The Hymn to Christ as
a God, in Pliny, appealed to in the latter end of the second Pli. l. x. Ep. 97.
Century, as a very early evidence of the belief of his Deity, seems to have
been joined with the Eucharist. For Pliny tells us, on the same occasion, of
the Covenant the Christians entered into against all the liberties used by
wicked Persons. And the public Singers are mentioned in the earliest distinct
Accounts we have of their Offices, not as newly introduced, but as actually
obtaining without any memory of a late Original. Had the reasons of the things
been all that had been requisite for raising of the Affections, I cannot
conceive any need our Adversaries can pretend for Singing: That does no
otherwise contribute to the raising of the Affections, than as the assistance
and Improvement of the Imagination may be supposed to contribute to it. The
Singing does not add a new Reason, nor improve the old ones, why the Affections
should be raised. But however they do dispose the Affections to follow Reason,
more readily and more vigorously than they would if they had not the assistance
of a favorable Imagination; and that by the Nature of the things themselves;
and in that regard, Music Instrumental also was acknowledged to have the same
influence that Singing had by the Imagination over the Affections; and to add
to the advantages of Singing Vocally: So it was that David's playing on the
Harp cured Saul of the evil Spirit, by curing that Melancholy which disposed
him to receive the Influences of the evil Spirit: So it was that the like use
of Instrumental Music disposed Elisha for the Influences of the good Spirit,
by composing that Passion which his Zeal against the Idolatry of the King of
Israel had put the Prophet into; it made him capable of being acted by the
Spirit of Prophesy. For cheerfulness of Temper is one of the Dispositions
required by the Rabinical Jews themselves, for fitting Men for Prophecy. That
may possibly be the Reason why the Scriptures mention Instrumental Music as
received in the Schools of the Prophets, especially when they were actually
Prophesying; as it should seem 1 Samuel x. 5. 1 Chr. xxv. 1.
to dispose them for the freer Influences of the Divine Spirit. The Singing
Hymns to such Instruments is called Prophesying, in the places now mentioned.
So far the nature of the Spiritual Worship of the Gospel is from superseding
this assistance of Instrumental Music, as our Adversaries would have us
believe, that on the contrary it contributed to it, if we would rather believe
the Scriptures and the actual Opinions of the sacred Writers. So Miriam
Prophesied with a Timbrel, the Instrument most used by Women: So Samuel's
Disciples, the Sons of the Prophets, the Candidate expectants of that sacred
Gift: They also Prophecy with a Psaltery, a Tabret, and a Harp, and a Pipe: So
the ordinary Officers in the Jewish Liturgicks, were to Prophecy with Harps
and Psalteries, and Cymbals according to the order of King David, 1 Chr. xxv.
1; 2. And Jeduthun is said to Prophecy with a Harp, to give Thanks, and to
Praise the Lord, v. 3. Why should we therefore think it strange, that the
Church of Jerusalem in the Revelations, should be represented Rev. v. 8. xiv.
2. xv. 2.
Harping with the Harps of God? We see it was the proper Employment of
Prophets, according to the sense of the sacred Writers; that is, of those
wherein that Church of Jerusalem did so much abound. How could those Sacred
Writers judge Instrumental Music improper for a Spiritual Dispensation, when
they thought it so useful in an ordinary way, to dispose Men for the receiving
the Spirit of Prophecy.

IF our Adversaries would learn from XI. The Benefit of Music in Holy Offices
thought natural, and not ascribed to any extraordinary Providence.
the Scriptures, they should reason from the Opinions received in the Ages of
the Sacred Writers, rather than from prejudices imbibed from Modern Systems.
That would be the way to reason as they did then, and the best expedient for
finding the Sense of them who were used to that way of Reasoning. They pretend
that all the efficacy of Instrumental Music then, was due to a particular
Interposition of God seconding his own Institution. Had the Institution been
singular and different from the Customs of other Religions, or the event other
than what would have been expected, according to the opinions then received
among those who had no regard to the Mosaical Institution; there had been
indeed some pretense for ascribing the Benefit rather to the extraordinary
Interposition of God, than to the Natures of the things themselves. The jealous
God, who will not give his Glory to another, makes choice of the most unlikely
means in the opinions of those with whom he has to deal, when he designs to
challenge the Glory of the event, entirely to himself. So it was when he was
pleased to restore the Sight of him that was born Blind, by anointing his Eyes
with Clay: So when Naaman was to be Cured of his Leaprode by Washing in Jordan,
rather than in Abana and Pharpar, the Rivers of his own Country: So when he
reduced the Numbers of Gideon's Army, from many Thousands to 300. Here, on the
contrary, those very means are used, which even the Heathens themselves had
agreed on as most naturally conducive to the same end, and which least needed
an extraordinary Interposition of Providence, in the Opinions of those who were
to use them. It was easy to foresee that they would ascribe the event to the
natural Course, of second Causes themselves, and that, in the way of reasoning
suited to their Capacities, they would also think they had reason to do so, and
that Gd intended they should do so, whilst he signified nothing to the
contrary: And therefore God must have indeed intended they should think so, if
he did at all intend they should understand him rightly. And who can think
Saul's Servants particularly inspired when they recommended a Musician to their
Master, as an expedient against the Ailings caused by the evil Spirit? The
reason in all likelihood why they recommended it, was because they knew it a
likely Cure of Melancholy, and they believed withal, that when the Melancholy
was cured, the evil Spirit who was confined to Rules, could not exercise his
Malignity on a subject indisposed to receive his Influences. This is a plain
Account how the thing might be done, in their Opinions, by Instrumental Music,
as an ordinary means, without any pretense to Revelation, which they neither
did, nor had any reason, to pretend to. The like Account seems most probable of
the Case of Elisha, when he also made use of Instrumental Music for disposing
himself to receive the Spirit of Prophecy. He pretends no Revelation for it;
nor indeed could he do so, if he was yet indisposed for it, till he had used
the remedy of Music. For if he had been capable of Inspiration without the use
of Music, he might as easily have answered the principal Question demanded of
him, as have used one Revelation for an expedient to qualify him for a second.
But it has appeared that the practice was already received in the Schools of
the Prophets, which might easily put Elisha in mind of it, when he found his
case required it. And for its being received in those Schools, no divine
Revelation is, that I know, so much as pretended. The most likely original
therefore, is its natural conduciveness to dispose the Mind for being acted by
Prophetic Inspirations. The Heathens used it for that end, purely on account
of its natural usefulness for that purpose. The Priests of Cybele, the Galli,
advanced their Enthusiasm by the use of Cymbals: So did the Bacchae in the
Rites of Bacchus, who for the time were transported besides themselves, and
knew not what they did, so absolutely they were under the power of that emotion
of Mind which they believed Prophetic. They brought themselves to that
Condition among other means, by this also of Instrumental Music. The Passage
of Nero, ridiculed by Persius, is famous to this purpose: Torva Mimalloneis
implerunt cornua bombis. To the same purpose, I conceive, may be referred those
Passages of the New Testament that require our rejoicing always; that forbid
our grieving, as well as quenching, of the Holy Spirit; that require perfect
Concord between married Persons, that their Prayers might not be hindered. By
all these things it appears, that, in the received Opinions of those Ages,
Cheerfulness of Temper was thought to dispose for the Influences of the good
Spirit, and Melancholy for the Influences of the evil one; and that Music
Instrumental, as well as Vocal, contributed to promote that Cheerfulness, and
to remove that Melancholy. These Opinions, being supposed and alluded to in the
Scriptures, ought therefore to be taken for the measures of Interpreting them.
And what is there in this Hypothesis, that can, in Reason, be supposed
Temporary? Can we suppose God to have made new Rules, for the Influences of the
two Spirits now, that were not in the Age of the Apostles? Or, supposing the
Rules the same, Can we suppose any Change in the Nature of Instrumental Music,
that may now make it unuseful, for those very same ends, for which it was then
believed so very Advantageous?

OUR Adversaries, who have been always XII. The Influences of Good and Evil
Spirits upon Man, such as may be promoted or obstructed by Instrumental Music.
more intent on the Words, than the Reasonings of the Scriptures, have not, I
think, so well considered the Rules of Providence, by which both Spirits are
confined in Acting upon Mankind. The rather, because they are rather supposed
than delivered in express Terms. But God does not deal with Mankind
Arbitrarily, nor suffer Spirits to Influence him otherwise, than may be
consistent with that Free will that he has given him, in order to the making
him capable of Rewards and Punishments, and of Political Government. That the
good Spirit suggests good Thoughts, and that the evil Spirit tempts by
injecting evil ones, is undoubtedly supposed in the Scriptures. But the manner
how this is done, is not so clearly Explained. Yet it is certain, that neither
of them do it to the uttermost of their Natural Power. The Holy Spirit being
Omnipotent, could do more Good; and the Evil Spirit, though Finite, yet being so
much Superior to Man, could do more Mischief than we see is done by them. They
might assume Bodily Shapes, and propose their Arguments as visibly to us, as we
do to one another. But this is not the way of Conversation observed. They might
impress Ideas immediately upon our Imagination, if God had been pleased it
should have been so. But that had been too great an Imposition upon our Humane
Liberty. As for that immediate Conversation with them which separated Spirits
have with each other, of that we are incapable whilst we our selves are in
Bodies. Even our superior Soul, uses the Imagination, and is incapable of
framing any distinct Ideas of things that are not Material. The way therefore
remaining, how Spirits may Influence us, without violence to our Liberties, is
by their Exciting or Compounding Ideas already in us on fit Occasions, when
external Objects are before us, that may Invite us to what is Good, or Ensnare
us to what is Evil. So the Inspiration of the Good Spirit, is called (...), a
putting us in Mind of what we knew before, on the Season wherein we are to
Practice. For the adapting Thoughts to the Seasons of Practice, is that upon
which the Event does principally depend. This therefore the Good Spirit may do
undoubtedly, as well in Ideas of the Understanding, as of the Material
Faculties. And there was no sort of Prophecy, wherein both sorts of Faculties
were not concerned. Prophetic Dreams had their principal Scene in the
Imagination. Prophetic Visions not only there, but also perhaps in the
External Senses. The Bath Col. was to the Sense of Hearing. Even the Mosaic
Degree of Prophecy, was a Conversation with the Deity, under a sensible
Representation, though not of any particular living Creature that might have been
Represented by an Image. The Jews therefore do reasonably require in him who
would be disposed for the Spirit of Prophecy, a lively Imagination, as well as
a good Understanding. So that no good Man who wants either of them, is by his
Goodness alone, disposed, as is requsite, for receiving the Gift of Prophecy.
But the Imagination requisite for the Influences of the Good Spirit, was such
as was Calm and Sedate, free from tumultuous Passions, and ungovernable
Fancies, and consistent with the most accurate use of Reasoning. This therefore
was the Reason, why the first Christians imputed the Heathen Divinations of the
Pythiae, the Sibyls, the Bacchae, etc. rather to Enthusiasm and malignant
Spirits, than to a Gift of truly Divine Prophecy, because of the Brutish
Transports, and indecent, undisciplined, Behavior, into which those Persons
were driven, when they surrendered themselves to the Conduct of those pretended
Deities. And what difficulty is there, why grave and grateful Tunes of
(Instrumental as well as Vocal) Music might not contribute to the allaying the
Passions, and to invigorate the Imagination to such a degree, as would still be
consistent with Decorum, and perfect Subjection to the Nobler Faculties, which
this Divine Principle kept in possession of their Native Right of Government?
On the other side, the Evil Spirits were not believed, in the Apostles Days, so
pure from Matter as they have been since the modern Aristotelean Philosophy,
received at Second-hand from the Spanish Arabians, has prevailed. It was rather
the Grossness of their Aerial Clothing that was then thought to Confine them
to these Aerial Regions, and to make them need the Nidour of Bloody Sacrifices
for their Nourishment and Delight, and that inclined them to that Malignity of
Nature, that made the Devils; that ungovernable Pride, that Envy at the
Prosperity of others, that Relish of Cruelty, and doing ill Offices to their
fellow Creatures, which are the Characteristicks of those wicked Beings. This
being supposed, must make them incapable of Acting the reasonable, but only the
inferior material, Faculties. Their Power therefore was conceived to be only
in the Imagination, and the material Faculties depending on it. These being
suited to their degenerated Nature, they can therefore Act upon them as far as
the Rules of Providence shall give them leave, for the trial of free Agents, in
order to Rewards or Punishments. Their way of Tempting therefore, is to awaken
those Ideas which lie Dormant in the Imagination and sensitive Memory, as the
effects of vicious Inclinations, confirmed by frequently repeated vicious Acts.
I mean, to awaken them at the Presence of vicious Objects, and suitable
Opportunities. This may be allowed them, if they be permitted to Act upon the
Brain, the Seat of the Imagination, and the other material Faculties and Ideas
which raise the Passions, and make them Headstrong, and consequently affect
the whole Body, in the Disturbances following upon them. Accordingly Madnesses,
which arise from Disorders of the Brain, were usually ascribed to Devils in
those Times. The Excellent Mr. Mead, has long since made this Observation on
those Words of the Evangelist: He has a Devil, and is Mad; why hear ye him?
Joh. x. 20. So having a Devil, is the same with being Mad, in the Language of
that Age. Thou have a Devil: Who goes about to kill thee? Joh. vii. 20. And
when the Jews charge our Savior with Inconsistency in his Discourse, they tell
him that he had a Devil, Joh. viii. 48. but more plainly v. 52. Now we know
that thou have a Devil; Abraham is dead, and the Prophets, and thou say, If
a Man keep my saying, he shall never taste of Death. So St. John x. 21. These
are not the Words of one that has a Devil. From the Coherence of our Savior's
Discourse, they infer that he had no Devil. The same Opinion is represented by
St. Justin Martyr, as the Sense of the Christians of his Age, that Mad Persons
Apology.
were believed to be Daemoniacks. As therefore King Saul was Punished by having
an evil Spirit sent him from the Lord; so also, frequently in the Poets, the
ancientest Writers of the Greeks, and the Personators of the eldest Antiquities
they knew of, it is mentioned as the Punishment of piacular Persons; that they
were delivered over to Furies, and by them alienated from their Senses, and
driven into Madness. So in the Case of Athamas, of Hercules, of Alcmaeon, of
Orestes, etc. And their Cure was usually by Expiations and Offices of Religion,
rather than Physic, which proved the Aylings to be caused immediately by
Spirits. Yet sometimes also by Physic, which proved withal, that the
Disposition of the matter was removeable by Natural Expedients, and that when
it was so, the Evil Spirits had no longer Power to molest those who were so
Cured, by the Rules prescribed to them by Providence. This Hippocrates proves
particularly in the Case of the Morbus Sacer. Besides these de Morb. Sac.
Distractions of Mind, there were also other Aylings and Diseases inflicted by
way of Punishment on Criminals by the Sentence of God, and the Intervention of
Evil Spirits. Such were the Falling Sickness, such were Aylings returning with
the Changes of the Moon, such were Leprosies, such several sorts of Fevers and
Agues, such all those Molestations which were removable by Charms, and the like
suspected means of Covenants and Intercourse with Evil Spirits. For it was the
received Opinion, as Tertullian shows, that the Devils could Cure no Maladies
but such as had been caused by them, by ceasing to use the Means that had
caused them, when they were adress'd to in the ways appointed by themselves,
and permitted by Providence for the Punishment of those who relied on them, and
maintained such unlawful Intercourse with the Spirits that had appointed them.
They did not so much as pretend to Cure all sorts of Diseases by Charms and
Expiations. I believe all those Diseases which were so Cured, may be reduced to
the Brain; that part which I have shown was thought liable to the Devils
Influences. I mean, including the Spinal Marrow, which is of the same Nature
with the Brain. This also is included in the Part allowed to the Devils to Act
by the Romancer, under the Name of St. Clemens, in the third Century; and
therefore a good Witness of the Opinions received among the Christians of that
Age. This is expressed less clearly in the Recognitions, whereof we have only
the Translation by Rufinus, in these Words. Ante omnia ergo intelligere debetis
Recog. l. v. c. 17.
deceptionem Serpentis antiqui and callidas ejus suggestiones, qui quasi per
prudentiam decipit vos, and velut ratione quadam serpit per sensus vestros;
atque ab ipso vertice incipiens, per interiores dilabitur medullas; lucrum
magnum computans deceptionem vestram. But more clearly in the Greek, perhaps
more Faithfully preserved in the Clementines: (...) Clem. Hom. x. c. 10.
(...). It is no great matter whether the Tradition be true, that is mentioned
by the Ancients, that the Spinal Marrow of a Man, when corrupted turns into a
Serpent. Such as it is, we have it from Authors ancient, and not contemptible,
Ovid, Pliny, Plutarch, and AElian. However, we Ovid. Met. xv. v. 389. Plin. N.
H. x. 66. Plut. Cleomen. AEli. de animal l. 1. c. 51.
know, even pretended Physiology is taken, by the Mystical Interpreters of the
Old Testament, as a Rule of Mystical Interpretation, and does really serve the
end of God, for recommending Mystical Senses to the observation of the Reader,
better than truer Physiology, that had not been so well understood by the
Readers of those Times. Besides, we know what a Subject the Fall of Man, and
the Devils concern in it, under the Allegory of a Serpent, the Old Serpent, as
he is called in the Revelations, afforded of Mystical Interpretations. We know
withal, that even among the Heathens, a lower sort of Demons, especially those
called Heroes, were usually represented under the Symbols of Serpents, possibly
in memory of this Scripture History, as has been observed by the late Learned
Bishop of Worcester, in his Origin. Sacr. Why might not then this Natural
History be adapted to signify the Seat of the Devils Influence? There is a
not-unlike Experiment pretended by the Pythagoreans, for Explaining their
Symbol for Abstaining from (...), the rather apposite to this purpose, because
they, as well as our Sacred Writers, designed mystical Senses, especially in
their Symbols. But I cannot allow my self at present, to follow this Argument
as far as it would lead me. It suffices now, to observe that this Hypothesis
seems generally alluded to in the Sacred Writers, especially of the New
Testament, and therefore cannot indeed be thought so precarious as our
Adversaries might otherwise conceive, if they will suffer themselves to be led
away with popular Prejudices, without examining it. The New Testament plainly
enough distinguishes the Gift of Healing, which Cured Diseases not caused by
Devils, directly from the Curing Infirmities caused by Devils, which were
sufficiently Cured by casting out the Devils that caused them. And I think
also, that they mention no Aylings of the latter sort, which may not be
accounted for by their Power allowed them by God on the Parts now mentioned.
However, this Difference between Divine Prophecy and Diabolical Enthusiasm,
seems to have been generally agreed on, that Prophecy required Imagination, but
perfected and duly subordinated to the Nobler Faculties; but Enthusiasm went no
farther than the Imagination; and therefore disordered and hindered the
Understanding, and the immaterial Faculties depending on it. And our
Adversaries must be very difficult indeed in their Concessions, if they can
doubt whether Instrumental Music can affect the Imagination, so as to Compose
or Disorder it. Yet this alone is sufficient for disabling Devils to Influence
it, if their Power be confined by Providence to disposed Matter, and Music may
indispose the Imagination for their Influences, and it be not withal, in their
Power to make or hinder Dispositions.

BUT our Adversaries have a strange XIII. Such a Notion of the Spiritualness of
our Religion as makes incapable of Sensible Assistances, is fundamentally
inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Apostolical Age.
Notion of the Spiritualness of our Christian Religion, as if all Bodily and
External Assistances were now perfectly useless and inconsistent with the
Nature of our present Dispensation. On this account, they are averse to all
Assistances of our Senses, as well as this of Instrumental Music. But why
should God have Instituted Sacraments for Assisting our Senses, if the whole
kind of such Assistances had been so derogatory to the Nature of his new
Establishment? Why should he have allowed even Vocal Music, if even our Senses
could contribute nothing to the raising of the Devotion of our Spirits? I know
our Adversaries are more willing to impute this Usefulness of Instrumental
Music, rather to the extraordinary Interposition of God, seconding his own
Institution. But why should they think it derogatory to the Providence of God,
that he should make use of the Power, himself has given to the Natures of
Things? Or why should they deny the Experience of so many Heathens, who, though
they regarded not the Institutions of the God of the Jews, yet received the
same Practice of Instrumental Music, on account of the Devotion they pretended
to feel raised in themselves by it, in their several false Religions. This
could be imputable to nothing but the Natures of the things themselves. But
where have they learned such a Notion of the Spiritualness of the Christian
Religion, that should exclude the Use, or even the Necessity, of Corporeal
Assistances. The Scripture is not more express in requiring a Spiritual
Worship, than it is in requiring that also of the Body. Our Bodies are Temples
of the Holy Ghost, and we are accordingly required to Glorify God in our
Bodies, as well as our Spirits which are his, 1 Cor. vi. 19, 20. The unmarried
Woman, is so to care for the things of the Lord, that she may be Holy both in
Body and in Spirit, vii. 34. We are to present our Bodies a living Sacrifice,
holy, acceptable to God, which is our reasonable Service, Romans xii. 1. And our
whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body, are to be preserved Blameless unto the Coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. v. 23. If Service be expected from the Body
as well as the Spirit, How can it be disagreeable to the Nature of our
Spiritual Religion, that such Parts of Bodily Worship may be retained or
introduced as may in their own Nature contribute to the Worship of the Spirit?
There was indeed near the Apostles times, an Opinion introduced among the
Philosophers, Numenius perhaps may be the first that brought it in, from whom
Porphyry owns Plotinus to have borrowed what he has to this purpose, That the
Soul alone was the Man, and that the Body was no part of the Man, but a Prison
to the Soul, and therefore preternatural to it, and to be avoided by it, that
it might be qualified for a perfect State. And these did indeed so insist on
the Spiritual Nature of Religion, as to discharge the Body from any share in
it. The Good Man with them was the only Priest, the Soul it self the only
acceptable Temple, the Devotion of the Mind the pleasing Sacrifice. And the the
way to union with God, was to alienate themselves as much as was possible from
the Body, and from the external Societies of Men, and to enure themselves to
abstracted Operations of the Mind, in order to the Cultivating of the Spirit,
which was the only Power that they thought capable of an Union with the Supreme
Being. This is that Philosophical Religion so much Celebrated by Plotinus,
Porphyry himself, and Hierocles, and several other of the later Philosophers.
Porphyry particularly was very much pleased with it, as appears from his
Sentences, and his Books de Abstinentia, but especially from his Epistle to
Anebo, where he does by these Principles undermine all Obligation to the
Externals of the Heathen, as well Ap. Jambli. de mist Egypt. Porphy. vit.
Plotin.
as the Christian Religion. This put him on Starving himself in his Lilybaean
Retirement, if his Master Plotinus (whom he followed in these Opinions) had not
reclaimed him. This seems to be the Original of all that Enthusiasm that has
decry'd the external Ordinances and Sacraments even of Christ himself, upon
Pretenses to greater Perfection, and several Fancies of the old Monks relating
this way in Anastasius Sinaita; of the Popish Mystical Divinity and Quietism,
of the Familists and Quakers, of the Bourignonists and Philadelphians, etc. It
is strange, our Presoyterian Adversaries who dislike these Consequences in
others, so destructive of their own Discipline, are notwithstanding insensible
of the advantage they have given to others, of justifying Separation from
themselves, by these Pretenses of the Spiritual Nature of the Evangelical
Worship, by which themselves defended their own Separation from their own
Superiors. This might at least have warned them to a more accurate Examination
of the Principle, when they found they could not justify the Consequences
which followed from it. For us it is abundantly sufficient that this Doctrine,
though taught by the Adversaries of the Apostles Age, was notwithstanding
perfectly different from the Sense of the Apostolical Church it self. The
Heretics by this means evaded the Resurrection of the Body, pretending the
Resurrection promised was already past, in their mystical Resurrection from
Sin. For the rising of the Body could not be thought a Reward, if the being in
the Body was preternatural, and a State of Punishment. Thence also it
proceeded, that so many of those first Heretics defiled the Flesh, as not
belonging to them, and condemned Marriage, as contributing to confine Souls to
Bodies, upon this very Pretense of being themselves Spiritual, and being
therefore for a more Spiritual way of Worship. But it is as certain, that this
Doctrine was different from the Doctrine of the Apostles, as it is certain the
Apostles were for the Holy Treatment and Resurrection of the Body, and that
they Condemned those for Heretics, who Reasoned from this Principle insisted
on by our Adversaries, of which they had otherwise no better means of
Information. How therefore can our Adversaries Reason loosly for the
Reformation of Christianity from that same Principle which we see was contrary
to the very Foundations of truly Primitive Apostolical Christianity? Which was
the Foundation of most of those Heresies which were then Condemned by that
Unquestionable Authority.

FOR my part, I can see no Difference, XIV. The same Reasons that proved Bodily
worship useful in the Mosaic Discipline, prove it so still.
in this particular, between the Old and the New Peculium. We have Bodies as
well as they, and of the same frail Make and Constitution as theirs were. Our
Souls are also of the same Kind, as dependent on our Bodies as theirs, and as
apt to be Influenced by them. Providence has imposed no new Rules, that we know
of, for the Influences of Good and Evil Spirits, from what were imposed then.
What then should hinder, but that still our Minds should be Influenced by the
Good and Evil Dispositions of our Bodies as much as formerly? And that in order
to the receiving the Influences of both sorts of Spirits. And certainly they
cannot think that Music has lost any of that Influence on our Bodies that it
had formerly. How can they therefore doubt, but that it might still have the
same effect on the like Bodies, alike Influencing the same kind of Souls? The
Church is still as much a Body as it was then, and as much obliged to Worship
God in Assemblies, though not confined to one particular Nation, as it was then.
And the Apostle requires that all Acts of the Worship in Assemblies, were to be
performed with a design of Edifying the whole Assemblies. He permits no
Exercise of Gifts, even of the Divine Spirit there, but such as were for common
Edification. But the Edification of Assemblies is not otherwise performable
than by Sensible and Corporeal Significations. These are the only means by
which the whole Body can Communicate in the Devotion of every particular, by
which they can mutually give and receive Edification. It is therefore still as
impossible to signify a great Honor for the Deity Adored in such Assemblies
but by Signs greatly affecting the very Senses. And what is done in the Name of
the whole Body, ought to be suited to the Dignity of the Body represented. That
must be by Signs by which Bodies usually signify their great Respect by the
Customs of such Bodies. But Bodies do not usually signify their great Respect
in their Worldly intercourse otherwise than by Pomp and Magnificence. They
cannot therefore signify it in Affairs of Religion by Signs, mean and
ordinary. Especially if their Design be to signify it to the Senses, and for
the Edification of others. For certainly Signs which signify a mean or no
Respect on other occasions, cannot be thought to signify a great one in the
Affairs of Religion. It is on the contrary taken as an Affront to Honor
excellent Persons in a way unsuitable to their Character, though the same
Significations might justly be reputed Honorable, if performed to an inferior
Person to whom they had been proportionable. This Consideration must make all
Significations short of the utmost that can be done dishonorable when paid to
an Infinitely Perfect Being. The Magnificence therefore of the Worship of God,
ought to be such as it used to signify the greatest Respect to the Senses of
the Spectators, if the Respect be to be signified Sensibly. I know not how our
Adversaries can deny any part of this Reasoning on the Principles now mentioned.

BUT I know they do pretend Authority XV. The Worship of God in Spirit, not
opposed to that which is Sensible and Corporeal, but to the Literal Sense of
the Law of Moses.
for this way of Arguing, God is a Spirit, says our Savior, and they that
Worship him, must Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, St. Joh. iv. 24. This is
spoken with relation to the Worship of the Jews at Jerusalem, and the
Samaritans on Mount Gerizim; and therefore must signify something Spiritual in
the Christian Religion, which was not so in the Worship of the Jews and the
Samaritans. But this might very well be true without making external Worship
inconsistent with the spiritual Nature of the Christian Religion. The true
Account of this Matter, I take to be this: That in what was common to the Jews
and the Samaritans, there were two Parts, the Sensible and the External Part,
which was proper to themselves, and which the Christians were not concerned in;
and the Mystical and Spiritual, which was principally designed by God, which
was thenceforward to obtain as the peculiar Glory of the Christian Religion. So
the New Testament is opposed to the Old, that it is not of the Letter as the
Old was, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 6. that is, that the New Testament is
really the same with the Old, the same thing in the Spiritual Sense, which was
prefigur'd by the Literal Sense, of what was enjoined on the Jews then. Thus
the Letter and Circumcision are taken for Circumcision in the Literal Sense,
Romans ii. 27. by a known Hendiadis, and Circumcision of the Heart, is said to be
in the Spirit, not in the Letter, v. 29. So the Service in newness of the
Spirit, is opposed to that which had been in the oldness of the Letter, Romans
vii. 6. And when the Jews understood our Savior's Discourse concerning Eating
his Flesh, and Drinking his Blood in a Carnal Sense, he Corrects their Mistake,
by telling them, That the Words he had spoken to them were Spirit and Life, St.
Joh. vi. 63. that is, by warning them, that his Words were to be understood not
Literally but Mystically. Life is joined with Spirit in our Savior's Words,
exactly as it is by the Apostle, when he also tells us, that the Letter
kills, but the Spirit gives Life, 2 Cor. iii. 6. intimating, that the Life
promised by Moses, when he set Life and Death before the Israelites, was not to
be expected from the Observation of the Literal Sense of the Mosaical Law, but
the Mystical, which was a strong Obligation to the New Peculium. Because the
Mystical Sense even of the old Law, which was the principal Sense designed by
God, was supposed to be the same with the Gospel. So Spirit and Truth are also
fitly joined together in the Discourse of our Savior with the Woman of
Samaria. For the Mystical Sense, was the Sense truly intended by God, and the
Literal no otherwise then as conveying the Mystical. The Truth here is also
opposed to the Shadow. So the Apostle tells us, that the Law was a Heb. viii.
5. x. 1. Col. ii. 17.
Shadow of things to come, that is, of those which were to be fulfilled under
the Gospel. The Shadow is opposed to the Body that causes it, therefore the
Word Body as signifying Truth in opposition to the Shadow of the Body, is
applied to the Realities of the Gospel, even in things not properly Corporeal.
So the fullness of the Godhead was said to dwell in our blessed Savior Bodily.
Col. ii. 9.
Not like that which was in the Tabernacle of Moses, which was but a Shadow
Heb. viii. 2, 5. ix. 24.
of the true Tabernacle. That the Mosaic Tabernacle was but a Shadow, was
granted by the Mystical Interpreters of the Law, as appears from Philo. They
gathered it from the Name of Bezaleel (...). Philo. Alleg. Leg. l. 11. p. 79.
(...) de Plantat. Noe. p. 218. (...) de Somn. p. 596.
who made the Tabernacle, which signifies so, and from its being made in
Imitation of the Pattern in the Mount, which Pattern the New Testament
Reasonings suppose to be meant of the Gospel. This way of Reasoning, though it
would be precarious in other things, yet is the properest for understanding
Prophecies, which were usually understood by the God that gave them in that
Sense which seemed otherwise most remote from their Literal Signification. This
is so notorious, that not having leisure for it, I cannot think it necessary to
heap Examples. Our Savior's Design therefore in this Discourse with the Woman
of Samaria, is to show that the confinement of the solemn Worship of God to one
Place, either Jerusalem or Mount Gerizim, was disagreeable to the Nature of the
Worship of the Gospel, and therefore to be Abrogated by it. And as to that
particular Design, I take our blessed Lords Reasoning to be this. The original
Consecration both of the Tabernacle and the Temple, was by the Descent of a
Luminous Body on them, as a Symbol of the Majestatick Presence of God, which
the Rabbis call a Schechinah. This visible Appearance at first, was supposed
to be the cause of the Consecration, which lasted afterward, long after the
visible Appearance it self had disappeared, as the Jews say it did under the
second Temple. This way of Consecration, confined Consecration to Places. The
Schechinah it self, as a Body, could not be otherwise than confined. And whilst
God was pleased to reserve this Power to himself, that besides the Consecration
of Men, which was requisite to separate the Place Consecrated from common uses,
no Place however should be counted Holy, till God himself had signified his own
Acceptance of it, by such a visible Symbol of his own Presence; it followed
necessarily, that if God showed this Symbol only in one Place, no other Place
besides that one could be counted Holy as accepted by him. But the true
Presence of God signified by that Symbol, our Savior observes, and that by the
mystical way of Reasoning then received, to have been suitable to the Nature of
God himself, who was a Spirit, and therefore Spiritual, and might as well be
(if God pleased) in Places where no such Appearance was to the Senses, as where
it was. Withal, that these invisible Archetypes were the Eternal things that
were to hold when the visible Ectypes were abolished; this was also granted him
in the Platonic Reasonings of that Age. When therefore the Gospel was to take
place, which was a State of those very Archetypes which were Prefigur'd in the
Law, from that time forward God was not to insist on that way of Consecration,
by visible Schechinahs which had been required before. But as the separation of
a Place from common use, was sufficient on Man's part to Consecrate it, if God
should be pleased to accept it; so when this way of signifying the Divine
acceptance immediately by a Schechinah was laid aside, the Divine acceptance
would be sufficiently signified by the acceptance of the Priest whom God had
Invested with an indefinite Authority, of not only representing, but obliging,
him to ratify what he was to do in his Name, in things wherein God had not
particularly obliged him to expect a more particular Signification of his
Pleasure. When therefore this mystical Dispensation was to take place, then as
every City was to be equal with Mount Gerizim, or even Jerusalem it self, then
the Bishops of particular Cities, were to be equal with the High Priest of
Jerusalem, and might as freely Consecrate as he, and exercise the supreme Power
of the Evangelical Mystical Sacrifice within his own Jurisdiction. This I take
to be the true Design of our Saviors Discourse in that Place, to prepare both
Jews and Samaritans, not to be surpised at this Change, which was punctually
fulfilled in the Event, how contrary soever it seemed to their present received
Opinions and Expectations.

AND what is there in all this Reasoning, XVI. Nothing therefore can be
Objected to Instrumental Music that is inconsistent with the spiritual Nature
of the Worship of the Gospel.
wherein our Adversaries can think our present Cause concerned? Spiritual we
see here, is not opposed to Bodily, but Literal, that is Literal of the Law of
Moses, where it was to interfere with the Mystical Sense, which was principally
intended by the Legislator. Do we revive the Literal Sense as it concerned the
particular Nation of the Jews? Or do we extend the Obligation of it fartherso
as to oblige other Nations, on whom it was not imposed then, and for whom it
was never intended, under the Spiritual Dispensation of the Gospel? Do we so
urge the Literal Sense as to exclude the Mystical, so as to exclude Gentiles
from the Benefits of the Law, whilst they do indeed more comply with the true
Design of the Legislator, than if they had observed the Literal Sense? Do we
exclude any from the new Peculium, who have the Circumcision of the Spirit, for
no other Reason, but because they want the Circumcision of the Letter? This had
indeed been repugnant to the Design of the Gospel, which was to convince us,
that, in all things inconsistent, the Observation of the Mystical Sense was to
take place of the Literal, and thenceforwards to take away its Obligation. And
do we say otherwise? Or do we say, that Schechinahs are to be expected for
Consecrations now, or any other Significations of the Divine Acceptance of what
is separated for his use by Men, besides the acceptance of them, who are
Authorized in general to represent and oblige him in things whereof he has made
no particular exception? Can they pretend, that our present Dispute has any
Relation to those which divided the Jews and Christians in the Apostolical Age?
They very well know, that our present Dispute is wholly between Christians, and
has no relation to the Obligation of the Mosaic Law in any Sense. It is very
true, that the Literal Sense of the Mosaic Law usually related to External
Sensible Things, and the Mystical to Things Insensible and Spiritual. And the
Mystical Sense being the Spiritual, may give the occasion why our Adversaries
fancy that the Mystical Sense should always relate to Spiritual Things. But it
is not being opposed to Sensible or Bodily, but Literal, shows plainly that the
things concerned in the Literal Sense, are not considered in this Reasoning, as
Sensible and Corporeal, And on the other side, in the Reasonings of the New
Testament, the Evangelical Institutions even in this World, are all supposed to
belong to the Spiritual Sense of the old Law. And for that very Reason it is
inferred, that they were principally regarded by God, because the mystical
Sense of the Law was more principally intended by him than the Literal. The
whole Evangelical Institution, is, in the same Reasoning, supposed to be the
Pattern showed to Moses in the Mount, in Imitation of which, the Tabernacle was
to be made. And this in order to the proving, that the Evangelical Institutions
were to be Eternal, because the Ideal Patterns of things were in the Platonic
way of Reasoning supposed to be so. This Eternity concerned in this Dispute,
can only be meant of that which was to last as long as this World; so the
everlasting Hills, Genesis xlix. 26. And the everlasting Mountains, Hab. iii. 6.
And the Land of Canaan, is said to be given for an everlasting Possession, Genesis
xvii. 8. xlviii. 4. For in this Sense, the Everlastingness of the Gospel, is
opposed to the Duration of the Law, which was, even in this Life, to give way
to a more lasting Establishment. But it is certain, that those very
Institutions of the Gospel, which have succeeded the abrogated Institutions of
the Law, and which are therefore supposed to be Spiritual in this Sense, as
Spiritual is opposed to the Literal Sense of the Law, are notwithstanding
themselves Sensible and Corporeal. So is Baptism, which has succeeded in the
Place of the abrogated Circumcision of the Letter. So also is our Eucharistical
Sacrifice, which now answers the abrogated Bloody Sacrifices. These therefore
must be supposed to be Spiritual in this Sense of the Word, notwithstanding
their being Sensible and Corporeal. Our Adversaries therefore do certainly
mistake the meaning of this Reasoning, when they hence gather that any
Observations are contrary to the Spiritual Nature of the Gospel, on that
account alone, because they are Sensible and Corporeal.

BUT, though Sensible Assistances should XVII. Pomp and Magnificence of the
external Worship, is not inconsistent with the Design of the Gospel.
not be inconsistent with the Nature of Evangelical Worship, yet our
Adversaries think, at least, that Pomp and Magnificence must needs be so. One
would think, by the gradation, that their Arguments on this Head were more
cogent and convictive, but it proves quite the contrary. Not one Text can they
pretend against the Pomp and Magnificence of the public Worship of God. rather
all the appearance of Scripture Reasonings is against them. The Worship of the
Old Testament was manifestly very Magnificent; nor can our Adversaries deny
that it was so; what have they therefore to say, why it ought not to be so
still? Can they show any Text of the New Testament against it as a thing that
was to cease and to be no more practiced? I know of none they do pretend either
in the same, or in equivalent Terms. Can they then pretend any thing
inconsistent with it in the constitution of the Gospel, or of the new Peculium?
These things I have shown to be the true Originals of the abrogation of what
was indeed abrogated in the old Mosaic Law. The reasoning of the Old Test; as
well as the positive Precepts of it, rather favor, than contradict, the
Magnificence and Sumptuousness of the public Solemnities of the divine
Worship. David would not offer Burnt Offerings unto the Lord his God, of that
which cost him nothing. 2 Samuel xxiv. 24. and Malachy makes mean Sacrifices to
redound to the contempt of the Religion wherein they were used. He makes them
to be a polluting God's Altar, and interprets the offering them as if the
Offerers of them had said, The Table of the Lord is contemptible, Mal. i. 7. He
Expostulates concerning them farther, v. 8. Offer it now to thy Governor, will
he be pleased with thee, or accept thy Person says the Lord of Hosts? Plainly
intimating, that God did as much expect expensive Sacrifices from those who
were able to Offer them, and had reason to do so, as any of their Governors;
and would as much resent the contrary as an affront, as Governors would mean
Presents from such as were able to offer great ones. The Reasoning is the very
same in Is. xl. 16. Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the Beasts thereof
for a Burnt Offering. Arguing for the Magnificence of the Offering from the
greatness of the Person to whom it is made. And I have already shown how in the
N. T. the Reason even of abrogated Precepts is owned as still obliging, as a
reason approved by God. Much more in cases wherein our Adversaries can prove no
abrogation, such as is this of Instrumental Music. But the divine Authority of
the N. T. does also plainly approve the same Reasoning. It is a clear instance
of it, when our Savior values the poor Widow's Mites as more than the
Offerings of the Rich, who had cast in greater Sums out of their greater
abundance, St Mar. xii. 43. St. Luke xxi. 3. This plainly shows, That as God
does graciously accept of mean things from those who are able to give no more,
so he does not excuse them from Magnificence whose Abilities may afford it. Our
Savior reasons the same way in the case of the Woman who anointed his Feet
with the Alabaster Box of very precious Ointment. The same Objection was S.
Mat. xxvi. 7, etc. S. Mark xiv. 3. S. Luke. vii. 36.
made then which is made by our Adversaries now, that it might have been sold
for much and given to the Poor. Yet our Savior commends the seasonableness of
the Gift, as will as the Gift it self, and returns the Woman an honorable
Memorial for it, wherever his Gospel should be preached. The Objection would
indeed be greater then, when the numbers of the Poor were greater, and the
Abilities of the Christians for Contribution were less, than they are now. Yet
even so our Savior did not approve of our Adversaries Reason. He allowed a
liberality in showing their respect to the Temple of his Body, as a token of
what he would also judge commendable if used to the material Temples that
should afterward be Consecrated to his Worship. And in giveing a precedent for
teaching his Disciples what he would have them do afterward, and introducing
it, he did not allow even the present Necessities of his Disciples to overruled
him. Thus, I am very apt to think, the generality of his Disciples were then
inclinable to understand him. And therefore thus, in all likelihood, he
designed they should understand him, when he gave them no warning of
misunderstanding him in such a way of Interpreting his Mind as he foresaw them
inclinable to follow by the way of reasoning of that Age. It was a received
Principle, that our Saviors Actions, as well as his Discourses, were
Prophetical and Instructive. And that they signified many things which were not
to be understood at present, but afterward when they were fulfilled, and when
Providence had fitted circumstances for practicing them. Especially in things
which were not practicable at present, as not fitted to their present
Circumstances. This was plainly the Case then in relation to the Subject of our
present Discourse. The Poverty of the Apostolical Christians, disabled them for
all things Sumptuous and Magnificent. Nor was there then any Prospect of a
Change for the better which might make it prudent to provide expressly for the
Case. Withal our blessed S. Joh. xiii. 7.
Savior knew that his Sense would be gathered from his Actions. Himself had
trained up his Disciples to do so. And the Jews in their mystical
Interpretations of the History of the Old Testament had, even in his time,
taken up the Custom of gathering the Sense of God from the Prophetic Instincts
and Actions of their own Patriarchs. The leaving them therefore to those
Inferences, which he foresaw them inclinable to make from his Actions and
Intimations was a very prudent, a very sufficient Provision for a Case which
was to fall out at such a distance afterward.

THE only Reason this present Adversary insists on for proving the
Inconsistence XVIII. Magnificence not repugnant to the Simplicity of the Gospel.
of Magnificence with the Nature of the Worship of the Gospel, is that the
Romanists are usually censured for their excess in this kind. This he only
takes for granted, and draws Inferences from it; but never offers any Proof
that it is indeed blameable. The same way he takes in his use of the other
popular Prejudices now disproved but, methinks, it would have better become
them who so usually appeal from humane Authorities to the Scriptures, (if they
could find any) that even themselves could judge favorable to their Design,
before they had ventured on drawing Inferences. That would have made their
Dissent look more like a reverence to greater Authority, than Resentmentand an
Aversation to their Adversaries against whom they are concerned in this whole
Dispute. But I cannot, indeed, imagine what they can pretend from the
Scriptures against the Magnificence of Gods Worship in those who are able to
bear the Burden of it. They may fancy, perhaps, that the Simplicity of the
Gospel may be inconsistent with this Magnificence. But the Simplicity of the
Gospel is never (that I know of) used concerning the Worship of the Gospel it
self, but concerning the good meaning of the Persons who Preached the Gospel.
It is plainly opposed to (...) 2 Cor. XI. 3. It is used as synonymous with
(...) 2 Cor. 1. 12. which plainly show that it signifies Sincerity and
Heartiness, only in opposition to double Dealing. But so far it is from
implying Inexpensiveness, that on the contrary, it rather sometimes denotes
Liberality, when it is used concerning a subject that is capable of it. So,
(...). Romans xii. 8. As the (...) is opposed to that which is called (...) S.
Mat. vi. 22. 23. And as the (...) is opposed to (...) S. Mat. xx. 15. as that
signifies Bounteouesness and Liberality. In this way of Interpretation the
Simplicity of the Gospel signifies the Generosity of the Gospel, and will
rather countenance Magnificence than discourage it.

BUT our present Adversary is solicitous XIX. Sacred Dancet not unlawful, but
not therefore necessary to be restored, if Instrumental-Musick beso.
for the Consequences that may follow from the restitution of Instrumental
Music. He conceives that by the like Inferences we may restore Circumcision
and bloody Sacrifices, and the old Custom of Dancing to the Instrumental
Music. And what if we should grant him his last Consequence concerning
Dancing, so far at least, as to acknowledge that the Church might lawfully
reduce it? I doubt he would be hard put to it to prove it unlawful. It must be
so, at least, if he would confine himself, as they pretend to do, to the
Scriptures. He cannot sure think there is any Argument in the irreverent
Expression he uses concerning it. It is no other than what Michol would,
probably, have used if she had spoken English. But David was contented to bear
the Reproach of it, and to justify it against her. And I believe our
Adversaries will not easily question but that we are safer in following the
Sense of David than they are in following that of Michol. The Design of the
Objection in both Cases, both of our Adversaries and of Michol, is to Charge
the Posture of Dancing with the Imputation of Levity. As if there could not be
Grave and Decorous Dances as well as Grave and Decorous Tunes; and as if there
could not be Grave and Decorous tunes on Instrumental, as well as on Vocal,
Music. At present, it is sufficient for us now, that if their Objection had
been true in general, God would neither have allowed sacred. Dancing then, nor
would David have avowedly defended it, nor would God have seconded him in doing
so by inflicting a Punishment on Michol for her Profane upbraiding her Prince
and Husband with it, as if in Practicing it he had done any thing beneath the
Dignity of his Station. If they will defend David in it, they are as much
obliged, as we are, to own the weakness of this general Charge. I think
therefore the Practice, if it had been again received, secure enough if they
will be pleased to admit no Objections against it now that would have proved it
unlawful then. For we have a greater Evidence, than any their Reasons can
pretend to that it was not unlawful then. But supposing it lawful, yet the
Apostle himself will assure them that all things indeed lawful are not on that
account alone to be therefore owned as expedient. 1. Cor. vi. 12. x. 23. And
therefore fit to receive a new Sanction. There will be no more Obligation to
revive that ancient Custom now, than many others which were undoubtedly
allowable and prudent in those times wherein they were universally received;
but have now lost the reason that made them useful then, by their being since
as universally disused. Singularity alone is an inconvenience in a thing
indifferent in its own Nature, where there are not more momentous
Considerations to make amends for it, and to recommend it. However the genuine
Ignatius in his uninterpolated Epistles reasons from allusions to holy Dances
and Instrumental Music. This (...).
shows that, whether they practiced them or not, yet the Christians, of that
Age at least, did not Condemn them. And there is reason to believe they did
not. The Pythagoreans greatly approved them, as we know the Jewish Essenes were
great admirers of the Pythagoreans, who derived many of their own Customs to
the whole Body of the Christians. Such were their Praying to the East, their
great aversness even to lawful Oaths, their Reconciliations before Sunset,
their use of Milk and Honey as a Symbol of the new Plutarch, (...).
Birth. These things we find the Church possessed of in very ancient Monuments,
without any Account of their first Original. And the first and last are not so
accountable from any other Original as this of their being brought among the
Christians by the universal Conversion of the Essenes. So the Author of the
Book of Judith makes the Jews expressing Jud. xv.
their Joy for the defeat of Holosernes's Army by Dances with Music also
Instrumental. This appears partly from (...), etc. Ep. ad Ephesians. N. 4.
the Greek, partly from the Latin, which in those Apocryhal Books are strangly
different. This shows, at least, the Sense of the Jews in that Age wherein that
Book first appeared. That could not be later than the Apostles time because
Clements mention Judith in his Epistle to the Corinthians. And indeed, within
fresh Memory of Ignatius, the Apostolical Church, which was the Head of all
other Churches, had notoriously approved and communicated with Instrumental
Music, at least in the Worship of the Temple. It is not also improbale but
that the Apostles continued it in the Head Church, whether in Pella, or in the
Ruins of Jerusalem, after the Dissolution of the Worship of the Temple. That
mention of Harpers with it in the Vision of the Revelations has nothing joined
with it Characteristick of the Jewish Worship before the Dissolution. And
therefore may represent the Fact truly as it was in this Interval between the
Destruction of the Temple and the new troubles which befell the Christians in
the latter end of Domitian, but especially under Trajan. This is a time wherein
we have no Monuments that can inform us any thing to the contrary. And within
this time it must have been that St. John saw that Vision in his Exile at
Patmos. The eldest Testimony produced by our Adversary from Clemens
Alexandrinus is considerably later than Ignatius, when the memory of the
Traditions of the Apostolical Church of Jerusalem was now much forgotten by the
many Disturbances which followed on the Ruin of the Temple. It is not
improbable that the Instrmental Music was the Prerogative of that Supreme
Church, as it seems also to have been of the Temple Worship of the Jews in
Jerusalem. The Music usually accompained the Sacrifices, which by the Jewish
Law were to be Offered only at Jerusalem, we never find it mentioned in the
Synagogue-Worship. And this may give a probable Account, why it was not
received in other Christian Churches besides that of Jerusalem. They were
formed in imitation of the Jewish-Synagogues at first, with the same dependence
(in many regards) on the Church of Jerusalem that the Synagogues had on the
Temple. And when after the Decease of all the Apostles, the other Churches
succeeded into the full Rights of the Head Church of Jerusalem; the disorders
of the times had so long discontinu'd that Custom even in the Head Church, that
though Ignatius might, yet it might be very possible that Clemens Alexandrinus
might not remember it. No, not even with the Assistance of those old Witnesses
of Apostolical Tradition from whom Clemens received his Informations of the
Apostolical Affairs, as he Strom. 1.
himself tells us. But it is not likely that any of those Witnesses could be
near so old as Ignatius. But the Music described in the Revelations is such as
might likely be practtis'd by the Apostles in the Ruins of Jerusalem after the
Dispersion of the Jews, and the Abolition of the Temple-Sacrfices.

HOWEVER our Adversary conceives XX. The Jewish Circumcision contrary to the
Design of the Gospel. The Gentile nothing to our Adversaries purpose. The Case
of neither of them like that of Instrumental Music.
that Circumcision and the old bloody Sacrifices might be restored by the same
Consequence that Instrumental Music were, if any Church should think fit to do
so. He might well think so, whilst he believed that the only Reason which made
Circumcision and those Sacrisices unlawful now, was their having been observed
formerly. But I have shown how contrary that way of Reasoning is, to the way of
Reasoning used by the Writers of the N. T. and have thereby proved a necessity
of settling an Hypothesis, by which we may be able to distinguish what is
Abolished from what is not so. And the Hypothesis now given, affords a Rule
sufficient, to show why Instrumental Music may still be Lawful, though neither
Circumcision nor bloody Sacrifices were so. That is because Instrumental Music
is no way repugnantto the Constitution of the new Peculium, which is not true
of the Jewish Circumcision, nor the Jewish Sacrifices. For no uncircumsised
Person could partake of the Jewish Sacrifices, and he that was Circumcised, was
thereby Incorporated into the Jewish Nation. Whilst these two things were
insisted on it was impossible for a Gentile not Incorporated into the Jewish
Nation to be admitted to the Benefits of the new Peculium, which was directly
contrary to the new Revelations of the Gospel. But our Author urges the
Circumcision of other Nations as if their Agreement in it would have gone as
far to have recommended it for a Law of Nations as their Consent in
Instrumental Music. But he did not remember that no other Nation that used
Circumcision did pretend to use it as the Jews, as a Ceremony of Admission into
the peculiar People of God, which is the only Consideration, that made it
inconsistent with the Constitution of the Gospel. Several of them seemed to
have used it, not as an Initiation to their Nation, but to their Sacerdotal
Dignity, to qualify Men for being admitted to the Secrets of their Religion.
So it seems to have been in the Cases of Pythagoras and Apion, who were
Circumcised among the Egyptians. And therefore also among other Nations who
derived their Circumcision from the Egyptians, as particularly the Colchians
are said to have done by Scsostris. And perhaps this may be the Reason why the
old Peculium is called a Royal Priesthood, as well as a Holy Nation, because
the right of Admitting into that Nation was equal to that which among other
Nations was thought sufficient to confer that higher Degree of Sanctity which
all Nations ascribed to their Priests above the ordinary Holiness, thought
requisite to partake of the National Sacrifices which were common to the whole
Nation. But no Nation however beside the Jews pretended to be the peculiar
People, who were favored with the immediate Patronage of the supreme Being.
They could not therefore impose Incorporation into themselves as a Condition of
Admission into the new Peculium on other Nations besides themselves, though their
Circumcision had been designed as a Right of Incorporation. Their Circumcision
therefore not being imposed as a Condition of the Peculium, had been as
Innocent as that of the Jews was, when observed only by their own Nation, and
not imposed on others, as a Condition requisite to qualify them for the
Spiritual Favors of the Peculium. Upon those terms the Jews themselves, were
permitted the use of it whilst they Commnnicated with the Uncircumsised
Gentiles, in the Offices of the Christian Religion. Much less could it be
Condemned in other Nations, who never imposed it farther than their own Nation.
There was therefore neither parity of Reason, nor sufficient Consent of Nations
to prove the Jewish Circumcision lawful now, though we should on, those Accounts,
grant that Instrumental Music were so.

BUT Bloody Sacrifices, our Adversary XII. No Bloody Sacrifices whatsoever were
fit for the Design of the Christian Sacrifices.
conceives might at least pretend to them. Not certainly so as to unite all
Nations into one Body, which was the true Design of our Evangelical
Eucharistical Sacrifices. The Jewish Sacrifices none were capable of, but one
only Nation, that of the Jews. The same was the Case of many others of the
public National Sacrifices. None were indeed supposed to have a Right in them,
but the Nation for whose use they were originally Instituted. Some were as
severe as the Jews themselves, to make it Piacular and Capital, if one of
another Nation did but come into that part of their Temples, where the public
Sacrifices were Offered. So it appears that it was only the remissness of their
Discipline above that of the Jews, that made them allow others that were not of
their Nation, to partake of their public Sacrifices. Augustus when he was in
Egypt, Suet. Aug. c. 93.
would take no notice of Apis, and commended his Grandson Caius, because he
would not Pray at Jerusalem. The like was the Practice of Hadrian, who
pretended Spartian Adri.
to an Inquisitiveness into all things, and to be a severe Observer of
Discipline. And it was a Favor usually desired from the Senate, that other
Nations might have leave to Offer their Donaries at the Roman-Altars, These are
sufficient Evidences of what was generally taken for the Rule, which is the
only thing to be regarded in this Reasoning. It is true the Jews allowed
public Sacrifices for the Persian Kings and the Roman Emperors. But not so,
as to suffer any Heathens to partake in them. Yet even this was blamed by the
strictest Pretenders to the Observation of the Law among them, the Galileans
and the Zealots. Though otherwise if any other Nation could admit others to their
National Sacrifices, the Jews had more reason to do so. They by their own
Confession Worshipped a God, to whom all other Nations ought Duty as well as
themselves, which other Nations did not pretend concerning their own Deities.
There was therefore no Sacrifice of this kind, that all Nations with their
National distinctives could pretend an equal Right to. How could they therefore
unite all Nations into one Body, as it was the Design of our Christian Religion
to unite them? None of them pretended to a Right to be confirmed in Heaven,
besides that of the Jews, which yet could not unite all Nations, whilst it was
believed to be the Right of one only Nation. There were no Bloody Sacrifices in
the World, which being received into one Place, gave a Right to all other
Sacrifices in the World. I do not now insist on what Porphyry has Porphyry de
Abst.
endeavored to prove at large, that the first Sacrifices received among the
Nations, were not Bloody, but Innocent, and such as were perfectly agreeable
with his Pythagorean Notions, which were for the (...). They did not either
know or regard the most ancient Example of Abel to the contrary. However he has
said very considerable things for it, from the Histories of the Heathens. That
is enough to disprove that sort, at least of Sacrifices, from being a Tradition
of the Law of Nations. And the Reputation of being (...), had then prevailed
not only in those Cities which had submitted to Pythagorean Legislators, but
also among the Romans themselves. I am apt to think this was the Reason, why so
many of the good Emperors who affected Felicia Tempora, affected also that
their Reigns might be (...), free from the Piaculum of shedding Civil Blood, at
least of the better Quality. But the Pythagorean Doctrines were particularly
grateful to the Jewish Essenes, who were as I said, the best disposed to the
Christian Religion, and who seem therefore to have been extirpated by an
universal Conversion, upon the appearance of it. They were most addicted to the
Mystical sense of the Law, which is the Foundation of most of the Reasonings of
the New Testament. Numenius the Heathen, who first joined the Mystical
Interpretation of the Law of Moses with the Heathen Philosophy, was a
Pythagorean, and so was Philo the Jew, and the Essenes, as the same Philo
teaches. This alone was sufficient to dispose the Essenes to an aversation to
Bloody Sacrifices, and to have the better Opinion of the Christian Religion,
when they understood, that by it they could satisfy the Design of the
Legislator without them. If they could once free themselves thereby, from the
Obligation of the Bloody Sacrifices, required by the Law of Moses, there were
no other in view, that were likely to be substituted instead of them, at least
by them. But the Mystical Interpretations of the Old Testament, afforded an
easier account of the Change which was to be made by the Gospel, and more
grateful to the Relish of the Pythagorean Essenes, and the Philosophical
Asceticks. The everlasting Priesthood which was to answered by that of the
Gospel, was supposed to be that of Melchizedeck. So it is expressly called by the
Psalmist, as the Apostle has observed: No doubt as granted him by the Mystical
Reasonings of those Times. His Sacrifice, ((...) is the Word used by Philo,
concerning him, as well as by St. Paul, concerning our Savior) was Bread and
Wine, exactly the same with that of the Gospel. The Notion of a Priest implies
an Offering, by the Reasoning in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Heb. viii. 3. And
no other thing but Bread and Wine is mentioned in the Story of Melchizedeck,
that can be called an Offering. Our Eucharist therefore, must, by this
Reasoning, be the everlasting Offering or Sacrifice, relating to his
everlasting Priesthood. The rather because there is a Bread from Heaven,
mentioned also in the Old Testament, a very fit original Archetype to answer
our Evangelical Terestrial Sacrifice. That was the Manna which was called Bread
by Moses, and was indeed Rained from Heaven, and is called the Food of Angels
by the Psalmist. No doubt to show its Heavenly Mystical Nature, far exceeding
the Nature of our common Bread. It is called also a Body prepared, as the same
Apostle Quotes the Words of the Old Testament. These are the very Expressions
used by our blessed Savior, concerning his own Sacrament in St. Joh. vi. He
also calls it Manna, Bread from Heaven, and his own Body, exactly according to
these Mystical Reasonings from the Old Testament. We never find any mention of
an Archetypal Heavenly Beast, answering those Bloody Sacrifices. Yet the whole
Benefit of these Sacrifices depended on these Archetypal Patterns answering
them in Heaven. Thence followed the Obligation of God, to ratify in Heaven what
was performed by the Priest on Earth, in giving or denying the Mystical
Benefits of the Sacraments, as the Priest shall think fit to give or deny the
Sacramental Elements. Thence the Union between the Church Militant and the
Church Triumphant, on account of the Union between the Caelestial Archetype,
and the Terrestrial Eucharistical Sacrifice. Thence the Union between the
Patriarchal Church of the Old Testament, and the Apostolical of the New,
because the whole efficacy of those old Sacrifices of Beasts, was derived from
their representing and applying the Death of our blessed Savior, as
commemorated and applied in our Christian Eucharistical Sacrifice. Thence the
Union of all the visible Churches in the World with the Caelestial Church, and
among themselves, and the Reason obliging all particular Churches in Earth, to
ratify each others Censures, which was that which made their Admissions into
Communion, and their Excommunications Catholic, though the Acts themselves, were
only the Acts of single Churches. The Reason was, because every particular in
admitting a Member, entitled the Member so admitted to the Heavenly Church,
with which all the particularly Churches in the World were one, and therefore
were obliged to own such a Member, for a Member of themselves. And every
particular Church in Excommunicating a Member, deprived the Excommunicated of
his Right to the Heavenl Church; which whosoever wanted, could not be owned by
any particular Church, which pretended to be one with that which was Heavenly;
of so much consequence was this whole Mystical Reasoning, greater perhaps than
our Adversary was aware of. However, this Reasoning gives a clear Account, that
though Instrumental Music were as indifferent as we conceive it to be, it would
not therefore follow, that it would be Indifferent, or in the Power of any
Church, to restore the Custom of Bloody Sacrifices.

I know not whether it be worth XXII. No Reason for opposing the first
Impositions whilst Lawful, for fear of Rigours afterward.
the while, to take notice of another Consequence, much insisted on by the
Party; that is, the Danger of exceeding in Impositions, if the first
Impositions be submitted to. But truly conscientious Reasoners, would first
have proved the Hurtfulness of many lawful Impositions, if submitted to by the
Ecclesiastical subject. The Government might indeed be blamed for it; but in
the subject, (for whom they are concerned) though the Imposition were indeed
hard, yet submission to it for Peace sake, would for that Reason be highly
commendable, as an Act of the greater self-denial and the greater Zeal for
Pecae and Discipline, and the greater Abhorrence of needless Division, whilst
nothing Sinful were imposed. Then they would have given some (...) concerning
the due Number that might be imposed, that might neither be too small nor too
numerous. This they would have done, if they had desired to have purged
themselves to God, and their own Consciences, that they had not opposed
subjection to those who were over them in the Lord, but Rigours of those who
had abused the just Authority committed to them. But to stop at the first
Impositions, before they can pretend them Rigorous, looks as if Flesh and
Blood, as if Stomach and Resentment, as if an aversation to subjection it self,
had been the original of their Quarrel. It runs into the opposite extreme, as
indeed their Defenses of their Schism generally do, as if the Authority it
self, not any Tyrannical use of it, were the thing regretted by them. The
Topic it self they cannot defend, nor justify the Consequences of it, who are
notwithstanding so forward to warn others of Consequences. There is hardly any
thing necessary in Humane Life, but what excess may make pernicious. Eating is
so. Yet how great a part do Surfeits make in our Bills of Mortality? Will they
therefore think it reasonable for avoiding Surfeits, to dissuade from Eating?
If they had no design of running into an extreme of opposing all Impositions in
things indifferent; our Churches Impositions, (whatever the Outcry has been
against them) have been so few, that I cannot tell how, even our Adversaries
themselves, could charge our Churches Impositions with being excessive, if they
had allowed of any Impositions at all: If they allow of none, they would do
well to own that their Disputes are not against Abuses only of Authority, but
against Authority it self. Their doing so, would let the Favorers of
Comprehension see, that our Disputes are not indeed of so trivial an
Importance, as they are commonly conceived to be. That they are indeed, whether
we shall have any Authority which our Adversaries shall think themselves
obliged in Conscience to own, and to be concluded by, when nothing but
Conscience can oblige them to it, in a State of Persecution. That is indeed
whether we our selves shall have any Body Politic, when they are once received
into it. For we cannot any longer have such a Body than we have the Authority
essential to the Constitution of such a Body. Then it would become the
Favorers of Comprehension to consider whether any Grants of our Adversaries
can make amends for so great a Concession on our Parts, as the Dissolution of
our selves? Or whether any other independent Body in the World, would think fit
to admit Enemies to their Constitution, into their Body together with their
hostile Opinions; or whether they could think any Pretenses, how fair soever
they might seem otherwise, to be sufficient to compensate a Reconciliation of
so fatal Consequence. The rather so, because it perfectly discharges Persons
reconciled on such Terms from all Obligations to perform, what should
afterward be performed as a Condition of the Reconciliation on their Parts.
For it is only their Difference to our common Authority, that can make them
really one with us, when they are admitted into our Assemblies. The giving this
up to them as a Condition of their coming in to us, is like opening a Gap which
may seem to let them in whilst themselves please, but lets them out again as
soon as their old Animosities shall put them on laying hold of new Pretenses,
or retrieving the old ones. But a regular Admission of them, should be by the
Gate. And the same Power of the Keys, which opens the Gate to them at their
Admission, should lock them in after they are once admitted. I know no
possibility they have of avoiding these Consequences, unless they can show,
either that a Body Politic can subsist without Government, or, that Government
can subsist without a right of imposing in things indifferent, either of which
indeed would be a great Performance. If therefore (to avoid the odium of so
hard Terms imposed on us, of an Admission which when it is made, shall give us
no longer security of their Union with us, than themselves please) they will
pretend a Defference to our Common Ecclesiastical Authority that may keep them
ours by Principles afterward. I could then wish, that they would be pleased to
consider farther, that when a true Authority is once admitted, That must be
allowed to judge concerning the Exigences of the Society to which it is
related, and therefore to judge concerning the true mean between both extremes,
of what is deficient and what is superfluous. I mean so as to conclude the
subject in Affairs of that Nature. This Consideration will show, that were
there indeed any excess, yet the Authority would be responsible for it, but not
to the Subject to whom it owes no account, but to God, from whom the Authority
is indeed received. This will show that the subject cannot be responsible for
the Sin of the Imposition, so long as there can be proved no Sin in submitting
to the Imposition, because the Imposition is a right to which the Subject
cannot pretend. Where therefore the Sin of Imposition is separable from the Sin
of Submission, there certainly the Duty of Submission still holds. The Reason
is manifest, because the Subject cannot deny its Duty for a Cause that does not
concern it to enquire into, and for which it is not responsible unto God,
whatever may be amiss in it. And this will always be the Case, whilst the
Impositions are only in matters of their own Nature indifferent.

BUT our Author pleases himself particularly XXIII. The ceasing of Instrumental
Music, Rev. 18. 22. describes a great Calamity, but does not prove its
unlawfulness.
with a Passage in the Revevelations, where it is foretold concerning Babylon;
That the Voice of Harpers and Musicians, and of Pipers and Trumpeters should be
heard no more in her, Rev. xviii. 22. He urges it modestly, and it became him
to do so, having before decried all Arguing from that same Book, because of its
Obscurity. The Reason holds in reference to Facts to come. These are the things
wherein the Prophetical Style is professedly obscure, even to those who were
then living; not so in Facts, then being or past. These, there is no Reason to
believe that God intended to conceal from the meanest Capacities, because they
were not likely to hinder the Freewills which were to contribute their Parts in
fulfilling the Prophesies here delivered. And of this kind are the Allusions,
for which we are at present concerned, to the then present Customs of the
Church of Jerusalem. But to urge the Authority of this Book, as our Adversary
does, with relation to the State of Antichrist, is to urge it in a Sense
wherein God usually designed that his Prophecies should not be understood till
they were fulfilled, that they might not give warning to those who were to
fulfill them, as they must certainly do, if they could certainly be understood
before. Till therefore this Prophecy (if it relate to Antichrist) be
fulfilled, it is not to be expected that it should be understood so certainly
as to be Argumentative. But, to give him the utmost that he can, with any
Reason desire, all that he can make of it, is only to have it understood as a
Prophecy, not as a Law; as a Prediction of the event, not as a Determination
of what was lawful or unlawful. It is very common in the Prophetic Scriptures,
to foretell Judgments by the deprivation of what was delightful on any account,
Good or Evil, even on account of Religion as well as Luxury. So Hosea
Prophesies that the Children of Israel should abide many Days without a King,
and without a Prince; and without a Sacrifice, and without an Ephod. Hos. iii.
4. Can our Adversary therefore gather, that Kings, and Sacrifices, and Ephods,
were Sins then? No, but it is denounced as the most afflictive thing to them,
who in the midst of their Impieties, were full of their Pretensions of Zeal for
God and for his Temple, Jer. vii. 4. The like Predictions against the Temple,
as a Punishment of the unworthy Worshipers in it, are frequently mentioned on
other occasions also, which can by no means be interpreted as a Condemnation of
the Temple then, but rather of the People, as unworthy of so great a Favor.
So, in the Babylonish Captivity, they are represented as hanging their Harps on
the Willows, when their Adversaries insultingly demanded of them one of the
Songs of Sion, Psalm. cxxxvii. 2, 3, 4. We cannot therefore conclude, that the
Temple-Songs played on their Harps, were sinful then, but unseasonable, not
suitable to the Condition they were then in, and the Behavior that became them
in the desolation of the Temple. So God threatens to turn their Feasts into
Mourning, and their Songs into Lamentation, Am. viii. 10. Hos. ii. 11. We must
not rherefore say, that their holy Feasts or Songs were sinful. All that is
implied thereby, is only this, that they should be so estranged from Joy, that
it should find no place in their holiest Offices, even of Religion. So Job
expresses the sadness of his Condition: My Harp also is turned into mourning,
and my Organ into the Voice of them that Weep, Job. xxx. 31. So in Isa. xxiv.
8. The mirth of Tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends, the Joy
of the Harp cease. And in Ezekiel. xxvi. I will cause the noise of thy Songs to
cease, and the sound of thy Harps shall be no more heard. Who sees not, from
these and the like Places, that these Expressions are used to describe a State
not Sinful but Penal rather and Calamitous? The same appears from the other
things following in this very Text, concerning which we are disputing, of the
Revelations. It follows, And no Crafts-man of whatsoever Craft he be, shall be
found any more in thee. Will our Adversary therefore say, that all sorts of
Crafts are here condemned as unlawful? It is easy to observe, that there is
nothing more foretold in these Words, but the failing of the Trade of Babylon,
for which she had been so very famous. It follows farther, And the sound of a
Millstone shall be heard no more in thee; and the light of a Candle shall shine
no more at all in thee. Must Milstones therefore and Candles be unlawful also?
This only shows a Famine that should befall them, and a want of Corn to employ
the Millstone, as cleanness of Teeth for want of Bread to foul them is likewise
threatened, Am. iv. 6. Teeth as well as Mills are called the Grinders, Eccle.
xii. 3, 4. It also describes the Disconsolateness of their Condition, when they
should want the common comfort of Light. Exactly parallel to the Passage in
Jer. xxv. 10. where it is threatened that the sound of the Millstone, and the
light of the Candle should be taken away. Next it is added, And the Voice of
the Bridegroom, and of the Bride, sholl be heard no more at all in thee. The
Adversary himself will not, I believe, conclude that the rejoycings in Marriage
are therefore unlawful. This is also another way of signifying a very dejected
State in the Prophetical Poetic Style. So Jer. vii. 34. xvi. 9. xxv. 10. Thus
it was counted to have no share in those few Solemnities of Joy, which were
allowed in States not utterly ruined, at least at Nuptial Festialties. So clear
it is, that though we should grant that these things were to be understood of
Antichrist, yet they would not prove the Sinfulness of the things of which he
was to be deprived, but the Calamity of the Deprivation.

BUT our Author has an Observation XXIV. Dr. Lightfoots Observation, that the
Temple Worship was wholly Ceremonious, and the Synagogue Worship wholly Moral,
is not true.
from the very learned Dr. Lightfoot, which if it had been true, would, I
confess, weaken what I have said for Instrumental Music; Christ, says that
excellent Person, abolished the Worship of the Temple as purely Ceremonious;
but he perpetuated the Worship of the Synagogue, reading the Scriptures,
Praying, Preaching and Singing of Psalms, and Transplanted it into the
Christian Church as purely Moral. For I have already granted that Instrumental
Music was used not in the Worship of the Synagogues, but of the Temple. But
there are no Words of Christ, that I know of, that could be so much as
pretended for showing what he designed concerning these two Worships in
General, and much less to show that this was Christ's design concerning them.
We have seen withal, that the Apostles did separate from the Synagogue worship,
though they never did so from that of the Temple. This would rather imply the
contrary to what that great Man has advanced, if Arguments were allowed to
proceed universally on either side. But as there is no Text, so neither is
there any Reason, to pass this Judgment concerning both these kinds
universally. I know not why singing of Psalms should be counted Moral.
Especially according to our Adversaries Opinion, which ascribes its efficacy
for promoting Devotion, not to its own Nature, but to its divine Institution.
This must needs take away the antecedent Reason of its Institution. So far it
is from allowing it an Antecedent Reason, that it must necessarily and
universally oblige without any positive Sanction. This is usually thought
necessary according to the commonly received notion of a Law of Nature. And on
the contrary the use of Lots were taken by the Apostles from the use of the
Temple Worship, where it was usually made use of, for determining which
particular Priests of the whole (...) were to perform the duty of the Week.
This could be used by the Jews no where but at Jerusalem, because there was no
other place where Priests could lawfully Officiate. But by the Apostles it was
made use of not only for choosing a new Apostle of their own order, as in the
Case of St. Mathias, but also for determining the Persons that were to be
invested with Ecclesiastical Sacerdotal Power. And that very consequently,
because the exercise of the Evangelical Priesthood was not confined to one
place as that of the Jewish Priesthood was, to Jerusalem. This was used so
generally, that from thence the name of Clerus came to be appropriated to the
sacred Order in opposition to the Laity, as I have often shown elsewhere. It is
therefore a plain instance Diss. Cyp. 1.
that the general way of Reasoning will not hold that any thing must be
unlawful now, on that alone account, that it had been used in the Worship of
the Temple. I know no ground the Doctor could have for this Distinction, but
that he seems to have believed, that the Temple worship was universally settled
by a positive Law of God, as having no antecedent reason why it should have
obliged without such a positive Sanction; and that the Synagogue worship having
no positive Sanction in the Scriptures (without which our Adversaries allow no
proof of a positive Devine Sanction) must therefore have received the Sanction
it pretended to from the nature of the things themselves, and therefore as
immutable as those natures of things from which they thought it was derived.
This is indeed so far suitable to our Adversaries Principles, granted on
popular received Prejudices, that in things of this nature they allowed no
humane Sanction to be of any force. This precarious Supposition did naturaly
put them upon finding a Divine original for all the old Establishment of the
Worship of the Synagogue, which because they could not pretend to find in the
Scriptures, they were obliged to derive from the Moral Law, which was indeed
supposed to derive its Authority from a divine Legislation. But the Moral Law,
being founded, as they thought, on the Nature of the things, they must
therefore believe its Obligation as Eternal and Immutable, as those Natures
were supos'd to be. So on the contrary, because the written Law was written
with a prospect on one fixed Place for their solemn Assemblies, which fixation
was made by a positive divine Sanction, which was designedly to cease upon the
Destruction of the Jewish Temple, and the Dispersion of the Jewish Nation,
therefore they think the whole written Law relating to the Temple, was to have
an end with the Temple, for the use of which it was contrived. But neither way
does the Argument proceed as our Adversaries are concerned for it. The
Synagogue Worship not being a thing expressly provided for in the old
Testament) where there is no mention of Synagogues in the latter Sense of the
Word) I should rather have taken for an Argument against the Reasonings of the
Nonconformists, from the Testimonies of the old Testament, for the necessity of
an express divine Command for every indifferent Circumstance of Divine-Worship
when the whole kind of Synagogue-Worship cannot pretend to a divine Command in
the Scriptures. And without the Scriptures, there can be no divine Command
pretended, by their Principles, but what is Moral, which must therefore be
grounded on Eternal and Immutable Reasons, which will not be so easily found
for every particular of the Worship of the Synagogue, as our Adversaries may
fancy before they consider it. Every atnecedent Reason will not do. For inded
no Law, however positive can be thought prudent, that has not an antecedent
Reason, that might move the Legislator to add his Sanction to it. But if that
had been alone sufficient to oblige the Subject, there could have been no
necessity of the subsequent Law. The reason therefore requisite for a moral
Law, musts be such as must hold necessarily and universally, and so as to
expose the Person who is not ruled by it, not only to inconvenient
Consequences, and prejudicial to his Temporal concerns, but so as to involve
him in the guilt of sin, with relation to God, and the consequent indefinite
Effects af the divine Displeasurs, besides the natural Consequences of the
Actions it self. Such Reasons as these, our Adversaries will not be so easily
able to find for all the particulars of the Synagogue-Worship, when they shall
be pleased to consider it sedately. I am sure the Worship of the Body, and of
the Mouth too may be without singing, if they will allow no more natural
conduciveness to Vocal Music for raising the Imagination and the Affections,
than they do to that which is Instrumental. The Reasons mentioned in the things
Sung, receive no more accession of strength by their being Sung Vocally, than
they would by being Sung Instrumentally. I am apt to think the whole
Synagogue-Worship was introduced after the Captivity perhaps instead of the
Schools of the Prophets, that is, after that ordinary way of Educating Prophets
in Schools had failed of which we find no more mention after the Captivity.
From that time forwards the failing of the ordinary use of Prophets is owned in
the Scriptures. Ps. lxxiv. 9. Nehem. vii. 65. Contr. Apion.
and Josephus, as well as in the less certain Testimonies of the Rabbis. At
least as to Colleges and Schools. Whilst, those ordinary Bodies of the Prophets
were still in being, the People seem to have made the same use of them, as was
afterward made of the Synagogues, for performing those parts of the Offices of
their Religion with them, which by the Law, were allowed to be performed
elsewhere than at Jerusalem, 2. Kings iv. 23. The new Moons and the Sabbaths,
are mentioned as ordinary occasions of having recourse to them. If so, the
whole Synagogue way of Worship must have been settled by prudential Provisions,
which could alone take place upon the failing of the Spirit of Prophesy.
Especially if we will not allow any proof of Prophetic discoveries, by those
few Prophets which even then remained after the Prophetic Colleges were
generally dissolved. This our Adversaries are averse to on other occasions. If
they be true to themselves on this occasion also, I do not foresee how it is
possible for them to pretend any Divine Revelation for this way of Worship in
the Synagogues, from those few Prophets yet remaining, whose Writing we have
extant. And how can they possibly prove a Revelation that is no where Written?
What then will become of their Negative Arguments from our present Scriptures?
Nor does their Argument hold on the other side, that every particular of the
Temple Worship, must for that only Reason, because it was so, be unlawful now.
They might indeed infer that its confined use in the Temple must cease, when
the confinement of all sacerdotal Offices to that Temple, was its self
abrogated and repealed. But they very well know our present Dispute, is not
whether Instrumental-Musick be to be confined now, as it was formerly, to that
particular Temple. They might say, farther, that the Obligation it then had
from that Mosaical Sanction, is expired when the Mosaical Sanction is it self
repealed from whence that Obligation was derived. But neither is that our
present Question, whether the same Instrumental-Musick shall oblige us now, on
account of that Mosaic Imposition, which even then was never intended for
uncircumsised Gentiles, such as we are now. All that can be thence inferred by
any regular Reasoning, is, that, upon the Revocation of the Confinement of
sacerdotal Worship to the Temple, Instrumental-Musick returned to its own
Nature as it was before, either to remain as it was at first, Indifferent, or
to receive, or retain, some other Sanction distinct from that. But that it must
be thenceforward unlawful, is more than I think our Adversaries will ever be
able to prove from this concession alone, that it was formerly a part of the
Worship of the Temple.

ANOTHER pretense the Adversary XXV. Though Instrumental Music had been a Shadow
of the organical Worship of our Bodies under the Gospel, that would not prove
it inconsistent with it. Yet that it was a Shadow of it, cannot be easily
proved.
has for proving Instrumental Music abolished, is, because it was a shadow of
something then to come, of our Praising God with the Organs of our Bodies under
the Gospel. This would indeed hold if it so signified somewhat to come, as to
be guilty of false Signification, when the thing signified was actually come to
pass. If this had been the Case, that, while Instrumental Music was used, it
signified Bodily Worship only to come, our Adversaries would do well to
consider how it could have been used by the Jews. even in the time of the
Mosaic Law. For it is certain that the Jews used the Worship of the Organs of
their Bodies together with their Instrumental Music, not only of their Mouths
as we do, but also of their Feet, in their Religious Dances. If bodily Worship
being used at the same time with it made a false signification inconsistent
with the futurity which it is pretended to signify now, Why should it not do
so then also? If even then when it was was designed as a Prophetic Symbol of
the Organical Worship of the Body, that same Organical Worship of the Body
might notwithstanding be used at the same time with it, Why not now? This was,
one would think, sufficient to show that it is signification of bodily Organical
Worship, was not so essential to it but that, when that particular Reason
should fail, it might notwithstanding be continued on other Considerations
which might give no pretense of false signification, and inconsistency with the
present Innovations of the Revelations peculiar to the Gospel. This I have
shown to be the only true Reason of the abrogation of all the particulars of
the old Mosaic Law, as abrogation is understood by our Advarsaries, not only
to make things unobliging but unlawful also. But how does our Adversary know
that Instrumental Music was a Type of our bodily organical Worship under the
Gospel, or of any other particular Practice now in use? No other Reason is
pretended, but the general precarious presumption that all usages then
practiced, that were not Moral, must needs be so. The Apostle does indeed
acknowledge, that of events, they were (...) of what we might expect in the like
Cases, 1. Cor, x. 11. He also owns that the Law in general had a shadow of good
things to come. Heb. x. 1. But that every particular Imposition of the Law was
a shadow of some particular Imposition that was to answer it under the Gospel,
I know no Text our Adversaries can pretend to that could inform them. Many of
the positive, as well as the Moral, Precepts of the Jewish Law, were adapted to
the particular Exigencies of that Nation. Many were fitted to the Vices that
Nation was generally more inclined to than other Nations, as Idolatry,
Covetousness, etc. Many to those they were more in danger of, on account of
their particular Situation, the Vices of their Neighbor Nations. Many to other
Reasons and customs long since antiquated, as Maimonides has judiciously
observed from the Caldean Writings by him ascribed to the Zabij. Many to
particular Favors of Conversation, which God was in those Ages pleased to grant
to other Nations, as well as his Peculium. Such were those of the Waters of
Jealousy, of the ways of atoning unknown and involuntary Murders, and the
Oracles of Lots, and Prophets and Urim. Why should we think that such Laws as
these should have any prospect farther than those Ages, and that Nation for
which they were designed? Especially since the reasons of many of them failed
long before the Publication of the Gospel; and when they obtained, concerned no
other Nation whatsoever besides that of the Jews.

OUR Adversaries might have been XXVI. All Symbols of those times did not
foretell any future Innovations which should abolish them. Instrumental Music
could not be abrogated by the Organical woship of the Body, as being a shadow
of it.
pleased to consider that the way of delivering even known Moral Duties under
Mystical Symbols, was the usual Custom of those of those earliest Ages, even
where no farther future Innovations were ever thought of. Such were the ancient
Oracles, the Fables and Parables and dark Sayings and Riddles of the Wise. Such
the Pythagorean Symbols, taken up from the Observations of the Customs of those
Oriental Nations through which Pythagoras had traveled for Cultivating his
Knowledge, by the Inventions of those Nations that were then famous for
Inventions. And so the Jews of the Apostles Age understood that by prohibiting
the eating of Animals, God's true design was to forbid the Vices, of which
those Animals were counted Symbols by the received Traditions of the
Physiologers. So Philo and St. Barnabas, that I may confine my self to the Age
that I am speaking of. These had no more relation to the times of the Gospel
than of the Law, nor could be thought to be more obligatory then, than now. The
Vices designed by those Animals the Jews were obliged to avoid as much as we
are, and in order thereunto, were obliged to understand the Mystical Senses
intended by those Symbols. Nor are we more excused from the Mystical Sense than
they, though we be not obliged by the letter of the Prohibitions of those
Animals. The reason why such things were delivered by Mystical Symbols was not
to conceal them from the Persons to whom they were delivered for any time, much
less till distant events might come to pass; but only to dispose the Hearers to
receive them with the greater Reverence, according to the Customs of those
times, wherein all wise and sacred Documents were so recommended, that too much
familiarity might not expose them to contempt. Clemens Alxandrinus has at large
shown that to have been the Fashion of those Ages. But the Symbols we are
concerned for in judging what particulars of the Jewish Ceremonial law were to
be abrogated in our Adversaries Sense, so as that from the time of the
Publication of the Gospel, they were to become unlawful, and incapable even of
any new humane Sanction, were quite of another kind. These were purposely
cotrived to be Symbolical, that they might not be understood till the Gospel
was clearly published; and that, when it was sufficiently published, it might
then be understood that all the changes that followed upon the new Revelations
of the Gospel, were Originally designed by God. By their not being understood
before they found themselves obliged, not to admit Gentiles to the Privileges
of the new Peculium, without Proselytism of Justice and Incorporation into that
particular Nation of the Jews. Perfectly agreeable to what God himself designed
till then. But from that time forward God intended his new Establishments of
the Gospel should take Place, whereby Gentiles were to be admitted to these
same Privileges, without the Condition of Incorporation. Thence forwards
therefore it was necessary that there should be that evidence concerning what
was to be abolished, that might satisfy, even the Jews by Nation, of their
Duty of admitting Gentile Proselytes into the Peculium, without exacting from
them, those particulars of the Mosaic Law, which were abrogated by the new
Revelations of the Gospel. For they were Jews by Nation, who had then the Power
of admitting into both Peculiums. The Old was in the Power of the Sanhedrin;
the New was in the Power of the Apostles, who were themselves also Jews by
Nation, and under the same prejudices of Education with other Jews, from which
they were to be reclaimed by the Evidence of these new Revelations of the
Gospel. This being so, it plainly appears, that it is not every shadow that is
sufficient for our Adversaries purpose of proving a thing unlawful. A shadow
consistent would only return to its own nature of Original indifferency, and
would still be as capable as formerly of receiving a new Obligation from a new
lawful Sanction. But the Symbolical shadowing, we are here concerned for, was
to perfigure and predict a new and ungrateful Innovation of the Gospel, which
should in course repeal some Custom, they were then in possession of as
inconsistent with it, such could not be the Singing with the Organs of our
Body, as shadowed by the old inanimate Organs. For vocal Music was even then
also in present use, not only future. It was not ungrateful to the Jews
themselves, and therefore had no need of being concealed from them, till the
times of the Gospel. It was not inconsistent with any other received Custom of
theirs, which might have been abrogated by that inconsistency, not with that
very Practice of Instrumental Music which is pretended to have shadowed it. So
far from that, that even then the Jews had been used to Practice them together.
There can therefore be no pretense herefor shadowing a thing to come, when that
same thing was in present use among the Jews themselves, and which could not
therefore seem strange to them, and against which they could not therefore be
possessed with any prejudice.

SO little our Adversary would gain by XXVII The Harping in Heaven could not by
the Reasoning of that Age, be taken for a Shadow.
it for his purpose, though his Observation had been true, that Instrumental
Music had been one of the shadows of the Mosaic Law. But the contrary will
appear more likely, if he will be pleased to remember, that it is mentioned in
Heaven, in the Revelations. Which by the way will make the way of Arguing from
those Passages in the Revelations which mention Harping in the Heavenly
Jerusalem, stronger than perhaps our Adversary was aware of. For in the
Reasonings of the Apostolical Age, the shadows of the Law which were made, as I
have shown, by Bezaleel, are directly opposed to the Heavenly things
themselves, which are supposed to be the Pattern shown by God to Moses in the
Mount that was to be copied by Bezaleel. The shadow is said to be (...), Heb.
viii. 5. as an imitation of them. The shadows therefore are called (...), to
which the (...) are professedly opposed by the same Apostle, Heb. ix. 23. If
therefore Harping have any place in Heaven, it cannot, by this way of
Reasoning, be reckoned among the shadows of the Mosaic Law, which were to be
abolished. These Archetypes are the (...) hidden in the (...) according to St.
Paul, Col. ii. 3. exactly answering the Hellenistical Platonical Language of
that Age from which the Apostle Reasons. The Platonists placed their (...) in
the Contemplation of those Ideae in the (...). The Pythagoreans from whom Plato
borrowed his Timaeus, and who were more closely followed by Philo and the
Hellenists, call the same thing (...), which the Platonists call (...), as
appears in Aur. Carm Pyth.
their golden Verses. And the same Word is used by the LXXII, who are followed
by Philo, who represent the Request of Moses thus, (...). And (...) and (...)
are Terms used in this same matter, by the same Philo. It is further
observable, in the same Reasoning, that the Heavenly things are supposed to be
Eternal. So the Platonists of their Ideae. Their (...) (so they called their
Archetypal Man) was thought free from that Generation and Corruption to which
Individuals were believed obnoxious. So St. Paul, The things which are not seen
are eternal, 2 Cor. iv. 8. And eternal in the Heavens, v. 1. and where he
speaks of the shaking of the Heaven and Earth, he mentions this event of that
shaking, that it should be, that the things which cannot be shaken should
remain, Heb. xii. 27. Who sees not that those Words of the Apostle, are
designedly used concerning these very Changes which were to be made by the
Gospel? And that the Heavenly things, are those which are supposed incapable of
that shaking, and therefore to remain? (...) is the Word used by St. Paul, and
plainly signifies the same thing with (...), in St. John. ii. 17, and elsewhere
frequently. The same Word is used on the same occasion, and in the same Sense
by Philo, (...) MENON: Leg. Alleg. L. II. p. 79.
And we see how he opposes it to the (...). By this Reasoning therefore,
Harping cannot be reckoned among the shadows, nor can it be supposed abolished
by the Innovations of the Gospel, if it be reckoned among the Caelestials,
which are not capable of being affected by the great shaking of the Gospel, and
which must therefore remain unmoved under the Gospel Dispensation. This
Argument will receive a farther Confirmation, if he will be pleased to remember
farther, that the Gospel State supposed in the Reasonings of the N. T. is
really supposed to be the same with that of the Caelestial Patterns showed to
Moses in the Mount, in imitation of which the Mosaic Dispensation was formed.
And that even in this World, before its complete Perfection, which it is to
receive in the future State. Hence it is, that it is said, that the Jerusalem
above, is even now, the Mother of us all; That even now, we are Fellow-Citizens
with the Saints in Heaven; That our (...) is there; That here we are (...) and
(...), as having here no abiding City; that we are said to have actually sat
down in Heavenly places. Who can therefore wonder, that considers this, if the
Heavenly Jerusalem described in the Revelations, represent the present State of
the Church of Jerusalem then on Earth? Our Circumcision is the Circumcision
made without Hands, Col. ii. 11. opposed to the Jewish Circumcision, made by
Hands, Ephesians. ii. 11. Exactly as our Savior is said to be a High Priest of good
things to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with Hands,
that is to say, not of this Building, Heb. ix. 11. And as he is said, not to
have entered into the holy places made with Hands, which are the figures of the
true; but into Heaven it self, v. 24. If the Tabernacle, and the Holy Places
made without Hands, be Heaven it self; why should we doubt, but that the
Circumcision made without Hands, should have been then thought Mystical and
Heavenly? The same Apostle gives it else-were, as a Character of the things
that were to be abrogated by the Gospel; that the Reason of their abrogation,
was their being made. So he tells us, yet once more signifies the removing of
those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, Heb. xii. 27. It
seems plainly to allude to the Ectypes of the Tabernacle which were made by
Bezaleel, in opposition to those Patterns of which there is no mention of their
being made, but only shown by God to Moses in the Mount. For their not being
mentioned as made, is the same Reason for reckoning on them as not made in this
mystical way of Reasoning, as it was to reckon on Melchizedeck's having no
Father, no Mother, no Genealogy, no beginning of Days, nor end of Life; because
none of these particulars are mentioned concerning him in the Scripture. Nor
must this be called precarious Reasoning, in Interpreting Prophesies, being the
usual way taken, ever since there were Prophesies in the Prediction of disstant
future Events. The same thing is supposed in all those Places, where the things
of the Gospel are called Eternal, in opposition to the things answering them
under the Mosaic Law. So the Life promised in the Gospel, is called Eternal, in
opposition to the Life promised by Moses, in Deuteronomy. So the Salvation of
our Lord Jesus, is called Eternal, Heb. v. 9. in opposition to that of the
Jewish Jesus, the Son of Nun. So his Redemption also is called Eternal, in
opposition Heb. ix. 12.
to the many Redeemers mentioned in many places of the old Testament, where the
same Word is used in the LXXII. So the Inheritance of the Gospel, is likewise
called Eternal, in opposition to the Inheritance of Canaan. So the everlasting
Destrustion, the everlasting Consolation, 2 2. These. i. 9.
These. ii. 16, The everlasting Covenant, Heb. xiii. 20. The everlasting
Kingdom. 2 Pet. i. 11. The everlasting Gospel. Rev. xvi. 6. By the same
Allusion it is, that the things of the Gospel are said to be things themselves,
and the true things. So the Gospel Worshippers, are the true Worshippers, St.
Joh. iv. 23. The Eucharistical Bread, the true Bread, in opposition to the
Manna of the Israelites, St. Joh. vi. 32. The Holiness of the Gospel, the true
Holiness, Ephesians. iv. 24. The Tabernacle of the Gospel, (which none can doubt to
be Heaven it self) the true Tabernacle, Heb. viii. 2. For the Archetypal Ideae,
were supposed only to have Truth in them, according to the Platonists. So Grace
and Truth which came by Christ. is opposed to the Law given by Moses, St. John
i. 17. And being steadfast to the Gospel Commuion, in opposition to the
Communion of the Heretics, is said to be the abiding in the Truth. All these
Forms of Speech understood according to the Custom of that Age, do plainly
suppose, that all the Heavenly Archetypes of the Law were Evangelical, and
incapable of any revocation that shouldymake them unlawful under the Gospel;
and that all the positive Institutions of the Gospel, were reckoned on as
Heavenly, and therefore Harpers, being mentioned in the Heavenly Jerusalem,
must needs be supposed to have place among those ancient Customs that were not
to be abrogated. It is certain that Instrumental Music could be it self no
Shadow, according to the Doctrine of the Gospel, seeing the Evangelical Writers
reckon it among the Heavenly Archetypes, which were the Truth and the Body that
answered those Shadows. Nor is it any more difficult to prove Harps in Heaven,
which the Adversary insultingly requires, than to prove a Circumcision there
not made with Hands; than it is to prove a Manna and a Bread there, that is the
Food of Angels. This sure, is an easier Account of that Idiome in the Style of
the new Testament, which my late excellent Friend Dr. More, called
Israelitismus, than that insisted on by our Adversary. He might have been
pleased to remember, two Israelitisms there mentioned, the Mystical, which by
the Christians of that Age, was believed to be perfectly the same with their
own Constitution, as consisting of a Body of Gentiles ingrafted upon the
Apostles, who were themselves Jews by Extraction; and the Literal, which was in
some things contrary to the new Revelations of the Gospel, and so far, as it
was so, abrogated by them. And it is certainly much more rational to Interpret
them by the Israelitism they professed rather, than by that which they opposed.
This was no other than the Native Language that was, in course, to be expected
in their Circumstances. But the Event of this way of Interpretation will be
quite contrary to what the interest of our Adversaries Cause will require. It
will argue that the Israelitish Customs so alluded to, were still received by
the converted Christians, and that they could be no part of those old
Isarelitish Customs which were antiquated on account of their inconsistency
with the Gospel. This therefore will confirm what I said before, that the
Apostles still continued this Instrumental Music in their capital residence,
at least, whilst the quietness of their Circumstances in those troublesome
times would allow them to do so.

BUT there are Odours also, (...), joiined XXVIII. Incense might have been used
by the Aposties after the destruction of the Temple.
with the Harpers, Rev. v. 8. and the viii. 3. 4. joined with the public
Prayers, exactly as among the Jews. This the Adversary makes an argument of,
that it must have been the old antiquated Judaism that was here alluded to, not
that which was approved by the Christans. I suppose he may think himself the
more secure here, because even our Churches do not practice what here seems to
have been practiced by the Apostles. But he might have remembered that there
were also several other undoubted Apostolical Practices which have been since
discontinued generally, at least in the Reformation. Such were those of the
Ecclesiastical Deaconesses, the Kiss of Charity, and the Feasts of Love. He, I
confess, cannot account for this, who makes all things either Sins or Duties,
thatare taken from Precedents of that Age, and allows no mean between those two
Extremes. We can easily do so who believe that the Apostles themselves, as well
as other Ecclesiastical Governors, took some things into the use of the Church
from the civil Usages of their Age, which as they were prudent then, when they
were in Civil use, so they may as prudently be disused now, when they have been
so long antiquated as to their Civil use, and the particular Exigencies of
those times are now ceased, which were the principal Considerations that then
recommended them. But I see no reason why our Adversaries should believe that
the use of Incense was not continued, even after the Destruction of the Temple,
in the principal residence of the Apostles. It is to this Day practiced by a
far greater consent of the ancientest Churches, Greek as well as Latin; nor can
we find any Original of it, that can prove it later than the times of the
Apostles themselves. It appears in the first and ancientest Liturgies of both
Tongues. It is mentioned in those Canons which are therefore called
Apostolical, because they who first gathered them into a Body, knew no Original
of their Practice short Can. ap. 2. gr
of the Apostolical times. It is St. Jerome's rule, that the Immemorial Customs
of each Church should be presumed to have been Apostolical. This Rule was
probably followed by this Author. Thus therefore there is reason to presume
that this Custom might have descended from the Apostles themselves. We have
indeed an express mention of it in an Author considerably antienter than the
Collect of these Canons, that is, of the ancient Hippolytus, the Disciple of
St. Irenaeus, and a witness of Apostolical Traditions: So he (...) Ora. de
consum. Mund.
(...). Tertullian is the eldest Latin Christian Writer extant, and he also
mentions the cost the Christians were at in buying Frankincense, Tert. Apol. c.
42. Thura plane non emimus. Those are the Words of the Objectors, not of
Tertullian. His own Answer follows, Si Arabiae queruntur, Scient Sabaei pluris
and carioris suas Merces Christianis Sepeliendis profligari quam Dijs
fumigandis. He mentions inded no other use of it but in Burials. He elsewhere
excludes it from Sacrifices, where he tells us, That the Oblation offered by
the Chrstians was not Grana Thuris unius assis, non Arabicae arboris Lachrymae,
etc. c. 30. unless possibly he might intend some Emphasis in the Words unius
assis, as a reproof of their Niggardliness in it, as Alexander the great is
said to have reproved his Tutor Aristotle, for his having obstructed his native
Magnificence, after his Conquering Arabia. This might have been opposed to the
greater Expensiveness of the Christians on Franckincense mentioned in the
former Place. But I am rather apt to think, that the Case of the African
Churches might be somewhat singular. Tertullian mentions their being at first
Converted by the Church of Rome, Praesc. c. 36. And as it should seem, at a
distance from the Apostles, ib. c. 32. After the Church of Rome had taken a
liberty of Innovating from the Practice of the Ephesian College of Apostles, in
the keeping of Easter, under Xystus, It might do so in this Case as well as the
other. But Hippolytus was originally of the East. It is certain the first
Jewish Christians, the Apostles themselves, found it actually practiced. It is
withal certain that they as Jews were prejudiced in favor of received Customs,
so as not to disuse them, but upon some great evidence of Divine Revelation to
the contrary. And where can our Adversaries find any express Revelation of the
N. T. against this Custom? Where can they find any new Establishment of the new
Peculium inconsistent with it? On the contrary the Apostle alludes to it in
those Words of his, concerning the Alms of the Philippians, when he calls them
an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, Phil. iv. 18.
well pleasing to God. These Words exactly answer the Custom of joining Incense
with their Oblations then practiced in the Temple Worship, as it was also
afterward among the Christians. I see no reason why the Practice should be
discontinued by the Christians. For these were Sacrifices allowed by the
Pythagoreans themselves, who were against the bloody Sacrifices then generally
received. This is plain from Porphyry. There is therefore no reason why they
should be ungrateful to the Essenes themselves, who were of all the Jews best
disposed to the Christian Religion. Withal they were common to the Jews with
the Heathens, and therefore fittest for the old and new Peculium to unite in.
So far from any repugnancy to that Union which I have shown to have been the
true reason of the abrogation of those old Jewish usages, which were indeed
abrogated by the Christian Religion. If our Adversaries ask how we can
discharge our selves from the obligation of these things if we believe them
lawful, the answer will be very easy on the Principles now proposed. By being
excused from Circumcision, we Gentiles, are discharged from all the Impositions
God was pleased to lay on the Jewish Nation, since we are not now any longer
obliged to any Incorporation with them. And this is sufficient to leave things
of this nature in their original indifferency as to Us, as if they never had
been imposed.

HOWEVER our Adversary pretends, XXIX. The reasonings of tho Fathers produced
by our Adversary in this Cause, are quite different from those of the
Apostolical Age it self.
That the Fathers reason as he does; that they also own Instrumental Music
peculiarly fitted to that State of Nonage, in which the Apostle supposes the
Jews under the old Law. St. Chrysostom makes such Musical Instruments rather
permitted than imposed. (...). Isidore Pelusiote says, they were born with
(...). And the Author of the Quaest. ad Orthodox. very probably Justinus
Siculus, who lived in the time of Pope Faelix II, tells us, that it is not so
proper for a State of Infancy, (...), to sing Simply, but to sing with
inanimate Instruments, etc. If these things had been true, it would have been
an Indignity below the honorable State of the Gospel to have used these things
now, and a false signifying that we were not yet past that State of Childhood,
from which it was the design of the Gospel to free us. But we must always
distinguish between the Reasonings and the Testimonies of those original
Conveyors of our Christian Religion to us. In their Reasonings they had no more
advantage than other Men: Especially where they lived at any distance, and were
therefore any way suspicious of not keeping close to the Reasonings of that Age
whose Traditions they pretend to gather by their Reasonings. For of these
Reasonings we can also judge as well as they, whether they were agreeable to
the Reasonings to which the H. G. accommodated his Revelations, that they might
be rightly understood in the sense in which he intended them. For the
Reasonings of their own Age could no farther contribute thereto, than as they
still continued the same with those of their Age, wherein the Holy Ghost was
pleased to discover and publish his new Revlations relating to the peculiar
constitution of the Gospel. But the reasonings of the Age of Clemens
Alexandrinus, who is the first of those produced by our Author, were by no
means fit to inform him in this matter; much less of those later Fathers, who
lived at so much a greater distance from the Age of the Apostles. They cannot,
they do not, pretend any one Author of the Apostolical Age who showed them a
Precedent of this way of reasoning. They had none of that Age that ever
reckoned Instrumental Music among the Rudiments and Elements of the Childish
State, which were in course to be antiquated as soon as the Peculium should
attain to their perfect and adult Age. On the contrary its being mentioned by
the Apostle in Heaven, shows that it was impossible by the reasonings of that
Age, that it could have been reckoned among the Rudiments and Elements of
Children. For there all are supposed to have arrived to the fullness of the
measure of the Stature of Christ: Which Words do plainly describe the Age of
Adults, in opposition to that of Children. And indeed (...) in that place would
be better Translated Age than Stature, being opposed rather to the Age than the
Stature of Children. So the Saints in Heaven are said to be perfect, as the
(...) is opposed to (...), not only in the Scripture, but also in ordinary
Classick Authors. Nor can I understand how our Adversaries could possible
excuse the Apostles themselves from this Notion of Childishness, whilst even
they Communicated with this Instrumental Music of the Temple, if the bare
Observance of, that Music had been taken for an Element and Rudiment of
Children. These Reasonings from the Sense and Practice of the Apostolical Age
and Writers, are far more certain for proving the Sense of that Age, than the
reasonings insisted on by our Adversary from the Sense of those Fathers, who
however superior to us, were yet confessedly later than the Age of greatest
Authority, that of the Apostles

THOSE very excellent Persons did not XXX. The next age to the Apostles seems
to have discontinued Instrumental Music with out any dislike of it. The true
design of the Reasoning from the State or Childhood, and Weak and Beggarly
Elements explained.
sufficiently consider how very easy it was, for matters of this Nature to be
discontinued, without the least dislike of those immediately succeeding Ages,
that discontinued them. Supposing this Music proper for the Jerusalem
Sacrifices, as they were plainly in the Temple of Jerusalem, there could be no
pretenses to them in any other Church in the World, besides the Head Church of
Jerusalem, where the first Apostle had the same right over all the Churches in
the World, as the High Priest of the Jewish Sanhedrin had over all the Jewish
Synagogues, in all their Dispersions. This was an easy Account why this
Practice of Instrumental Music might have been reserved to the Apostolical
Church, till that Church was utterly extinguished by the Death of the last
Apostles. After the last residence of the Apostolical Body at Ephesus, in
Trajan's time, all the Churches in the World, were equal to that Church where
the Apostles had made their last residence, and equal withal among themselves.
Then they might, if they pleased, have taken up that same Custom universally.
But were very unlikely to do so, having never till that time used it. And for
any one single Church to have done so, when the rest did not so, would have
been thought invidious and assuming. It might have been Interpreted as a
Challenge of the Catholic Jurisdiction, to have alone exercised the
Prerogative of that Church, which before had a Right to a Catholic
Jurisdiction. So Solomon Interpreted it in his Brother Adonijah, that de
desired one of the Royal Concubines. For they also followed the right of the
Crown, as appears from the 2 Samuel xii. 8. This was far from the Humility of
those Times, and gives a clear Account, why it might have been universally
disused, how lawful soever it might have been thought otherwise. But this could
be no hindrance why it might not have been resumed afterward, by any
particular Church that pleased, when there was no danger of that Consequence.
When the memory of the Apostolical prerogative was lost, and when no Title
could be pretended for any particular Church in the World, why it should
succeed to the Apostolical prerogative. The pretense of the Church of Rmeisfar
later than these earliest itmes of Christianity, of which I am now speaking.
However it was very natural for their earliest Successors, when they sound this
Practice discontinued in Fact, to impute the discontinuance of it, to some
disapprobation it had received from the Christian Religion; and to bethink
themselves of some such Reasons as these produced by them why it might have
been disliked by them who discontinued it, as unsuitable to the Dignity of the
new Peculium. But I have shown, that this Reasoning of theirs in this
particular, could not possibly be the Reasoning of the Apostolical Age, who
both actually Communicated with Instrumental Music, and who allowed it a place
in Heaven, which was not accounted the Place of Rudiments and Children,
according to the Hypothesis of mystical Reasoning. This is abundantly
sufficient to discharge us from any Obligation to be concluded by the
Reasonings of these Fathers in this particular, how great a Veneration soever
we may profess for their Authority in attesting Traditions, either of their own
Age, or the Apostles. Indeed the whole design of this Topic of Reasoning from
the State of Nonage and Rudiments was, not to prove the observation, even of
the externals of the Mosaic Law unlawful, but the stopping at them, so as not
to admit the farther Discoveries of the Gospel. The (...) is opposed to the
(...), the (...). Ephesians. iv. 13. And to the (...), which was when God sent his
son made of a woman made under the Law, Gal. iv. 4. This was to stop at the
(...) (so the Law is called, Gal. iii. 24.) whose Office was to bring us to
Christ, if then they refused to be taught by Christ, but chose rather still to
continue under the Discipline of the Paedagogue. That was indeeed a keeping
themselves back from enjoying the Benefit of that fullness of Age, which, as we
have seen, commenced with our Savior's Dispensation. And it was a listing
themselves with Children, to keep still to the Paedagogue, who by the
Discipline of that Age, was a perpetual Companion and Guardian of the Morals of
unadult Persons, till they reached those Years of Discretion that might make it
safe to trust them to themselves. This did not therefore in the least make the
practice of the Law Childish, whilst they used it as the Apostles themselves
did, in subordination to the new Discoveries of the Gospel, that is, whilst
they observed only those particulars of the Law, which were consistent with the
Gospel. Which will neither save the ends of those Fathers, nor our Adversaries.
The (...) plainly allude to the things wherein those Youths which were under
the Discipline of Paedagogues, were usually Instructed. Especially during the
former part of that Discipline. That was Grammatical Learning, wherein they
were Instructed by their Grammarians and Literators, the Letters themselves
being properly called (...). But as this Word is used here, it plainly denotes
the Ectypal resemblances of the Law, in opposition to the Evangelical Heavenly
Archetypes, which were supposed to answer them under the Gospel. So Mount Sinai
is said, (...), Gal. iv. 25. Here we have the true Notion of (...), as it is
used by St. Paul. Mount Sinai in Arabia, the portion of Hagar the Handmaid, is
supposed to be a (...). That is in opposition to Mount Sion, the Mountain of
the true Peculium, which answered is as the portion of Sarah the Freewoman,
the Mother of the true Peculium. So the very ancient Author teaches, de
Montibus Sinai and Sion, by some ascribed to St. Cyprian. Agreeably enough to
the Notions of the new Testament, where we frequently find Mount Sion
mentioned, as that wherein the Archetypal Mystical Peculium was alone concerned
Romans ix. 33. xi. 26. Heb. xii. 22. 1 Pet. ii. 6. Rev. xiv. 1. This being indeed
the Title by which the Peculium is designed in the old Testament, wherein it is
so frequently called the Daughter, and the Virgin Daughter of Sion, never of
Sinai, though thence it was, that Moses received his Law. Accordingly the
Jerusalem that is now, is said also to be a (...), that is another Fellow
(...), in the same Sense, wherein the Word had been used of Mount Sinai in
opposition to the (...), which is the Mother of us all. Gal. iv. 26. In both
Cases the Worldly Figures are so called in opposition to the Heavenly
Archetypes of the Gospel. They are therefore called the (...), Gal. iv. 3. Col.
ii. 8, 20. As (...) is opposed to (...). It is the (...), Ephesians. vi. 12, in
opposition to the (...), which is always ascribed to the Messiah. So the (...),
Heb. ix. 1, is opposed to the (...), v. 24. And as I have shown, that the
Church here on Earth is called Heaven, so the deserting the Church is called,
the loving this present World (...), 2 Timothy iv. 10. opposed as I said to the
(...) of the Messiah. These (...) are called (...), Gal. iv. 9. They are first
called (...), as (...) are joined together. Romans xv. 1. So the (...). Romans
viii. 3. The plain Importance of these Expressions seem to have been this, That
in the Reasonings of the New Testament, in matters of this Nature, the mystical
Benefits represented and covenanted for, by these Symbols of the Law, were
never supposed to be performed by the Symbols them selves, otherwise than as
they represented and applied the Archetypes, answering them under the Gospel.
Thence it followed that in separation from those Evangelical Archetypes, the
Legal Symbols must have been perfectly useless and insignificant, in relation
to those greater Benefits expected by them which of themselves they were no way
able to perform. So the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, that it was not
possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sins, Heb. x. 4.
Why so, but to let his Nation see the necessary Obligation that lay upon them
to qualify themselves for being received to the Christian Eucharistical
Sacrifices, which answered those bloody Sacrifices under the Gospel, if they
desired the mystical Benefit of a true Expiation: So he again Warns the
Galatians, That in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails nor
Uncircumcision (...), any thing, but the new Creature (...), Gal. vi. 15. Here
we see the (...) in opposition to the (...) and (...) is ascribed to the (...)
in Baptism, which was Instituted instead of Circumcision under the Gospel. For
the (...) was alone to be expected by the Spirit, which was the Prerogative of
our Christian Baptism. This was the (...). Romans xii. 2. and the (...), which is
joined with the (...). Tit. iii. 5. which could be no other than that of our
Christian Baptism, as it is also described St. Joh. iii. 5. This, by the way
gives a clear account why the Law is said (...). Romans viii. 3. For Flesh is
ordinarily used in the old Testament also as a Symbol of Weakness, as the
Spirit is of Strength. And the Apostle plainly warns that the Spirit was not
received by the works of the Law, but by the hearing of Faith. Gal. iii. 2. So
the Apostle shows that the literal Jerusalem, to which the separating Jews
pretended, could give no Title to that Liberty which both Parts agreed to be a
privilege of the true Peculium, as the Offspring of Sarah the Free Woman. So
far from that, that he observes that that Jerusalem was even then in Bondage
with her Children. But the Jerusalem, continues he, which is above, is Free,
which is the Mother of us all. Gal. iv. 25. 26. So he also elsewhere observes,
that it was the Seed of Abraham's Faith, not of his Flesh that had a just Right
to Inherit the Promises made to his Seed. Romans iv. 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18. ix.
7, 8. This therefore seems to be the true account why the legal Symbols are
called (...) when compared with the Originals which were to succeed them under
the Gospel. The same (...) are also said to be (...), Gal. iv. 9, Plainly in
opposition to the (...) which is frequently ascribed to the Mystical Spiritual
Benefits expected by them, but in vain. For the Reasoning of the Apostles
supposed, that they are really to be expected only from the Rites which were to
succeed those legal Symbols under the Gospel. So we read the (...) Romans ii. 4.
the (...), Romans ix. 23. Ephesians. iii. 16. Col. i. 7. the (...). Romans xi. 33.
Alluding all to the Mystical Senses of the Law, and the Benefits signified and
conveyed by them. So again the (...). Ephesians. i. 7. with relation to the Spiritual
(...) so literally poured out then upon the Christians, but not on the dividing
Jews, who kept to the literal Institutions of the Law, which afforded them no
Riches of this kind, whilst they obstinately persisted in their Separation.
Justly therefore they might be styled in this Sense Poor, when compared with
the richer Institutions of the Gospel, which in that Age, yielded these
invaluable Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge in so very great abundance. The
same Expression of (...) with relation to the mystical Benefits of these
external (...) thus explained, is used also in Philo (...), Phil. de Ops.
M^act, p. 5.
before St. Paul, as well as Ignatius after him. This is abundantly sufficient
to show, that these are the true Interpretations of the Expressions objected by
our Adversaries, according to the Notions and Language of that Age.

THESE things thus explained, will XXXI. So explained they conclude nothing to
the purpose of those Fathers or our Adversaries.
make it appear how very different the Reasonings of these Fathers and our
Adversaries are in these Matters, from those of the Apostolical Writers from
whom they borrow them. The whole design of them as used by the Apostolical
Writers, is against Jews, who either would not come over to the Christian
Communion on the terms prescribed by the Gospel of Communicating with the
Uncircumcised Gentiles in the Holy Offices of the Christian Religion, or who
were inclined to a defection from it, as soon as they understood that these
terms were expected from them, out of zeal for their former Notions, which were
contradicted, and at length abrogated, by these new Revelations of the Gospel;
and out of zeal for their whole Law, which was imposed on them as a particular
Nation, and on the Gentiles, whilst their Incorporation into that particular
Nation was required by God as a Condition of their Admission into the true
Peculium, which now they found repealed by these new Revelations of the Gospel.
The using these Rudiments without a design of defection was so far from being
blamed by the Arguments now mentioned, that it was practiced by the Apostles
themselves, as Jews, till the dissolution of the Temple; that it was urged and
insisted on by those many Myriads of believing Jews, who were zealous for the
Law, with a perfect good understanding with the Apostles; that St. Paul
himself, who had said most of any against the Obligation of the Law, complied
with Act. XXI. 20. 23, 24.
them, and was urged to do so by the chief Apostle St. James, But a breach is
plainly supposed in the Arguments insisted on by our Adversaries. A not coming
over to Christ, or relapsing from him, and stopping with the Paedagogue who was
to, bring them to Christ, was that which was to continue them in, or reduce
them to the State of Childhood. This made them Rudiments and Elements, when
they went no further than the Mosaic Institutions. This made them weak and
beggariy when separated from the Gospel Institutions, which were alone supposed
able to confer the mystical Benefits Convenanted for, as well as represented by
those legal Symbols. This made them beggarly when they kept them off from the
Evangelical Archetypal Symbols, which were thence forwards appointed by God, as
the only ordinary conveyancers of that riches of Grace which the separating
Jews in vain expected from their own Symbols. This was the true dispute of
great Importance in that Age, in which the Arguments now mentioned, were
insisted on with great Prudence and Strength. The Error confuted was the
depending on Circumcision for the Incorporation into the true Peculium, which
could no longer be expected without our Christian Baptism. And the depending on
the Temple Sacrifices for all the Benefits of the Heavenly mystical Sacrifice,
which were thenceforward to be expected from our Christian Eucharist. The
contenting themselves with the literal Circumcision in the Flesh for their
intitling themselves to the name of the Seed of Abraham, and the Promises made
to them that were so, without the Faith of Abraham in the Messiah, which he had
when those Promises were made to him before his carnal Circumcision, as the
Apostle observes. Romans iv. 9, 10, 11, 12. These and the like were the Weak and
beggarly Elements spoken of by St. Paul, when depended on for the Benefits
which they were not able to perform; and that in separation from those means by
which alone they could be performed by the new Revelations of the Gospel. And
this Reasoning was very proper to oblige all Jews to come into the Christian
Communion, and to continue in it, if they desired the mystical Benefits
conferred formerly in the Jewish Communion alone, before the Gospel Revelations
had altered the Case, but not afterward. But then these Reasonings conclude
nothing against the very same abrogated Symbols, if practiced in unity with the
uncircumsised Believers much less if the same things had been observed by the
Ecclesiastical Power of the Church, without regard to the old Imposition of
Moses. For the latter could oblige all its own Subjects, which the former could
not do, being only obligatory to the Jewish Nation. Here therefore there was no
Enmity, no Wall of Partition, which might any way tend to the dissolution of
their common Body and Communion. Withal it is plain that this Reasoning extends
to no other Jewish Customs but those only who were thought to entitle to some
mystical Benefits represented and conveyed by them, till God had declared it
otherwise by his new Revelations. And therefore it is to no purpose, in
reference to this design, to find a thing represented by the Jewish Symbol,
unless it be a mystical Benefit, to which it was to entitle from God as a
Covenanting Symbol Instituted by him. In vain therefore does our Adversary
pretend that Instrumental Music shadowed our Worship with the Organs of our
Bodies. Had that been true, yet it had been nothing to the purpose in relation
to the design of these reasonings. That had been a Duty, not a Benefit, which
is plainly supposed as pretended to in all the Instances of these Reasonings.
It was their losing the Substance conveyed by the shadow, on which all the
force of the Argument depends, that is drawn from the Appellation of shadows.
The Weakness of the Elements or Rudiments of the Mosaic Law, as argumentative
in this Case, implies their insufficiency to convey the Benefits, as their
Beggarliness implys their Inability to confer the Mystical Riches that were
expected from them. If therefore our Adversary will make Instrumental Music a
Shadow or a Rudiment, he should bethink himself of some Mystical Benefit
represented and conveyed by it under the Law, but now conveyed by some other
Institution succeeding it under the Gospel. For this is absolutely requisite to
make it now an empty Shadow, and a weak and beggarly Element. And what may that
be? Is it the admitting us to the Joys of the Heavenly Society, represented by
Instrumental Music? And why may not the like use of Instrumental Music
entitle us to that now as well as represent it? I have shown that the Gospel
Symbols are supposed as best qualified to give us a title to any thing
Heavenly, by the Reasonings of the New Testament. I have shown, that by the
same Reasonings the same Title is denied to the legal Symbols in a Statee of
Separation from the Communion of the Church. I have shown that the contrary is
supposed, by the same Reasonings, concerning the Symbols of the Church, that
they, and they alone, are supposed sufficient to perform what is represented,
and Symbolically Covenanted for by them. The weakness and beggarliness of what
would otherwise have been useful, do more concern our Adversaries than Us, who
practice even their Vocal Music, as the Jews did, in a Separation from the
truly Original Apostolical Communion. The good God open their Eyes, and make
them truly sensible of it. Thus I think I have obviated all that has been said
or can be said, from our Adversaries Principles, with relation to my own
principal Argument? And I have not leisure to follow him in things less
necessary to my own design.

FINIS.

