A SERMON Preached before HIS MAJESTY on GOOD FRIDAY at Whitehall, March 24.
1664/5.

By J. DOLBEN, D. D. Dean of WESTMINSTER, and Clerk of the CLOSET.

Published by His Majesty's special Command.



London, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, 1665.

Out of the Gospel.
19. Chapter St. JOHN, part of the 19. Verse. Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.
ALthough I am by my Place, and the honor usually vouchsafed me to appear here
on Good Friday, a Preacher of ill Omen and abode, one engaged (...), to be
Phalaris. Ep. a.
an Evangelist of sad uncomfortable things: And you may expect from me at least
a Tragical doleful representation of our Saviors Crucifixion, That I shall
call you to contemplate all the bloody stages of his conflict with Sin and
Death, to meditate on the several aggravations of his sufferings, and consider
if ever any sorrow were like unto his sorrow wherewith the Lord Lam. 1 12.
afflicted him in the day of his fierce anger; And not show you those things as
in a Scene or Landscape, but with a vehement astonishing Rhetoric, (such as
the Subject will furnish to the meanest Orator) force and drive them home into
your souls, recollect all the sad thoughts which have been fermenting in your
breasts during the Lent past, and actuate them in one pungent amazing sorrow,
able not only to fetch tears from your eyes, but even to repeat his Agonies
and draw showers of Blood from every heart that is not more infidel then Judas
or Pilate, more insensate then the earth it self, and harder then the rocks and
stones about Jerusalem. Nay further yet, you may justly look that I should this
day come up with a Discipline in my hand, turn all the whips and thorns and
nails upon my Auditory; lance and wound your Consciences, by convincing you
that your selves have inflicted, and daily by your sins do inflict those pains
which you bewail, act those Treasons which ye condemn and abhor, execute those
inhumane Butcheries which you tremble at, are confounded and ready to dye at
their very apprehension. Though to do all this, and so make it your Passion
day, as well as your Saviors, would be most suitable to my office, and apposite
to the business of our present meeting; Yet I have now chosen to put on another
Person; Not to lament the shame and cruelties, but to Celebrate the Triumphs
and Glory of Christ's Passion, to do Homage to the King of sufferings, and adore
the Majesty of our Lords abasement; Discovering to you, not only that the
Contumelious addresses of Honor, the mock Purple, the counterfeit Scepter, and
the Bloody Diadem of Thorns, were, as St. Chrysostom phraseth it, (...),
Mystical representations of a Chrysostom. Tom. 5. (...).
real Kingdom, while they upbraided his vain affecting a false one; But that
this whole Treatment, so entertained by Christ as it was, did directly signify
and declare him to be Messiah, the King both of Jews and Gentiles, and that
having already punctually fulfilled what the Prophets of old had spoken
concerning his Birth and life, there remains now nothing to complete the
Demonstration, but that he answer all the Types and Prophecies of his Death
too, That the Captain Heb. 2. 10.
of our salvation be made perfect by sufferings! Perfect in the whole latitude
of the (...)
original word, consecrated and inaugurated upon the Altar and Throne of the
Cross; while the soldiers are busily anointing him with the most Precious
ointment which the world ever saw, his own inestimable Blood, and Pilate
becomes both his Herald and his Champion, proclaiming him with defiance to his
enemies,

King of the Jews.

THat his Title may appear good, and well cleared and justified by this
procedure, I will set it forth, 2. By opening to you what this Magnificent
Style, King of the Jews, imports; what Royalty and Dominion was by God designed
to Messiah, challenged and exercised by our Savior Christ. 2. Show you that
this shameful, cruel Death did apply all that honor and power to Jesus of
Nazareth, demonstrated him to be the very person promised by God, represented
by Types, described by Prophesies, expected by the whole Nation of the Jews,
under the Names of Shilo, the coming King, Messiah the Prince.

THe First Part of my Text is to declare the Nature of Christ's Kingdom. And
this we are therefore concerned carefully to examine; because from their
mistaking this, fancying a temporal, in stead of a spiritual Messiah, arose the
Fundamental Error of the Jews, and all their prejudice against Christ: That
God would one day raise up unto them out of their Deuteronomy. 18. 15
Brethren, a Prophet like and superior to Moses; a Prince whose Dominion
should extend from one Sea to the other, to whose Scepter the Kings of the
Earth Psalm. 72. 8. 9, 10, 11.
should submit their Majesty: They were at all times so confident, that this
conceit made them triumph in the midst of their Captivities; Despise, and in
their own thoughts reign over their Masters and Conquerors; nay, even yet,
after so many Defeats of their desires, so long and dreadful Desolation, makes
them threaten and design to ruin all Kingdoms where they are dispersed. That
about the time of our Saviors Incarnation, this Great Person should discover
himself, their sollicitous examining the Records of Scripture had assured them;
they had computed diligently the Periods of Daniels Chronology, compared all
coincidences of Affairs which answered his Predictions; and from thence settled
in themselves a seeming pregnant hope, and spread even among the Gentiles an
expectation of a mighty and happy Prince now to arise in Judea, Cic. de
Divinatione. l. 2. circa med. Virgil. Eclog 4 Sueton. in Vespesiano Tacit,
Histor. l. 5.
who should Govern the World. This alarmed Herod's Jealousy at the arrival of
the Magi: And this Tradition helped to interpret unto those wise men the
portent of that New Star, which their skill in Astronomy had made them observe.
This made the Jews take fire on every little occasion, run into war at the call
of every Rascal that was bold and Sueton. ubi supra Joseph. (...), l. 6. c. 31.
wicked enough to head their Rebellions: And therefore it was no wonder, when
the Fame of Christ's Miracles reported him a man like to answer the largest of
their wishes, that they flocked about him with importunate Eagerness: Nor was
it the light and giddy multitude alone that fixed their hopes on him; even the
most sage and cautious of their Rulers had a vehement surmise that he should
redeem Israel. But when he opened himself fully, preaching only Innocence,
Obedience, Poverty of Spirit, Contempt of worldly Advantages, and embracing
Affliction; When he lived poor, and conversed with them that were so; declined
respect and honor, and refused the offer of a Kingdom: When in stead of
freeing his Country from Roman Tributes and Exactions, he determined in favor
of Caesar's right, and was so far from undertaking a war to deliver himself or
others from oppressing Power, that he instructs his Scholars to offer their
left Cheek to him that should strike them on the right, and make no other
return to their most injurious persecuters beside blessings and prayers; these
were so contrary to the Jews Hypothesis, so disagreeing with that Idea and
Fancy which they had cherished, of a fighting, conquering, triumphing Messiah;
Poverty was so unlike to raise and pay Armies; Meekness so unfit to rout
Legions; Patience so unable to break the yoke of Servitude, to shake and
subvert the Roman Empire; that their defeated Hope turns to Scorn, their
Kindness to Rage and Cruelty: And because Jesus will not be their Captain, he
must be their Martyr, and suffer for their seditious Thoughts and Designs,
because he will not act them. You see what Scribes and Pharisees mean by King
of the Jews; and therein, how ill Interpreters Carnality and Self-love are of
the Mind of God; how little room souls full of the world have for the
entertainment of spiritual Benefits; how hard it is for men whose Affections
are riverted to the Earth, to raise themselves up to heavenly contemplations.
Should I let my self loose to enumerate all the absurd and monstrous Dreams,
the contradictions and impossibilities which the Jews embrace; how they
confound all the Principles and Rules of humane understanding, jumble and
invert the Series of times and actions, and disturb the whole frame of Nature;
merely that they may force themselves to apprehend in the Shell and Outside of
a Prophecy, Flesh in stead of Spirit, Earth in stead of Heaven, a filthy
robbing Barchocab, a murdering Villain and Boutefeu, rather then a Jesus,
Prince of Peace and Life; you would extremely pity such miserable Delusions,
and say, their Fathers, who longed for Leeks and Onions, but loathed Mannah;
wished to return to slavery and making Brick in Egypt, rather then enjoy the
delights and plenty of Canaan, had appetites far less corrupt, wills less
debauched then they. But to our business. It Is most true, all great things are
said of Messiah in the Psalms and Books of the Prophets; and they generally
expressed under the Symbols of earthly power and happiness: But that was Gods
way of dealing with the Jews. They were a fleshly People, and God bred them
under a suitable fleshly Economy, drew them on to his service like children
with entertainments agreeable to their infirmity; That they might grow up under
the Pupillage and imperfect institution of the Law, and by its Carnal
Ordinances and Rewards, as by the art of a Schoolmaster, be made fit for and
led unto Christ. Consider, I pray you, that no man apprehends any thing he
knows not, but by analogy and likeness to somewhat that he already understands
(of which we have a ready vulgar instance in the impossibility of making a
Negro of Guinee, or even a Native of our own Barbados, conceive what frost or
snow can be, till he has seen a winter in England) and you will presently
discern how necessary it was that God should represent to Jews, who thought of
no happiness beyond a perpetual affluence of plenty in Canaan, those infinitely
greater, but spiritual Blessings which he designed them in his Son, under the
figure and shadow of such things as they were affected with. St. CHRYSOSTOM
says well and judiciously, That had the spirituality of Christ's office been
plainly and nakedly declared by Tom. 6. (...). per totum.
the Prophets, none of the Jews would once have thought on him before his
coming, or regarded him when he came. And therefore though all the other
Prophecies were so delivered as to be clear and intelligible to those who
received them; yet, such as concern Messiah had a vail and shadow of earthly
things drawn over them, that the people might not be dazzled and confounded with
too much brightness and glory; but approach cheerfully, and comprehend by
degrees that Mystery which they contained, being allured and engaged to taste
and like its spiritual Divine intention by a Preparatory relish and
pregustation of Carnal Promises. All which we find distinctly exemplified in
the carriage and temper of Christ's own twelve chosen Disciples. To the same
purpose, though on another occasion discourses Maimonides himself, assigning
this for the reason why God prescribed by Moses such an outward and fleshly way
of worship to the Jews, Because, says he, that people who had seen the
Egyptians and all other Nations adore their Idols with sacrifices continually
More Nevochim Par. 3 c. 3^
smoking upon their Altars, consecrating themselves and their oblations with
blood, wine, salt, and perfumes, and other sensible rites, were not then
capable of a mental internal Religion, could not suddenly be brought to leap
from one contrary to another and apprehend how to serve God only in spirit and
truth; And therefore it was sufficient for that time, to draw them from those
false and ridiculous Deities, from offering one Beast to another, from burning
incense before a Cat or Crocodile; and engage them to worship the one true God,
though in a fashion not unlike that which they observed the Heathen to use
toward their Abominations.

Which assertion as it expressly avows what I now insist on, The necessity of
Gods condescending to speak to the Jews in such a Dialect as they would
understand, and propose sublime and heavenly notions in terms suitable to
their low thoughts; as we see those curious men who establish a kind of
discourse and correspondence with Birds, are forced to whistle and chirp like
them: so does it, by the way, give us the confession of that learned Rabbi,
That the whole carnal Economy of the Law was in God' s original intendment
temporary, not designed to continue always, being but an imperfect rudiment,
attempered to their present infirmity; A rough draught of a more excellent
reasonable service, Perfective of humane Nature, Worthy of God, and apt to
elevate the soul, and bring it near to him that should be revealed in the
fullness of time, or, as the Jews sometimes speak, in the days and Kingdom of
Messiah; which observation will go a great way toward the determining the main
controversy between us and them. Nevertheless, this veil upon the face of
Moses was not so dark, the cloud which covered the Mystery of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom was not so thick and impenetrable, but that considering discerning men
might have seen through it, had there not been another vail and cloud upon
their hearts, had they not loved that too much which lay nearest to their
senses: For ISAIAH brings in Christ with the Spirit of the Isaiah 61. 1. Luke
4. 18 19. 7 22. John 7. 49
Lord upon him, Anointing him, i. e. making him his Messiah, to the end that he
might preach the Gospel to the poor, whom Scribes and Pharisees thought
unworthy, profane, and such as it would be a kind of sacrilege to cast away
their Doctrine upon; To heal the brokenhearted, not to add affliction and
vengeance to their grief; to preach deliverance to the Captives, not to enslave
and destroy all Nations of the world, as the Jews expect; to restore the blind
their sight, and set at liberty those that are bruised; illustrating their
souls with Divine light and Graces, redeem the contrite from the pressures of
sin, and the bondage of Satan, and proclaiming the acceptable year of the
Lord, the perpetual Jubilee of lasting eternal comfort to the poor that hear his
voice. DANIEL describes him, making Dan. 9. 24.
reconciliation for iniquity, and introducing everlasting righteousness. JOEL
(as he is cited by St. Joel 2. 28.
Peter, and his prophecy applied to the times of the Gospel, Acts 2.) promises,
that in his time Gods Spirit shall be poured out upon all flesh; and the gift
of Prophecy and Vision (which had ceased ever since the Captivity) bestowed
upon all ages, sexes and conditions. MICAH sets out Messiah extirpating Micah 4.
Idolatry, and bringing in the Heathen to serve the true God. And that his
spiritual Dominion might be complete and absolute, MALACHI represents him
reforming and purifying the Jewish worship; Coming as a refiners fire to purge
the son's of Levi as Gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an
offering of righteousness. Sure all these are more then earthly actions,
Offices designed to some higher purpose then filling the Jews Basket, and
increasing the milk and honey of Canaan. And therefore it would be much more
commodious for the Jews, to embrace the spiritual sense of other Prophecies
which fall in naturally and sweetly with these that I have mentioned, and all
together present us a coherent beautiful prospect of Messiah's Kingdom, then
to make him fight with himself as fiercely as with Gog and Magog, set one part
of his Character to contradict and destroy the other, and all of it to oppose
the mind of God, and that great end for which he designed and promised to send
Christ into the world. How much more Rational as well as more Pious is it, to
acknowledge, That God may be as good as his word, when he is extremely better?
perform his Promises most graciously, by giving things infinitely more valuable
then the letter of his undertaking imports; in stead of Corn and Wine and Oil,
consigning to us an assurance of competent provision for our bodily needs, and
therewith a fullness of Content, and Heaven into the bargain? then to depend
upon impossible events, and brutish expectations; such as make the Paradise of
Mahomet seem a sober and severe refectory; and the most prodigious Fables of
Heathen Poetry, modest and probable Inventions: Unworthily to disparage the
Goodness of God, by supposing that he has no greater Blessings even in this
life, for men whom he has inspired with Rational Divine Souls, on whom he has
stamped the signature of his own Image; then such low sensual satisfactions as
are enjoyed equally, perhaps with more gust, by the Beasts which perish: no
better treatment for his own Elect precious People, whom he vouchsafed to teach
and govern by his immediate Word and Power, then what he scatters without
distinction among the Heathen who have not heard of his Name? To abase and
undervalue his Wisdom by imagining that it has found no more efficacious
methods to advance that Righteousness which David and the other Prophets so
highly celebrate in their descriptions of Messiah's Government, then the
allurements of earthly Prosperity, which we know by many notorious examples of
the Jews, and (God wot) by a nearer experiment in our selves, are more apt to
produce contrary effects, to make men grow wanton when they are full and fat,
Kick and Rebel against God in the strength of his benefits. How gloriously are
the Predictions of Messiah's Victories and Triumphs fulfilled in Christ's
conquering Sin and Death, subduing and captivating the powers of Hell? and how
unworthy is it of his greatness, to bring him into the world only to avenge
the Jews of their enemies, which Shamgar with an Ox-goad, Sampson with an Asses
jaw, Gideon by a stratagem of Trumpets and broken Pitchers, nay Deborah by her
feminine conduct, with the help of Jaels nail and hammer, might have performed
as successfully as he? How repugnant is it to that meekness and beneficence
which the Scriptures attribute to him, His coming down like rain into a fleece
of wool, and as the still and Psalm. 72 8.
fatning drops which water the ground, his deliverng the poor when they cry,
pitying, preserving the helpless; to set him out with a Commission like a
Turkish or Tartarian General to harasse and Ubi solitudinem saciunt pacem
appellant: Tacit, in vita Agricolae. Ysaiah 35. 9.
Depopulate the Earth; establishing peace, as our Countryman Galeacus in
Tacitus says the Romans did in his time, by Vastation and ruin; taking away
Lions and Bears from Jerusalem, and becoming himself more devouring and savage
then all the beasts of the wilderness; Making all nations blessed through him,
only by vexing, afflicting and destroying all the nations of the World? I
might run through the several other footsteps of Messiahs Kingdom extant in
the Old Testament, and show how eminently, and with how much harmony and
consent they are verified in a spiritual sense, and what impossibilities, how
many unworthy and vile consequences lie in bar against those absurd
interpretations which the Jews catch from the outward sound of the letter, or
rather from their own prejudice and Carnality. But the time will not allow me
so large a course, nor does the Case need it. For after all their
Tergiversations, all the shameful discomfitures of their Nation in which
obstinacy can engage them; They must be forced to acknowledge with us, that
there is somewhat more then earthly greatness and felicity intended in these
things, or else confess of themselves what the Socinians unkindly impute to
their Fathers, that they have no hope or grounded belief of Heaven at all,
because they will easily grant, that among all the Revelations recorded in the
Books of their Canon, nothing looks so far, or so directly toward Heaven, as
do the Prophecies and Descriptions of Messiah and his Kingdom. And therefore
now, in stead of disputing any longer against their Cavils, it will be great
Charity, to assert and make out this Truth for them: And that I will do from
the mouth of their Father Jacob, who prophesies thus; The Scepter shall not
depart from Genesis 49. 10.
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh See Mr. M de
discourse 8.
come, and to him the gathering or obedience of the Nations, i. e. till Shiloh
come, and the Nations be gathered to obey him: So, in perfect accordance with
the Original, a learned and happy Critic of our Nation understands the Text.
Now we all see, that the Scepter is many Ages since departed from Judah; they
have not for almost 1600 years been so much as a People, but scattered,
proscribed Vagabonds, driven like Chaff before the Wind over the face of the
Earth. So that if Shiloh be not come already, he never can come, the positive
precise limitation of his time being evidently past at the Dissolution of the
Jewish State. But then, if you recollect when that dissolution happened, that
Titus destroyed their Temple-service and Commonwealth, just when the Nations
were gathered to the obedience of Christ, when the Gentiles began to receive
the Gospel at the preaching of his Apostles; You will believe that old Jacob
was vouchsafed on his Deathbed a sight and revelation of Christ's Spiritual
Dominion, and dyed in that hope; Promising to Judah, (now the head of his
Family) That some face of Government should always be preserved among the
Children of Israel (as there was in their greatest distresses) until Shilo,
Judah's son after the flesh, should begin to reign spiritually in the hearts of
Men, till both Jew and Gentile should submit to his Scepter of righteousness,
and be governed by the Divine Laws of his heavenly Discipline. By this prime
fundamental Prophecy, you see the purport of all the rest; For nothing can be
more expressly foretold then is Christ's Spiritual Kingdom in these words; Nor
was ever the event of any Prophecy so signalized. A Nation chosen by God from
the Mass of mankind, a solemn way of worship invented and prescribed by
himself, both destroyed utterly, to proclaim and perpetuate the memory of its
completion, and assure us that Gods Temporal favors in Canaan were but Types
and shadows, the substance whereof is Christ, and therefore they ought of their
own nature to vanish and disappear, when he brought in the solid eternal
blessings of his heavenly Kingdom, which they prefigured. So that I shall not
need now to add any more upon this head unless it be to give you a short, but
real view of that Kingdom in Christ's own exercise and administration of it.
Look therefore into his Sermon on the Mount (I had rather you should find it in
your hearts then in your Books) where you shall discover a Perpetual Edict of
that Law by which Christ will govern his Kingdom, and a Scheme of that Policy
whereby it must subsist. A Divine Law, and a Policy all spirit. Had a Solon or
Lycurgus been to lay the Plot and groundwork of a Commonwealth, you should
have seen an institution apt to make their Citizens Rich, Politic and fierce,
successful troublers of the World. Had Machiavel been the Contriver, he would
have recommended Craft, Jealousy profound dissimulation, crooked Arts of
Deceit and Circumvention; advanced Ambition, Avarice, Rapine and Bloodshed,
the virtues of the Iron age, and the accomplishments of Caesar Borgia. These
are the methods by which worldly Greatness is usually acquired and maintained.
But Christ founds his Kingdom on nobler Principles, because it is interests are
of a sublimer Nature. And therefore here, instead of anxious cares and fears,
the sollicitous plots and contrivances which carnal men set up as a
Counter-Providence of their own, to check and control that wisdom which
governes and sustaines the World; We are taught, by retrenching and mortifying
our desires, to need little, and to be sure of what we want by asking it of
God; And be happy, whether we obtain our petitions or no, by our
unconcernednesse for these outward things; Depending securely on that goodness
which suffers not a Sparrow to be unprovided for, nor a flower of the field to
lack that nourishment and those influences which are requisite to maintain its
verdure. In stead of that Ambition which makes men climb till they grow giddy,
and most an end like Falcons lessen as they mount; We are directed how to find
Honor in the Dust, in that Humility which makes us like the coequal Son of
God. Instead of Fraud, Lying, Hypocrisy, which use to be called Cunning, but
are fripperies of folly (for sure he that wants not wit has no need to be a
knave) Christians are showed a straighter way to their ends, by the rule of
strict severe justice, with honest upright intentions, ingenuous open single
hearts. Thus Christ builds his new and holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven
from God, according Revel. 21 11, 12 Isa. 54, 11, 12.
to St John's description, and the elder design of Isaiah, with Crystal,
Sapphires, and Carbuncles, where every part is transparent and seen through by
its own light; That which is all beauty, needs hide nothing, and when its
brightness ought to illustrate others, must shine out; It Was only sin made
nakedness inconvenient and shameful, and that innocence which Christ designed
to retrive, takes away the fig leaves from before our minds as well as bodies,
introducing a simplicity which fears not Momus his window and privy light into
our souls; A charity, apt to keep out Breasts always open, ready to receive and
cherish our Brethren. In the place of false perficlious friendships, those
kindnesses which are but properties, and baits for Treachery; Christ advances
a real affectionate amity and good will even to enemies, whose Evil we are
commanded to overcome with our good, being taught a new skill, by heaping our
Love like Coals of fire upon their heads, to subdue their most obstinate
hardness, and melt them down into the same Mass of Christian charity with our
selves: And that no pretense be left of hating any person under the notion of
enmity, the very name of Enemy, and of Stranger, is for ever banished the
World; The partition wall of Jewish uncharitableness razed and demolished, and
every man become brother to every man. Indeed no body can properly be an enemy
to a Christian, because he cannot truly hurt him, unless the Christians own sin
give a sting and venom to the others malice. For what can the supposed enemy
do? He can make me Poor; Christ made himself so, and if I be Poor in spirit
too, that conformity to my Savior gives me a Title to his * Kingdom, where
all my real solid Muc. 5. 3.
Concernments are. He can make me Mourn, 4.
and then I shall be comforted. He can soften my meekness by oppression and
tyranny, and that gives me an inheritance in the Earth. He can do me wrong, 5.
and thereby need my Pardon, and offer me an occasion of being Merciful, which
shall secure me the Mercy that I need infinitely more. He can 7.
put me to those fiery Trials which may refine and burnish my Purity, and so
make me more 8.
fit to see God. He can take away my life, and so send me sooner to Heaven;
give me an earlier entrance into that Region of Eternal Bliss, for which the
previous temporary Paradise of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom on earth is designed
to prepare me. I must not insist on all the parts of this Divine Sermon: In a
word therefore, that one Golden Rule of Doing as we would be done by; not only
abstaining from offering such injuries as we are unwilling to suffer, but doing
all the good to the Bodies and Souls of our Neighbors, which we desire to
receive from God or Man; This short, but comprehensive Precept, which wise
Heathens have admired, and almost Deified, would at once do all the great
things which the Prophets have in so many Allegories and Hyperboles ascribed to
Messiah; this would beat Swords into Plough-shares, and Spears into
Pruning Hooks; this would bring the Wolf and the Lamb Isai. 2. 4.
to feed quietly together, and make the Lion eat straw with Isai. 65 25.
the Bullock: Not by changing the nature of those Animals, as the Jews fondly
imagine, and teaching Wolves to graze, or Lions to pull their fooder from a
Rack: But by taming our ravenous appetites, cicurating our fierceness and rage,
those savage Beasts within us, and introducing such a sweetness into the souls
of men, as that Innocence may dwell more safely in the Arms of Power, and
Strength be no longer a Terror, but a Support and Guard to impotent Weakness,
while every Christian is a Protector, a Tutelar Angel and God to his Brother.
You may now be sure, Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, which is in every
instance so contrary to it; (I wish the same unlikeness were not too observable
among his professed Subjects, who allow, but follow not his Rule;) and Pilate
had reason enough to rest secure, that Jesus, though he asserted himself to be
King, could on these terms be no dangerous Rival or Competitor with Tiberius;
such a Kingdom might bless and prosper Caesar's Government, could not impeach
his Power or diminish his Greatness.

It must now seem very strange, after Christ has so expressly renounced all
claim to Temporal Authority, convinced the Jews and Romans, that his Kingdom
is not of this World, if any Christians can be so bold as under him, and in his
Name, to assume the Government of the World. It must be matter of deepest
astonishment to those who believe our Savior spoke truly when he told his
Apostles, The Disciple Matthew. 10 24.
is not above his Master, nor the Servant greater then his Lord; that any
Person, as Vicar to Jesus of Nazareth (who refused to arbitrate between
contending Luk 12 13, 14.
Brethren, had himself no house where to lay his 9 58.
head, and admitted men into the condition of his Subjects upon the terms of
forsaking all worldly interests) should pretend to dispose of Crowns and 14 33.
Scepters, averr that by Him Kings reign, that He can pull down one, and set up
another, and do it too when their weakness or misfortune gives him opportunity.
Pilate would have been very jealous of such a Spiritual Prince, though the Jews
perhaps would have liked him well; for he looks more like a Lieutenant of their
Messiah, then a Deputy and Apostle, of our Christ, who treads on the necks of
Caesar's, and without a figure makes his enemies Frederic. I. Imp. Pap. Alexand.
3
lick the Dust. Had the Apostles themselves owned such a Commission,
Christianity had never taken root in the World: Had St. Peter declared, that
all Power in Heaven and Earth was given to him by Terreni simul and coelestis
Imperii jus. Extr. Job. de major. and obed. c. si^r^trum.
God, he had been crucified with his heels upwards, not by the choice of his
own Humility, but for a suitable punishment of his inverting the Doctrine of
Christ, and turning the Gospel and the World it self up-side-down. Had Heathen
Princes been Acts 17. 6.
alarmed at first with this pretense; told, that while They and their People
remained Infidels, a Christian Bishop might give away their Country to any one
that should convert them by the Sword, (the old Greek pretense, (...)) and if
they embraced the Faith, and yet happened to err in any point of it, they
should be deposable at his pleasure; that by professing Christianity, they
should Extr. de major. and obed. c. solitar
acknowledge to hold their Power and Dignity at the beck and good liking of
their Pastor, from Extr. Com. tit. cod. Vnam Sanctam, per tot.
whom, as the greater Luminary, they must derive all their saint influences and
borrowed light, he alone having right to institute earthly Powers, to judge
all, and be judged of none, and therefore must in all things be obeyed, even of
Princes, at the peril of their souls: Do you think the Roman Emperors, or the
Monarchs of the East, would have been brought in to Christ's fold by these
harsh invitations, this rough voice of the Shepherd? Would such a Doctrine have
placed the Cross on the Crowns of Kings, made them Nursing Fathers to the
Church? I doubt it would rather have exasperated their fury, sharpened their
persecutions, and made cruelty it self seem just and necessary, a provident
endeavor to destroy Christianity in its first conception, as a Viper which was
like to tear out the bowels of its Mother. I know I am not wise enough to
interpret the Revelation, nor am I bold enough to affix hard names without
certain grounds. But we have some, who frankly enough call the Pope Antichrist,
sounding out that name with all the force of their lungs, (which is great;) and
yet (if it be not ill manners to make comparison between so high pretenders)
themselves deserve that Title as well as he, and upon the same Reason: For
who-ever advances in Christendom an Interest so directly contrary to that of
Christ, is an Anti- or Counter-Christ. You know who they are which talk so much
of advancing Christ's Scepter, and the Rod of his Power: but you know likewise
(by woeful experience) that all this is only that it might become a Rod in
their hands to eat up all other Rods, and be the greater Serpent when it has
done so. Beside, there is among us a Pestilent Devilish Sect, which we call the
Fifth Monarchy, but should call it the Sixth or Seventh, for the Papacy and
Presbytery come both in before it; These expect just such a Temporal fleshly
Kingdom as the Jews talk of, urge all the same Texts, interpret them out of
their Books, and would bring in the Dominion they aspire to, like them, with
Blood, Confusion and Ruin, make Christ reign among Thieves and Murderers; And
as the former Temporalists would place Christ on his Throne, that themselves
may sit on his right hand and on his left, so these cry up King Jesus, only
for a stale and property to serve their design of binding the hands and eating
the flesh of other Kings, that the sheep may tear and devour the Wolves. But
most certainly, were he now once more upon earth in the same lowly guise as
before, Preaching the same spiritual Doctrines, advancing the same heavenly
Kingdom, they would persecute and crucify him again as the Jews did, for
defeating their Carnal hopes and Designs. I have been the longer in clearing
and asserting the spirituality of Christ's Kingdom, because in effect it
concludes the whole Question, and therefore I may make you amends by shortning
the other remaining part of my discourse. For seeing Christ had no interest or
authority in earthly things; Seeing his Empire and Dominion was not to consist
in Temporal Power and Greatness, but in the establishing such a Rule in the
hearts of his subjects, as might make them fit to reign with him in another
world: 'Twill be no wonder, if he suffered unkindness in a strange enemies
Country, was advanced by Death and the steps of his Cross to be crowned with
glory Heb. 2. 9, 10. Rev. 3. 21.
and honor, to sit on the Throne of God in the full enjoyment and
administration of his Kingdom in Heaven, the reward and purchase of his
sufferings. Had I time, I might easily show the great fitness and infinite
wisdom of this Method; but by Gods goodness and the Kings favor I may have
another opportunity for that. My present undertaking obliges me no further
then to evidence the design of God, expressed by Types and Prophecies that
Christ should thus suffer, and so enter into his glory: My other Part.

FIrst, for Types: And concerning them, I will freely yield all that can be
demanded. That they are illustrations rather then Proofs; fit to open men's
apprehensions, to refresh and strengthen their memories, and confirm the Faith
of Believers: But not able to convince, and enforce the assent of a
pertinacious Gain-sayer, who admits no part of our assertion. Yet with Jews
(the great Masters of Allegories) who acknowledge (unless when their hatred to
Christ compells them to renounce all ingenuity) a great part of the Mosaical
dispensation to have been symbolical, and doubt not, but that God did declare
his mind by ut vocibus Ita robus Prophetatum.
Real as well as verbal. Prophecies; foreshew future events by Persons,
Offices, Rites, and actions, as well as foretell them by Words; these things
must be of great weight and consideration. Non minus Parabolis operato Deo quam
locuto. Tertull. I. de Resurrec. carn.
For which Reason the Primitive Fathers, though they use other Topiques against
Heathen disputers, and in the main controversy with the Jews, insist (as the
Apostles did before them) upon the irrefragable arguments of Christ's miracles
and resurrection, yet they refell their little exceptions against the
circumstances of his outward condition both in life and death, by instances of
these prefigurations recorded in the Old Testament, indulging sometimes to zeal
and fancy, successfully and artificially enough, considering whom they dealt
with; but more freely then will become me in this Philosophical age.

The use I mean to make of such adumbrations I hope shall not be blamed by the
most rigorous Demonstrators. For I pretend to assume no more, then that those
Persons who in the substance of their Character were apparently Types of
Messiah, may be understood in all the most conspicuous Tracts and lineaments of
that character, the remarkable accidents of their lives, and famous
Circumstances of their Conditions, to represent him too: That those Offices,
Actions and Rites, which must be observed to have many things in them very
notable, of which no other account can rationally be given, then a meaning to
adumbrate somewhat more noble in fullness of time to be revealed, may not be
thought, now that the substance appears to answer and own its shadows; The
Antitype, applies and interprets its foregoing Types, inconveniently
referred by me to that Purpose. If the most illustrious Heroes under the Law
attained not their dignity and exaltation, approved not not their Virtue and
Zeal for God, but by passing a sharp trial and discipline of afflictions; it
canbe thought unreasonable, that Christ also should be consummated by an
answerable method of sufferings, if it diminish not the excellency of
Patriarchs and Prophets, that they were hardly treated by men very unlike them;
were no argument of Gods disfavour, that he seemed to sleep, neglecting and
leaving them unregarded in those pressures and difficulties; but rather a
comfortable presumption that he had better things in store for them, reserved
to their proper season, whereby he meant abundantly to make good with advantage
all his gracious Promises; why should we prescribe God other Laws in a Parallel
Case? Shorten his arm, and shrink up the nerves of his power, suspect his
goodness, and circumscribe his wisdom by our narrow conceits, which before we
allowed to operate by its own rule; judging Christ to be forsaken by his
Father, because he is exposed to endure the contradiction of sinners, and
rather appointed to triumph over, then be delivered from the petulant injuries
of unreasonable and wicked men? Whereas it is much more rational, that seeing a
series of correspondent effects and Productions, we should acknowledge the same
hand-working in all, the same Providence pursuing one uniform design,
perfecting and accomplishing in the Person of Messiah, what it began to form
and shape out by degrees in those models and ruder Draughts (literally those
Types) which were exhibited from time to Divinarum virium lineamenta. Tertull.
ubi supra.
time under the Law. To name some few by way of instance.

Recollect, I pray you, that ABRAHAM, when God promised him the inheritance of
Canaan, and a Descendent from his loins in whom all Nations should be blessed;
was (as it were) in the same breath commanded to get out of his Country, to
forsake his Kindred and his Fathers house, to conflict Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3.
with difficulties and dangers in his wandering life, and not permitted
(otherwise then as a journying, fleeting stranger and Pilgrim) to take a view
and taste of the Promised Land, and at last dies, expecting with a very distant
hope, the accomplishment of that Promise, which he obtained not: And then you
will not wonder, if Christ, in whom this and all other Promises of God are Yea
and Amen, performed the principal sublimest part of it, made all Nations
blessed, by being himself a stranger among Psalm. 69. 8.
his Brethren, an alien unto his mothers children, who gave him a courser
reception then Abraham met at Egypt or in Gerar. ISAAC, the first pledge of
this promised blessing, was derided and grieved by Ishmael as soon as he was
capable of feeling such injuries, in which respect he is brought by St. Paul as
an example of the Spirit persecuted by the Flesh, Psalm. 4 29.
and did prefigure the scorns and contumelies which Christ suffered from his
Brethren: Then devoted and given up to Death by his Father, lies a destined
Sacrifice upon the Altar; and when the Knife is at his throat, redeemed by
substitution of a Ram, to show that the offering of the Blessed Seed was yet to
be suspended, and Beasts for a time accepted as a Pledge of that expiation
which he should one day make. Thus did Isaac, in whose loins Christ then was,
represent and personate beforehand the entire Mystery of his Passion, and
(which is not unworthy of note) in the very Place where afterward it was to be
acted. How punctually did JOSEPH, being sold for a bond-slave, suffering a
Martyrdom for Virtue, and then rising from his Chains, and the stench of a
loathsome Dungeon, to be a Savior to Egypt, and to Jacobs Family, set forth
the Persecutions, Innocence, Exaltation of Christ, and the Salvation which by
all these he wrought out for the whole Israel of God? Was Messiah to be like
unto MOSES? Then it is Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
most fit, by an early persecution as soon as he was born, being cast out to
one Danger and Death for the avoiding another, by the unkindness and treachery
of those whom he came to save; the threats, and hard dealings from Pharaoh, and
the long and manifold grievings of his meek soul by his perverse Contrymen
whom he had brought out of slavery; He should leave behind him a Copy and
Pattern which Christ must transcribe, and be equal to Moses in every part of
his laborious troublesome life, as well as transcend him in Wisdom, Power, and
the incomparable Deliverance and Salvation whereof the achievements of Moses
were but a weak imperfect shadow. Does Ezekiel four or five times call Christ,
DAVID, prophesying, that he Ezekiel. 34, 23, 24. and 37. 24, 25.
shall be an Eternal Prince over Gods People, feed and guide them in the ways
of his Judgments and Statutes? Then (beside that this description of Christ's
Government inferrs the spiritual ends and purposes of his Dominion) we are
assured by God himself, that DAVID was a Type of Christ; and indeed he was a
lively and exact one; In him we have a concurrent adumbration of all Christ's
Offices: The Authority of a King; the Spirit and Illumination of a Prophet; and
(though not the Function of a Priest, yet) the Holiness and Devotion, the Care
and Zeal for Gods service, belonging to that Function: Nothing could better
represent our King of the Jews in the form of a Servant, then David; a King
chosen by God, and anointed by his appointment, yet living without power in the
time of Saul. Nor could any thing foreshew the ill treatment which our Lord
found in the days of his humiliation at their hands, whom he delivered from
more dreadful enemies then Philistines and Giants of Gath; like those disgraces,
oppressions and persecutions which David endured from Saul, whose Battles he
had fought. As his victories over the enemies of Israel, were Types of Christ's
subduing the powers of darkness; His Reigning over the People of God, an
emblem of Christ his Sons spiritual dominion in the hearts of the Faithful, in
which sense only David's house became sure, and his Kingdom perpetual: So were
the cruelties of Saul, the treachery of Doeg, and Achitophel, the railing and
curses of Shimei, and the unnatural rebellion of Absalom, only so many
prelusions to Herod's early attempts on Christ's life, the slanders, blasphemies,
malicious designs, and bloody Prosecutions of the Jews, the treason of Judas,
and the pernicious wisdom of Caiaphas. Nothing more can be added to make the
resemblance complete, but this, that David was a person most dear to God, as
being a man after his own heart, received the amplest testimonies and
assurances of Gods favor, the most gracious Promises and Pledges of his
lasting sure Mercies; Yet no man more severely chastised by his afflicting
hand: Which makes it a less wonder, that God for the great ends of Mercy
designed by that method, should give up the Son of his love, in whom he
declared himself by a voice from heaven to be delighted and well pleased, into
the hands of evil men: And for a complement of his sufferings, pour his own
wrath, due to our sins, like fire into his bones. This whole Parallel is by
David so fully set forth in very many places of Lam. 13.
the PSALMS, that the most acute interpreters are often put to great
difficulties, how to distinguish the persons, and assign when the Prophet
speaks of himself, and when of our Savior; and indeed P. 2. 22 40 69.
nothing can safely be resolved, but that both are intended; the two cases
being so much one, that the same words most fitly express them. I hope you will
forgive me the insisting so long upon this famous Type of our Saviors
sufferings. I will name no more, though it be evident that the best and most
renowned men of all Ranks, and particularly the PROPHETS (who sure had as good
right to Gods Temporal promises as any other Jews) were vexed, tormented,
imprisoned, banished, slain, to leave a cloud of witnesses attesting this
Truth, that as Christ exceeded them all infinitely in the excellency of his
Person and Dignity of his Office, so he was to out-go them only in the degrees
of his afflictions, that the merit of his sufferings might be of greater value,
as being intended to higher purposes. Nor will I trouble you after all this
with the many Typical Rites and Actions observed very pertinently by others;
though some of them do not only adumbrate Christ's sufferings in general, but
point particularly at his Crucifixion. As ISAAC' s carrying the wood whereon he
was to lie, which in the Antitype is fairly answered by Christ's carrying his
cross; The crucified saving Brazen serpent, giving health to all that looked up
in Faith to it, besides a fit declaration and (...) (in St. Chrysostomes
expression) of Christ's curing the deadly fiery bitings of the old Serpent by
virtue of his death, represented in that figure; gives us a further
advantageous instance against the Jews, that every thing is not accursed which
hangs on a Tree. And St. John's authority is very considerable, who applies
the command of not breaking a bone of the Paschal Lamb to this business; and
his Reason of the Rite, that it Joh. 19 34.
was intended to leave a Prophetical intimation, that Christ our Passover
should die a death to which breaking of limbs was ordinarily annexed, but yet
that the breaking his should by care from Heaven be prevented; is much better
then Maimoni's weak More Nevochim. part. 3. c. 46.
conjecture, that it was only to comply with the Jews haste; For in what haste
soever they then were, the Wisdom of God is never in haste, nor can his
Providence be surprised, or decree any thing to no purpose.

After these Typical representations, it will be now seasonable to hearken to
the voices of the Prophets, which are the voice of God, and with clearer
evidence predict what the other did but tacitly insinuate and adumbrate; and
we shall find them all with one mouth proclaim the same thing, the great and
various sufferings and violent Death of Messiah: Whom though they do not
always Dan. 9. 26.
name, as sometimes they do, particularly Daniel tells us MESSIAH shall be cut
off, and dates his account not to the Birth or Reign, but the Death of Messiah
the Prince; yet they so describe him, as that the ancient Jews understood their
meaning well enough, allowing the reading of Psalm. 22. 15. and expounding it of
Messiah; as also Zach. 12. 10. which are both referred to by S. John as
Prophecies v. Fuller Misc. l. 3, c. 12.
of Christ's being pierced on the Cross. And the latter Rabbis, by their
pitiful shifts, show clearly that they refuse the Interpretations of their
Fathers only for fear of prejudicing their Hypothesis; and therefore
strengthen our Arguments, while they endeavor to elude their force. Out of the
great plenty of Prophecies I will select but one; (for what God has said once,
is as infallibly true as if he had said it a thousand times:) It Is the 53
Chapter of Isaiah, where you may read the contempt and scorn, the pains and
torments, the ignominious and servile Death of Christ, so graphically
described, so fully expressed, that you would imagine the Prophet to have been
Spectator of the whole Tragedy, and retiring from that black Scene while the
sense of it was warm and high in him, he did (...), dip his Pen into his Mind,
and transcribe as much as Ink and Paper could delineate from his affections and
troubled Soul into his Book. I need not enlarge, for the Jews are so oppressed
with multitude and weight of Evidences for a suffering Messiah, that to deliver
themselves in this strait, they give us a Tale of two Messiahs, the first to be
afflicted and killed, the other to triumph only and reign: And so while one
part of their fiction confesses the sufferings we contend for, and the other
is affirmed vainly without ground or color by them, they have thereby yielded
us the whole Cause: And we may safely conclude, that since Jesus of Nazareth
appears every way to have been such a Person as all Predictions and Types have
fore-shewed, and to have been so used as they assure us he was to be, and no
other is pretended to answer those prefigurations in any degree, Pilate was as
good a Prophet as Caiphas, and being overruled by the Spirit of God, wrote
more then he understood, but not more then was true, in this Title and
Recognition.

Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews.

ANd now perhaps some of you are ready to say, that I have spoken a great deal
to my Text, but little to my Auditory: Why should I bring you back to the first
Elements of Christianity, who have been baptized into Christ's death in your
infancy, grown up in the profession of his Gospel, have had Christ in many
Sermons evidently set forth crucified among you, and received him often in the
holy Sacramental representation of his Death? After so many pledges of service
and love enterchanged between you, what reason have I to doubt of your being
Christians? I do not doubt it: But give me leave to tell you, There goes more
to that then we generally imagine; every man is not a Christian who believes
his Creed, nor does every one believe the Creed who supposes and takes it for
granted: Many of us believe the Articles of our Faith as we do the Antipodes,
or the story of the Trojan War; we care not whether they be true or no: And
such have need sometimes to be catechized in the grounds, and more in the
importance of their Faith. And many others who explicitly believe the Truth,
are so far from obeying it, that they hold it in unrighteousness; and R m. 1.
these ought often to be told, that they believe enough to condemn, but not
enough to justify and save them. Suppose then, that you have devoured all the
scandal of the Cross, and what is an offense to Jews, and to Greeks
foolishness, is to you the wisdom and power of God, the one appearing eminently
in the contrivance of this Mystery, and the other in the great things wrought
thereby. And now upon the whole matter, your arms are open to receive Christ,
for the very reasons which provoke the Jews to reject and scorn him: you can
discern the Lord of Glory through the disguise and form of a servant,
contemplate him triumphing over the powers of Death and Hell in a servile
ignominious Crucifixion, and therefore, because he came not down from the
Cross, you will believe him. Pardon me, if I say, you may do all this, and yet
be Jews. To make it appear, let me mind you of the Jews miscarriages in this
behalf. We have found them blameable, 1. For not accepting Jesus as their King:
2. In the reason why they refused him, Because he he was a Spiritual, not a
Temporal Prince. Be faithful then to your own souls, and in this solemn season
of self-examination ask your Consciences these two Questions; 1. Whether you do
sincerely own and receive Jesus for your King? 2. If you find your selves
faulty and deficient in that Duty, Whether the reason why you do not cordially
embrace him be any other then that of the Jews, because his Kingdom and his
Laws are spiritual, and you are Carnal? 1. Whether you do own and accept Christ
for your King? I know you are apt enough to admit his other Relations to you;
every one hearkens willingly to the glad tidings of a Mediator and a Savior:
It Is pleasant to think of a Sacrifice considerable enough to atone for our
sins, of such a High Priest entered within the vail interceding on our behalf at
Gods right hand, who will surely be heard when he prays, and who has already
obtained eternal redemption forus. Nay we can like well that he be a King too,
(provided that as his Kingdom is not of this world, so he trouble not us with
it in this world, pretend not to govern us till we come to heaven. It Is not
amiss that he be powerful enough to overcome our Enemies to spoil
Principalities and Powers, lead captivity captive, and after that give gifts
unto men, when he has through his Death destroyed the Devil who had the power
of Death, that he be able and willing to enstate us in eternal life, and assume
us to the participation of his Kingdom. Tell me now, I pray you, what
temptation had the Jews, why they should not be as good Christians as we upon
their own grounds, if this be all? what carnality of theirs would have resisted
the proposition of such a Sacrifice to expiate for their sins? Why should not a
Pharisee be content that he might have an Advocate always pleading for him at
the Throne of Grace? What could move the grossest dreamer in the Sanhedrim to
refuse a reversion of eternal glory in heaven after the enjoyment of those
present selicities which he desired on earth? There is something surely more
then this in the accepting and acknowledging Christ for our King, or else the
Jews would have accepted him too. The Duty of a subject to a Prince is
expressed in one word, Obedience. The Tributes of our Esteem, Honor, Reverence
and Recognition, are good circumstances in the performance of our main Duty;
but without it are follies or crimes. I need not teach the Court how little
Complements signify, you know that for the most part they are like Nil's in a
Cipher, used only to amuse, to conceal, not explain our minds: Nor shall I
need to say here, the profession of that Duty and service which we mean not to
perform, is no more then a Complement, unless it prove a scorn too; for in
severe examination, to acknowledge our Sovereigns Power, and yet refuse his
commands, is at once to recognize and defy him; to call Christ our Prince, and
not submit to his rule and Laws, is but to bow before him, cry Hail King of the
Jews, and crucify him. Obedience hereby appears to be the natural necessary
Duty of a Subject to a Prince, because it supports and maintains the end of the
Relation between them, enables the Prince to do his Office. It is the end of
all Government, to procure the good of the whole Community; but no Governor
can do that, unless he be obeyed: without obedience, the Scepter is but a Reed
in his hand, a Rod of weakness and contempt, not of power. It Is folly to expect
to sit quietly under our own Vines and Fig Trees, enjoying all the benefits of
peace and plenty, unless we conform to those Laws which preserve peace, and
effect plenty, by regulating every man in the orderly pursuit of his own honest
ends without enterfering with those of his Neighbor. It Is madness to look that
a King in his single Person should suppress Rebellions, repel the force of
invading Armies, drive Enemies Fleets from his Coasts, or conquer them upon
their own: But by the free and hearty obedience of his People, He can do
whatsoever his whole Kingdom can do, Because thereby their entire strength is
concentred in Him, and He can manage and employ it as easily as the members of
his own body. The same obligation both of Duty and Interest have we to obey
Christ; of Duty, that we defraud him not of what we owe him; and Interest, that
he may be able to do us the good which he designs: For neither can he subdue
his and our Enemies (to the purposes we are concerned in;) nor make his
Subjects happy without the concurrence of their obedience. He cannot destroy
the works of the Devil, if we will persist to employ our selves in his works,
resolve to be slaves still, notwithstanding all the liberty purchased for us,
and when the Captain of our Salvation has cast down and bruised his head; made
it easy and safe for us to tread upon our old Enemy, we set him up again, and
fall down and worship him Nor can he bring us to heaven unless we conform to
the Laws and conditions by which we are to be advanced; receive his Kingdom
first into us, that we may be afterward received into it; For whatever God
might have done, if we suppose a time before the method of our Redemption was
decreed; It will be safe to say, that since he has limited himself by an
express act and declaration of his will, and Covenanted with Christ, that upon
his voluntary laying down his life as a ransom for the World, he should have
power to bestow the Kingdom upon such, and such only as Believe and Repent,
no man now can look to go to Heaven by Christ, but he whose Faith receives
Christ for his King, and whose Repentance grieves for having offended him, and
resolves to serve him faithfully for the time to come. These are the two joint
inseparable Conditions of our Salvation neither of which will singly avail us:
For as it is impossible to Repent without Faith, to convince us of the
necessity and benefit of that Duty, so our Repentance it self instructs us,
that Faith alone is not our whole work; Because we Repent not that we have no
Faith (seeing we suppose Faith, to be the principle which moved us to repent)
but we grieve to find our selves defective in our obedience, that we have not
performed what we believe our selves bound, and engaged to. For this is the
proper business of Faith, to show us our King, and direct us in our duty to
him. If we only believe the Theory of the Gospel, acknowledge the truth of all
that our Savior has taught, and no more, This makes Christ but such a King as
GROTIUS think's Pilate took Grot, in Joh. 9. v. 38.
him for, a kind of Rex Stoicus, a Prince and author of some rare opinions and
speculative truths; and Christianity it self but a sect (as Tertullian often
calls it in a better sense) combined in the asserting an excellent Hypothesis;
not a Kingdom and body Politic, joined to one Common head, by which all the
members are guided in the actions of life, and pursuance of real solid
concernments. Me thinks the Lawyers (who are versed in matters of government)
give us a good Notion of Faith, when they join it with, and make it Synonymous
to True Allegiance. And a Prohibition from them would be seasonable in this
case, to track the exorbitances of some Divines, who evaporate all Religion in
Notions. Had Christ been proposed to us only as Prophet, such a Faith had been
a hand fitter to receive him, it might have apprehended Visions and Revelations
well enough: but seeing he is a King, and delivers commands, Obedience only is
relative to them. And we may believe St. James, who tells us, that Faith which
works not, when it is bidden by such an Authority, James 2. 26.
is Dead. The Faith which only lives, and can make us do so, is that which
expresses it self by lively operations, being animated and (...) Gal. 5. 6.
actuated by an obedient Love, that Generous Principle which even in humane
affairs noble produces all the great and worthy things in the world, by those
Persons who serve the Prince whom they love, vigorously and Bravely. That
Obedience only can bring us back to God, we may know by this, that
Disobedience cast us out of his favor and presence: and if the effect of our
Redemption be to recover us the Paradise and the favor of of God, which we
lost at first by disobeying his commands, it must also put us into a state of
obedience, without which we cannot be capable of recovery, the Cherubim with
their flaming sword will still fight against us upon the old quarrel; and it
must find a way to help us in that state, or else we shall quickly lose all
again. It was very agreeable to the Majesty and goodness of God, to
compassionate the weakness of his poor Lapsed Creature so far, as to make our
task easy and proportioned to our infirmity, to accept sincere honest
endeavors instead of exact unerring obedience, which Adam failed of, and we in
the ruin of our nature could by no mean have performed. But to be reconciled
to disobedience, is inconsistent with every one of his attributes; even
goodness it self would cease to be good, should it Patronize and encourage
evil; now disobedience is all Evil, transgresses and violates the whole Law at
once, The soul that does ought presumptuously, Number. 15. 30, 31.
disobeying with a high hand, reproacheth the Lord, and despises his
comandments. I may add, and his Mercy and Grace too, which are afforded to
invite and help us to obey, and would not have been given us to that purpose,
were disobedience by any means reconcilable to our obligation and Gods favor:
And between Obedience and Disobedience I know no Medium; That pretense of
serving Christ out of Gallantry is something that I confess my self not acute
enough to understand, any further, then as a color for not serving him at all.
For precarious Authority is a contradiction in Terms; the Prince who has no
other, is a Tenant at will, holds his Crown and Dignity in a kind of Villenage,
and servile dependence on the Pleasure of his Subjects; and where Christ has
no greater command then so, he may be any thing else, but cannot be a King. My
Brethren, be not deceived; though God so loved the world as to give his only
begotten Son to die for us; yet doubtless he loved his Son whom he sent from
his bosom, infinitely more then all the world for whom he gave him; and
therefore will be sure to provide for his honor before our safety: To which
purpose, we see he has settled his Kingdom on such terms, as that we shall not
have the benefits we expect, unless he have from us the glory due to him. We
cannot be saved, unless he be obeyed; and we become so far both his Servants
and Friends, as to do whatsoever he commands us. God will certainly assert his
own Laws, and vindicate his Sons Honor; and that may be done, whatever becomes
of us: Christ may be glorified even in our destruction, and will be so, if we
envy him the glory of saving us: He will show himself a King in punishing our
Rebellions, if we bereave him of the delight of rewarding and crowning our
Obedience. His Kingdom cannot stand, to the effecting its gracious purposes of
making us happy, if it be so divided against it self, as that our perverseness
draws one way, while his Precepts direct us another: Nor to the preservation of
his Majesty, if he be so divided against himself, as to prevaricate in the
execution of his own Laws, suffer our disobedience to prevail over his Justice,
and escape the punishment denounced against it, that Death which we choose and
seek in the error of our ways. Let us therefore be wise, and follow the good
Advice long since given to Mankind in this behalf; which Cicero has translated
for us out of the Sibyls Books, Eum qui Rex est Regem essem agnoscamus. Loca
sup. citat. de Divinatione, l. 2.
Let us obey faithfully and in good earnest the King whom we own and
acknowledge; yield the same compliance to his Rule and Government which we give
every thing else under whose power we are. Even our follies may counsel us in
this; our sins may inform and direct us to the way of performing righteousness;
serve but God as heartily as you do the Devil, and it will be well. While sin
reigns in our mortal bodies, we obey it in all the lusts thereof. One fleshly
appetite bids us go, and we go; another calls us to come, and we come at a
beck; a third commands us to do this, and we do it readily, without stop or
hesitancy, Ambition makes us slaves, in hope of being Princes; We become
flatterers and parasites to great persons, and if one of them strike us on the
right cheek, we hastily turn to him the left, esteeming his scornful blows as
healing as the KINGS Touch. Our Covetousness condemns us to the mines, sends us
to the confines of Hell, and we often break into the bowels of it to fetch
Treasure, and we bring up with labor and hazard our Idol Gold from them, which
we consecrate for a God in our hearts, and serve it with far more Religion,
then the Lord of heaven and earth. Our Luxury, Gaming, and other costly sins,
take away our Cloaks, and we give them our Coats also: Our Proud, Malicious,
Lustful Quarrels bereave us of our eyes and hands, and we choose rather to go
to Hell, blind or maimed, then having all our Members to enter into Glory. Why
do we not obey Christ at this rate? Why do we love to be the Slaves and Martyrs
of the Devil and Damnation, abhorring the free and happy Service of Christ.
It Is not because his wages is inconsiderable; for eternal life is the reward of
such as obey him. Nor that his commands are grievous and intolerable; for they
are peace and joy in the Lord: Present happiness in themselves, and pledges of
future glory. I should disparage the excellency of Christ's prescriptions by
saying, That as much as Health is better then a Fever, so much is Sobriety
better then Drunkenness; which often recompenses the jolly, voluntary madness
of one hour, with the indisposition and uneasiness, at least, if not greater
inconvenience of many years. If a lasting vigorous constitution of Body, a
constant serenity of Mind, a Soul firm and lively in all its faculties; an
active Manhood, a venerable Wise, length of days, be more eligible, then early
Gouts and Catarrh's; a decrepit useless youth, a wretched contemptible old Age
before its time; a Soul always loose and unhinged, a Mind sottish in debates,
and brutish in its resolutions, unable to give or take counsel; then is the
perpetual feast of Temperance more inviting, then the loads of Gluttonous
meats, and the killing debauches and riots of Luxury and Incontinence. Heathen
Philosophy could have made these comparisons, and carried them by instances
through the whole Scheme of Ethics; or rather it would have disdained that
Virtue should be at all compared, either with the filthy nature of Vice, or its
pernicious consequences. And I hope a Christian conversation will appear in all
respects to transcend Heathen Morality, as far as that is above the dirt and
mire of the most brutish sensuality. The satisfactions of a regular orderly
life led, secundum Naturam, Cic. de Fin. passim.
which is all Philosophy aims at, are much more agreeable then those low and
vile disorders which some men desire to wallow in; but infinitely short of
those heavenly joys, wherewith minds illuminated by the Holy Ghost, furnished
and adorned with his Graces, are continually entertained; beside, that this
Paradise they now enjoy, is the way to Heaven, this serving and walking with
God in a delightful affluence of pleasures, is but their pledge and assurance
of being translated in time to live with him for ever. Nor yet is our
employment dishonorable and base; for our Lord requires us to do nothing, but
what himself has done before us. It Is true that Seneca says, Rules and
Precepts are neither so compendious, nor efficacious a way to Epist. 6.
teach Virtue, as when we see the thing it self exemplified in actions adorned
with all the advantage and life of Circumstances, and real Demonstrations; we
apprehend better such solid representations, and are affected more, when we
perceive our Teacher believes himself, and practices what he recommends; and
men, in all cases, follow cheerfully, when their leaders first attempt
difficulties, endure hardships, and undertake dangers in their own Persons: All
these Invitations we have from Christ. He is himself the Rule of all he
teaches; the Example of all he commands; the Instance and Pledge of all he has
promised: We may learn of him to be meek and lowly; for he has dignified that
humility by debasing and emptying himself, which Aristotle thought a vice, and
we account a Eth. Nicons. l. 2. c. 7.
folly; He has consecrated that Poverty in his own wants and destitutions,
which we fear more then death; He has sanctified Afflictions in his
Sufferings, honored contempt and scorn by being reviled and spit upon, and
placed a Crown for martyrdom upon his Cross; He has conquered Death by
submitting to it, and made it now a way to Eternal Life, of which his
Resurrection and Ascension are our certain Pledges. What then is the reason,
why after all this we are unwilling to learn the best things, follow the
noblest, most alluring example, embrace the most precious rewards under the
conduct and government of this our King? The very same thing causes our
backwardness which made the Jews so refractory and untoward before us; the
things proposed to us are spiritual, and we are carnal. I doubt not but R.
Akiba thought much better of Jesus whom he helped to condemn and crucify, then
of Barcochab, whose Esquire he made himself in that fatal Rebellion against the
Romans; but the one gave him hopes of enjoying the worldly things which he
loved, the other would have taught him to contemn them, which was a hard lesson
to a Carnal Man. And we may believe, the Jews now desire that Messiah whom they
look for, and yet some of them deny him beforehand for the reason that Christ
was refused by their Fathers. Fagius tells us, diverse of Fag. in Deuteronomy. 23
them confessed to him that they would not have Messiah come in their days,
because the Law would oblige them to forsake their Usury, being returned to
Canaan, and having no strangers left on whom to exercise it. Just so it is with
us; we are enslaved by strong habits and the power of sin, and so not free to
apply our selves to a better Master; we are bored through the ear, and cannot
abide to change, though for liberty; we have so long served our senses, and
fleshly appetites, that our souls themselves are grown flesh: Being used to
Leeks and Onions, gross foul feeding, we loath Manna as insipid light Bread;
relish not spiritual delights, because they are too subtle and too pure, food
rather for Angels then Men. And as spiritual entertainments are too fine, so
spiritual commands, which undertake to purge the heart and soul, are too severe
for flesh and blood. Repentance is a grim Duty; Mortification, that
Metaphorical death, is to us like the true one, a King of Terrors; Because to
our fleshly concupiscences it is a true and real Death, brings out those
Enemies of Christ which will not let him reign over them, and slays them before
his face. For this sad and killing malady, this spiritual madness of ours, I
know but one remedy: Had we the same reserve of Reason in our distemper, as had
that mad Philosopher, who leaped into the Water, which the nature of his
Disease made him abhor, we might find a cure as he did: could we be persuaded
(for trials sake) to take up Christ's yoke a while, we should soon find it an
Instrument not made to load and gall our necks, but to ease and defend us from
the pressure of our burden; we should discover, that no one Precept has been
given us by Christ, but to make our life more comfortable, and our duty more
agreeable. Meekness was prescribed to allay the storms of Anger, to preserve a
Person of that Dignity that every Christian is, from discomposing himself,
forfeiting his Reason and his Reverence with Mankind at every little accident,
and to cast out the Devil of Rage, which makes us foam and tear our selves, and
place us quiet, and in our right minds at the feet of Christ. Not to look is
enjoined, as an expedient to make the ancient Duty of not lusting more
practicable, it being much easier to keep a house from burning before then
after the fire is kindled in it. Resignation and Contentedness are commanded,
to deliver us from the Rack of covetous and impatient Desires,, and to be our
Sanctuary in all distresses. Humility will prevent Quarrels, and Mercifulness
will end them as soon as they begin. Charity will reconcile us to God and Man,
and the Duty shall I call it? or Privilege? of doing all the good we can to
men's bodies and souls, is a Dignity and a pleasure (I had almost said) too
great for mortal Men; it makes us Kings and Priests, nay, Angels, the ministers
and conveyers of Gods mercies and graces, and subordinate Saviors to one
another; anticipating our future joys and blessedness, giving us beforehand
that Quality which alone shall possess our souls in Heaven, pure and universal
Love. The Apostles themselves were carnal enough, unapt to entertain the
Spiritual part of Christ's Doctrine and Kingdom; continued, even after the
Resurrection, to expect an earthly Acts 1. 6,
Rule under him: But when the Holy Ghost had enlightened their Minds, and
racked their Affections from this Earth and Lees, then they soon despised all
the allurements of the World, scorned them as dross and dung, accounted nothing
happy or pleasant but to serve Christ, nothing great and honorable but to
suffer and die for him. The same Spirit of Grace, did we not check and stifle
his good motions, unkindly grieve him by refusing and resisting his Addresses
and Courtships to our souls, would work the same blessed effects on us, give us
a true taste and delightful relish of spiritual excellencies; convince us,
that nothing is so lovely as innocence, that harmless Dove-like temper; nothing
so happy as a Conscience always at peace with it self and with God; nothing so
honorable as to serve Christ, whose Injunctions are but so many steps and
degrees whereby we ascend nearer and nearer to God: Assure us, that Repentance
it self is but the casting off an intolerable Burden, Mortification but the
pulling a Thorn out of our Flesh, which grew there from the Curse; subduing
that Rebel part which is always infesting our quiet, and giving us an entire
Dominion over our lusts, which Heathen Moralists say is the greatest Empire
that mortal men are capable of; and in sum, that there can be no objection
against that Obedience which makes our Lives comfortable, and Death it self
advantageous. Lastly, this would establish such a practice of Christianity as
might remove the only scandalous obstacle of the Jews conversion. At this day
they say, Christians themselves keep them from being Christians, add a new
offense to the Cross, which lay not in the way of their Fathers; By not living
such lives as the Prophets foretold should be the effect of Messiah's
Government, and as Christ's own Doctrine and undertaking gave the World ground
to expect. What shall I do? (says a poor doubting Jew,) I see, after so many
Ages of vain which our Doctors talk of; and indeed, Jesus of Nazareth did so
well answer all the Characters observable in Scripture, that I began to turn my
thoughts toward him: But alas, I perceive his own Scholars do not believe him:
They persecute us indeed for blaspheming his Name, and yet they give us every
day new cause to blaspheme him; and not only think him an Imposter, because we
see nothing come to pass which he promised, no meekness, no humility, no
patience, no innocence, and especially none of that love which he told us
should be the badge and cognizance of his Disciples. But on the contrary, all
the vices reign among the Professors of the Gospel, which Jesus professed he
came to extirpate and drive out of the world. How can we choose but speak evil
of His Name, when Christians lie, and cozen, and swear falsely by it; call his
name over all their wickednesses and lusts; slander, backbite, supplant, rob
and murder one another, and all in Christ's Name, do all those things for which
no Sacrifice will expiate with us, and which Heathen honesty abhors to hear of,
for Christ's sake, and in zeal to his Glory. If Christ taught these things, he
deserves all the Reproaches and Curses which any Jew can lay upon him; and if
he did not, where shall I be instructed in his Doctrine, for Christians seem to
think he did teach them. Furnish me, I pray, with some answer to this objection
in charity to this Jew, for your own credit, and for Christ's honor; nay, help
me, I pray you, to defend mine own Sermon. For perhaps another Jew will say, I
am willing to think God did not intend Messiah a Temporal Kingdom, But has
your Jesus any where a Spiritual one? You have proved his Title, But where is
his Possession? Can he have a Kingdom without Subjects? Perhaps he ought to
reign, but I would be glad to see that he does: I would join my self to a
Church, not to a fancy and Rosecrucian invisible society, which subsists only
in imagination. The Prophets have told us, that Messiah shall see of his seed:
I would be Isai. 53. 10.
glad to see it too, and that the pleasure of the Lord did prosper in his hand.
But certainly, you Christians believe our Messiah, not your own; for all your
aims, endeavors and affections are fixed upon worldly advantages, and
satisfactions of the flesh; and while your discourses destroy the Temporal
Dominion of Jesus, and your lives his Spiritual, you seem to confirm me, that
Jesus of Nazareth is not King of the Jews. These objections cannot be taken off
by any way but one; the Reformation of our lives, the expressing in our
actions, as well as words, that Religion which Christ's Doctrine, Example,
Graces, and holy Ordinances were designed to plant and keep up. Were this done,
we should soon see the Mountain of the Lord advanced, and all the Nations flow
to it; Micah 4 1. Isai. 2. 2. 3.
Jews and Heathens would be ravished with the beauty of such a Religion, and
crowd into Christianity; ambitiously contend to come under the government of
that King who makes Virtue the Complexion of his Subjects, Humility, Meekness,
Purity and Charity, the Elements of his new World, and out-doing all the
Heathen Fables of a Golden age, all the Jewish fancies of a second Paradise in
their new Jerusalem, settles among Christians a temporary Heaven, while they
live in the way to that Eternal one which he has prepared for them after
death. To which Kingdom, prepared for us in the eternal design of his mercy,
and purchased by the blood of his Cross, he bring us by the help and guidance
of his grace and holy Spirit, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA in some Copies thus to be amended.
Page 5. lin. 6. for seeming, read teeming. P. 8. l. 11. for Chrysostom, r.
Chrysostom; P. 10. after unworthy, add of their care: after profane, add and
accursed. P. 14. l. 25. for Nation, r. Reason. P. 27. l. 23. dele uot. P. 35. l.
4. for therefore, r. thereby. P. 42. l. ult, for track, r. trash. P. 43. l. 2.
r. a Prophet. P. 43 l. 25. for help, r. keep. P. 46. l. 2. r. esse. P. 47. l.
27. for meats, r. meals.


