portrait of John Done Viri Seraphici Joannis Done Quadragenarij Effigies
vera, Qui post eam aetatem Sacris initiatus Ecclesiae Sti Pauli Decanus obijt.
Ano^ Da^m 1631o An^o Aetatis suae 59o
Lombart Sculp. londre


LETTERS TO SEVERAL PERSONS OF HONOR: WRITTEN BY JOHN DONE Sometime Deane of
St Paul's London.

Published by JOHN DONE Dr. of the Civil Law.

LONDON, Printed by J. Flesher, for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his
shop in St Dunstans Churchyard under the Dyall. 1651.

To the most virtuous and excellent Lady Mris. BRIDGET DUNCH.
MADAM,

IT is an argument of the Immortality of the Soul, that it can apprehend, and
embrace such a Conception; and, it may be some kind of Prophecy, of the
continuance, and lasting of these Letters, that having been scattered, more
then Sibyls leaves, I cannot say into parts, but corners of the World, they
have recollected and united themselves, meeting at once, as it were, at the
same spring, from whence they flowed, but by Succession.

But, the piety of Aeneas to Anchises, with the heat, and fervor of his zeal,
had been dazelled, and extinguished by the fire of Troy, and his Father become
his Tomb, had not a brighter flame appeared in his Protection, and Venus
herself descended with her embraces, to protect her Martial Champion; so that
there is no safer way, to give a perpetuity to this remnant of the dead
Author; but, by dedicating it to the Altar of Beauty and perfection; and if
you, Madam, be but pleased to shed on it, one beam of your Grace and Favor,
that very Adumbration will quicken it with a new Spirit, and defend it from all
fire, (the fate of most Letters) but the last; which, turning these into ashes,
shall revive the Author from his Vrne, and put him into a capacity of
celebrating you, his Guardian Angel, who has protected that part of his Soul,
that he left behind him, his Fame and Reputation.

The courtesies that you confer upon the living, may admit of some allay, by
a possibility of a Retaliation; but what you bestow upon the Dead, is a
Sacrifice to pure Virtue; an ungifted Deity, it is true, without Oblation, Altar,
or Temple, if she were not enshrined in your noble breast, but, I must, forever,
become her votary, if it be, but for giving me this Inclination, and desire of
being

Madam Your most humble servant Jo. Done.

A COLLECTION of Letters written to several Persons of Honor.
To the worthiest Lady Mrs. Bridget White.
MADAME,
I Could make some guess whether souls that go to heaven, retain any memory of
us that stay behind, if I knew whether you ever thought of us, since you
enjoyed your heaven, which is your self, at home. Your going away has made
London a dead carcass. A Term, and a Court do a little spice and embalme it,
and keep it from putrefaction, but the soul went away in you: and I think the
only reason why the plague is somewhat slackned, is, because the place is dead
already, and no body left worth the killing. Wheresoever you are, there is
London enough: and it is a diminishing of you to say so, since you are more
then the rest of the world. When you have a desire to work a miracle, you will
return hither, and raise the place from the dead, and the dead that are in it;
of which I am one, but that a hope that I have a room in your favor keeps me
alive; which you shall abundantly confirm to me, if by one letter you tell me,
that you have received my six; for now my letters are grown to that bulk, that
I may divide them like Amadis the Gauls book, and tell you, that this is the
first letter of the second part of the first book.

Your humblest, and affectionate servant J. D.
Strand S. Peter's day at nine.
To the worthiest Lady Mrs. B. W.
MADAME,
I Think the letters which I send to you single lose themselves by the way for
want of a guide, or faint for want of company. Now, that on your part there be
no excuse, after three single letters, I send three together, that every one of
them may have two witnesses of their delivery. They come also to wait upon
another letter from Sr E. Herbert, of whose recovery from a Fever, you may
apprehend a perfecter contentment then we, because you had none of the former
sorrow. I am an Heretic if it be sound Doctrine, that pleasure tastes best
after sorrow. For my part, I can love health well enough, though I be never
sick; and I never needed my Mistress frowns and disfavours, to make her favors
acceptable to me. In States, it is a weakness to stand upon a defensive war,
and safer not to be invaded, then to have overcome: so in our souls health, an
innocence is better then the heartiest repentance. And in the pleasures of this
life, it is better that the variety of the pleasures give us the taste and
appetite to it, then a sour and sad interruption quicken our stomach; for then
we live by Physic. I wish therefore all your happinesses such as this entire,
and without flaw, or spot of coffeehouse; and such is the love and service of

Your humblest and affectionatest servant J. D.
Strand S. Peter's day at 4.
To the same.
MADAME,
THis letter which I send enclosed has been yours many months, and has
languished upon my table for a passage so long, that as others send news in
their letters, I send an antiquity in mine. I durst not tear it, after it was
yours: there is some facriledge in defacing any thing consecrated to you, and
some impiety to despair that any thing devoted to you should not be reserved
to a good issue. I remember I should have sent it by a servant, of whose
diligence I see I was too confident. I know not what it says: but I dare make
this letter no longer, because being very sure that I always think the same
thoughts of you, I am afraid I should fall upon the same words, and so send one
letter twice together.

Your very affectionate servant J. D.
November. 8.
To the Honorable Lady Mrs. B. W.
MADAME,
I Have but small comfort in this letter; the messenger comes too easily to me,
and I am too sure that the letter shall be delivered. All adventures toward
you should be of more difficulty and hazard. But perchance I need not lament
this; it may be so many of my letters are lost already that it is time that one
should come, like Jobs servant, to bring word, that the rest were lost. If you
have had more before, this comes to ask how they were received; and if you
have had none, it comes to try how they should have been received. It comes to
you like a bashful servant, who though he have an extreme desire to put
himself in your presence, yet has not much to say when he is come: yet has it
as much to say as you can think; because what degrees soever of honor,
respect, and devotion, you can imagine or believe to be in any, this letter
tells you, that all those are in me toward you. So that for this letter you
are my Secretary; for your worthiness, and your opinion that I have a just
estimation of them, write it: so that it is as long, and as good, as you think
it; and nothing is left to me, but as a witness, to subscribe the name of

Your most humble servant J. D.
Though this letter be yours, it will not misbecome or disproportion it that I
mention your Noble brother, who is gone to Cleave, not to return till toward
Christmas, except the business deserve him not so long.



To the Honorable L. the Lady Kingsmel upon the death of her Husband.
MADAME,
THose things which God dissolves at once, as he shall do the Sun, and Moon,
and those bodies at the last conflagration, he never intends to reunite again;
but in those things, which he takes in pieces, as he does man, and wife, in
these divorces, by death, and in single persons, by the divorce of body and
soul, God has another purpose to make them up again. That piece which he takes
to himself, is presently cast in a mould, and in an instant made fit for his
use; for heaven is not a place of a proficiency, but of present perfection.
That piece which he leaves behind in this world, by the death of a part
thereof, grows fitter and fitter for him, by the good use of his corrections,
and the entire conformity to his will. Nothing disproportions us, nor makes us
so incapable of being reunited to those whom we loved here, as murmuring, or
not advancing the goodness of him, who has removed them from hence. We would
wonder, to see a man, who in a wood were left to his liberty, to fell what
trees he would, take only the crooked, and leave the streightest trees; but
that man has perchance a ship to build, and not a house, and so has use of
that kind of timber: let not us, who know that in Gods house there are many
Mansions, but yet have no model, no design of the form of that building,
wonder at his taking in of his materials, why he takes the young, and leaves
the old, or why the sickly overlive those, that had better health. We are not
bound to think that souls departed, have divested all affections toward them,
whom they left here; but we are bound to think, that for all their loves they
would not be here again: Then is the will of God done in Earth, as it is in
Heaven, when we neither pretermit his actions, nor resist them; neither pass
them over in an inconsideration, as though God had no hand in them, nor go
about to take them out of his hands, as though we could direct him to do them
better. As Gods Scriptures are his will, so his actions are his will; both are
Testaments, because they testify his mind to us. It is not lawful to add a
scedule to either of his wills: as they do ill, who add to his written will,
the Scriptures, a scedule of Apcryphall books: so do they also, who to his
other will, his manifested actions, add Apocryphal conditions, and a scedule
of such limitations as these, If God would have stayed thus long, or, If God
would have proceeded thus long, or, If God would have proceeded in this or this
manner, I could have born it. To say that our afflictions are greater then we
can bear, is so near to despairing, as that the same words express both; for
when we consider Caines words in that original tongue in which God spoke, we
cannot tell whether the words be, My punishment is greater then can be born;
or, My sin is greater then can be forgiven. But Madame, you who willingly
sacrificed your self to God, in your obedience to him, in your own sickness,
cannot be doubted to dispute with him, about any part of you, which he shall be
pleased to require at your hands. The difference is great in the loss, of an
arm, or a head; of a child, or a husband: but to them, who are incorporated
into Christ, their head, there can be no beheading; upon you, who are a member
of the spouse of Christ the Church, there can fall no widowhead, nor orphanage
upon those children, to whom God is father. I have not another office by your
husbands death; for I was your Chaplain before, in my daily prayers; but I
shall enlarge that office with other Collects, then before, that God will
continue to you, that peace which you have ever had in him, and send you quiet,
and peaceable dispositions in all them with whom you shall have any thing to
do, in your temporal estate and matters of this world. Amen.

Your Ladyships very humble and thankful servant in Christ Jesus J. Done.
At my poor house at S. Paul's. 26. October. 1624.
To my honored friend S T. Lucey.
SIR,
I Make account that this writing of letters, when it is with any seriousness,
is a kind of ecstasy, and a departure and secession and suspension of the soul,
which does then communicate it self to two bodies: And as I would every day
provide for my souls last convoy, though I know not when I shall die, and
perchance I shall never die; so for these ecstasies in letters, I oftentimes
deliver my self over in writing when I know not when those letters shall be
sent to you, and many times they never are, for I have a little satisfaction in
seeing a letter written to you upon my table, though I meet no opportunity of
sending it. Especially this summer, when either by my early retiring home, or
your irresolutions of your own purposes, or some other possessions of yours you
did less reveal to me your progresses, and stations, and where I might cross
you by letters, then heretofore: I make shift to lay little fault upon you,
because my pardon might be easier, if I transgress into a longer and busier
letter then your Country sports admit; but you may read it in winter: And by
that time I may more clearly express my self for those things which have entered
into me, concerning your soul: for as the greatest advantage which man's soul is
thought to have beyond others, is that which they call Actum reflexum, and
iteratum, (for Beasts do the same things as we do, but they do not consider nor
remember the circumstances and inducements; and by what power, and faculty, it
is that they do them) so of those which they call Actum reflexum the noblest is
that which reflects upon the soul it self, and considers and meditates it, Into
which consideration when I walk after my slow and unperfect pace, I begin to
think that as litigious men tired with suits, admit any arbitrament; and
Princes travailed with long and wastfull war, descend to such conditions of
peace, as they are soon after ashamed to have embraced: so Philosophers, and so
all sects of Christians, after long disputations and controversies, have
allowed many things for positive and dogmaticall truths which are not worthy of
that dignity; And so many doctrines have grown to be the ordinary diet and food
of our spirits, and have place in the pap of Catechismes, which were admitted
but as Physic in that present distemper, or accepted in a lazy weariness,
when men, so they might have something to rely upon, and to excuse themselves
from more painful inquisition, never examined what that was. To which
indisposition of ours, the Casuists are so indulgent, as that they allow a
conscience to adhere to any probable opinion against a more probable, and do
never bind him to seek out which is the more probable, but give him leave to
dissemble it and to depart from it, if by mischance he come to know it. This,
as it appears in all sciences, so most manifestly in Physic, which for a long
time considering nothing, but plain curing and that but by example and
precedent, the world at last longed for some certain Canons and Rules, how
these cures might be accomplished; And when men are inflamed with this desire,
and that such a fire breaks out that rages and consumes infinitely by heat of
argument, except some of authority interpose. This produced Hippocrates his
Aphorisms; and the world slumbred or took breath, in his resolution diverse
hundreds of years: And then in Galens time, which was not satisfied with the
effect of curing, nor with the knowledge how to cure, broke out another desire
of finding out the causes why those simples wrought those effects. Then Galeu
rather to stay their stomachs then that he gave them enough, taught them the
qualities of the four Elements, and arrested them upon this, that all
differences of qualities proceeded from them. And after, (not much before our
time) men perceiving that all effects in Physic could not be derived form
these beggarly and impotent properties of the Elements, and that therefore they
were driven often to that miserable refuge of specifique form, and of antipathy
and sympathy, we see the world has turned upon new principles which are
attributed to Paracelsus, but (indeed) too much to his honor. Certainly it is
also so in the Physic of our soul Divinity, for in the Primitive Church, when
amongst the Fathers there were so diverse opinions of the state of the soul,
presently after this life, they easily inclined to be content to do as much for
them dead as when they were alive, and so concurred in a charitable disposition
to pray for them; which manner of prayer then in use, no Christian Church at
this day having received better light, will allow of. So also when in the
beginning of S. Augustines time, Grace had been so much advanced that man's
Nature was scarce admitted to be so much as any means or instrument (not only
no kind of cause) of his own good works: And soon after in S. Augustines time
also man's free will (by fierce opposition and arguing against the former error)
was too much overvalued, and admitted into too near degrees of fellowship with
Grace; those times admitted a doctrine and form of reconciliation, which though
for reverence to the time, both the Dominicans and Jesuits at this day in their
great quarrel about Grace and Free will would yet seem to maintain, yet
indifferent and dispasioned men of that Church see there is no possibility in
it, and therefore accuse it of absurdity and almost of heresy. I think it
falls out thus also in the matter of the soul: for Christian Religion presuming
a soul, and intending principally her happiness in the life to come, has been
content to accept any way which has been obtruded; how this soul is begun in
us. Hence it is that whole Christian Churches aresthemselves upon propagation
from parents; and other whole Christian Churches allow only infusion from God.
In both which opinions there appear such infirmities as it is time to look for
a better: for whosoever will adhere to the way of propagation, can never evict
necessarily and certainly a natural immortality in the soul, if the soul
result out of matter, nor shall he ever prove that all mankind has any more
then one soul: as certainly of all beasts, if they receive such souls as they
have from their parents, every species can have but one soul. And they which
follow the opinion of infusion from God, and of a new creation (which is now
the more common opinion) as they can very hardly defend the doctrine of original
sin (the soul is forced to take this infection, and comes not into the body of
her own disposition) so shall they never be able to prove that all those whom
we see in the shape of men have an immortal and reasonable soul, because our
parents are as able as any other species is to give us a soul of growth and of
sense, and to perform all vital and animal functions. And so without infusion
of such a soul may produce a creature as wise and well disposed as any horse or
Elephant, of which degree many whom we see come far short; nor has God bound
or declared himself that he will always create a soul for every embryon, there
is yet therefore no opinion in Philosophy, nor Divinity, so well established as
constrains us to believe, both that the soul is immortal, and that every
particular man has such a soul: which since out of the great mercy of our God
we do constantly believe, I am ashamed that we do not also know it by searching
farther: But as sometimes we had rather believe a Travelers lie then go to
disprove him; so men rather cleave to these ways then seek new: yet because I
have meditated therein, I will shortly aquaint you with what I think; for I
would not be in danger of that law of Moses, That if a man dig a pit, and cover
it not, he must recompense those which are damnified by it: which is often
interpreted of such as shake old opinions, and do not establish new as certain,
but leave consciences in a worse danger then they found them in. I believe that
law of Moses has in it some mystery and appliablenesse; for by that law men
are only then bound to that indemnity and compensation, if an Ox or an Ass
(that is, such as are of a strong constitution and accustomed to labor) fall
therein; but it is not said so, if a Sheep or a Goat fall: no more are we, if
men in a silliness or wantonness will stumble or take a scandal, bound to
rectify them at all times. And therefore because I justly presume you strong
and watchful enough, I make account that I am not obnoxious to that law, since
my meditations are neither too wide nor too deep for you, except only that my
way of expressing them may be extended beyond your patience and pardon, which I
will therefore tempt no longer at this time.

Your very affectionate friend and servant and lover I. Done.
From Micham, my close prison ever since I saw you, 9 October.
To the Noblest Knight Sr. Edward Herbert L. of Cherbury; sent to him with his
Book Biathanatos.
SIR,
I Make account that this book has enough performed that which it undertook,
both by argument and example. It shall therefore the less need to be it self
another example of the Doctrine. It shall not therefore kill it self; that is,
not bury it self; for if it should do so, those reasons, by which that act
should be defended or excused, were also lost with it. Since it is content to
live, it cannot choose a wholsomeraire then your Library, where Authors of all
complexions are presented. If any of them grudge this book a room, and suspect
it of new or dangerous doctrine, you who know us all, can best moderate. To
those reasons which I know your love to me will make in my favor and
discharge, you may add this, that though this doctrine has not been taught
nor defended by writers, yet they, most of any sort of men in the world, have
practiced it.

Your very true and earnest friend and servant and lover J. Done.

To Sr Robert Carre now Earl of Ankerum, with my Book Biathanatos at my going
into Germany.
SIR,
I Had need do somewhat toward you above my promises; How weak are my
performances, when even my promises are defective? I cannot promise, no not in
mine own hopes, equally to your merit toward me. But besides the Poems, of
which you took a promise, I send you another Book to which there belongs this
History. It was written by me many years since; and because it is upon a
misinterpretable subject, I have always gone so near suppressing it, as that it
is only not burnt: no hand has passed upon it to copy it, nor many eyes to
read it: only to some particular friends in both Universities, then when I
writ it, I did communicate it: And I remember, I had this answer, That
certainly, there was a false thread in it, but not easily found: Keep it, I
pray, with the same jealousy; let any that your discretion admits to the sight
of it, know the date of it; and that it is a Book written by Jack Done, and
not by D. Done: Reserve it for me, if I live, and if I die, I only forbid it
the Press, and the Fire: publish it not, but yet burn it not; and between
those, do what you will with it. Love me still, thus far, for your own sake,
that when you withdraw your love from me, you will find so many unworthinesses
in me, as you grow ashamed of having had so long, and so much, such a thing as

Your poor servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.

To the Countess of Bedford.
MADAM,
AMongst many other dignities which this letter has by being received and seen
by you, it is not the least, that it was prophesied of before it was born: for
your brother told you in his letter, that I had written: he did me much honor
both in advancing my truth so far as to call a promise an act already done;
and to provide me a means of doing him a service in this act, which is but
doing right to my self: for by this performance of mine own word, I have also
justified that part of his Letter which concerned me; and it had been a double
guiltiness in me, to have made him guilty toward you. It makes no difference
that this came not the same day, nor bears the same date as his; for though in
inheritances and worldly possessions we consider the dates of Evidences, yet in
Letters, by which we deliver over our affections, and assurances of friendship,
and the best faculties of our souls, times and days cannot have interest, nor
be considerable, because that which passes by them, is eternal, and out of the
measure of time. Because therefore it is the office of this Letter, to convey
my best wishes, and all the effects of a noble love unto you, (which are the
best fruits that so poor a soil, as my poor soul is, can produce) you may be
pleased to allow the Letter thus much of the souls privilege, as to exempt it
from straitness of hours, or any measure of times, and so believe it came
then. And for my part, I shall make it so like my soul, that as that affection,
of which it is the messenger, begun in me without my knowing when, any more
then I know when my soul began; so it shall continue as long as that.

Your most affectionate friend and servant J. D.

To the right honorable the Countess of Montgomery.
MADAM,
OF my ability to do your Ladyship service, any thing may be an emblem good
enough; for as a word vanishes, so does any power in me to serve you; things
that are written are fitter testimonies, because they remain and are permanent:
in writing this Sermon which your Ladyship was pleased to hear before, I
confess I satisfy an ambition of mine own, but it is the ambition of obeying
your commandment, not only an ambition of leaving my name in the memory, or in
the Cabinet: and yet, since I am going out of the Kingdom, and perchance out of
the world, (when God shall have given my soul a place in heaven) it shall the
less diminish your Ladyship, if my poor name be found about you. I know what
dead carcasses things written are, in respect of things spoken. But in things
of this kind, that soul that inanimates them, receives debts from them: The
Spirit of God that dictates them in the speaker or writer, and is present in
his tongue or hand, meets himself again (as we meet our selves in a glass) in
the eyes and hearts of the hearers and readers: and that Spirit, which is ever
the same to an equal devotion, makes a writing and a speaking equal means to
edification. In one circumstance, my preaching and my writing this Sermon is
too equal: that that your Ladyship heard in a hoarse voice then, you read in a
course hand now: but in thankfulness I shall lift up my hands as clean as my
infirmities can keep them, and a voice as clear as his spirit shall be pleased
to tune in my prayers in all places of the world, which shall either sustain or
bury

Your Ladyships humble servant in Christ Jesus J. D.

To Sir H. R.
IF a whole year be but Annus ab Annulo, because it returns into it self, what
Annululus shall be diminutive enough, to express our weekly revolutions? In
chains the least linkes have most curiosity, but that can be no emblem of us:
but they have also the most strength, and that may. The first sphere only
which is resisted by nothing, absolves his course every day; and so does true
friendship well placed, often iterate in act or purpose, the same offices. But
as the lower spheres, subject to the violence of that, and yet naturally
encouraged to a reluctation against it, have therefore many distractions, and
eccentricities, and some trepidations, and so return but lamely, and lately to
the same place, and office: so that friendship which is not moved primarily by
the proper intelligence, discretion, and about the natural center, virtue,
does perchance sometimes, some things, somewhat like true friendship; but has
many deviations, which are strayings into new loves, (not of other men; for
that is proper to true wise friendship, which is not a marring; but of other
things) and has such trepidations as keep it from showing it self, where great
persons do not love; and it returns to the true first station and place of
friendship planetarily, which is uncertainly and seldom. I have ever seen in
London and our Court, as some colors, and habits, and continuances, and
motions, and phrases, and accents, and songs, so friends in fashion and in
season: and I have seen them as suddenly abandoned altogether, though I see no
change in them, nor know more why they were left, then why they were chosen. To
do things by example, and upon confidence of another judgment may be some
kind of a second wisdom; but it is but writing by a copy: or indeed it is the
hardest of all, and the issue of the first wisdom, for I cannot know that this
example should be followed, except I knew that it is good, and so I judge my
Judge. Our assent therefore, and arrest, must be upon things, not persons. And
when we are sure we are in the right way, for great persons, we may be glad of
their company, if they go our way; we may for them change our place, but not
our end, nor our way, if there be but one, us in Religion. In persevering in
it, it concerns as much what our companions be, but very much what our friends.
In which I know I speak not dangerously nor mis-appliably to you, as though I
averted you from any of those friends, who are of other impressions then you or
I in some great circumstances of Religion. You know I never fettered nor
imprisoned the word Religion; not straightning it Frierly, ad Religiones
factitias, (as the Romans call well their orders of Religion) nor immuring it
in a Rome, or a Wittemberg, or a Geneva; they are all virtuall beams of one
Sun, and wheresoever they find clay hearts, they harden them, and moulder them
into dust; and they entender and mollify waxen. They are not so contrary as
the North and South Poles; and that they are connaturall pieces of one circle.
Religion is Christianity, which being too spiritual to be seen by us, does
therefore take an apparent body of good life and works, so salvation requires
an honest Christian. These are the two Elements, and he which elemented from
these, has the complexion of a good man, and a fit friend. The diseases are,
too much intention into indiscreet zeal, and too much remissness and negligence
by giving scandal: for our condition and state in this, is as infirm as in our
bodies; where physicians consider only two degrees; sickness, and neutrality;
for there is no health in us. This, Sir, I use to say to you, rather to have so
good a witness and corrector of my meditations, then to advise; and yet to do
that too, since it is pardonable in a friend: Not to slack you toward those
friends which are religious in other clothes then we; (for Amici vitia si feras
facis tua, is true of such faults) but to keep you awake against such as the
place where you must live will often obtrude, which are not only naked,
without any fashion of such garments, but have neither the body of Religion,
which is moral honesty, and sociable faithfulness, nor the soul, Christianity.
I know not how this paper escaped last week which I send now; I was so sure that
I enwrapped it then, that I should be so still, but that I had but one copy;
forgive it as you use to do. From Micham in as much haste, and with as ill Pen
and Ink, as the letter can accuse me of; but with the last and the next weeks
heart and affection.

Yours very truly and affectionately J. Done.

To Sir H. G.
SIR,
THis letter has more merit, then one of more diligence, for I wrote it in my
bed, and with much pain. I have occasion to sit late some nights in my study,
(which your books make a pretty library) and now I find that that room has a
wholesome emblematique use: for having under it a vault, I make that promise
me, that I shall die reading, since my book and a grave are so near. But it
has another unwholesomenesse, that by raw vapors rising from thence, (for I
can impute it to nothing else) I have contracted a sickness which I cannot
name nor describe. For it has so much of a continual Cramp, that it wrests
the sinews, so much of a Tetane, that it withdraws and pulls the mouth, and so
much of the Gout, (which they whose counsel I use, say it is) that it is not
like to be cured, though I am too hasty in three days to pronounce it. If it be
the Gout, I am miserable; for that affects dangerous parts, as my neck and
breast, and (I think fearfully) my stomach, but it will not kill me yet; I shall
be in this world, like a porter in a great house, ever nearest the door, but
seldomest abroad: I shall have many things to make me weary, and yet not get
leave to be gone. If I go, I will provide by my best means that you suffer not
for me, in your bonds. The estate which I should leave behind me of any
estimation, is my poor fame, in the memory of my friends, and therefore I would
be curious of it, and provide that they repent not to have loved me. Since my
imprisonment in my bed, I have made a meditation in verse, which I call a
Litany; the word you know imports no other then supplication, but all Churches
have one form of supplication, by that name. Amongst ancient annals I mean
some 800 years, I have met two Letanies in Latin verse, which gave me not the
reason of my meditations, for in good faith I thought not upon them then, but
they give me a defense, if any man; to a Lay man, and a private, impute it as a
fault, to take such divine and public names, to his own little thoughts. The
first of these was made by Ratpertus a Monk of Suevia; and the other by S.
Notker, of whom I will give you this note by the way, that he is a private
Saint, for a few Parishes; they were both but Monks, and the Letanies poor and
barbarous enough; yet Pope Nicolas the 5, valued their devotion so much, that
he canonized both their Poems, and commanded them for public service in their
Churches: mine is for lesser Chapels, which are my friends, and though a copy
of it were due to you, now, yet I am so unable to serve my self with writing it
for you at this time, (being some 30 staves of 9 lines) that I must entreat you
to take a promise that you shall have the first, for a testimony of that duty
which I owe to your love, and to my self, who am bound to cherish it by my best
offices. That by which it will deserve best acceptance, is, That neither the
Roman Church need call it defective, because it abhors not the particular
mention of the blessed Triumphers in heaven; nor the Reformed can discreetly
accuse it, of attributing more then a rectified devotion ought to do. The day
before I lay down, I was at London, where I delivered your Letter for Sr Ed.
Conway, and received another for you, with the copy of my Book, of which it is
impossible for me to give you a copy so soon, for it is not of much less then
300 pages. If I die, it shall come to you in that fashion that your Letter
desires it. If I warm again, (as I have often seen such beg-gers as my
indisposition is, end themselves soon, and the patient as soon) you and I shall
speak together of that, before it be too late to serve you in that commandment.
At this time I only assure you, that I have not appointed it upon any person,
nor ever purposed to print it: which later perchance you thought, and grounded
your request thereupon. A Gent. that visited me yesterday told me that our
Church has lost Mr Hugh Broughton, who is gone to the Roman side. I have known
before, that Serarius the Jesuit was an instrument from Cardinal Baronius to
draw him to Rome, to accept a stipend, only to serve the Christian Churches in
controversies with the Jews, without indangering himself to change of his
persuasion in particular deductions between these Christian Churches, or being
enquired of, or tempted thereunto. And I hope he is no otherwise departed from
us. If he be, we shall not escape scandal in it; because, though he be a man
of many distempers, yet when he shall come to eat assured bread, and to be
removed from partialities, to which want drove him, to make himself a
reputation, and raise up favorers; you shall see in that course of opposing
the Jews, he will produce worthy things: and our Church will perchance blush to
have lost a Soldier fit for that great battle; and to cherish only those
single Duellisms, between Rome and England, or that more single, and almost
self-homicide, between the unconformed Ministers, and Bishops. I writ to you
last week that the plague increased; by which you may see that my Letters -- --
opinion of the song, not that I make such trifles for praise; but because as
long as you speak comparatively of it with mine own, and not absolutely, so
long I am of your opinion even at this time; when I humbly thank God, I ask and
have, his comfort of sadder meditations; I do not condemn in my self, that I
have given my wit such evaporations, as those, if they be free from
profaneness, or obscene provocations. Sr you would pity me if you saw me
write, and therefore will pardon me if I write no more: my pain has drawn my
head so much awry, and holds it so, that mine eye cannot follow mine hand: I
receive you therefore into my prayers, with mine own weary soul, and commend my
self to yours. I doubt not but next week I shall be good news to you, for I
have mending or dying on my side, which is two to one. If I continue thus, I
shall have comfort in this, that my B. Savior exercising his Justice upon my
two worldly parts, my fortune, and body, reserves all his mercy for that which
best tastes it, and most needs it, my soul. I profess to you truly, that my
lothnesse to give over now, seems to my self an ill sign, that I shall write no
more.

Your poor friend, and God's poor patient, Jo. Done.

To my worthy and honored friend Mr George Garet.
SIR,
I Am sorry, if your care of me have made you importune to any body else; yet I
cannot be very sorry because it gives new testimonies of your favor to me, of
which I shall ever be very glad, and (that which is my only virtue) thankful:
so desperate fortunes as mine, may well make friends loath to do courtesies,
because an inability in deserving or requiting, takes from them the honor of
having done a courtesy, and leaves it but the poor name of an alms; and alms
may be given in easier proportions, and more meritoriously. But Sr, by what
name or weight soever you esteem this kindness which you have done me, I value
it so, as might alone persuade me of your care of me; in recompense of which,
you must be pleased to accept new assurances that I am

I pray let my service be presented by you to Mr Roope.

Your very affectionate servant, J. Done.

To Mr George Garet.
SIR,
I Have not received that Letter, which by this, I perceive you sent to London;
if there were any thing in that, by which I might have taken occasion to have
done you service before this time, I have a double reason of grief for the want
of it. I came from thence upon Thursday, where I left Sir Tho. Roe so indulgent
to his sorrow, as it had been an injury to have interrupted it with my
unusefull company. I have done nothing of that kind as your Letter intimates,
in the memory of that good Gentlewoman; if I had, I should not find any better
use of it, then to put it into your hands. You teach me what I owe her memory;
and if I pay that debt so, you have a part and interest in it, by doing me the
honor of remembering it: and therefore it must come quickly to you. I hope not
for your return from Court, till I come thither; which if I can be master of my
self, or servant to my self, which I think is all one, I hope to do some ten
days hence, making it my way to the Bathe. If you find any there that have not
forgot my name, continue me in their favor, and hold in your self a firm
assurance that I am

Your affectionate servant J. Done. J. Done.

To Mrs Martha Garet.
MADAME,
THough there be much merit, in the favor your brother has done me in a
visit, yet that which does enrich and perfect it, is, that he brought you with
him; which he does, as well by letting me see how you do, as by giving me
occasions, and leave to talk with you by this Letter: if you have any servant,
which wishes you better then I, it must be because he is able to put his wishes
into a better frame, and express them better, and understand proportion, and
greatness better then I. I am willing to confess my impotencie; which is,
that I know no wish good enough for you; if any do, my advantage is, that I
can exceed his, by adding mine to it. You must not think that I begin to think
thus, when you begin to hear it, by a Letter; As sometimes by the changing of
the wind, you begin to hear a Trumpet, which sounded long before you heard it;
so are these thoughts of you familiar and ordinary in me, though they have
seldom the help of this conveyance to your knowledge: I am loath to leave; for
as long as in any fashion, I can have your brother and you here, you make my
house a kind of Dorvey; but since I cannot stay you here, I will come thither
to you; which I do, by wrapping up in this paper, the heart of

Your most affectionate servant J. Done.

To Sir Thomas Roe.
SIR,
IT is an ease to your friends abroad, that you are more a man of business
then heretofore; for now it were an injury to trouble you with a busy Letter.
But by the same reason I were inexcusable if I should not write at all, since
the less, the more acceptable; therefore, Sir, though I have no more to say,
but to renew the obligations I have toward you, and to continue my place in
your love, I would not forbear to tell you so. If I shall also tell you, that
when this place affords any thing worth your hearing, I will be your relator, I
think I take so long a day, as you would forget the debt, it appears yet to be
so barren. How soever with every commodity, I shall say something, though it be
but a descant upon this plain song, that I am

Your affectionate servant J. Done.

To all my friends: Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
I Am not weary of writing; it is the course but durable garment of my love;
but I am weary of wanting you. I have a mind like those bodies, which have hot
Livers, and cold stomachs; or such a distemper as traveled me at Paris; a
Fever, and dysentery: in which, that which is physic to one infirmity,
nourishes the other. So I abhor nothing more then sadness, except the ordinary
remedy, change of company. I can allow my self to be Animal sociale, appliable
to my company, but not gregale, to herd my self in every troup. It is not
perfectly true which a very subtle, yet very deep wit Averroes says, that all
mankind has but one soul, which informs and rules us all, as one
Intelligence does the firmament and all the Stars in it; as though a
particular body were too little an organ for a soul to play upon. And it is as
imperfect which is taught by that religion which is most accommodate to sense (I
dare not say to reason (though it have appearance of that too) because none may
doubt but that that religion is certainly best, which is reasonablest) That all
mankind has one protecting Angel; all Christians one other, all English one
other, all of one Corporation and every civil coagulation or society one
other; and every man one other. Though both these opinions express a truth;
which is, that mankind has very strong bounds to cohabit and concur in
other then mountains and hills during his life. First, common, and mutual
necessity of one another; and therefore naturally in our defense, and
subventions we first fly to our felves; next, to that which is likest, other
men. Then, natural and inborn charity, beginning at home, which persuades us
to give, that we may receive: And legal charity, which makes us also forgive.
Then an ingraffing in one another, and growing together by a custom of
society: and last of all, strict friendship, in which band men were so presumed
to be coupled, that our Confessor King had a law, that if a man be killed, the
murderer shall pay a sum felago suo, which the interpreters call, fide ligato,
et comite vitae. All these bands I willingly receive, for no man is less of
himself then I: nor any man enough of himself. To be so, is all one with
omnipotence. And it is well marked, that in the holy Book, wheresoever they
have rendered Almighty, the word is Self-sufficient. I think sometimes that the
having a family should remove me far from the curse of Vae soli. But in so
strict obligation of Parent, or Husband, or Master, (and perchance it is so in
the last degree of friendship) where all are made one, I am not the less
alone, for being in the midst of them. Therefore this oleum laetitiae, this
balm of our lives, this alacrity which dignifies even our service to God, this
gallant enemy of dejection and sadness, (for which and wickedness the Italian
allows but one word, Triste: And in full condemnation whereof it was prophesied
of our blessed Savior, Non erit tristis, in his conversation) must be sought
and preserved diligently. And since it grows without us, wemust be sure to
gather it from the right tree. They which place this alacrity only in a good
conscience, deal somewhat too roundly with us, for when we ask the way, they
show us the town afar off: Will a Physician consulted for health and strength,
bid you have good sinews and equal temper? It is true, that this conscience is
the resultance of all other particular actions; it is our triumph and banquet
in the haven; but I would come toward that also, (as Mariners say) with a
merry wind. Our nature is Meteorique, we respect (because we partake so) both
earth and heaven; for as our bodies glorified shall be capable of spiritual
joy, so our souls demerged into those bodies, are allowed to partake earthly
pleasure. Our soul is not sent hither, only to go back again: we have some
errand to do here: nor is it sent into prison, because it comes innocent: and
he which sent it, is just. As we may not kill our selves, so we may not bury
our selves: which is done or endangered in a dull Monastique sadness, which is
so much worse then jolity (for upon that word I durst -- -- And certainly
despair is infinitely worse, then presumption: both because this is an excess
of love, that of fear; and because this is up, that down the hill; easier, and
more stumbling. Heaven is expressed by singing, hell by weeping. And though our
blessed Savior be never noted to have laughed, yet his continuance is said
ever to be smiling. And that even moderate mirth of heart, and face, and all I
wish to my self; and persuade you to keep. This alacrity is not had by a
general charity and equanimity to all mankind, for that is to seek fruit in a
wilderness: nor from a singular friend, for that is to fetch it out of your
own pocket: but the various and abundant grace of it, is good company. In which
no rank, no number, no quality, but ill, and such a degree of that as may
corrupt and poison the good, is exempt. For in nearer then them, your friend,
and somewhat nearer then he, in your self you must allow some inordinatenesse
of affections and passions. For it is not true that they are not natural, but
storms and tempests of our blood and humors: for they are natural, but
siokly. And as the Indian priests expressed an excellent charity, by building
Hospitalls and providing surgery for birds and beasts samed by mischance, or
age, or labor: so must we, not cut off, but cure these affections, which are
the bestiall part.

To Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
EVery tuesday I make account that I turn a great hourglass, and consider that
a weeks life is run out since I writ. But if I ask my self what I have done in
the last watch, or would do in the next, I can say nothing; if I say that I
have passed it without hurting any, so may the Spider in my window. The
primitive Monks were excusable in their retirings and enclosures of
themselves: for even of them every one cultivated his own garden and orchard,
that is, his soul and body, by meditation, and manufactures; and they ought the
world no more since they consumed none of her sweetness, nor begot others to
burden her. But for me, if I were able to husband all my time so thriftily, as
not only not to wound my soul in any minute by actual sin, but not to rob
and cosen her by giving any part to pleasure or business, but bestow it all
upon her in meditation, yet even in that I should wound her more, and contract
another guiltiness: As the Eagle were very unnatural if because she is able
to do it, she should perch a whole day upon a tree, staring in contemplation
of the majesty and glory of the Sun, and let her young Eglets starve in the
nest. Two of the most precious things which God has afforded us here, for the
agony and exercise of our sense and spirit, which are a thirst and inhiation
after the next life, and a frequency of prayer and meditation in this, are
often envenomed, and putrefied, and stray into a corrupt disease: for as God
does thus occasion, and positively concur to evil, that when a man is
purposed to do a great sin, God infuses some good thoughts which make him
choose a less sin, or leave out some circumstance which aggravated that; so
the devil does not only suffer but provoke us to somethings naturally good,
upon condition that we shall omit some other more necessary and more
obligatory. And this is his greatest subtilty; because herein we have the
deceitful comfort of having done well, and can very hardly spy our error
because it is but an insensible omission, and no accusing act. With the first
of these I have often suspected my self to be overtaken; which is, with a
desire of the next life: which though I know it is not merely out of a
weariness of this, because I had the same desires when I went with the tide,
and enjoyed fairer hopes then now: yet I doubt worldly encombrances have
increased it. I would not that death should take me asleep. I would not have
him merely seize me, and only declare me to be dead, but win me, and overcome
me. When I must shipwreck, I would do it in a Sea, where mine impotencie might
have some excuse; not in a sullen weedy lake, where I could not have so much as
exercise for my swimming. Therefore I would fain do something; but that I
cannot tell what, is no wonder. For to choose, is to do: but to be no part of
any body, is to be nothing. At most, the greatest persons, are but great wens,
and excrescences; men of wit and delightful conversation, but as moales for
ornament, except they be so incorporated into the body of the world, that they
contribute something to the sustentation of the whole. This I made account that
I begun early, when I understood the study of our laws: but was diverted by the
worst voluptuousnes, which is an Hydroptique immoderate desire of humane
learning and languages: beautiful ornaments to great fortunes; but mine needed
an occupation, and a course which I thought I entered well into, when I
submitted my self to such a service, as I thought might employed those poor
advantages, which I had. And there I stumbled too, yet I would try again: for
to this hour I am nothing, or so little, that I am scarce subject and argument
good enough for one of mine own letters: yet I fear, that does not ever proceed
from a good root, that I am so well content to be less, that is dead. You,
Sir, are far enough from these descents, your virtue keeps you secure, and
your natural disposition to mirth will preserve you; but lose none of these
holds, a slip is often as dangerous as a bruise, and though you cannot fall to
my lowness, yet in a much less distraction you may meet my sadness; for he
is no safer which falls from an high tower into the leads, then he which falls
from thence to the ground: make therefore to your self some mark, and go
toward it alegrement. Though I be in such a planetary and erratique fortune,
that I can do nothing constantly, yet you may find some constancy in my
constant advising you to it.

Your hearty true friend J. Done.
I came this evening from M. Jones his house in Essex, where M. Martin has
been, and left a relation of Captain Whitcocks death, perchance it is no news
to you, but it was to me; without doubt want broke him; for when M. Hollands
company by reason of the plague broke, the Captain sought to be at Mris. Jones
house, who in her husbands absence declining it, he went in the night, his boy
carrying his cloakbag, on foot to the Lord of Sussex, who going next day to
hunt, the Captain not then sick, told him he would see him no more. A Chaplain
came up to him, to whom he delivered an account of his understanding, and I
hope, of his belief, and soon after dyed; and my Lord has buried him with his
own Ancestors. Perchance his life needed a longer sickness, but a man may go
faster and safer, when he enjoyes that day light of a clear and sound
understanding, then in the night or twilight of an ague or other disease. And
the grace of Almighty God does every thing suddenly and hastily, but depart
from us, it inlightens us, warms us, heats us, ravishes us, at once. Such a
medicin, I fear, his inconsideration needed; and I hope as confidently that he
had it. As our soul is infused when it is created, and created when it is
infused, so at her going out, Gods mercy is had by asking, and that is asked by
having. Lest your Polesworth carrier should cosen me, I send my man with this
letter early to London, whither this Tuesday all the Court come to a
Christening at Arondell house, and stay in town so that I will sup with the
good Lady, and write again to morrow to you, if any thing be occasioned there,
which concerns you, and I will tell her so; next day they are to return to
Hampton, and upon friday the King to Royston.



To Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
IF this which I send you enclosed give me right intelligence, I present you a
way by which you may redeem all your former wastes, and recompense your ill
fortunes, in having sometimes apprehended unsuccesfull suits, and (that which I
presume you affect most) ease your self from all future inquisition of widows
or such businesses as ask so over industrious a pursuit, as divest a man from
his best happiness of enjoying himself. I give you (I think) the first
knowledge, of two millions confiscated to the Crown of England: of which I dare
assure my self the coffers have yet touched none, nor have the Commissioners
for suits any thing to oppose against a suit founded upon this confiscation,
though they hold never so strictly to their instructions. After you have served
your self with aproportion, I pray make a petition in my name for as much as
you think may begiven me for my book out of this; for, but out of this, I have
no imagination. And for a token of my desire to serve him, present M. Fowler
with 3 or 4000 li. of this since he was so resolved never to leave his place,
without a suit of that value. I wish your cosen in the town, better provided,
but if he be not, here is enough for him. And since I am ever an affectionate
servant to that journey, acquaint M. Martin from me, how easy it will be to
get a good part of this for Virginia. Upon the least petition that M. Brook can
present he may make himself whole again, of all which the Kings servants M.
Lepton and master Water^use, have endammaged him. Give him leave to offer to M.
Hakevill enough to please himself, for his Aurum Reginae. And if M. Gherard
have no present hopeful design upon a worthy Widow, let him have so much of
this as will provide him that house and coach which he promised to lend me at
my return. If M. Inago Jones be not satisfied for his last Mask (because I
hear say it cannot come to much) here is enough to be had: This is but a copy,
but if Sir To. Cotton have the original he will not deny it you; if he has it
not, no body else has it, nor can prevent you; husband it well, which you may
easily do, because I assure my self none of the children nor friends of the
party condemned will cross you or importune the King for any part. If I get no
more by it, yet it has made me a Letter. And Sir (to depart from this Mine) in
what part of my Letters soever you find the remembrance of my humble service to
my Lord of Bedford, I beseech you ever think them intended for the first, and
in that rank present them. I have yet received but one Letter from you which
was of the 10 of December by M. Pory, but you see that as long as there is one
egg left in the nest, I never leave laying, nor should although you had sent
none since; all at last will not amount to so good a testimony as I would fain
give how much I am

Your affectionate servant and lover, J. Done.
Sir, I write this Letter in no very great degree of a convalescence from such
storms of a stomach colic as kept me in a continual vomiting, so that I know
not what I should have been able to do to dispatch this wind, but that an
honest fever came and was my physic: I tell you of it only lest some report
should make it worse, for me thinks that they who love to add to news should
think it a masterpiece to be able to say no worse of any ill fortune of mine
then it deserves, since commonly it deserves worse then they can say, but they
did not, and I am reprieved. I find dying to be like those facts which denying
makes felony: when a sickness examines us, and we confess that we are willing
to die, we cannot, but those who are -- incur the penalty: and I may die yet,
if talking idly be an ill sign. God be with you.



To the same.
SIR,
IT is in our State ever held for a good sign to change Prison, and nella
Signoria de mi, I will think it so, that my sickness has given me leave to
come to my London-prison. I made no doubt but my entrance-pain (for it was so
rather then a sickness, but that my sadness putrefied and corrupted it to
that name) affected you also; for nearer Contracts then general Christianity,
had made us so much toward one, that one part cannot escape the distemper of
the other. I was therefore very careful, as well to slack any sorrow which my
danger might occasion in you; as to give you the comfort of having been heard
in your prayers for me, to tell you as soon as my pain remitted what steps I
made toward health, which I did last week. This Tuesday morning your man
brought me a Letter, which (if he had not found me at London) I see he had a
hasty commandment to have brought to Micham. Sr, though my fortune has made me
such as I am, rather a sickness and disease of the world then any part of it,
yet I esteemed my self so far from being so to you, as I esteemed you to be far
from being so of the world, as to measure men by fortune or events. I am now
gone so far toward health, as there is not infirmity enough left in me for an
assurance of so much nobleness and truth, as your last Letter is to work upon,
that might cure a greater indisposition then I am now in: And though if I had
died, I had not gone without testimonies of such a disposition in you toward
the reparation of my fortune, or preservation of my poor reputation; yet I
would live, and be some such thing as you might not be ashamed to love. Your
man must send away this hour in which he visits me; and I have not yet (for I
came last night) offered to visit my La. Bedford, and therefore have nothing to
say which should make me grudge this straitness of time. He tells me he sends
again upon Thursday, and therefore I will make an end of this Letter, and
perfect it then. I doubt my Letters have not come duly to your hand, and that I
writing in my dungeon of Michim without dating, have made the Chronology and
sequence of my Letters perplexed to you; howsoever you shall not be rid of this
Ague of my Letters, though perchance the fit change days. I have received in a
narrow compass three of yours, one with the Catalogue of your Books, another I
found here left last Saturday by your man, and this which he brought me this
morning Sir, I dare sit no longer in my wastcoat, nor have any thing worth the
danger of a relapse to write. I owe you so much of my health, as I would not
mingle you in any occasion of repairing it, and therefore here ask leave to
kiss your hands, and bid you good morrow and farewell.

Your very true friend and servant J Done.

To Sr H. G.
SIR,
IT should be no interruption to your pleasures, to hear me often say that I
love you, and that you are as much my meditations as my self: I often compare
not you and me, but the sphere in which your resolutions are, and my wheel;
both I hope concentrique to God: for me thinks the new Astronomy is thus
appliable well, that we which are a little earth, should rather move toward
God, then that he which is fulfilling, and can come no whither, should move to
wards us. To your life full of variety, nothing is old, nor new to mine; and as
to that life, all stickings and hesitations seem stupid and stony, so to this,
all fluid slipperinesses, and transitory migrations seem giddie and featherie.
In that life one is ever in the porch or postern, going in or out, never within
his house himself: It is a garment made of remnants, a life raveld out into
ends, a line discontinued, and a number of small wretched points, useless,
because they concur not: A life built of past and future, not proposing any
constant present; they have more pleasures then we, but not more pleasure; they
joy oftener, we longer; and no man but of so much understanding as may deliver
him from being a fool, would change with a madman, which had a better
proportion of wit in his often Lucidis. You know, they which dwell farthest
from the Sun, if in any convenient distance, have longer days, better
appetites, better digestion, better growth, and longer life: And all these
advantages have their minds who are well removed from the scorchings, and
dazlings, and exhalings of the worlds glory: but neither of our lives are in
such extremes; for you living at Court without ambition, which would burn you,
or envy, which would divest others, live in the Sun, not in the fire: And I
which live in the Country without stupefying, am not in darkness, but in
shadow, which is not no light, but a pallid, waterish, and diluted one. As all
shadows are of one color, if you respect the body from which they are cast
(for our shadows upon clay will be dirty, and in a garden green, and flowery)
so all retirings into a shadowy life are alike from all causes, and alike
subject to the barbarousnesse and insipid dullness of the Country: only the
emploiments, and that upon which you cast and bestow your pleasure, business,
or books, gives it the tincture, and beauty. But truly wheresoever we are, if
we can but tell our selves truly what and where we would be, we may make any
state and place such; for we are so composed, that if abundance, or glory
scorch and melt us, we have an earthly cave, our bodies, to go into by
consideration, and cool our selves: and if we be frozen, and contracted with
lower and dark fortunes, we have within us a torch, a soul, lighter and warmer
then any without: we are therefore our own umbrella's, and our own suns. These,
Sir, are the sallads and onions of Micham, sent to you with as wholesome
affection as your other friends send Melons and Quelque-choses from Court and
London. If I present you not as good diet as they, I would yet say grace to
theirs, and bid much good do it you. I send you, with this, a Letter which I
sent to the Countess. It is not my use nor duty to do so, but for your having
of it, there were but two consents, and I am sure you have mine, and you are
sure you have hers. I also writ to her Lap for the verses she showed in the
garden, which I did not only to extort them, nor only to keep my promise of
writing, for that I had done in the other Letter, and perchance she has
forgotten the promise; nor only because I think my Letters just good enough
for a progress, but because I would write apace to her, whilst it is possible
to express that which I yet know of her, for by this growth I see how soon she
will be ineffable.

SIR,
THough my friendship be good for nothing else, it may give you the profit of a
tentation, or of an affliction: It may excuse your patience; and though it
cannot allure, it shall importune you. Though I know you have many worthy
friends of all ranks, yet I add something, since I which am of none, would
fain be your friend too. There is some of the honor and some of the degrees of
a Creation, to make a friendship of nothing. Yet, not to annihilate my self
utterly (for though it seem humbleness, yet it is a work of as much
almightinesse, to bring a thing to nothing, as from nothing) though I be not of
the best stuff for friendship, which men of warm and durable fortunes only
are, I cannot say, that I am not of the best fashion, if truth and honesty be
that; which I must ever exercise, toward you, because I learned it of you: for
the conversation with worthy men, and of good example, (though it sow not
virtue in us, yet produces and ripeneth it. Your man's haste, and mine to
Micham cuts off this Letter heve, yet, as in littell paterns torn from a whole
piece, this may tell you what all I am. Though by taking me before my day
(which I accounted Tuesday) I make short payment of this duty of Letters, yet I
have a little comfort in this, that you see me hereby, willing to pay those
debts which I can, before my time.

Your affectionate friend J. Done.
First Saturday in March. 1607. You forget to send me the Apology; and many
times, I think it an injury to remember one of a promise, lest it confess a
distrust. But of the book, by occasion of reading the Deans answer to it, I
have sometimes some want.



To the Countess of Bedford.
Happiest and worthiest Lady,
I Do not remember that ever I have seen a petition in verse, I would not
therefore be singular, nor add these to your other papers. I have yet
adventured so near as to make a petition for verse, it is for those your
Ladyship did me the honor to see in Twicknam garden, except you repent your
making; and having mended your judgment by thinking worse, that is, better,
because juster, of their subject. They must needs be an excellent exercise of
your wit, which speak so well of so ill: I humbly beg them of your Ladyship,
with two such promises, as to any other of your compositions were threatenings:
that I will not show them, and that I will not believe them; and nothing should
be so used that comes from your brain or breast. If I should confess a fault
in the boldness of asking them, or make a fault by doing it in a longer
Letter, your Ladyship might use your style and old fashion of the Court toward
me, and pay me with a Pardon. Here therefore I humbly kiss your Ladyships fair
learned hands, and wish you good wishes and speedy grants.

Your Ladyships servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir H. Goodere.
BEcause things be conserved by the same means, which established them, I nurse
that friendship by Letters, which you begot so: though you have since
strengthened it by more solid aliment and real offices. In these Letters from
the Country there is this merit, that I do otherwise unwillingly turn mine eye
or thoughts from my books, companions in whom there is no falsehood nor
frowardness: which words, I am glad to observe that the holy Authors often
join as expressers and relatives to one another, because else out of a
natural descent to that unworthy fault of frowardness, furthered with that
incommodity of a little thin house; I should have mistaken it to be a small
thing, which now I see equalled with the worst. If you have laid my papers and
books by, I pray let this messenger have them, I have determined upon them. If
you have not, be content to do it, in the next three or four days. So, Sir, I
kiss your hands; and deliver to you an entire and clear heart; which shall
ever when I am with you be in my face and tongue, and when I am from you, in my
Letters, for I will never draw Curtain between you and it.

Yours very affectionately J. Done.
From your house at Micham friday morning. When you are sometimes at M.
Sackvills, I pray ask if he have this book, Baldvinus de officio pii hominis
in controversiis; it was written at the conference at Poissy, where Beza was,
and he answered it; I long for it.



To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Hope you are now welcome to London, and well, and well comforted in your
Fathers health and love, and well contented that we ask you how you do, and
tell you how we are, which yet I cannot of my self; If I knew that I were ill,
I were well; for we consist of three parts, a Soul, and Body, and Mind: which
I call those thoughts and affections and passions, which neither soul nor body
has alone, but have been begotten by their communication, as Music results
out of our breath and a Cornet. And of all these the diseases are cures, if
they be known. Of our souls sicknesses, which are sins, the knowledge is, to
acknowledge, and that is her Physique, in which we are not dieted by drams and
scruples, for we cannot take too much. Of our bodies infirmities, though our
knowledge be partly ab extrinseco, from the opinion of the Physician, and that
the subject and matter be flexible, and various; yet their rules are certain,
and if the matter be rightly applied to the rule, our knowledge thereof is also
certain. But of the diseases of the mind, there is no Criterium, no Canon, no
rule; for, our own taste and apprehension and interpretation should be the
Judge, and that is the disease it self. Therefore sometimes when I find my
self transported with jollity, and love of company, I hang Leads at my heels;
and reduce to my thoughts my fortunes, my years, the duties of a man, of a
friend, of a husband, of a Father, and all the incumbencies of a family: when
sadness dejects me, either I countermine it with another sadness, or I kindle
squibs about me again, and fly into sportfulness and company: and I find
ever after all, that I am like an exorcist, which had long labored about one,
which at last appears to have the Mother, that I still mistake my disease. And
I still vex my self with this, because if I know it not, no body can know it.
And I comfort my self, because I see dispassioned men are subject to the like
ignorances. For diverse minds out of the same thing often draw contrary
conclusions, as Augustine thought devout Anthony to be therefore full of the
holy Ghost, because not being able to read, he could say the whole Bible, and
interpret it; and Thyreus the Jesuit for the same reason does think all the
Anabaptists to be possessed. And as often out of contrary things men draw one
conclusion. As to the Roman Church, magnificence and splendour has ever been an
argument of Gods favor, and poverty and affliction, to the Greek. Out of this
variety of minds it proceeds, that though our souls would go to one end,
Heaven, and all our bodies must go to one end, the earth: yet our third part,
the mind, which is our natural guide here, chooses to every man a several
way: scarce any man likes what another does, nor advisedly, that which himself.
But Sir, I am beyond my purpose; I mean to write a Letter, and I am fallen into
a discourse, and I do not only take you from some business, but I make you a
new business by drawing you into these meditations. In which let my opennesse
be an argument of such love as I would fain express in some worthier fashion.

To Sir G. F.
SIR,
I Writ to you once this week before; yet I write again, both because it seems
a kind of resisting of grace, to omit any commodity of sending into England,
and because any Packet from me into England should go, not only without just
freight, but without ballast, if it had not a letter to you. In Letters that I
received from Sir H. Wotton yesterday from Amyens, I had one of the 8 of March
from you, and with it one from Mrs. Danterey, of the 28 of January: which is a
strange disproportion. But Sir, if our Letters come not in due order, and so
make not a certain and concurrent chain, yet if they come as Atoms, and so
meet at last, by any crooked, and casual application, they make up, and they
nourish bodies of friendship; and in that fashion, I mean one way or other,
first or last, I hope all the Letters which have been addressed to us by one
another, are safely arrived, except perchance that packet by the Cook be not,
of which before this time you are clear; for I received (as I told you) a
Letter by M. Not. Rich, and if you sent none by him, then it was that Letter,
which the Cook tells you he delivered to M. Rich; which, with all my
criticismes, I cannot reconcile; because in your last Letter, I find mention of
things formerly written, which I have not found. However, I am yet in the same
perplexity, which I mentioned before; which is, that I have received no
syllable, neither from her self, nor by any other, how my wife has passed her
danger, nor do I know whether I be increased by a child, or diminished by the
loss of a wife. I hear from England of many censures of my book, of Mris.
Drury; if any of those censures do but pardon me my descent in Printing any
thing in verse, (which if they do, they are more charitable then my self; for I
do not pardon my self, but confess that I did it against my conscience, that
is, against my own opinion, that I should not have done so) I doubt not but
they will soon give over that other part of that indictment, which is that I
have said so much; for no body can imagine, that I who never saw her, could
have any other purpose in that, then that when I had received so very good
testimony of her worthiness, and was gone down to print verses, it became me
to say, not what I was sure was just truth, but the best that I could conceive;
for that had been a new weakness in me, to have praised any body in printed
verses, that had not been capable of the best praise that I could give.
Presently after Easter we shall (I think) go to Frankford to be there at the
election, where we shall meet Sir H. Wotton and Sir To. Rich, and after that we
are determined to pass some time, in the Palatinate. I go thither with a great
deal of devotion; for me thinks it is a new kind of piety, that as Pilgrims
went heretofore to places which had been holy and happy, so I go to a place
now, which shall be so, and more, by the presence of the worthiest Princess of
the world, if that marriage proceed. I have no greater errand to the place then
that at my return into England; I may be the fitter to stand in her presence,
and that after I have seen a rich and abundant Country, in his best seasons, I
may see that Sun which shall always keep it in that height. Howsoever we stray,
if you have leisure to write at any time, adventure by no other way, then M.
Bruer, at the Queens Arms, a Mercer, in Cheapside. I shall omit no
opportunity, of which I doubt not to find more then one before we go from
Paris. Therefore give me leave to end this, in which if you did not find the
remembrance of my humblest services to my Lady Bedford, your love and faith
ought to try all the experiments of pouders, and dryings, and waterings to
discover some lines which appeared not; because it is impossible that a Letter
should come from me, with such an ungrateful silence.

Your very true poor friend and servant and lover J. Done.
This day begins a History, of which I doubt not but I shall write more to you
before I leave this town. Monsieur de Rohan, a person for birth, next heir to
the Kingdom of Navar, after the Kings children, (if the King of Spain were
weary of it) and for alliance, son in law to D. Sally, and for breeding in
the wars and estate, the most remarkable man of the Religion, being Governor
of S. Jean d' Angeli, one of the most important towns which they of the
Religion bold for their security, finding that some distasts between the
Lieutenant and the Mayor of the town, and him, were dangerously fomented by
great persons, stole from Court, rode post to the town and removed these two
persons. He sent his secretary, and another dependent of his to give the Queen
sasisfaction, who is so far from receiving it, that his messengers are
committed to the Bastile, likely to be presently tortured; all his friends here
commanded to their houses, and the Queens companies of light horse sent already
thitherward, and foot companies preparing; which troops being sent against a
place, so much concerning those of the Religion to keep, and where they abound
in number and strength, cannot choose but produce effects worthy your hearing in
the next Letter.



To Sir H. G.
SIR,
BEcause I am in a place and season where I see every thing bud forth, I must
do so too, and vent some of my meditations to you; the rather because all other
buds being yet without taste or virtue, my Letters may be like them. The
pleasantness of the season displeases me. Every thing refreshes, and I wither,
and I grow older and not better, my strength diminishes, and my load grows,
and being to pass more and more storms, I find that I have not only cast out
all my ballast which nature and time gives, Reason and discretion, and so am as
empty and light as Vanity can make me; but I have over fraught my self with
Vice, and so am riddingly subject to two contrary wrackes, Sinking and
Oversetting, and under the iniquity of such a disease as inforces the patient
when he is almost starved, not only to fast, but to purge. For I have much to
take in, and much to cast out; sometimes I think it easier to discharge my
self of vice then of vanity, as one may sooner carry the fire out of a room
then the smoke: and then I see it was a new vanity to think so. And when I
think sometimes that vanity, because it is thin and airie, may be expelled
with virtue or business, or substantial vice; I find that I give entrance
thereby to new vices. Certainly as the earth and water, one sad, the other
fluid, make but one body: so to air and Vanity, there is but one Centrum
morbi. And that which later Physicians say of our bodies, is fitter for our
minds: for that which they call Destruction, which is a corruption and want of
those fundamental parts whereof we consist, is Vice: and that Collectio
stercorum, which is but the excrement of that corruption, is our Vanity and
indiscretion: both these have but one root in me, and must be pulled out at
once, or never But I am so far from digging to it, that I know not where it
is, for it is not in mine eyes only, but in every sense, nor in my
concupiscence only, but in every power and affection. Sir, I was willing to let
you see how impotent a man you love, not to dishearten you from doing so still
(for my vices are not infectious, nor wandering, they came not yesterday, nor
mean to go away to day: they Inn not, but dwell in me, and see themselves so
welcome, and find in me so good bad company of one another, that they will not
change, especially to one not apprehensive, nor easily accessible) but I do it,
that your counsel might cure me, and if you deny that, your example shall, for
I will as much strive to be like you as I will wish you to continue good.

To the Honorable Knight Sr H. Goodere one of the Gent. of his Majesty's privy
Chamber.
SIR,
YOU may remember that long since you delivered Mr Fowler possession of me, but
the wide distance in which I have lived from Court, makes me reasonably fear,
that now he knows not his right and power in me, though he must of necessity
have all, to whom you and I join in a gift of me, as we did to him, so that
perchance he has a servant of me, which might be passed in a book of
concealment. If your leisure suffer it, I pray find whether I be in him still,
and conserve me in his love; and so perfect your own work, or do it over
again, and restore me to the place, which by your favor I had in him. For Mr
Powell who serves her Maty as Clerk of her counsel, has told me that Mr
Fowler has some purpose to retire himself; and therefore I would fain for all
my love, have so much of his, as to find him willing when I shall seek him at
Court, to let me understand his purpose therein; for if my means may make me
acceptable to the Queen and him, I should be very sorry, he should make so
far steps therein with any other, that I should fail in it, only for not
having spoke to him soon enough. It were an injury to the forwardness of your
love to add more; here therefore I kiss your hands, and commend to you the
truth of my love.

Your very affectionate servant and lover Jo. Done.
From my lodging in the Strand, whither I shall return on Monday, 13 June 1607.
To Sr H. G.
SIR,
YOU husband my time thriftily, when you command me to write by such a
messenger, as can tell you more then I can write, for so he does not only
carry the Letter, but is the Letter. But that the naming of some things, may
give you occasion to ask him farther, and him to open himself unto you, give me
leave to tell you, that the now Spa. Ambassador proceeds in the old pace, the
King has departed from his ordinary way so far, as to appoint 9 of the
Council to treat with him; but when they came to any approaches, he answered,
that he brought only Commission to propose certain things, which he was ready
to do, but he had no instructions to treat, but expected them upon an other
return from his Master. So that there is no treaty for the marriage begun yet:
for I know you have heard Olivarez his free acknowledgement, that til the
Prince came, there was no thought of it. The King in his gests of this progress,
has determined it, not as heretofore, at Windsor, but at Farnham during
pleasure: so he is within a journey of Southampton; and even that circumstance
adds to some other reasons, that he expects the Prince this Summer, and that
Sir W. Crofts, in his last dispatches, enlarged the Prince in his liberty, from
his Father, to come away, if he would. Amongst all the irregularities of this
age, to me this is as strange as any, That this year there is no peace, and yet
no sword drawn in the world; and it is a lost conjecture to think which way any
of the Armies will bend. Here it is imagined, that Yukendorfe and Gabor (for,
for any concurrence of love, it is but a dream) may so far distress Bohemia,
as that Tilly must be recalled thither; and that if he be, Brunswikes way is
open into Baviere, where he may recompense great losses, whilst Mansfield and
Gonzales, and his Excellency and Spinola, keepthe balance even in their parts,
by looking upon another. This noble friend of yours is in his last minute, in
this Town; and I am going into the Coach with my Lo to Hanworth. If I might
have forborne the sealing the rest till my return from thence, you might have
heard something more from.

Your very true poor friend and humble servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.
No straitness makes me forget my service to your daughters: If my Bell were
tolling, I should pray for them, and though my Letter be sealing, I leave not
out my wishes, that their fortunes may second their goodness. Amen.



To Sir H. G.
SIR,
THis Tuesday morning, which has brought me to London, presents me with all
your Letters. Me thought it was a rent day, I mean such as yours, and not as
mine; and yet such too, when I considered how much I ought you for them, how
good a mother, how fertile and abundant the understanding is, if she have a
good father; and how well friendship performs that office. For that which is
denied in other generations is done in this of yours: for here is
superfetation, child upon child, and that which is more strange, twins at a
latter conception. If in my second religion, friendship, I had a conscience,
either errantem to mistake good and bad and indifferent, or opinantem to be
ravished by others opinions or examples, or dubiam to adhere to neither part,
or scrupulosam to incline to one, but upon reasons light in themselves, or
indiscussed in me, (which are almost all the diseases of conscience) I might
mistake your often, long, and busy Letters, and fear you did but entreat me to
have mercy upon you and spare you; for you know our Court took the resolution,
that it was the best way to dispatch the French Prince back again quickly, to
receive him solemnly, ceremoniously, and expensively, when he hoped a
domestique and durable entertainment. I never meant to excel you in weight nor
price, but in number and bulk I thought I might, because he may cast up a
greater sum who has but forty small moneys, then he with twenty
Portuguesses. The memory of friends, (I mean only for Letters) neither enters
ordinarily into busied men, because they are ever employed within, nor into men
of pleasure, because they are never at home. For these wishes therefore which
you won out of your pleasure and recreation, you were as excusable to me if you
writ seldom, as Sir H. Wotton is, under the oppression of business, or the
necessity of seeming so; or more then he, because I hope you have both pleasure
and business: only to me, who have neither, this omission were sin; for
though writing be not of the precepts of friendship, but of the counsels, yet,
as in some cases to some men counsels become precepts, and though not
immediately from God, yet very roundly and quickly from his Church, (as selling
and dividing goods in the first time, continence in the Roman Church, and
order and decency in ours) so to me who can do nothing else, it seems to bind
my conscience to write; and it is sin to do against the conscience, though
that err. Yet no man's Letters might be better wanted then mine, since my whole
Letter is nothing else but a confession that I should and would write. I owed
you a Letter in verse before by mine own promise, and now that you think that
you have hedged in that debt by a greater by your Letter in verse, I think it
now most seasonable and fashionable for me to break. At least, to write
presently, were to accuse my self of not having read yours so often as such a
Letter deserves from you to me. To make my debt greater (for such is the desire
of all, who cannot or mean not to pay) I pray read these two problemes: for
such light flashes as these have been my hawkings in my sorry journies. I
accompany them with another ragge of verses, worthy of that name for the
smalnesse, and age, for it has long lien among my other papers, and laughs at
them that have adventured to you: for I think till now you saw it not, and
neither you, nor it should repent it. Sir, if I were any thing, my love to you
might multiply it, and dignifie it: But infinite nothings are but one such; yet
since even Chymera's have some name and titles, I am also

Yours.

To your self.
SIR,
IF this Letter find you in a progress, or at Bath, or at any place of equal
leisure to our Spa, you will perchance descend to read so low meditations as
these. Nothing in my L. of Salisburies death exercised my poor considerations
so much, as the multitude of libells. It was easily discerned, some years
before his death, that he was at a defensive war, both for his honor and
health, and (as we then thought) for his estate: and I thought, that had
removed much of the envy. Besides, I have just reasons to think, that in the
chiefest businesses between the Nations, he was a very good patriot. But I
meant to speak of nothing but the libells, of which, all which are brought
into these parts, are so tastelesse and flat, that I protest to you, I think
they were made by his friends. It is not the first time that our age has seen
that art practiced, That when there are witty and sharp libels made which not
only for the liberty of speaking, but for the elegancie, and composition,
would take deep root, and make durable impressions in the memory, no other way
has been thought so fit to suppress them, as to divulge some course, and
railing one: for when the noise is risen, that libels are abroad, men's
curiosity must be served with something: and it is better for the honor of
the person traduced, that some blunt downright railings be vented, of which
every body is soon weary, then other pieces, which entertain us long with a
delight, and love to the things themselves. I doubt not but he smoothered some
libels against him in his life time. But I would all these (or better) had been
made then, for they might then have wrought upon him; and they might have
testified that the Author had meant to mend him, but now they can have no
honest pretense. I dare say to you, where I am not easily misinterpreted, that
there may be cases, where one may do his Country good service, by libelling
against a live man. For, where a man is either too great, or his Vices too
general, to be brought under a judiciary accusation, there is no way, but this
extraordinary accusing, which we call Libelling And I have heard that nothing
has soupled and allayed the D. of Lerma in his violent greatness, so much as
the often libels made upon him. But after death, it is, in all cases,
unexcusable. I know that Lucifer, and one or two more of the Fathers who writ
libellous books against the Emperors of their times, are excused by our
writers, because they writ not in the lives of those Emperors. I am glad for
them that they writ not in their lives, for that must have occasioned tumult,
and contempt, against so high and Sovereign persons. But that does not enough
excuse them to me, for writing so after their death; for that was ignoble, and
useless, though they did a little escape the nature of libels, by being
subscribed and avowed: which excuse would not have served in the Star Chamber,
where sealed Letters have been judged Libels; but these of which we speak at
this present, are capable of no excuse, no amolishment, and therefore I cry you
mercy, and my self too, for disliking them, with so much diligence, for they
deserve not that. But Sir, you see by this, and by my Letter of last week, from
hence the peremptory barrenness of this place, from whence we can write
nothing into England, but of that which comes from thence. Till the Lady
Worster came hither, I had never heard any thing to make me imagine that Sir
Rob. Rich was in England; the first hour that I had knowledge of it, I kiss
his hands by this Letter. I make account to be in London, transitorily, about
the end of August. You shall do me much favor, if I may find a Letter from
you (if you shall not then be there) at the Lady Bartlets: I shall come home in
much ignorance, nor would I discern home by a better light, or any other then
you. I can glory of nothing in this voyage, but that I have afflicted my Lady
Bedford with few Letters. I protest earnestly to you, it troubles me much more
to dispatch a packet into England, without a Letter to her, then it would to
put in three. But I have been heretofore too immodest toward her, and I suffer
this Purgatory for it. We make account to leave this place within 8 or 10 days,
and hence to make our best haste to the Count Maurice, where we think to find
again the young Palatine: all this I tell you only because when you know, that
we shall run too fast to write any more Letters, you may easily pardon the
importunities and impertinencies of this, and cast into no lower place of your
love

Your very true friend and servant J. Done.
Spa, 26 July here 1612.
To my Lord G. H.
SIR,
I Am near the execution of that purpose for France; though I may have other
ends, yet if it do but keep me awake, it recompenses me well. I am now in the
afternoon of my life, and then it is unwholesome to sleep. It is ill to look
back, or give over in a course; but worse never to set out. I speak to you at
this time of departing, as I should do at my last upon my deathbed; and I
desire to deliver into your hands a heart and affections, as innocent toward
you, as I shall to deliver my soul into Gods hands then. I say not this out of
diffidence, as though you doubted it, or that this should look like such an
excuse, as employed an accusation; but because my fortune has burdened you so,
as I could not rectify it before my going, my conscience and interpretation
(severer I hope then yours toward my self) calls that a kind of demerit, but
God who has not only afforded us a way to be delivered from our great many
debts, contracted by our Executorship to Adam, but also another for our
particular debts after, has not left poor men unprovided, for discharge of
moral and civil debts; in which, acknowledgement, and thankfulness is the
same, as repentance and contrition is in spiritual debts: and though the value
and dignity of all these be not perchance in the things, but in the
acceptance, yet I cannot doubt of it, either in God, or you. But Sir, because
there is some degree of thankfulness in asking more (for that confesses all
former obligations, and a desire to be still in the same dependency) I must
entreat you to continue that wherein you have most expressed your love to me,
which is, to maintain me in the same room in my Lady Bedfords opinion, in the
which you placed me. I prosesse to you that I am too much bound to her, for
expressing every way her care of my fortune, that I am weary before she is; and
out of a loathnesse, that so good works should be bestowed upon so illstuffe,
or that somuchill fortune should be mingled with hers, as that she should miss
any thing that she desired, though it were but for me; I am willing to depart
from farther exercising her indevours in that kind. I shall be bold to deliver
my poor Letters to her Ladyships hands, through yours, whilst I am abroad
'though I shall ever account my self at home, whilst I am in your memory.

Your affectionate servant and lover J. Done.

To Sir H. G.
SIR,
NAture has made all bodies alike, by mingling and kneading up the same
elements in every one. And amongst men, the other nature, Custom, has made
every mind like some other; we are patterns, or copies, we inform, or
imitate. But as he has not presently attained to write a good hand, which has
equalled one excellent Master in his A, another in his B, much less he which
has sought all the excellent Masters, and employed all his time to exceed in
one Letter, because not so much an excellency of any, nor every one, as an
evennesse and proportion, and respect to one another gives the perfection: so
is no man virtuous by particular example. Not he that does all actions to the
pattern of the most valiant, or liberal, which Histories afford: nor he which
chooses from every one their best actions, and thereupon does something like
those. Perchance such may be in via perficiendorum, which Divines allow to
Monastical life, but not perfectorum, which by them is only due to Prelacy.
For virtue is even, and continual, and the same, and can therefore break no
where, nor admit ends, nor beginnings: it is not only not broken, but not tied
together. He is not virtuous, out of whose actions you can pick an excellent
one. Vice and her fruits may be feen, because they are thick bodies, but not
virtue, which is all light; and vices have swellings and fits, and noise,
because being extremes, they dwell far asunder, and they maintain both a foreign
war against virtue, and a civil against one another, and affect Sovereignty,
as virtue does society. The later Physicians say, that when our natural inborn
preservative is corrupted or wasted, and must be restored by a like extracted
from other bodies; the chief care is that the Mummy have in it no excelling
quality, but an equally digested temper: And such is true virtue. But men who
have preferred money before all, think they deal honorably with virtue, if
they compare her with money: And think that as money is not called base, till
the allay exceed the pure; so they are virtuous enough, if they have enough to
make their actionscurrant, which is, if either they get praise, or (in a lower
abasing) if they incur not infamy or penalty. But you know who said, Augusta
innocentia est ad legem bonum esse: which rule being given for positive Laws,
severe mistakers apply even to Gods Law, and (perchance against his
Commandment) bind themselves to his Counsails, beyond his Laws. But they are
worse, that think that because some men formerly wastfull, live better with
half their rents then they did with all, being now advantaged with discretion
and experience, therefore our times need less moral virtue then the first,
because we have Christianity, which is the use and application of all virtue:
as though our religion were but an art of thrift, to make a little virtue go
far. For as plentiful springs are fittest, and best become large Aqueducts, so
does much virtue such asteward and officer as a Christian. But I must not give
you a Homily for a Letter. I said a great while since, that custom made men
like; we who have been accustomed to one another are like in this, that we love
not business: this therefore shall not be to you nor me a busy Letter. I end
with a problem, whose errand is, to ask for his fellows. I pray before you
ingulfe your self in the progress, leave them for me, and such other of my
papers as you will lend me till you return. And besides this Allegorical
lending, lend me truly your counsails, and love God and me, whilst I love him
and you.

To my very true and very good friend Sir Henry Goodere.
SIR,
AT some later reading, I was more affected with that part of your Letter,
which is of the book, and the namelesse Letters, then at first. I am not sorry,
for that affection were for a jealousy or suspicion of a flexibilty in you.
But I am angry, that any should think, you had in your Religion peccant
humors, defective, or abundant, or that such a book, (if I mistake it not)
should be able to work upon you; my comfort is, that their judgment is too weak
to endanger you, since by this it confesses, that it mistakes you, in thinking
you irresolved or various: yet let me be bold to fear, that that sound true
opinion, that in all Christian professions there is way to salvation (which I
think you think) may have been so incommodiously or intempestively sometimes
uttered by you; or else your having friends equally near you of all the
impressions of Religion, may have testified such an indifferency, as has
occasioned some to further such inclinations, as they have mistaken to be in
you. This I have feared, because hertofore the inobedient Puritans, and now the
over-obedient Papists attempt you. It has hurt very many, not in their
conscience, nor ends, but in their reputation, and ways, that others have
thought them fit to be wrought upon. As some bodies are as wholesomly nourished
as ours, with Akornes, and endure nakedness, both which would be dangerous to
us, if we for them should leave our former habits, though theirs were the
Primitive diet and custom: so are many souls well fed with such forms, and
dressings of Religion, as would distemper and misbecome us, and make us corrupt
toward God, if any humane circumstance moved it, and in the opinion of men,
though none. You shall seldom see a Coin, upon which the stamp were removed,
though to imprint it better, but it looks awry and squint. And so, for the most
part, do minds which have received diverse impressions. I will not, nor need to
you, compare the Religions. The channels of Gods mercies run through both
fields; and they are sister teats of his graces, yet both diseased and
infected, but not both alike. And I think, that as Copernicisme in the
Mathematiques has carried earth farther up, from the stupid Center; and yet
not honored it, nor advantaged it, because for the necessity of appearances,
it has carried heaven so much higher from it: so the Roman profession seems to
exhale, and refine our wills from earthly Drugs, and Lees, more then the
Reformed, and so seems to bring us nearer heaven; but then that carries heaven
farther from us, by making us pass so many Courts, and Offices of Saints in
this life, in all our petitions, and lying in a painful prison in the next,
during the pleasure, not of him to whom we go, and who must be our Judge, but
of them from whom we come, who know not our case. Sir, as I said last time,
labor to keep your alacrity and dignity, in an even temper: for in a dark
sadness, indifferent things seem abominable, or necessary, being neither; as
trees, and sheep to melancholique night-walkers have unproper shapes. And when
you descend to satisfy all men in your own religion, or to excuse others to
al; you prostitute your self and your understanding, though not a prey, yet a
mark, and a hope, and a subject, for every sophister in Religion to work on.
For the other part of your Letter, spent in the praise of the Countess, I am
always very apt to believe it of her, and can never believe it so well, and so
reasonably, as now, when it is averred by you; but for the expressing it to
her, in that sort as you seem to counsel, I have these two reasons to decline
it. That that knowledge which she has of me, was in the beginning of a graver
course, then of a Poet, into which (that I may also keep my dignity) I would
not seem to relapse. The Spanish proverb informs me, that he is a fool which
cannot make one Sonnet, and he is mad which makes two. The other stronger
reason, is my integrity to the other Countess, of whose worthiness though I
swallowed your opinion at first upon your words, yet I have had since an
explicit faith, and now a knowledge: and for her delight (since she descends to
them) I had reserved not only all the verses, which I should make, but all the
thoughts of women's worthiness. But because I hope she will not disdain, that I
should write well of her Picture, I have obeyed you thus far, as to write: but
entreat you by your friendship, that by this occasion of versifying, I be not
traduced, nor esteemed light in that Tribe, and that house where I have lived.
If those reasons which moved you to bid me write be not constant in you still,
or if you meant not that I should write verses; or if these verses be too bad,
or too good, over or under her understanding, and not fit; I pray receive them,
as a companion and supplement of this Letter to you; and as such a token as I
use to send, which use, because I wish rather they should serve (except you
wish otherwise) I send no other; but after I have told you, that here at a
Christning at Peckam, you are remembered by diverse of ours, and I commanded to
tell you so, I kiss your hands, and so seal to you my pure love, which I would
not refuse to do by any labor or danger.

Your very true friend and servant J. Done.

To Sr G.M.
IF you were here, you would not think me importune, if I did you good morrow
every day; and such a patience will excuse my often' Letters. No other kind of
conveyance is better for knowledge, or love: What treasures of Moral knowledge
are in Senecaes Letters to only one Lucilius? and what of Natural in Plinies?
how much of the story of the time, is in Ciceroes Letters? And how all of
these times, in the Jesuits Eastern and Western Epistles? where can we find
so perfect a Character of Phalaris, as in his own Letters, which are almost so
many writs of Execution? Or of Brutus, as in his privy seals for money? The
Evangiles and Acts, teach us what to believe, but the Epistles of the Apostles
what to do. And those who have endeavored to dignifie Seneca above his worth,
have no way fitter, then to imagine Letters between him and S. Paul. As they
think also that they have expressed an excellent person, in that Letter which
they obtrude, from our B. Savior to King Agabarus. The Italians, which are
most discursive, and think the world owes them all wisdom, abound so much in
this kind of expressing, that Michel Montaige says, he has seen, (as I
remember) 400 volumes of Italian Letters. But it is the other capacity which
must make mine acceptable, that they are also the best conveyers of love. But,
though all knowledge be in those Authors already, yet, as some poisons, and
some medicines, hurt not, nor profit, except the creature in which they reside,
contribute their lively activitie, and vigor; so, much of the knowledge buried
in Books perishes, and becomes ineffectuall, if it be not applied, and
refreshed by a companion, or friend. Much of their goodness, has the same
period, which some Physicians of Italy have observed to be in the biting of
their Tarentola, that it affects no longer, then the fly lives. For with how
much desire we read the papers of any living now, (especially friends) which we
would scarce allow a box in our cabinet, or shelf in our Library, if they were
dead? And we do justly in it, for the writings and words of men present, we may
examine, control, and expostulate, and receive satisfaction from the authors;
but the other we must believe, or discredit; they present no mean. Since then
at this time, I am upon the stage, you may be content to hear me. And now that
perchance I have brought you to it, (as Thom. Badger did the King) now I have
nothing to say. And it is well, for the Letter is already long enough, else let
this problem supply, which was occasioned by you, of women wearing stones;
which, it seems, you were afraid women should read, because you avert them at
the beginning, with a protestation of cleanliness. Martial found no way
fitter to draw the Roman Matrons to read one of his Books, which he thinks
most moral and cleanly, then to counsel them by the first Epigram to skip the
Book, because it was obscene. But either you write not at all for women, or for
those of sincerer palates. Though their unworthiness, and your own ease be
advocates for me with you, yet I must add my entreaty, that you let go no
copy of my Problems, till I review them. If it be too late, at least be able to
tell me who has them.

Yours, J. Done.

To Sr H. G.
I Send not my Letters as tribute, nor interest, not recompense, nor for
commerce, nor as testimonials of my love, nor provokers of yours, nor to
justify my custom of writing, nor for a vent and utterance of my meditations;
for my Letters are either above or under all such offices; yet I write very
affectionately, and I chide and accuse my self of diminishing that affection
which sends them, when I ask my self why: only I am sure that I desire that
you might have in your hands Letters of mine of all kinds, as conveyances and
deliverers of me to you, whether you accept me as a friend, or as a patient, or
as a penitent, or as a beadsman, for I decline no jurisdiction, or refuse any
tenure. I would not open any door upon you, but look in when you open it.
Angels have not, nor affect not other knowledge of one another, then they list
to reveal to one another. It is then in this only, that friends are Angels,
that they are capable and fit for such revelations when they are offered. If at
any time I seem to study you more inquisitively, it is for no other end but to
know how to present you to God in my prayers, and what to ask of him for you;
for even that holy exercise may not be done inopportunely, no nor importunely.
I find little error in that Grecians counsel, who says, If thou ask any
thing of God, offer no sacrifice, nor ask elegantly, nor vehemently, but
remember that thou would not give to such an asker: Nor in his other
Countriman, who affirms sacrifice of blood to be so unproportionable to God,
that perfumes, though much more spiritual, are too gross. Yea words which are
our subtillest and delicatest outward creatures, being composed of thoughts and
breath, are so muddie, so thick, that our thoughts themselves are so, because
(except at the first rising) they are ever leavened with passions and
affections: And that advantage of nearer familiarity with God, which the act of
incarnation gave us, is grounded upon Gods assuming us, not our going to him.
And, our accesses to his presence are but his descents into us; and when we get
any thing by prayer, he gave us before hand the thing and the petition. For, I
scarce think any ineffectuall prayer free from both sin, and the punishment of
sin: yet as God seposed a seventh of our time for his exterior worship, and as
his Christian Church early presented him a type of the whole year in a Lent,
and after imposed the obligation of canonique hours, constituting thereby
moral Sabbaths every day; I am far from dehorting those fixed devotions: But
I had rather it were bestowed upon thanksgiving then petition, upon praise then
prayer; not that God is indeared by that, or wearied by this; all is one in the
receiver, but not in the sender: and thanks does both offices; for, nothing
does so innocently provoke new graces, as gratitude. I would also rather make
short prayers then extend them, though God can neither be surprised, nor
besieged: for, long prayers have more of the man, as ambition of eloquence, and
a complacencie in the work, and more of the Devil by often distractions: for,
after in the beginning we have well entreated God to hearken, we speak no more
to him. Even this Letter is some example of such infirmity, which being
intended for a Letter, is extended and strayed into a Homily. And whatsoever
is not what it was purposed, is worse, therefore it shall at last end like a
Letter by assuring you I am

To your self.
SIR,
SIr Germander Pool, your noble friend and fellow in Arms, has been at this
house. I find by their diligent inquiring from me, that he has assured them
that he has much advanced your proceeding, by his resignation; but cooled them
again with this, that the L. Spencer pretends in his room. I never feared his,
nor any man's diligence in that; I feared only your remissness, because you
have a fortune that can endure, and a nature that can almost be content to
miss. But I had rather you exercised your Philosophy and evennesse in some
things else. He does not nothing which falls cleanly and harmelesly; but he
wrastles better which stands. I know you can easily forgive your self any
negligences and slacknesses, but I am glad that you are engaged to so many
friends, who either by your self, or fame have knowledge of it. In all the rest
of them there is a worthiness, and in me a love which deserves to be
satisfied. In this therefore, as you are forward in all things else, be content
to do more for your friends then you would for your self; endeavor it, that is
effect it.

Your very true friend and lover J. Done.
Tuesday.
To Sir H. G.
SIR,
IN the History or style of friendship, which is best written both in deeds and
words, a Letter which is of a mixed nature, and has something of both, is a
mixed Parenthesis: It may be left out, yet it contributes, though not to the
being, yet to the verdure, and freshness thereof. Letters have truly the same
office, as oaths. As these amongst light and empty men, are but fillings, and
pauses, and interjections; but with weightier, they are sad attestations: So
are Letters to some complement, and obligation to others. For mine, as I never
authorized my servant to lie in my behalf, (for if it were officious in him,
it might be worse in me) so I allow my Letters much less that civil
dishonesty, both because they go from me more considerately, and because they
are permanent; for in them I may speak to you in your chamber a year hence
before I know not whom, and not hear my self. They shall therefore ever keep
the sincerity and intemeratenesse of the fountain, whence they are derived. And
as wheresoever these leaves fall, the root is in my heart, so shall they, as
that sucks good affections toward you there, have ever true impressions
thereof. Thus much information is in very leaves, that they can tell what the
tree is, and these can tell you I am a friend, and an honest man. Of what
general use, the fruit should speak, and I have none: and of what particular
profit to you, your application and experimenting should tell you, and you can
make none of such a nothing; yet even of barren Sycamores, such as I, there
were use, if either any light flashings, or scorching vehemencies, or sudden
showers made you need so shadowy an example or remembrancer. But (Sir) your
fortune and mind do you this happy injury, that they make all kind of fruits
useless unto you; Therefore I have placed my love wisely where I need
communicate nothing. All this, though perchance you read it not till
Michaelmas, was told you at Micham, 15. August. 1607.

To my most worthy friend Sir Henry Goodere.
SIR,
BEcause evennesse conduces as much to strength and firmness as greatness
does, I would not discontinue my course of writing. It is a sacrifice, which
though friends need not, friendship does; which has in it so much divinity,
that as we must be ever equally disposed inwardly so to do or suffer for it,
so we must sepose some certain times for the outward service thereof, though it
be but formal and testimonial: that time to met toward you is Tuesday, and
my Temple, the Rose in Smith-field. If I were by your appointment your
Referendarie for news, I should write but short Letters, because the times are
barren. The low Countries, which used to be the Mart of news for this season,
suffering also, or rather enjoying a vacation. Since therefore I am but mine
own Secretary (and what is that?) I were excusable if I writ nothing, since I am
so: Besides that, your much knowledge brings you this disadvantage, that as
stomachs accustomed to delicacies, find nothing new or pleasing to them when
they are sick; so you can hear nothing from me (though the Country perchance
make you hungry) which you know not. Therefore in stead of a Letter to you, I
send you one to another, to the best Lady, who did me the honor to acknowledge
the receipt of one of mine, by one of hers; and who only has power to cast the
fetters of verse upon my free meditations: It should give you some delight, and
some comfort, because you are the first which see it, and it is the last which
you shall see of this kind from me.

Your very affectionate lover and servant J. Done.
Micham the 14 August,
To Sir I. H.
SIR,
I Would not omit this, not Commodity, but Advantage of writing to you. This
emptiness in London, dignifies any Letter from hence, as in the seasons,
earliness and latenesse, makes the sowrenesse, and after the sweetness of
fruits acceptable and gracious. We often excuse and advance mean Authors, by
the age in which they lived, so will your love do this Letter; and you will
tell your self, that if he which writ it knew wherein he might express his
affection, or any thing which might have made his Letter welcommer, he would
have done it. As it is, you may accept it so, as we do many China manufactures,
of which when we know no use, yet we satisfy our curiosity in considering
them, because we knew not how, nor of what matter they were made. Near great
woods and quarries it is no wonder to see fair houses, but in Holland which
wants both, it is. So were it for me who am as far removed from Court, and
knowledge of foreign passages, as this City is now from the face and furniture
of a City, to build up a long Letter and to write of my self, were but to
enclose a poor handful of straw for a token in a Letter: yet I will tell you,
that I am at London only to provide for Monday, when I shall use that favor
which my Lady Bedford has afforded me, of giving her name to my daughter;
which I mention to you, as well to show that I covet any occasion of a
grateful speaking of her favors, as that, because I have thought the day is
likely to bring you to London, I might tell you, that my poor house is in your
way and you shall there find such company, as (I think) you will not be loath
to accompany to London.

Your very true friend J. Done.
6 Aug. 1608.
To Sir H. Wootton.
SIR,
THat which is at first but a visitation, and a civil office, comes quickly to
be a haunting, and an uncivil importunity: my often writing might be subject
to such a misinterpretation, if it were not to you, who as you know that the
affection which suggests and dictates them, is ever one, and continual, and
uninterrupted; may be pleased to think my Letters so too, and that all the
pieces make but one long Letter, and so I know you would not grudge to read any
entire book of mine, at that pace, as you do my Letters, which is a leaf a
week: especially such Letters as mine, which (perchance out of the dullness of
the place) are so empty of any relations, as that they oppress not your
meditations, nor discourse, nor memory. You know that for air we are sure we
apprehend and enjoy it, but when this air is rarefied into fire, we begin to
dispute whether it be an element, or no: so when Letters have a convenient
handsome body of news, they are Letters; but when they are spun out of nothing,
they are nothing, or but apparitions, and ghosts, with such hollow sounds, as
he that hears them, knows not what they said. You (I think) and I am much of
one sect in the Philosophy of love; which though it be directed upon the mind,
does inhere in the body, and find piety entertainment there: so have Letters
for their principal office, to be seals and testimonies of mutual affection,
but the materials and fuel of them should be a confident and mutual
communicating of those things which we know. How shall I then who know nothing
write Letters? Sir, I learn knowledge enough out of yours to me. I learn that
there is truth and sirmnesse and an earnestness of doing good alive in the
world; and therefore, since there is so good company in it, I have not so much
desire to go out of it, as I had, if my fortune would afford me any room in it.
You know I have been no coward, nor unindustrious in attempting that; nor will
I give it over yet. If at last, I must confess, that I dyed ten years ago, yet
as the Primitive Church admitted some of the Jews Ceremonies, not for
perpetual use, but because they would bury the Synagogue honorably, though I
dyed at a blow then when my courses were diverted, yet it wilplease me a little
to have had a long funeral, and to have kept my self so long above ground
without putrefaction. But this is melancholique discourse; To change therefore
from this Metaphorical death to the true, and that with a little more relish
of mirth, let me tell you the good nature of the executioner of Paris: who when
Vatan was beheaded, (who dying in the profession of the Religion, had made his
peace with God in the prison, and so said nothing at the place of execution)
swore he had rather execute forty Huguenots, then one Catholic, because the
Huguenot used so few words, and troubled him so little, in respect of the
dilatory ceremonies of the others, in dying. Cotton the great Court Jesuit
has so importuned the Q. to give some modifications to the late interlocutory
arrest against the Jesuits, that in his presence, the C. Soisons, who had been
present in the Court at the time of the arrest, and Servin the Kings Advocate,
who urged it, and the Premier president, were sent for: They came so well
provided with their books, out of which they assigned to the Q. so many, so
evident places of seditious doctrine, that the Q. was well satisfied, that it
was fit by all means to provide against the teaching of the like doctrine in
France. The D. of Espernon is come to Paris, with (they say) 600 horse in his
train; all which company, came with him into the Court: which is an insolency
remarkable here. They say that scarce any of the Princes appear in the streets,
but with very great trains. No one enemy could wast the treasures of France so
much, as so many friends do: for the Q. dares scarce deny any, that so she may
have the better leave to make haste to advance her Marquis of Ancre, of whose
greatness, for matter of command, or danger, they have no great fear, he being
no very capable nor stirring man: and then for his drawing of great benefits
from the Q. they make that use of it, that their suits pass with less
opposition. I believe the treasure is scattered, because I see the future
receipt charged with so very many and great pensions. The Q. has adventured a
little to stop this rage of the Princes importunity, by denying a late suit of
Soissons: which though the other Princes grudge not that Soisson should fail,
for he has drawn infinite sums already, yet they resent it somewhat tenderly,
that any of them should be denied, when the Marquis obtains. That which was
much observed in the Kings more childish age, when I was last here, by those
whom his father appointed to judge, by an assiduous observation, his natural
inclination, is more and more confirmed, that his inclinations are cruel, and
tyrannous; and when he is any way affected, his stammering is so extreme, as he
can utter nothing. They cannot draw him to look upon a son of the Marquis, whom
they have put into his service. And he was so extremely affectionate toward
the younger son of Beaufort, that they have removed him to a charge which he
has, as he is made Prieur of Malta; but yet there pass such Letters between
them, by stealth and practice, as (though it be between children) it is become
a matter of State, and much diligence used to prevent the Letters. For the
young Marquis of Vervueil, the K. speaks often of transplanting him into the
Church, and once this Christmas delighted himself to see his young brother in a
Cardinals habit. Sir, it is time to take up, for I know, that any thing, from
this place, as soon as it is certain, is stale. I have been a great while more
mannerly toward my Lady Bedford, then to trouble her with any of mine own
verses, but having found these French verses accompanied with a great deal of
reputation here, I could not forbear to ask her leave to send them. I writ to
you by Mr. Pory the 17 of Jan. here, and he carried that Letter to Paris, to
gather news, like a snowball. He told me that Pindar is gone to Constantinople
with Commission to remove and succeed Glover: I am afraid you have neglected
that business. Continue me in M. Martins good opinion: I know I shall never
fall from it, by any demerit of mine, and I know I need not fear it, out of any
slacknesse or slipperinesse in him, but much business may strangle me in him.
When it shall not trouble you to write to me, I pray do me the favor to tell
me, how many you have received from me, for I have now much just reason to
imagine, that some of my Pacquets have had more honor then I wished them:
which is to be delivered into the hands of greater personages, then I addressed
them unto. Hold me still in your own love, and proceed in that noble testimony
of it, of which your Letter by M. Pory spoke, (which is the only Letter that I
have received, since I came away) and believe me that I shall ever with much
affection, and much devotion join both your fortune and your last best
happiness, with the desire of mine own in all my civil, and divine wishes, as
the only retribution in the power of

Your affectionate servant Jo. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
IF I would go out of my way for excuses, or if I did not go out of my way from
them; I might avoid writing now because I cannot choose but know, that you have
in this town abler servants, and better understanding the persons and passages
of this Court. But my hope is not in the application of other men's merits, to
me however abundant. Besides, this town has since our coming hither, afforded
enough for all to say. That which was done here the 25 of March, and which was
so long called a publication of the marriages, was no otherwise public then
that the Spa. Ambassador, having that day an audience delivered to the Queen
that his Master was well pleased with all those particulars which had been
formerly treated. And the French Ambassador in Spain is said to have had
instruction, to do the same office in that Court, the same day. Since that,
that is to say, these 4 last days, it has been solemnized with more outward
bravery then this Court is remembered to have appeared in. The main bravery was
the number of horses which were above 800 Caparazond. Before the days, the
town was full of the 5 Challengers cartells, full of Rodomontades: but in the
execution, there were no personal reencounters, nor other trial of any
ability, then running at the Quintain, and the Ring. Other particulars of this,
you cannot choose but hear too much, since at this time there cometoyouso many
French men. But lest you should believe too much, I presentyou these 2
precautions, that for their Gendarmery, there was no other trial then I told
you; and for their bravery, no true stuff. You must of necessity have heard
often of a Book written against the Popes jurisdiction, about three months
since, by one Richer, a Dr and Syndique of the Sorbonists, which Book has now
been censured by an assembly of the Clergy of this Archbishopric, promoved
with so much diligence by the Cardinal Peroun, that for this business he has
intermitted his reply to the Kings answer, which now he retires to intend
seriously: I have not yet had the honor to kiss his Graces hand, though I
have received some half-invitations to do it. Richer was first accused to the
Parliament, but when it was there required of his delators to insist upon some
propositions in his Book, which were either against Scripture, or the Gallican
Church, they desisted in that pursuit. But in the censure which the Clergy
has made, though it be full of modifications and reservations of the rights of
the King, and the Gallican Churches, there is this iniquity, that being to be
published by commandment of the Assembly, in all the Churches of Paris, which
is within that Diocese, and almost all the Curates of the Parishes of Paris
being Sorbonists, there is by this means a strong party of the Sorbonists
themselves raised against Richer; yet against this censure, and against three
or four which have opposed Richer in print, he meditates an answer. Before it
should come forth I desired to speak with him, for I had said to some of the
Sorbonist of his party, that there was no proposition in his Book, which I
could not show in Catholic authors of 300 years: I had from him an
assignation to meet, and at the hour he sent me his excuse, which was, that he
had been traduced to have had conference with the Ambassadors of England, and
the States, and with the D. of Bovillon, and that he had accepted a pension of
the King of England; and with all, that it had been very well testified to him
that day, that the Jesuits had offered to corrupt men with rewards to kill him.
Which I doubt not but he apprehended for true, because a messenger whom I sent
to fix another time of meeting with him, found him in an extreme trembling,
and irresolutions: so that I had no more, but an entreaty to forbear coming to
his house, or drawing him out of it, till it might be without danger or
observation. They of the Religion held a Synod at this time in this Town, in
which the principal business is to rectify, or at least to mature, against
their Provincial Synod, which shall be held in May, certain opinions of
Tilenus a Divine of Sedan, with which the Churches of France are scandalized.
The chief point is, Whether our salvation be to be attributed to the passive
merit of Christ, which is his death, or to his active also, which is his
fulfilling of the Law. But I doubt not but that will be well composed, if
Tilenus who is here in person with two other assistants, bring any disposition
to submit himself to the Synod, and not only to dispute. I do (I thank God)
naturally and heartily abhor all schism in Religion so much, as, I protest, I
am sorry to find this appearance of schism amongst our adversaries the
Sorbonists; for I had rather they had held together, to have made a head
against the usurpations of the To. Church, then that their disuniting should so
enfeeble them, as that the Parliament should be left alone to stand against
those tyrannies. Sir, you will pardon my extravagancies in these relations. I
look upon nothing so intentively as these things, nor falls there any thing
within my knowledge, which I would conceal from you. Though it concern not you
to know it, yet me thinks it concerns me to tell it. That Cook of which you
writ to me, is come hither, and has brought me other Letters, but not those of
which you writ to me, which packet, he says, you received again of him;
whether by his falsehood, or by your diligence in seeking a worthier messenger,
I know not; but I am sure I never lost any thing with more sorrow, because I am
thereby left still in uncertainties, and irresolutions, of that which I desire
much to know in women's businesses. If you write this way any more, choose no
other means, then by Mr Bruer at the Queens Arms a Mercer in Cheapside: he
shall always know where we are, and we are yet in a purpose to go from hence
within a fortnight, and dispose our selves to be at Frankford the 25 of May,
when the election of the Emperor shall be there. Though I be merely passive in
all this pilgrimage, yet I shall be willing to advance that design; because
upon my promise that I would do so, Sir Rob. Rich gave me his, that he would
divert from his way to Italy so much, as to be there then. When I came to this
Town I found Mr Matthew, diligent to find a means to write to you; so that at
this time, when there go so many, I cannot doubt but he provides himself,
therefore I did not ask his commandment, nor offer him the service of this
Packet. Sir, you are not evener to your self, in your most general wishes of
your own good, then I am in my particular, of which none rises in me, that is
not bent upon your enjoying of peace and reposednesse in your fortunes, in your
affections, and in your conscience; more then which I know not how to wish to

Your very affectionate servant and lover J. Done.
Paris the 9 Apr. 1612. here.
To Sir H. Wotton.
October. the 4th 1622. almost ad midnight. SIR,
ALL our moralities are but our outworks, our Christianity is our Citadel; a
man who considers duty but the dignity of his being a man, is not easily beat
from his outworks, but from his Christianity never; and therefore I dare trust
you, who contemplates them both. Every distemper of the body now, is
complicated with the spleen, and when we were young men we scarce ever heard of
the spleen. In our declinations now, every accident is accompanied with heavy
clouds of melancholy; and in our youth we never admitted any. It is the spleen
of the mind, and we are affected with vapors from thence; yet truly, even this
sadness that overtakes us, and this yielding to the sadness, is not so
vehement a poison (though it be no Physic neither) as those false ways, in
which we sought our comforts in our looser days. You are able to make rules to
your self, and our B. Savior continue to you an ability to keep within those
rules. And this particular occasion of your present sadness must be helped by
the rule, for, for examples you will scarce find any, scarce any that is not
encombred and distressed in his fortunes. I had locked my self, sealed and
secured my self against all possibilities of falling into new debts, and in
good faith, this year has thrown me 400l lower then when I entered this house.
I am a Father as well as you, and of children (I humbly thank God) of as good
dispositions; and in saying so, I make account that I have taken my comparison
as high as I could go; for in good faith, I believe yours to be so: but as
those my daughters (who are capable of such considerations) cannot but see my
desire to accommodate them in this world, so I think they will not murmr if
heaven must be their Nunnery, and they associated to the B. virgins there: I
know they would be content to pass their lives in a Prison, rather then I
should macerate my self for them, much more to suffer the mediocrity of my
house, and my means, though that cannot prefer them: yours are such too, and
it need not that patience, for your fortune does not so far exercise their
patience. But to leave all in Gods hands, from whose hands nothing can be wrung
by whining but by praying, nor by praying without the Fiat voluntas tua. Sir,
you are used to my hand, and, I think have leisure to spend some time in
picking out sense, in rags; else I had written less, and in longer time.
Here is room for an Amen; the prayer -- so I am going to my bedside to make for
all you and all yours, with

Your true friend and servant in Chr. Jesus J. Done.

A. V. Merced.
SIR,
I Write not to you out of my poor Library, where to cast mine eye upon good
Authors kindles or refreshes sometimes meditations not unfit to communicate to
near friends; nor from the high way, where I am contracted, and inverted into
my self; which are my two ordinary forges of Letters to you. But I write from
the fire side in my Parler, and in the noise of three gamesome children; and by
the side of her, whom because I have transplanted into a wretched fortune, I
must labor to disguise that from her by all such honest devices, as giving her
my company, and discourse, therefore I steal from her, all the time which I
give this Letter, and it is therefore that I take so short a list, and gallop
so fast over it, I have not been out of my house since I received your packet.
As I have much quenched my senses, and disused my body from pleasure, and so
tried how I can endure to be mine own grave, so I try now how I can suffer a
prison. And since it is but to build one wall more about our soul, she is still
in her own Center, how many circumferences soever fortune or our own
perverseness cast about her. I would I could as well entreat her to go out, as
she knows whither to go. But if I melt into a melancholy whilst I write, I
shall be taken in the manner: and I sit by one too tender toward these
impressions, and it is so much our duty, to avoid all occasions of giving them
sad apprehensions, as S. Hierome accuses Adam of no other fault in eating the
Apple, but that he did it Ne contristaretu^ delicias suas. I am not careful
what I write, because the enclosed Letters may dignifie this ill favored bark,
and they need not grudge so course a countenance, because they are now to
accompany themselves, my man fetched them, and therefore I can say no more of
them then themselves say, Mris Meauly entreated me by her Letter to hasten
hers; as I think, for by my troth I cannot read it. My Lady was dispatching in
so much haste for Twicknam, as she gave no word to a Letter which I sent with
yours; of Sir Tho. Bartlet, I can say nothing, nor of the plague, though your
Letter bid me: but that he diminishes, the other increases, but in what
proportion I am not clear. To them at Hammersmith, and Mris Herbert I will do
your command. If I have been good in hope, or can promise any little offices in
the future probably, it is comfortable, for I am the worst present man in the
world; yet the instant, though it be nothing, joins times together, and
therefore this unprofitableness, since I have been, and will still endeavor to
be so, shall not interrupt me now from being

Your servant and lover J. Done.

To the best Knight Sir H. Wootton.
SIR,
When I saw your good Countess last, she let me think that her message by her
footman would hasten you up. And it furthered that opinion in me, when I knew
how near M. Mathews day of departing this kingdom was. To counterpoyse both
these, I have a little Letter from you brought to me to Micham yesterday, but
left at my lodging two days sooner: and because that speaks nothing of your
return, I am content to be perplexed in it: and as in all other, so in this
perplexity to do that which is safest. To me it is safest to write, because it
performs a duty, and leaves my conscience well: and though it seem not safest
for the Letter, which may perish, yet I remember, that in the Crociate for the
wars in the Holy Land, and so in all Pilgrimages enterprised in devotion, he
which dies in the way, enjoyes all the benefit and indulgences which the end
did afford. Howsoever, all that can increase the danger of your Letter,
increase my merit; for, as where they immolate men, it is a a scanter devotion,
to sacrifice one of many slaves or of many children, or an only child, then to
beget and bring up one purposely to sacrifice it, so if I ordain this Letter
purposely for destruction, it is the largest expressing of that kind of piety,
and I am easy to believe (because I wish it) your have hither: Not that I can
fear any slacknesse in that business which drew you down, because your fortune
and honor are a pair of good spurs to it; but here also you have both true
business and many Quasi negotia, which go two and two to a business; which
are visitations, and such, as though they be not full businesses, yet are so
near them that they serve as for excuses, in omissions of the other. As when
abjurations was in use in this land, the State and law was satisfied if the
abjuror came to the sea side, and waded into the sea, when winds and tides
resisted, so we think our selves justly excusable to our friends and our
selves, if when we should do business, we come to the place of business, as
Courts and the houses of great Princes and officers. I do not so much intimate
your infirmity in this, as frankly confess mine own. The master of Latin
language says, Oculi and aures aliorum te speculantur and custodiunt. So those
two words are synonimous, and only the observation of others upon me, is my
preservation from extreme idleness, else I profess, that I hate business so
much, as I am sometimes glad to remember, that the Roman Church reads that
verse A negotio perambulante in tenebris, which we read from the pestilence
walking by night, so equal to me do the plague and business deserve avoiding,
but you will neither believe that I abhor business, if I enlarge this Letter,
nor that I would afford you that ease which I affect, Therefore return to your
pleasures.

Your unprofitablest friend Jo. Done.
March 14. 1607. It is my third Letter: which I tell you, because I found not
Mr. Rogers, but left the Letter which I sent last, with a stranger at Cliffords
Inn.



To Sir H. G.
SIR,
THis 14 of November last I received yours of the 9, as I was in the street
going to sup with my Lady Bedford, I found all that company forepossessed with
a wonder why you came not last saturday. I perceive, that as your intermitting
your Letters to me, gave me reason to hope for you, so some more direct
address or conscience of your business here, had imprinted in them an
assurance of your coming, this Letter shall but talk, not discourse; it shall
but gossip, not consider, nor consult, so it is made half with a prejudice of
being lost by the way. The King is gone this day for Royston: and has left
with the Queen a commandment to meditate upon a Masque for Christmas, so that
they grow serious about that already; that will hasten my Lady Bedfords
journey, who goes within ten days from hence to her Lord, but by reason of
this, can make no long stay there. Justinian the Venetian is gone hence, and
one Carraw come in his place: that State has taken a fresh offense at a Friar,
who refused to absolve a Gentleman, because he would not express in confession
what books of Father Paul, and such, he knew to be in the hands of any others;
the State commanded him out of that territory in three hours warning, and he
has now submitted himself, and is returned as prisoner for Mantua, and so
remains as yet. Sir H. Wootton who writ hither, adds also that upon his
knowledge there are 14000 as good Protestants as he in that State. The Duke
Joyeuse is dead, in Primont, returning from Rome, where M. Mole who went with
the L. Rosse, is taken into the Inquisition, and I see small hope of his
recovery (for he had in some translations of Plessis books talked of Babylon
and Antichrist. Except it fall out that one Strange a Jesuit in the Tower, may
be accepted for him. To come a little nearer my self, Sir Geffery Fenton one of
his Majesty's Secretaries in Ireland is dead; and I have made some offer for
the place, in preservation whereof, as I have had occasion to employ all my
friends, so I have not found in them all (except Bedford) more have and words
(for when those two are together, there is much comfort even in the least) then
in the L. Hay. In good faith he promised so roundly, so abundantly, so
profusely, as I suspected him, but performed what ever he undertook, (and my
requests were the measures of his undertakings) so readily and truly, that his
complements became obligations, and having spoke like a Courtier, did like a
friend. This I tell you, because being far under any ability of expressing my
thankfulness to him by any proportional service, I do, as much as I can,
thank him by thanking of you, who begot, or nursed these good impressions of me
in him. Sir, as my discretion would do, my fortune does bring all my debts into
one hand, for I owe you what ever Court friends do for me, yea, whatsoever I do
for my self, because you almost importune me, to awake and stare the Court in
the face. I know not yet what conjecture to make of the event. But I am content
to go forward a little more in the madness of missing rather then not pretend;
and rather wear out, then rust. It is extreme late; and as this Letter is
nothing, so if ever it come to you, you will know it without a name, and
therefore I may end it here.

To the Honorable Knight Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
THough you escape my lifting up of your latch by removing, you cannot my
Letters; yet of this Letter I do not much accuse my self, for I serve your
Commandment in it, for it is only to convey to you this paper opposed to those,
with which you trusted me. It is (I cannot say the waightyest, but truly) the
saddest lucubration and nights passage that ever I had. For it exercised those
hours, which, with extreme danger of her, whom I should hardly have abstained
from recompensing for her company in this world, with accompanying her out of
it, increased my poor family with a son. Though her anguish, and my fears, and
hopes, seem diverse and wild distractions from this small business of your
papers, yet because they all narrowed themselves, and met in Via regia, which
is the consideration of our selves, and God, I thought it time not unfit for
this dispatch. Thus much more then needed I have told you, whilst my fire was
lighting at Tricombs 10 a clock.

Yours ever entirely J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight H. G.
SIR,
YOur Son left here a Letter for me, from you. But I neither discern by it that
you have received any of mine lately; which have been many, and large, and too
confident to be lost, especially since, (as I remember) they always conveyed
others to that good Lady; neither do I know where to find, by any diligence,
your sons lodging. But I hope he will apprehend that impossibility in me, and
find me here, where he shall also find as much readiness to serve him, as at
Polesworth. This Letter of yours makes me perceive, that that Lady has
expressed her purpose to you in particular, for the next term. Accordingly, I
make my promises: for since one that meant but to flatter, told an Emperor,
that his benefits were to be reckoned from the day of the promise, because he
never failed, it were an injury from me to the constancy of that noble Lady, if
I should not, as soon as she promises, do some act of assurance of the
performance; which I have done, as I say, in fixing times to my creditors; for
by the end of next term, I will make an end with the world, by Gods grace. I
lack you here, for my L. of Dorset, he might make a cheap bargain with me now,
and disingage his honor, which in good faith, is a little bound, because he
admitted so many witnesses of his large disposition toward me. They are
preparing for a Masque of Gentlemen: in which M. Villars is, and M. Karre, whom
I told you before my L. Chamberlain had brought into the bedchamber. I pray,
if you make not so thick goings as you used, send this Letter to that good
woman, for it is not only mine. If I could stay this Letter an hour, I should
send you something of Savoy, for Sir Rob. Rich, who is now come from Court,
has laid a commandment upon me by message to wait upon him; and I know his
business, because he never sought me, but in one kind. But the importuny of the
hour excuses me, and delivers you from further trouble from

Your very true friend and servant J. Done.
13 December.
To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Love to give you advantages upon me, therefore I put my self in need of
another pardon from you, by not coming to you; yet I am scarce guilty enough
to spend much of your virtue from you, because I knew not of your being come
till this your Letter told me so, in the midst of dinner at Peckham, this
Monday. Sir, I am very truly yours; if you have overvalued me in any capacity,
I will do what I can to overtake your hopes of me. I wish my self whatsoever
you wish me; and so I do, what ever you wish your self. I am prisoner and
close; else I had not needed this pardon, for I long much, and much more by
occasion of your Letter, to see you: when you find that good Lady emptiest of
business and pleasure, present my humble thanks; you can do me no favor,
which I need not, nor any, which I cannot have some hope to deserve, but this;
for I have made her opinion of me, the balance by which I weigh my self. I
will come soon enough to deliver my thanks to Sir J. Harr. for your ease, whom
I know I have pained with an ilfavoured Letter, but my heart has one style,
and character; and is yours in wishing, and in thankfulness.

J. Done.
Peckham Monday afternoon.
To the Honorable Sir R. D.
SIR,
I Gave no answer to the Letter I received from you upon Tuesday, both because
I had in it no other commandment by it but to deliver your Letter therein,
which I did, and because that Letter found me under very much sadness, which
(according to the proportion of ills that fall upon me) is since also
increased, so that I had not written now, if I had been sure to have been
better able to write next week, which I have not much appearance of: yet there
was committed to my disposition (that is, left at my house in my absence) a
Letter from Sir W. Lover, but it was some hours after all possibility of
sending it by the carrier, so that Mr. W. Stanhope giving me the honor of a
visit at that time, and being instantly to depart, for your parts, did me the
favor to undertake the delivery of it to you. With me, Sir, it is thus, there
is not one person (besides my self) in my house well. I have already lost half
a child, and with that mischance of hers, my wife fallen into an indisposition,
which would afflict her much, but that the sickness of her children stupefies
her: of one of which, in good faith, I have not much hope. This meets a fortune
so ill provided for physique and such relief, that if God should ease us with
burialls, I know not well how to perform even that. I flatter my self in this,
that I am dying too: nor can I truly dye faster, by any waste, then by loss of
children. But Sir, I will mingle no more of my sadness to you, but will a little
recompense it, by telling you that my L. Harrington, of whom a few days since
they were doubtful, is so well recovered that now they know all his disease to
be the Pox, and Measels mingled. This I heard yesterday: for I have not been
there yet. I came as near importunity as I could, for an answer from Essex
house, but this was all, that he should see you shortly himself.

Your servant J. Done.
I cannot tell you so much, as you tell me, of anything from my Lord of Some.
since the Epithalamion, for I heard nothing.



To the Honor able Knight Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
I Have but one excuse for not sending you the Sermon that you do me the honor
to command, and I foresee, that before I take my hand from this paper, I shall
lose the benefit of that excuse; it is, that for more then twenty days, I have
been traveled with a pain, in my right wrist, so like the Gout, as makes me
unable to write. The writing of this Letter will implore a commentary for that,
that I cannot write legibly; for that I cannot write much, this Letter will
testify against me. Sir, I befeech you, at first, tell your company, that I
decline not the service out of sullenness nor laziness, nor that any fortune
damps me so much, as that I am not sensible of the honor of their commanding
it, but a mere inexperience whether I be able to write eight hours or no; but I
will try next week, and either do it, for their service, or sink in their
service. This is Thursday: and upon Tuesday my Lady Bedford came to this town:
this afernoon I presented my service to her, by Mris Withrington: and so asked
leave to have waited upon them at supper: but my messenger found them ready to
go into their Coach: so that a third Letter which I received from Mris Dadley,
referring me to Mris Withringtons relation of all that State, I lose it till
their return to this town. To clear you in that wherein I see by your Letter
that I had not well expressed my self in mine, Sir Ed. Herbert writ to Sir Ed.
Sackvil, not to press the King to fix any certain time of sending him, till he
was come over, and had spoken with the King: Sir Ed. Sackvil collects upon
that, that Sir Ed. H. means to go again; I think it is only, that he would
have his honor so saved, as not to seem to be recalled, by having a successor,
before he had emptied the place. We hear nothing from my Lord of Doncaster; nor
have we any way to send to him. I have not seen my Lady Doncaster, for she
crossed to Penhurst, and from thence to Petworth, my Lady Isabella came to this
Town; where, before her coming, a Letter attended her from my Lady of
Tichfield: and thither she went, with their servants, who staid her coming.
Hither came lately Letters with goodspeed from Vienna, in which there is no
mention of any such defeat, as in rumor C. Mansfeld has been said to have
given to the D. of Bavyer: but their forces were then within such distance, as
may have procured something before this time. Those which watched advantages in
the Court of the Emperor, have made that use of C. Mansfelds proceedings, as
that my Lord Digby complains, that there by, the forwardness in which his
negotiation was, is somewhat retarded. He proceeds from thence into Spain. The
D. of Bavyer has presented the Emperor an account of 1200ml. sterling in that
war, to be reimbursed: and finding the Palatinate to be in treaty, has
required a great part of Austria for his security, and they say, it is so
transacted; which is a good sign of a possibility in the restitution of the
Palatinate. For any thing I discern, their fears are much greater from Hungary,
then from Bohemia; and the loss of Canon, in a great proportion, and other
things, at the death of Bucquoy, was much greater, then they suffered to be
published. We here Spinola is passed over at Rhenebery; if it be so, they are
no longer distracted, whether he would bend upon Juliers, or the Palatinate. I
know not what you hear from your noble son in law, who sees those things
clearly in himself, and in a near distance; but I hear here, that the King has
much lost the affection of the English in those parts. Whether it proceed from
any sowrenesse in him, or that they be otherwise taken off, from applying
themselves to him, I know not. My Lord of S. Albons has found so much favor
as that a pension of 2000 l. will be given him; he desires that he might have
it for years, that so he might transfer it upon his creditors; or that in
place of it he might have 8000 l. for he has found a disposition in his
creditors (to whom I hear he has paid 3000 l. since by retyring) to accept
8000 l. for all his debts, which are three times as much. I have been some
times with my L. of Canterbury, since by accident, to give you his own words. I
see him retain his former cheerfulness here and at Croydon, but I do not hear
from Court, that he has any ground for such a confidence, but that his case
may need favor, and not have it. That place, and Bedington, and Chelsey, and
Highgate, where that very good man my Lord Hobard is, and Hackney, with the M.
of the Rolls, and my familiar Peckham, are my circumferrence. No place so
eccentrique to me, as that I lie just at London; and with those fragmentary
recreations I must make shift to recompense the missing of that contentment
which your favor opens to me, and my desire provokes me to, the kissing of
your hands at Polesworth. My daughter Constance is at this time with me; for
the emptiness of the town, has made me, who otherwise live upon the alms of
others, a houskeeper, for a month; and so she is my servant below stairs, and
my companion above: she was at the table with me, when your Letter was brought,
and I pay her a piece of her petition in doing her this office, to present her
service to my Lady Nethersoles, and her very good sister. But that she is gone
to bed two hours before I writ this, she should have signed, with such a hand
as your daughter Mary did to me, that which I testify for her, that she is as
affectionate a servant to them all, as their goodness has created any where.
Sir, I shall recompense my tediousness, in closing mine eyes with a prayer for
yours, as for mine own happiness, for I am almost in bed; if it were my last
bed, and I upon my last business there, I should not omit to join you with

Your very humble and very thankful servant in Christ Jesus J. Done.
Aug. 30. 1611.
To his honorable friend Sr H. G.
SIR,
TO you that are not easily scandalized, and in whom, I hope, neither my
Religion nor Morality can suffer, I dare write my opinion of that Book in whose
bowels you left me. It has refreshed, and given new justice to my ordinary
complaint, That the Divines of these times, are become mere Advocates, as
though Religion were a temporal inheritance; they plead for it with all
sophistications, and illusions, and forgeries: And herein are they likest
Advocates, that though they be feed by the way, with Dignities, and other
recompenses, yet that for which they plead is none of theirs. They write for
Religion, without it. In the main point in question, I think truly there is a
perplexity (as far as I see yet) and both sides may be in justice, and
innocence; and the wounds which they inflict upon the adverse part, are all se
defendendo: for, clearly, our State cannot be safe without the Oath; since they
profess, that Clergymen, though Traitors, are no Subjects, and that all the
rest may be none to morrow. And, as clearly, the Supremacy which the To. Church
pretend, were diminished, if it were limited; and will as ill a bide that, or
disputation, as the Prerogative of temporal Kings, who being the only judges
of their prerogative, why may not Roman Bishops, (so enlightened as they are
presumed by them) be good witnesses of their own supremacy, which is now so
much impugned? But for this particular Author, I looked for more prudence, and
humane wisdom in him, in avoiding all miscitings, or mis-interpretings,
because at this time, the watch is set, and every bodies hammer is upon that
anvill; and to dare offend in that kind now, is, for a thief to leave the
covert, and meet a strong hue and cry in the teeth: and yet truly this man is
extremely obnoxious in that kind; for, though he have answered many things
fully, (as no book ever gave more advantage then that which he undertook) and
abound in delicate applications, and ornaments, from the divine and profane
authors, yet being chiefly conversant about two points, he prevaricates in
both. For, for the matter, which is the first, he referres it entirely, and
namely, to that which D. Morton has said therein before, and so leaves it
roundly: And for the person (which is the second) upon whom he amasses as many
opprobries, as any other could deserve, he pronounces, that he will account
any answer from his adversary, slander, except he do (as he has done) draw
whatsoever he says of him, from Authors of the same Religion, and in print:
And so, he having made use of all the Quodlibetaries, imputations against the
other, cannot be obnoxious himself in that kind, and so has provided safely.
It were no service to you, to send you my notes upon the Book, because they are
sandy, and incoherent rags, for my memory, not for your judgment; and to
extend them to an easiness, and perspicuity, would make them a Pamphlet, not a
Letter. I will therefore defer them till I see you; and in the mean time, I
will adventure to say to you, without inserting one unnecessary word, that the
Book is full of falsifications in words, and in sense, and of falsehoods in
matter of fact, and of inconsequent and unscholarlike arguings, and of
relinquishing the King, in many points of defense, and of contradiction of
himself, and of dangerous and suspected Doctrine in Divinity, and of silly
ridiculous triflings, and of extreme flatteries, and of neglecting better and
more obvious answers, and of letting slip some enormous advantages which the
other gave, and he spies not. I know (as I begun) I speak to you who cannot be
scandalized, and that neither measure Religion (as it is now called) by Unity,
nor suspect Unity, for these interruptions. Sir, not only a Mathematique
point, which is the most indivisible and unique thing which art can present,
flows into every line which is derived from the Center, but our soul which is
but one, has swallowed up a Negative, and feeling soul; which was in the body
before it came, and exercises those faculties yet; and God himself, who only
is one, seems to have been eternally delighted, with a disunion of persons.
They whose active function it is, must endeavor this unity in Religion: and and
we at our lay Altars (which are our tables, or bedside, or stools, wheresoever
we dare prostrate our selves to God in prayer) must beg it of him: but we must
take heed of making misconclusions upon the want of it: for, whether the Mayor
and Aldermen fall out, (as with us and the Puritans; Bishops against Priests)
or the Commoners voices differ who is Mayor, and who Aldermen, or what their
Jurifdiction, (as with the Bishop of Rome, or whosoever) yet it is still one
Corporation.

Your very affectionate servant and lover J. Done.
Micham, Thursday late. Never leave the remembrance of my poor service
unmentioned when you see the good Lady.



Tos T. H.
SIR,
THis evening, which is 5o October, I find your Letter of Michaelmas day, and
though I see by it, that it is a return of a Letter, not of the last weeks, and
thereupon make account, that my last weeks Letter has satisfied you in some
things which this Letter commands, concerning Paul's, yet for other things I
would give you a drowsy relation, for it is that time of night, though I
called it evening. At the Kings going from hence, upon Monday last, we made
account to have seen Sir John Sutclin Secretary, and Sir Rob. Weston Chancellor
of the Exchequer, but they are not done, but both are fixed: my L. Cranfield
received his staff, with these two suits obtained from the King, That all
Assignations might be transferred into the Exchequer, and so no paiments
charged upon the Customs, nor Receivers, nor the Court of Wards, etc. And that
for a time there might be a damp cast upon Pensions, till they might be
considered. In the Low Countries the Armies stir not. In the Palatinate Sir
H. Vere attempting the regaining of Stenie Castle, was surprised with the Enemy
in so much strength, that they write it over for a Masterpiece, that he was
able to make a retreat to Manheme: so that now the Enemy is got on that side
the River which Heydelberg is on, and I know nothing that can stand in his way.
My L. Digby comes from Vienna, before he goes into Spain, by Count Mansfield,
by the Palatinate, by Paris; and therefore upon his coming, I shall be able to
say something to you. In Sir John Sutclin I presume you see an end of Sir To.
Naunton, and we see an end of Mr Tho. Murray too; I believe he comes no more to
the Prince. For the trial of my L. of Canterburies irregularity, there is a
Commission to six Bishops, London, Winchester, Rochester, and three only
elect, Lincoln, S. David's, and Exeter: two Judges, L. Hobard, and Dodridge; two
Civilians, Sir H. Martin, and D. Steward. The consecration of these elect
Bishops, and consequently, my being Dean, must attend the issue of this
Commission. Sir Tho. Roe is gone. The Proclamations of putting off the
Parliament, till February, are like to outrun this Letter. It is very late; and
it is one act, to say Grace after Supper, and to commend my self into the hands
of my blessed Savior, in my bed, and so close this Letter, and mine eyes, with
the same blessing upon all your family. Amen.

Your poor servant in Chr. fes. J. Done.

To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Receive this 14 your Letter of the 10. yet I am not come to an understanding
how these Carriers keep days: for I would fain think that the Letters which I
sent upon Thursday last might have given you such an account of the state of my
family, that you needed not have asked by this. But Sir, it has pleased God to
add thus much to my affliction, that my wife has now confessed her self to be
extremely sick; she has held out thus long to assist me, but is now
overturned, and here we be in two beds, or graves; so that God has marked out
a great many of us, but taken none yet. I have passed ten days without taking
any thing; so that I think no man can live more thriftily. I have purged and
vexed my body much since I writ to you, and this day I have missed my fit: and
this is the first time, that I could discern any intermission. This is enough,
the rest I will spend upon the parts of your Letter: Your Letter at Paul's is
delivered. In the History of that remove, this only perchance may be news to
you, that Mr Alabaster has got of the King the Deans best Living worth above
300l, which the Dean had good hope to have held a while. Of that which you writ
concerning a Book of the Nullity, I have heard no syllable any other way. If
you have received it by good hands, I believe it with you: otherwise the report
is naturally very incredible. Though the answering of it be a work for some,
both of better abilities really, and in common reputation also, yet I was like
enough to have had some knowledge thereof. You mention again some thing which
it seems you are not willing I should understand of my Lady Huntington: some of
your former Letters, have spoken of some other former Letters, (which I never
saw) which speak of the matter as of a history and thing done; and these later
Letters speak of it Prophetically, as of a future contingent. I am glad the
often remembrance of it, gives me often occasion of thankfulness to her, for
retaining me in her memory, and of professing my self in my end, and ways, her
most humble servant. For your Parliament business, I should be very sorry, if
you came not up, because I presume you had seposed many businesses, to have
been done at that time; but in the ways wherein you have gone, I protest I am
diffident. For first, for that L. whom you solicited by Letters through me, I
tell you with the whispering of a secret, but the confidence of a friend, that
you will be deceived whenever you think that he should take any delight in
doing you a courtesy. And I am afraid, the true heartinesse of the other noble
Gentleman M. Howard, will be of small use in this particular, if he have but
solicited my L. his father to reserve a blanke for his friend, for my L. has
suffered more denialls, even in places where he sent names, then could have
been feared. Besides M. How. has not written to his father therein, but to M.
Woodward, who perceiving those Letters to be written, before his purpose of
being Knight for the shire, thinks these Letters extinguished. You made me
offer so long since of a place (it was when you writ into the west) yet I could
think it no merit to have offered you one since, otherwise it has been since
in my power, for since the Mr. of the Rolls provided me one, Sir Ed. Herbert,
who makes haste away, made me a present of his; and I have had a third offer.
The business of your last weeks Letter concerning the widow, is not a subject
for a feverous man's consideration. Therefore I only send you back those Letters
which you sent; and ask you leave to make this which I am fain to call my good
day, so much truly good, as to spend the rest of it with D. Layfield, who is,
upon my summons, at this hour come to me My Physicians have made me afraid,
that this disease will work into my head, and so put me into lightnesses,
therefore I am desirous that I be understood before any such danger overtake me.

Your true poor servant J. Done.
14. March.
To the Honorable Knight Sir H. G.
SIR,
AFter I have told you, that the Lady Hay dyed last Tuesday, and that to her
end she was anguished with the memory of the execution of that fellow which
attempted her in the coach. I have told you all which has fallen out here.
Except between you and me that may be worth the telling, that my L. Chancellor
gave me so noble and so ready a dispatch; accompanied with so fatherly advise,
and remorse for my fortunes, that I am now, like an Alchymist, delighted with
discoveries by the way, though I attain not mine end. It spent me so little
time after your going, that, although you speak in your Letter of good
dispatchin your going, yet I might have overtaken you. And though percha^ce if
I had gone, it might have been inconvenient for me, to have put my self into my
L. Chamberlains presence, if that sickness be earnest at Ashby, and so I
should nothing have advanced my business, yet I should have come to that noble
Lady with better confidence, and more assurance of a pardon, when I had brought
a conscience, that I came despoiled of all other respects, only to kiss her
hands, in whose protection I am, since I have, nor desire other station, then a
place in her good opinion. I took so good contentment in the fashion which my
L. Chancellor used toward me, that out of a voluptuous loathnesse to let that
taste go out of my mouth, I forbear to make any further trial in that
business till the King come into these quarters. So that, Sir, I am here in
place to serve you, if either I be capable of your commandments, or this town
give any thing worth the writing. As often as you see your noble friend, and
her good sister, allow my name a room in your discourse, it is a short one, and
you will soon have done. But tell them not my desire to do them service, for
then you engage your self in a longer discourse, then I am worthy. Only in
pursuit of your commandment I sent the Paquet to the Post, for in mine own
understanding, there should appear small hope of arriving by that way, except
you know otherwise that the LL. mean to make some stay in their return, in
those parts: but the Letter is brought back again, for the Post went away
yesterday, and they knew of no occasion of sending till next week. Therefore
except I can inform my self of some good means, I will retain it, till I have a
fresh commandment from you. I see M. Taverner still in this town, the Lady
Carey went from hence but yesterday. I am in some perplexity what to do with
this packet, till some good fortune, or your Letters clear me.

Your humble servant J. Done.
Aug. 19.
To Sir H. Goodere at Polesworth.
SIR,
IT is true that M. Gherard told you, I had that commandment from the King
signified to me by my L. and am still under it, and we are within fourteen days
of our time for going. I leave a scattered flock of wretched children, and I
carry an infirm and valetudinary body, and I go into the mouth of such
adversaries, as I cannot blame for hating me, the Jesuits, and yet I go. Though
this be no service to my Lord: yet I shall never come nearer doing him a
service, nor do any thing liker a service then this. Yesterday we had news by
Sir Nowell Carou, from Paris, that the D. of Savoy was elected King of Bohemia;
which would cut off a great part of the occasion of our going: but it is not
much credible in it self, nor at all believed here, because it is not signified
from Savoy, nor Heidelberg. Since M. Gher. continues your Gazittier, I need
tell you nothing of the Q. of Frances estate. For your commandment in memory of
M. Martin, I should not have sat so many processes, if I could incline my
thoughts that way. It is not laziness, it is not gravity, nor coldness
toward his memory, or your service; for I have thought of it oftener, and
longer, then I was wont to do in such things, and nothing is done. Your last
packet, in which your daughter and I were joynt-commissioners, was brought to
me, because she was at Hampton, with the Queens body: but I sent her part to
her, and my La. Uvedalls to her, who presents her service to you by me now, and
says she will write next week, and so will I too, by Gods grace. You forget me
absolutely and entirely, whenever you forget me to that noble Countess. God
bless you in all, Amen.

Your true servant in Jes. Chr. J. Done.
9 Martii.
To the best Knight Sir H. G.
SIR,
AT your convenience, I pray send my Lady Bedford this enclosed, but be pleased
to put your self to some inconvenience, (if it be so) to kiss my Lady Ruthins
hands in my name, and to present my very humble service to her, and tell her,
that no ill conscience of having deserved her, but only an obedience to her
commandments, keeps me from saying to her self thus much; that this day I
received a letter from my L. of Kent, written yesterday at Wrest: in that his
Lordships sends me word, that that favor which he has formerly done me, in
giving me Blouham, is now likely to fall upon me, because the Incumbent is
dangerously ill: and because this is the season in which he removes from Wrest
thither, he desires (for I give you his own word) that he may be accommodate
there, (if it fall now) as heretofore. Out of my absolute and entire readiness
to serve that family, I sent back his messenger with this answer, that I
esteemed it a great part of my good fortune, that I should become worthy to be
commanded by him. If my Lady will be pleased to direct me in what particular
manner I may best serve her purposes, I shall gladly wait upon her at any
time, to receive her command with as much devotion and thankfulness as I
received the benefit. I beseech you make her believe it, as in any place you
believe

Your poor servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.
26 Febr. 1621.
To my best of friends Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Heard not from you this week; therefore I write more willingly, because it
has in it so much more merit. And I might do it very cheaply, since to convey
to you this Letter, which mine has the honor to bring, any little Letter
would serve, and be acceptable for that. Because it came not last week, I went
now to solicit it, and she sent it me next day with some thanks, and some
excuse that she knew not me, when I was with her. You know, I do not easily put
my self into those hazards, nor do much brag of my valor now, otherwise then I
purposed it for a service to you. The newest thing that I know in the world, is
my new son: whose mothers being well takes off from me any new waightupon my
fortune. I hear in Newgate, that M. Matthew is dead. The Catholics believe it
there: perchance out of a custom of credulity. But the report, is close
prisoner; for I never met it abroad. This is my third letter, all which I sent
by Spelty whom my boy found at Abington house. I have now two of the best
happinesses which could befall me, upon me; which are, to be a widower and my
wife alive, which may make you know, that it is but for your ease, that this
letter is no longer, in this leisure in which (having nothing else to write) I
might vary a thousand ways that I am

Your very affectionate servant J. Done.
Monday at night.
To my worthy friend G. K.
SIR,
I Receive this hear that I begin this return, your Letter by a servant of Sir
G. Greseley, by whom also I hasten this dispatch. This needs no enlargement
since it has the honor to convey one from M. Gherard. But though by telling
me, it was a bold letter, I had leave to open it, and that I have a little itch
to make some animadversions and Criticismes upon it (as that there is a ciphar
too much in the sum of the Kings debts, and such like) yet since my eyes do
easily fall back to their distemper, and that I am this night to sup at Sir A^.
Ingrams, I had rather forfeit their little strength at his supper, then with
writing such impertinencies: the best spending them, is upon the rest of your
Letter, to which, Sir, I can only say in general, that some appearances have
been here, of some treatise concerning this Nullity, which are said to proceed
from Geneva; but are believed to have been done within doors, by encouragements
of some whose names I will not commit to this letter. My poor study having lain
that way, it may prove possible, that my weak assistance may be of use in this
matter, in a more serious fashion, then an Epithalamion. This made me therefore
abstinent in that kind; yet by my troth, I think I shall not escape. I
deprehend in my self more then an alacrity, a vehemence to do service to that
company; and so, I may find reason to make rhyme. If it be done, I see not how
I can admit that circuit of sending them to you, to be sent hither; that seems
a kind of praying to Saints, to whom God must tell first, that such a man
prays to them to pray to him. So that I shall lose the honor of that
conveyance; but, for recompense, you shall escape the danger of approving it. My
next Letter shall say more of this. This shall end with delivering you the
remembrance of my Lady Bartlet, who is present at the sealing hereof,

Your very true and affectionate servant J. Done.
Jan. 19. Which name when there is any empty corner in your discourse with that
noble Lady at Ashby, I humbly beseech you to present to her as one more devoted
to her service then perchance you will say.



To Sir G. B.
SIR,
BEtween the time of making up my other Letters, and the hour that your man
limited me to call for them, came to my house an other packet directed to him:
for by this time, the carrier is as wise, as his horse, to go to the house that
he has used to go. I found liberty in the superscription to open, and so I
did; but for that part which concerns him, I must attend his coming hither,
for I know not where to seek him; and besides, I have enough to say for that
part which concerns my self. Sir, even in the Letter it self to me, I deprehend
much inclination, to chide me: and it is but out of your habit of good language
that you spare me. So little occasion as that postscript of mine, could not
bring you so near to it, if nothing else were mistaken, which (so God help me)
was so little, that I remember not what it was, and I would no more hear again
what I write in an officious Letter, then what I said at a drunken supper. I
had no purpose to exercise your diligence in presenting my name to that Lady,
but either I did, or should have said, that I writ only to fill up any empty
corner in your discourse. So, Sir, the reading of the Letter, was a kind of
travel to me, but when I came to the paper enclosed, I was brought to bed of a
monster. To express my self vehemently quickly, I must say, that I can scarce
think, that you have read M. Gherards letter rightly, therefore I send you back
your own again. I will not protest against my beingsuch a knave, for no man
shall have that from me, if he expect it: but I will protest against my being
such a fool, as to depose any thing in him with hope of locking it up, and
against that lowness, of seeking reputation by so poor a way. I am not so
sorry, that I am a narrow man, as that for all the narrowness, you have not
seen through me yet, nor known me perfectly; for I might think by this, (if I
had not other testimony) that I have been little in your contemplation. Sixteen
letters from M. Gherard, could not (I think) persuade a Middlesex Jury of so
much dishonesty in

Your true servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir G. P.
SIR,
I Would have intermitted this week without writing, if I had not found the
name of my Lady Huntington in your Letter. The devotion which I owe, and (in
good faith) pay in my best prayers for her good, in all kind awakens me to
present my humble thanks for this, that her Ladyship retains my name in her
memory: she never laid obligation upon any man, readier to express his
acknowledgement of them, to any servant of her servants; I am bound to say much
of this, for your indemnity; because though I had a little preparation to her
knowledge in the house where I served at first, yet, I think, she took her
characters of me, from you: And, at what time soever she thought best of me in
her life, I am better then that, for my goodness is my thankfulness, and I am
every day fuller of that then before, to her Lap. I say nothing to you of
foreign names in this Letter, because your son Sir Francis is here. For that
which you write concerning your son, I only gave my man Martin in charge, to
use his interest in the Keeper, that your son should fall under no wants there,
which it seems your son discharged, for I hear not of them. For other trifles,
I bad my man let him have whatsoever he asked, so, as it might seem to come
from him, and not me; and laying that look upon it, it came to almost nothing.
Tell both your daughters a piece of a story of my Con. which may accustom
them to endure disappointments in this world: An honorable person (whose name
I give you in a schedule to burn, lest this Letter should be mis-laid) had an
intention to give her one of his sons, and had told it me, and would have been
content to accept what I, by my friends, could have begged for her; but he
intended that son to my Profession, and had provided him already 300l a year,
of his own gift in Church livings, and has estated 300l more of inheritance
for their children: and now the youth, (who yet knows nothing of his fathers
intention nor mine) flies from his resolutions for that Calling, and importunes
his Father to let him travel. The girl knows not her loss, for I never told
her of it: but truly, it is a great disappointment to me. More then these, Sir,
we must all suffer, in our way to heaven, where, I hope you and all yours shall
meet

Your poor friend, and affectionate servant J. Done.
18 October. 1622.
To my much honored friend Sr T. Lucy.
SIR,
I Have scarce had at any time any thing so like news to write to you, as that
I am at this Town; we came from Spa with so much resolution of passing by
Holland. But at Mastricht we found that the lowness, and slacknesse of the
River, would incommodate us so much, as we charged our whole gests, and came
hither by Land. In the way at Lovaine we met the E. of Arondel, to recompense
the loss we had of missing my L. Chandis and his company, who came to Spa
within a few hours after we came away. Sir Ed. Conaway, by occasion of his
bodies indisposition, was gone home before: he told me he had some hope of you
about Bartholomewtide: But because I half understood by a Letter from you, that
you were determined upon the Country till Michaelmas, I am not so earnest in
endeavoring to prolong our stay in these parts, as otherwise I should. If I
could join with him in that hope of seeing you on this side the water; and if
you should hold that purpose of coming at that time, I should repent extremely
my laying of our journies; for (if we should by miracle hold any resolution) we
should be in England about that time, so that I might miss you both here, and
there. Sir, our greatest business is more in our power then the least, and we
may be surer to meet in heaven then in any place upon earth; and whilst we are
distant here, we may meet as often as we list in Gods presence, by soliciting
in our prayers for one another. I received 4 Letters from you at Spa by long
circuits. In the last, one from my L. Dorset: I, who had a conscience of mine
own unworthiness of any favor from him, could not choose but present my thanks
for the least. I do not therefore repent my forwardness in that office; and I
beseech you not to repent your part therein. Since we came to this Town, there
arrived an Extraordinary from Spain, with a reconfirmation of the D. d'Aumals
Pension, which is thereby 2400l a year, and he brings the title of Count, to
Rodrigo de Calderon, who from a very low place, having grown to be Secretary to
Lerma, is now Ambassador here, and in great opinion of wisdom: They say yet he
goes to Prague with the Marquis Spinola, and the G. Buquoy, to congratulate the
Emperor: but we all conclude here, that persons of such quality, being great
in matter of War, are not sent for so small an emploiment: we believe
certainly, that they deliberate a War, and that the reduction of Aix being
not worthy this diligence, their intentions must be upon Cleve, for the new
Town which the two Princes make by Collen, despites them much. The Elector of
Ments has lately been here, upon pretense of coming in devotion to Sichem,
and shortly the Electors of Colein and Saxony are to be here severally: all
concurs to a disposition of such a War, and the Landsgrave of Hasse (who is
as yet in the Union) is much solicited and caressed by this party, and I doubt,
will prove a frail and corruptible man. I durst think confidently, that they
will at least proceed so far toward a War, as to try how France will dispose
it self in the business: for it is conceived that the D. of Bovillon brought
to our K. good assurances from the Qu. Regent, that she would pursue all her
husbands purposes in advancing the designs of those Princes who are in
possession of Cleve, and in the Union. If she declare her self to do so, when
they stir, they are like to divert their purposes; but if she stand but
neutrall (as it is likely, considering how Spanish the Court is at this time) I
see not that the Princes of the Union are much likely to retard them. Sir, you
see what unconcerning things I am fain to write of, lest I should write of my
self, who am so little a history or tale, that I should not hold out to make a
Letter long enough to send over a Sea to you; for I should dispatch my self in
this one word that I am

Your affectionate servant and lover J. Done.
Aug. 16. here. 1612.
To the honor able Knight Sir H. G.
SIR,
SInce I received a Letter by your son, whom I have not yet had the honor to
see, I had a Letter Packet from you by Mr Roe: To the former, I writ before:
In this I have no other commandment from you, but to tell you, whether Mr
Villers have received from the K, any additions of honor, or profit. Without
doubt he has yet none. He is here, practicing for the Mask; of which, if I
mis-remember not, I writ as much as you desire to know, in a Letter which seems
not, to have been come to you, when you writ. In the Savoy business, the King
has declared himself by an engagement, to assist him with 100000l a year, if
the War continue. But I believe, he must farm out your Warwickshire
Benevolence for the payment thereof. Upon the strength of this engagement, Sir
Rob. Rich becomes confident in his hopes. If you stood in an equal disposition
for the West, and only forbore, by reason of Mr Martins silence, I wonder; for
I think, I told you, that he was gone; and I saw in Sir Tho. Lucies hand, a
Letter from him to you which was likely to tell you as much. Since I came from
Court, I have stirred very little: Now that the Court comes again to us, I may
have something which you may be content to receive from

Your very affectionate servant J. Done.
18 December.
To my good friend Sr H.G.
SIR,
THE Messenger who brought me your Letter presented me a just excuse, for I
received them so late upon Thursday night, that I should have dispatched before
I could begin; yet I have obeyed you drowsily, and coldly, as the night and my
indisposition commanded: yet perchance those hindrances have done good, for so
your Letters are the less curious, in which, men of much leisure may soon
exceed, when they write of business, they having but a little. You mention two
more letters then I send. The time was not too short for me to have written
them, (for I had an whole night) but it was too short to work a belief in me,
that you could think it fit to go two so diverse ways to one end. I see not,
(for I see not the reason) how those letters could well have concurred with
these, nor how those would well have been drawn from them, in a business
wholly relating to this house. I was not lazy in disobeying you, but (I
thought) only thrifty, and your request of those was not absolute, but
conditioned, if I had leisure. So though that condition hinder them not, since
another does (and you forethought, that one might) I am not stubborn. The good
Countess spoke somewhat of your desire of letters; but I am afraid, she is not
a proper Mediatrix to those persons, but I counsel in the dark. And therefore
return to that, of which I have clear light, that I am always glad, when I have
any way to express my love; for in these commandments you feed my desires, and
you give me means to pay some of my debts to you: the interest of which I pay
in all my prayers for you, which, if it please not God to show here, I hope we
shall find again together in heaven, whither they were sent. I came this
morning to say thus much, and because the Porter which came to Micham summoned
me for this hour to London: from whence I am this minute returning to end a
little course of Physic.

Yours very truly J. Done.
Friday 8 in the morning.
To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Writ to you yesterday taking the boldness to put a letter into the good
Ladies packet for you. This morning I had this new occasion of writing, that
Sir Tho. Roe, who brought this enclosed Letter to me, and left it unsealed,
entreated me to take the first opportunity of sending it. Besides that which is
in that letter (for he read it to me) I came to the knowledge in Yorkhouse that
my L. Chancellor has been moved, and incensed against you; and asking Sir Tho.
Roe, if he were directly or occasionally any cause of that, he tells me thus
much, that Sir W. Lover, and Sir H. Carey, have obtained of my L. to have a
Pursevant, and consequently a Sergeant sent into the Country for you. My L.
grounds this earnestness against you, upon some refusing to appear upon
process which has been taken out against you. And I perceive Sir Ed. Eston,
and both the other, admit consultations, of ways by petition to the King, or
Counsel, or L. Chamberlain, or any other. The great danger, obliquely likely
to fall, is that when it comes to light, how you stand toward M. Matthew, you
may lose the ease which you have by color of that extent, and he may lose the
benefit, of having had so much of his estate concealed. You will therefore at
least pardon my advising you, to place those sums, which by your retiring I
presume you do employ upon payment of debts, in such places as that these
particular friends be not forced to leave being so. I confess, the going about
to pay debts, hastens importunity. I find in my self, that where I was not
asked money before, yet when I offered to pay next Term, they seem loath to
afford me that time, which might justly have been desperate before: but that
which you told me out of the Country, with the assistance which I hope to
find here, (especially if your endeavor may advance it at Dorset house) I hope
will enable me to escape clamor, and an ill conscience, in that behalf. One
thing more I must tell you; but so softly, that I am loath to hear my self: and
so softly, that if that good Lady were in the room, with you and this Letter,
she might not hear. It is, that I am brought to a necessity of printing my
Poems, and addressing them to my L. Chamberlain. This I mean to do forth with;
not for much public view, but at mine own cost, a few Copies. I apprehend
some incongruities in the resolution; and I know what I shall suffer from many
interpretations: but I am at an end, of much considering that; and, if I were
as startling in that kind, as ever I was, yet in this particular, I am under
an unescapable necessity, as I shall let you perceive, when I see you. By this
occasion I am made a Rhapsoder of mine own rags, and that cost me more
diligence, to seek them, then it did to make them. This made me ask to borrow
that old book of you, which it will be too late to see, for that use, when I
see you: for I must do this, as a valediction to the world, before I take
Orders. But this is it, I am to ask you; whether you ever made any such use of
the letter in verse, A nostre Countess chez vous, as that I may not put it in,
amongst the rest to persons of that rank; for I desire very very much, that
something should bear her name in the book, and I would be just to my written
words to my L. Harrington, to write nothing after that. I pray tell me as soon
as you can, if I be at liberty to insert that: for if you have by any occasion
applied any pieces of it, I see not, that it willbe discerned, when it appears
in the wholepiece. Though this be a little matter, I would be sorry not to have
an account of it, within as little after Newyears tide, as you could. I have
something else to say, of M. Villars, but because I hope to see you here
shortly, and because new additions, to the truths or rumors, which concern
him, are likely to be made by occasion of this Masque, I forbear to send you
the edition of this Mart, since I know it will be augmented by the next: of
which, if you prevent it not by coming, you shall have, by letter an account
from

Your very affectionate friend and servant J. Done.
Vigilia St. Tho. 1614.
To the worthy Knight Sir Tho. Lucy.
SIR,
YOur Letter comes to me, at Grace after supper; it is part of the prayer of
that Grace, that God will bless you, and all yours with his best blessings of
both kind. I would write you news; but your love to me, may make you apt to
over-beleeve news for my sake. And truly all things that are upon the stage of
the world now, are full of such uncertanities, as may justly make any man loath
to pass a conjecture upon them; not only because it is hard to see how they
will end, but because it is misintertable and dangerous to conjecture otherwise,
then some men would have the event to be. That which is especially in my
contemplation, which is the issue of my L. of Canterburies business, (for
thereupon depends the consecration of my predecessor, upon which the Deanery
devolves to the King) is no farther proceeded in yet, then that some of the 10
Commissioners have met once; and upon Saturday next there will be a fuller
meeting, and an entrance into the business, upon which, much, very much in
consequence, depends. Of my L. of Donc. we are only assured, that he is in a
good way of convalescence; but of any audience nothing yet. Slacken not your
hold of my L. Treasurer, for I have been told that you are in his care. I send
you a Copy of that Sermon, but it is not my copy, which I thought my L. of
South-hampton would have sent me back. This you must be pleased to let me have
again, for I borrow it: for the other, I will pretermit no time to write it;
though in good faith, I have half forgot it. If in any letter I leave out the
name of the La. Hunt. or La. Burdell, or your daughters, tell them, that I
named them. I take the falsehood upon me; for I intend it very really, and very
humbly, where I am good for any thing in any of their services. Our blessed
Savior continue and enlarge his blessings to you all, Amen.

Your humble servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.
11 October. 1621. Why do you say nothing of, my little book of Cases.



To Sir G.B.
SIR,
IT is one of my blind Meditations to think what a miserable defeat it would
be to all these preparations of braverie, if my infirmity should overtake
others: for, I am at least half blind, my windows are all as full of glasses
of Waters, as any Mountebanks stall. This messenger makes haste, I thank him
for it; therefore I only send you this Letter, which was sent to me about
three days past, and my promise to distribute your other Letters, according to
your addresses, as fast as my Monsieur can do it; for, for any personal
service, you must be content, at this time, to pardon

Your affectionate servant J. Done.
December. 23.
To Sir H. Goodere.
SIR,
AGreeably to my fortune, and thoughts, I was crawld this back way from
Keyston; through my broken casement at Bedford, I saw, for my best dish at
dinner, your Coach: I studied your gests, but when I knew where you were, I
went out of this Town, in a doubt whether I should turn in to Wrest; and you
know the wisdom of the Parliament is, to resolve ever in the Negative:
Therefore it is likeliest I shall not come in there; yet, let me give you in
passing, thus much account of my self: I thought to kiss my L. Spencers hands,
at one house, and have passed three. If you know nothing to the contrary, risen
since I came from London, I am likely to have a room in my L. of Dov. train,
into the Country; if I have, I do not ask, but use the leave of waiting upon
you at home: There and ever elsewhere, our blessed Savior bless you, and all
yours, in which number, I pray, account ever

Your very thankful servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.

To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Cannot obey you, if you go to morrow to Parsons-green, your company, that
place, and my promise are strong inducements, but an Ague flouts them all, of
which I have had two such threatenings, that I provide against it by a little
Physic. This is one fetter; but I have a pair: for I attend Sir Geo. Mores
answer in a little business, of which I can have no account till his return,
so I am fastened here, till after Sunday. As you are sure that I love you
thoroughly, so think this a good expressing of that, that I promise now, that I
will certainly go with you on Monday, in despite of these interruptions, and
serve you with my company to the Bathe; which journie, it is time to hasten.
But I pray think this promise so much worth, that it may deserve your coming
this way on Monday, for I make it with that reservation. God send you Hawks and
fortunes of a high pitch.

Your honest affectionate J. Done.

To Sir T.R.
SIR,
I Have bespoke you a New-years-gift, that is, a good New year, for I have
offered your name with my soul heartily to God in my mornings best Sacrifice:
If for custom you will do a particular office in recompense, deliver this
Letter to your Lady, now, or when the rage of the Mask is past. If you make any
haste into the Country, I pray let me know it. I would kiss your hands before
you go, which I do now, and continue

Your affectionate servant and lover J. Done.
Micham, the last of 1607. as I remember.
To Sir Henry Goodere.
SIR,
I Speak to you before God, I am so much affected with yesterdaies accident,
that I think I profane it in that name. As men which judge Nativities,
consider not single Stars, but the Aspects, the concurrence and posture of
them; so in this, though no particular past arrest me, or divert me, yet all
seems remarkable and enormous. God, which has done this immediately, without
so much as a sickness, will also immediately without supplement of friends,
infuse his Spirit of comfort, where it is needed and deserved. I write this to
you from the Spring Garden, whither I withdrew my self to think of this; and
the intensenesse of my thinking ends in this, that by my help Gods work should
be imperfected, if by any means I resisted the amasement.

Your very true friend J. Done.

To my good friend G. H.
SIR,
THE little business which you left in my hands is now dispatched; if it have
hung longer then you thought, it might serve for just excuse, that these small
things make as many steps to their end, and need as many motions for the
warrant, as much writing of the Clerks, as long expectation of a Seal, as
greater. It comes now to you sealed, and with it as strong and assured seals of
my service and love to you, if it be good enough for you. I owe you a
continual tribute of Letters. But Sir, even in Princes and Parents, and all
States that have in them a natural Sovereignty, there is a sort of
reciprocation, and as descent to do some offices due to them that serve them:
which makes me look for Letters from you, because I have another as valuable a
pawn therefore, as your friendship, which is your promise; lest by the Jailors
fault this Letter stick long, I must tell you, that I writ and sent it 12o
December. 1600.

Your friend and servant and lover J. Done.
12. December. 1600.
To your self.
SIR,
I Send you here a Translation; but it is not only to believe me, it is a
great invention to have understood any piece of this Book, whether the gravity
of the matter, or the Poetical form, give it his inclination, and principium
motus; you are his center, or his sphere, and to you as to his proper place he
addresses himself. Besides that all my things, not only by obligation, but by
custom, know that that is the way they should go. I spoke of this to my L. of
Bedford, thinking then I had had a copy which I made long since, at Sea, but
because I find it not, I have done that again: when you find it not
unseasonable, let her see it; and if you can think it fit, that a thing that
has either wearied, or distasted you, should receive so much favor, put it
amongst her papers: when you have a new stomach to it, I will provide you
quickly a new Copy.

Your very true friend and servant and lover J. Done.
At my Micham Hospital, Aug. 10.
To the gallant Knight Sir Tho, Lucy.
SIR,
BEcause in your last Letter, I have an invitation to come to you, though I
never thought my self so fallen from my interest, which, by your favor, I
prescribe in, in you, and therefore when in the spring I hoped to have strength
enough, to come into those parts, upon another occasion, I always resolved to
put my self into your presence too, yet now I ask you more particularly how
you dispose of your self; for though I have heard, that you purpose a journey
to the Bath, and from thence hither, yet I can hope, that my service at
Lincolns Inn being ended for next Term, I may have intermission enough to
wait upon you at Poleseworth, before the season call you to Bath. I was no
easy apprehender of the fear of your departing from us; neither am I easy in
the hope of seeing you entirely over suddenly. God loves your soul, if he be
loath to let it go inch-meale, and not by swallowings; and he loves it too, if
he build it up again stone after stone; his will is not done except his way,
and his leisure be observed. In my particular, I am sorry, if my ingenuity and
candor in delivering my self in those points, of which you speak to me, have
defaced those impressions which were in you before: if my freedom have
occasioned your captivity, I am miserably sorry. I went unprofitably and
improvidently, to the utmost end of Truth, because I would go as far as I
could to meet Peace; if my going so far in declaring my self, brought you where
you could not stop. But I was as confident in your strength, as in mine own, so
am I still, in him, who strengthens al our infirmities and will, I doubt not,
bring you and me together, in all those particulars, so as we shall not part in
this world, nor the next. Sir, your own soul cannot be more zealous of your
peace, then I am: and God, who loves that zeal in me, will not suffer you to
suspect it. I am surprised with a necessity of writing now, in a minute; for I
sent to Bedford house to inform my self of means to write, and your daughter
sent me word, of a present messenger, and therefore the rest of this, I shall
make up in my prayers to our blessed Savior, for all happinesses to you.

Your poor servant in Chr. Jesus J. Done.
Drury house the 22 of December. 1607.
To Sir H.G.
SIR,
THis is a second Letter: the enclosed was written before. Now we are sure that
Heidelberge is taken, and entered with extreme cruelties. Almost all the
defendors forsook their stations; only Sir Ger. Herbert maintained his nobly,
to the repulsing of the enemy three times, but having ease in the other parts,
800 new fresh men were put upon his quarter, and after he had broke 4 Pikes,
and done very well, he was shot dead in the place. Manheim was soon after
besieged, and is still. Heydelth was lost the 6 of this month. the K. upon
news of this, sent to the Spanish Ambassaour, that the people were like to
resent it, and therefore, if he doubted ought, he should have a Guard: but I do
not see, that he seems to need it, in his own opinion, neither, intruth does
he; the people are flat: or trust in God, and the Kings ways: Sir Hor. Vere
has written to his wife, (as I am told) a Letter in the nature of a will, for
the disposing of his estate and children, as though he did not account to see
her any more, but yet Manheim cannot be lost, but by storming. Your man stays,
and our bell rings me into the Church; there Sir, I shall recommend you to Gods
goodness, with

Your friend J. Done.
24 September.
To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Live so far removed, that even the ill news of your great loss (which is
ever swiftest and loudest) found me not till now, your letter speaks it not
plain enough but I am so accustomed to the worst, that I am sure it is so in
this. I am almost glad that I knew her so little: for I would have no more
additions to sorrow. if I should comfort you, it were an alms acceptable in no
other title, then when poor give to poor; for I am more needy of it then you.
And I know you well provided of Christian, and learned, and brave defenses
against all humane accidents. I will make my best haste after your messenger:
and if my self and the place had not been ill provided of horses, I had been
the messenger, for you have taught me by granting more to deny no request.

Your honest unprofitable friend J. Done.
Pyesford 3 a clock just as yours came.
To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Cannot yet serve you with those books of which your Letter spoke. In
recompense I will tell you a story, which if I had had leisure to have told it
you when it was fresh, which was upon Thursday last, might have had some grace
for the rareness, and would have tried your love to me, how far you would
adventure to believe an improbable thing for my sake who relates it. That day
in the morning, there was some end made, by the E. of Salisbury and others, who
were Arbitrators in some differences between Herford and Mountegle, Herford was
ill satisfied in it, and declared himself so far as to say, he expected
better usage in respect not only of his cause but of his expense and service in
his Ambastage: to which Salisbury replied, that considered how things stood
between his Majesty and Herford house at the Kings entrance, the King had done
him especial favor in that employment of honor and confidence, by declaring
in so public and great an act and testimony, that he had no ill affections
toward him. Herford answered, that he was then and ever an honest man to the
King: and Salisbury said, he denied not that, but yet solemnly repeated his
first words again. So that Herford seemed not to make answer, but pursuing his
own word, said, that whosoever denied him to have been an honest man to the
King, lied. Salisbury asked him if he directed that upon him, Herford said,
upon any who denied this. The earnestnes of both was such, as Salisbury
accepted it to himself, and made protestation before the LL. present, that he
would do nothing else, till he had honorably put off that lie. Within an hour
after, Salisbury sent him a direct challenge, by his servant Mr Knightley;
Herford required only an hours leisure of consideration (it is said, it was
only to inform himself of the especial danger, in dealing so with a
Counselor) but he returned his acceptance: And all circumstances were so
clearly handled between them, that St James was agreed for the place, and they
were both come from their several lodgings, and upon the way to have met, when
they were interrupted by such as from the King were sent to have care of it. So
these two have escaped this great danger; but (by my troth) I fear earnestly
that Mistress Bolstrod will not escape escape that sickness in which she
labors at this time. I sent this morning to ask of her passage of this night;
and the return is, that she is as I left her yesternight, and then by the
strength of her understanding, and voice, (proportionally to her fashion, which
was ever remiss) by the eavennesse and life of her pulse, and by her temper, I
could allow her long life, and impute all her sickness to her mind. But the
History of her sickness, makes me justly fear, that she will scarce last so
long, as that you when you receive this letter, may do her any good office, in
praying for her; for she has not for many days received so much as a preserved
Barbery, but it returns, and all accompanied with a Fever, the mother, and an
extreme ill spleen. Whilst I write this Tuesday morning, from Bartlet house
one brings me a packet to your Master: he is gone; and that Lady and all the
company is from town. I thought I might be pardoned, if I thought my self your
man for that service to open it, which I did, and for the Letters I will
deliver them. What else you bid Foster do in his Letter, bid him do it there,
for (so God help me) I know not what it is. I must end now, else the carrier
will be gone. God be with you.

Yours entirely.
You know me without a name, and I know not how this Letter goes.



To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Had destined all this Tuesday, for the Court, because it is both a Sermon
day, and the first day of the Kings being here. Before I was to go forth, I had
made up this enclosed packet for you, and then came this messenger with your
packet, of which if you can remember the number, you cannot expect any account
thereof from me, who have not half an hour left me before I go forth, and your
messenger speaks of a necessity of returning homward before my returning home.
If upon the delivery of them, or any other occasion, there intervene new
subject of writing, I shall relieve my self upon Tuesday, if Tamworth carrier
be in town. To the particulars of the Letter to my self, I will give this
paper, and line. Of my Lady Bedford, I must say so much as must importune you
to burn the Letter; for I would say nothing of her upon record, that should not
testify my thankfulness for all her graces. But upon this motion, which I
made to her by letter, and by Sr Tho. Roes assistance, if any scruple should
arise in her, she was somewhat more startling, then I looked for from her: she
had more suspicion of my calling, a better memory of my past life, then I had
thought her nobility could have admitted: of all which, though I humbly thank
God, I can make good use, as one that needs as many remembrances in that kind,
as not only friends but enemies can present, yet I am afraid, they proceed in
her rather from some ill impression taken from D. Burges, then that they grow
in her self. But whosoever be the conduit, the water is the holy Ghosts, and in
that acceptance I take it. For her other way of expressing her favor to me, I
must say, it is not with that cheerfulness, as heretofore she has delivered
her self toward me. I am almost sorry, that an Elegy should have been able to
move her to so much compassion heretofore, as to offer to pay my debts; and my
greater wants now, and for so good a purpose, as to come disingaged into that
profession, being plainly laid open to her, should work no farther but that she
sent me 30 l. which in good faith she excused with that, which is in both parts
true, that her present debts were burdensome, and that I could not doubt of her
inclination, upon all future emergent occasions, to assist me. I confess to
you, her former fashion toward me, had given a better confidence; and this
diminution in her makes me see, that I must use more friends, then I thought I
should have needed. I would you could burn this letter, before you read it, at
least do when you have read it. For, I am afraid out of a Contemplation of mine
own unworthiness, and fortune, that the example of this Lady, should work upon
the Lady where you are: for though goodness be originally in her, and she do
good, for the deeds sake, yet, perchance, she may think it a little wisdom, to
make such measure of me, as they who know no better, do. Of any new treaty of a
match with Spain, I hear nothing. The wars in the Lowcountries, to judge by
their present state, are very likely to go forward. No word of a Parliament,
and I my self have heard words of the K. as directly against any such purpose,
as any can sound. I never heard word, till in your letter, of any stirs in
Scotland, for that of the French K. which you ask, it has this good ground,
That in the Assembly there a proposition has been made, and well entertained,
that the K. should be declared, to have full Jurisdiction in France; and no
other person to have any. It has much of the model and frame of our Oath of
Allegiance, but with some modification. It is true, it goes farther, then that
State has drove in any public declarations, but not farther then their
Schools have drove often and constantly: the easiness that it has found in
passing thus far without opposition, puts (perchance unnecessarily) in me a
doubt, that they are sure to choke it, at the Royal assent, and therefore
oppose it not, by the way, to sweeten the conveyance of their other purposes.
Sir, if I stay longer I shall lose the Text, at Court, therefore I kiss your
hand, and rest

Your very true servant J. Done.
We hear (but without second as yet) that Sir Rich. Philips brother in France,
has taken the habit of a Capuchin.



To Sir Thomas Lucy.
SIR,
THis first of April I received yours of 21 of Martii, which being two days
after the ordinary Smithfield day, I could do no more, but seal this letter to
be sent to you next Tuesday, because I foresee that I shall not then be in
town. Whatsoever I should write now, of any passages of these days, would lose
the verdure before the letter came to you, only give me leave to tell you that
I need none of those excuses, which you have made to your self in my behalf,
for my not writing. For your son in law came to me, so near the time of his
going away, as it had been impossible to have recovered him with a letter at so
far a distance, as he was lodged. And my L. Hunt. messenger received that
answer, which, I hope, before this time, you know to be true, that I had sent
the day before, by the infallible carrier of Smithfield. The Emperors death
may somewhat shorten our way; for I disoern now no reason of going to Vienna;
but I believe it will exte^d our business; so that I promise my self no speedier
return by that. If I write no letters into England out of these parts; I cannot
be without your pardon, if I write not to you, but if I write to any and leave
you out, lay all the faults which you have ever pardonedin me, to my charge
again. I foresee some reasons, which may make me forbear; but no flacknesse of
mine own, shall. Sir, if I have no more the commodity of writing to you here in
England, (as, we may be gone before next Tuesday) I tell you, in this departing
from you, with the same truth and earnestness as I would be believed to speak
in my last departing, and transmigration from the whole world, that I leave not
behind me a heart, better affected to you, nor more devoted to your service,
then I carry with me. Almighty God bless you, with such a reparation in your
health, such an establishment in your estate, such a comfort in your children,
such a peace in your conscience, and such a true cheerfulness in your heart,
as may be strong seals to you, of his eternal gracious purpose upon you. This
morning I spend in surveying and emptying my Cabinet of Letters; and at the top
of all I light upon this Letter lately received, which I was loath to bury. I
chose to send it you, to mine own condemnation; because a man so busy as he
is, descending to this expressing of himself in verse, I am inexcusable toward
you, for disobeying a commandment of yours, of that kind; but I rely upon
the general, that I am sure you are sure, that I never refuse any thing for
laziness, nor morosity, and therefore make some other excuse for me. You have
beenso long used to my hand that I stand not to excuse the hasty raggedness of
this Letter. The very illness of the writing, is a good argument that I forced
a time, in the fullness of business, to kiss your hand, and to present my
thanks as for all your favors, and benefits, so principally for keeping me
alive in the memory of the noblest Countess, whose commandment, if it had
been her Laps pleasure to have any thing said or done in her service, at
Heydelberg, I should have been glad to have received. Sir, God bless you, and
spiritu principali confirmet te; and

Your very true and affectionate servant in Chr. fes. J. Done.
4. Apr. 1619.
To the honorable Knight Sr Henry Goodere.
SIR,
AS you are a great part of my business, when I come to London, so are you
when I send. More then the office of a visitation brings this Letter to you
now; for I remember that about this time you purposed a journey to fetch, or
meet the Lad. Huntington. If you justly doubt any long absence, I pray send to
my lodging my written Books: and if you may stay very long, I pray send that
Letter in which I sent you certain heads which I purposed to enlarge, for I
have them not in any other paper: and I may find time in your absence to do
it, because I know no stronger argument to move you to love me, but because you
have done so, do so still, to make my reason better, and I shall at last
prescribe in you

Yours, J. Done.
Micham Wednesday.
To Sir H. G. at Polesworth.
SIR,
THis 25 I have your letter of 21, which I tell you so punctually, because by
it, nor by any other, I do not discern that you received my packet of Books;
not that I looked for so quick a return of the Sermon, nor of my Cases of
conscience, but that I forget so absolutely what I write, and am so sure that I
write confidently to you, that it is some pain to remain in any jealousy that
any Letter is miscarried. That which I writ to you of my L. Treasur.
disposition to you, I had from Mr Har; and I understood it to be his desire to
convey it through me. The last account which we have of my L. Douc. is, by
Letters of the 2o of this; by which also we saw, that the first Letters of his
convalescence, were but prophetical; for he was let blood a second time, and
is not strong enough yet to receive audience. Though I be not Dean of Paul's
yet, my L. of Warwick has gone so low, as to command of me the office of being
Master of my game, in our wood about him in Essex. I pray be you content to be
my officer too, the Steward of my services to all to whom you know them to be
due in your walk, and continue your own assurance that I am

Your affectionate servant in Chr. fes. J. Done.

To my worthy friend F. H.
SIR,
I Can scarce do any more this week then send you word why I writ not last. I
had then seposed a few days for my preparation to the Communion of our B.
Saviors body; and in that solitariness and arraignment of my self, digested
some meditations of mine, and apparelled them (as I use) in the form of a
Sermon: for since I have not yet utterly delivered my self from this
intemperance of scribbling (though I thank God my accesses are less and less
vehement) I make account that to spend all my little stock of knowledge upon
matter of delight, were the same error, as to spend a fortune upon Masks and
Banque^ing houses: I chose rather to build in this poor fashion, some Spittles,
and Hospitals, where the poor and impotent sinner may find some relief, or at
least understanding of his infirmity. And if they be too weak to serve
posterity, yet for the present by contemplation of them, etc.

To Sir H. G.
SIR,
I Have the honor of your Letter, which, I am almost sorry to have received:
some few days before the receipt thereof D. Turner, who accompanied my L, Carow
to Sion to dinner, showed me a Letter from you, from which I conceived good
hopes that your businesses being devolved into the hands of the Treasurer, had
been in much more forwardness, then by your Letter to me they appear to be. I
beseech God establish them, and hasten them, and with them, or without them, as
he sees most conducible to his purpose upon you, continue in you a relying upon
him, and a satisfaction in his ways. I know not whether any Letter from your
son, or any other report, may have given you any mention of me; he writ to me
from the Compter, that he was under a trifling arrest, and that 3l and some
little more would discharge him. I sent my man with that money, but bid him see
it employed for his discharge: he found more actions, and returned. Next day he
writ to me that 8l would discharge him, and that Mr Seldom would lay down half.
But Mr Seldom and I speaking together, thought it the fittest way, to respite
all, till, in a few days, by his writing to you, we might be directed therein;
and in the mean time, took order with the Keeper to accommodate him, and I bade
my man Martin, as from himself, to serve his present want with somethings.
Since we told him, that we would attend a return of his Letter to you, I heard
no more of him, but I hear he is out. Whosoever serves you with relations from
this Town, I am sure prevents me of all I can say. The Palatinate is absolutely
lost; for before this Letter come to you, we make account that Heydelberg and
Frankindale is lost, and Manheme distressed. Mansfield came to Breda, and
Gonzales, to Brussels, with great losses on both sides, but equal. The P. of
Orange is but now come to Breda, and with him, all that he is able to make,
even out of the Garrisons of their Towns. The ways of victual to Spinolaes
Army, are almost all precluded by him, and he likely to put upon the raising of
Spinola, between whom and the Town, there are hotter disputes, then ever our
times saw. The Secretary of the States here showed me a Letter yesternight,
that the Town spends 6000 pound of powder a day, and has spent since the siege
250m pounds. Argits Regiment and my L. Vaux, are so diminished by commings a
way, as that both (I think) make not now in Muster above 600. Mr Gage is
returning to Rome, but of his Negotiation I dare say nothing by a Letter of
adventure. The direction which his Maty gave for Preachers, had scandalized
many; therefore he descended to pursue them with certain reasons of his
proceedings therein; and I had commandment to publish them in a Sermon at the
Cross, to as great a Congregation as ever I saw together, where they received
comfortable assurance of his Maties constancy in Religion, and of his desire
that all men should be bred in the knowledge of such things, as might preserve
them from the superstition of Rome. I presume it is but a little while before
we shall see you here, but that little time is likely to produce many things
greatly considerable. Present, I pray, my thankful services to your good
daughters. I can give them no better a room in my prayers, and wishes, then my
poor Constance has, and they have that; so have you Sir, with

Your very true friend and servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.

To the worthiest Knight Sir Henry Goodere.
SIR,
OUr blessed Savior, who abounds in power and goodness toward us all, bless
you, and your family, with blessings proportioned to his ends in you all, and
bless you with the testimony of a rectified conscience, of having discharged
all the offices of a father, toward your discreet and worthy daughters, and
bless them with a satisfaction, and quiescence, and more, with a complacency
and a joy, in good ends, and ways toward them, Amen. Your man brought me your
Letter of the 8 of December this 21 of the same, to Chelsey, and gives me the
largeness, till friday to send a letter to Paul's house. There can scarce be
any piece of that, or of those things whereof you require light from me, that
is not come to your knowledge, by some clearer way, between the time of your
Letter, and this. Besides the report of my death, has thus much of truth in
it, that though I be not dead, yet I am buried within a few weeks after I
immured my self in this house, the infection struck into the town, into so many
houses, as that it became ill manners, to make any visits. Therefore I never
went to Knoll, nor Hanworth, nor Kenton, nor to the Court, since the Court came
into these quarters, nor am yet come to London; therefore I am little able to
give you account of high stages. Perchance you look not so low, as our ordinary
Gazetta, and that tells us, (with a second assurance) that the D. of Brunswick,
Christian, is dead of an Ague. My L. of Dorset even upon the day, when he
should have been installed with his six fellows, fell sick at London; and at
Court (which does not exalt all men) his Fever was exalted to the plague; but
he is in good convalescence. Of the Navy I hear of no great lim come back yet,
but my L. of Essex; something of the disappointing of the design they had, is
imputed to some difference, in point of command, between him and the Mr. of the
Ordinance, my L. of Valencia, but as yet, there is little manifested. Already
is issued a Proclamation, that there be no disbanding of the Soldiers, upon
their landing, in what part soever, and that his Majesty has present
employment for them. What the main business at Haghe has been, I know nothing;
but I hear, that their offer of pawning of Jewels to a very very great value,
to the States or private men, has found no acceptance, at least found no
money. Occasionally I heard from the Haghe, that the Queen having taken into
her care, the promoving and advancing of some particular men's businesses, by
way of recommendations to the Duke, expressed her self very royally, in your
behalf. This I tell you not, as though you knew it not, but because I had the
fortune to see it in a Letter of the simple Gentlewoman, from thence; by which
name, if you know her not, I have omitted heretofore to tell you a good tale.
They continue at Court, in the resolution of the Queen pastoral; when Q. Anne
loved gamboils, you loved the Court; perchance you may doubt whether you be a
thorough Courtier, if you come not up to see this, The Queen a Shepperdesse:
but I speak not this, by way of counsel, to draw you up, it is not only Non
Dominus, sed ego, but nec Deus nec ego, to call you hither, but upon fair
appearances of useful commings. Mr George Herbert is here at the receipt of
your letter, and with his service to you, tells you that all of Uvedall house
are well. I reserve not the mention of my Lady Huntington to the end of my
Letter, as grains to make the gold weight, but as tincture to make the better
gold, when you find room to intrude so poor and impertinent a name, as mine
is, in her presence. I beseech you, let her Lad: know, that she has sowed her
favors toward me, in such a ground, that if I be grown better (as I hope I
am) her favors are grown with me, and though they were great when she
conferred them, yet, (if I mend every day) they increase in me every day, and
therefore every day multiply my thankfulness toward her Ladyship: say what
you will (if you like not this expression) that may make her Ladyship know,
that I shall never let fall the memory, nor the just valuation of her noble
favors to me, nor leave them unrequited in my Exchequer, which is, the
blessings of God upon my prayers. If I should write another sheet, I should be
able to serve your curiosity no more of Dukes nor LL. nor Courts, and this half
line serves to tell you, that I am truly

Your poor friend and humble servant in Chr. fes. J. Done.

To my honored friend G. G. Esquire.
SIR,
NEither your Letters, nor silence, needs excuse; your friendship is to me an
abundant possession, though you remember me but twice in a year: He that could
have two harvests in that time, might justly value his land at a high rate;
but, Sir, as we do not only then thank our land, when we gather the fruit,
but acknowledge that all the year she does many motherly offices in preparing
it: so is not friendship then only to be esteemed, when she is delivered of a
Letter, or any other real office, but in her continual propensnesse and
inclination to do it. This has made me casie in pardoning my long silences,
and in promising my self your forgiveness for not answering your Letter
sooner. For my purpose of proceeding in the profession of the law, so far as
to a title you may be pleased to correct that imagination, wheresoever you
find it. I ever thought the study of it my best entertainment, and pastime,
but I have no ambition, nor design upon the style. Of my Anniversaries, the
fault that I acknowledge in my self, is to have descended to print any thing in
verse, which though it have excuse even in our times, by men who profess, and
practice much gravitie; yet I confess I wonder how I declined to it, and do
not pardon my self: But for the other part of the imputation of having said too
much, my defense is, that my purpose was to say as well as I could: for since I
never saw the Gentlewoman, I cannot be understood to have bound my self to have
spoken just truths, but I would not be thought to have gone about to praise
her, or any other in rhyme; except I took such a person, as might be capable of
all that I could say. If any of those Ladies think that Mistress Drewry was not
so, let that Lady make her self fit for all those praises in the book, and they
shall be hers. Sir, this messenger makes so much haste that I cry you mercy for
spending any time of this letter in other employment then thanking you for
yours. I hope before Christmas to see England, and kiss your hand, which shall
ever, (if it disdain not that office) hold all the keys of the liberty and
affection, and all the faculties of

Your most affectionate servant, J. D.
Paris the 14 of April, here, 1612.
To my honored friend G. G. Esquire.
SIR,
I Should not only send you an account by my servant, but bring you an account
often my self, (for our Letters are our selves) and in them absent friends
meet) how I do, but that two things make me forbear that writing: first,
because it is not for my gravity, to write of feathers, and strawes, and in
good faith, I am no more, considered in my body, or fortune. And then because
whenever I tell you how I do, by a Letter, before that Letter comes to you,
I shall be otherwise, then when it left me. At this time, I humbly thank God, I
am only not worse; for, I should as soon look for Roses at this time of the
year, as look for increase of strength. And if I be no worse all spring, then
now, I am much better, for, I make account that those Church services, which I
would be very loath to decline, will spend somewhat; and, if I can gather so
much as will bear my charges, recover so much strength at London, as I shall
spend at London, I shall not be loath to be left in that state wherein I am now,
after that is done; But I do but discourse, I do not wish; life, or health, or
strength, (I thank God) enter not into my prayers for my self: for others they
do; and amongst others, for your sick servant, for such a servant taken so
young, and healed so long, is half a child to a master, and so truly I have
observed that you have bred him, with the care of a father. Our blessed Savior
look graciously upon him, and glorify himself in him, by his way of
restitution to health; And by his way of peace of conscience in

Your very true friend and servant in Chr. Jos. J. Done.

SIR,
THis advantage you, and my other friends have, by my frequent Fevers, that I
am so much the oftener at the gates of heaven, and this advantage by the
solitude and close imprisonment that they reduce me to after, that I am thereby
the oftener at my prayers; in which, I shall never leave out your happiness;
and, I doubt not, but amongst his many other blessings, God will add to you
some one for my prayers. A man would almost be content to dye, (if there were
no other benefit in death) to hear of so much sorrow, and so much good
testimony from good men, as I, (God be blessed for it) did upon the report of
my death. Yet, I perceive it went not through all; for, one writ unto me, that
some (and he said of my friends) conceived, that I was not so ill, as I
pretended, but withdrew my self, to save charges, and to live at ease,
discharged of preaching. It is an unfriendly, and God knows, an ill grounded
interpretation: for in these times of necessity, and multitudes of poor there
is no possibility of saving to him that has any tenderness in him; and for
affecting my ease, I have been always more sorry, when I could not preach, then
any could be, that they could not hear me. It has been my desire, (and God may
be pleased to grant it me) that I might die in the Pulpit; if not that, yet
that I might take my death in the Pulpit, that is, die the sooner by occasion
of my former labors. I thank you, for keeping our George in in your memory, I
hope God reserves it for so good a friend as you are, to send me the first good
news of him. For the Diamond Lady, you may safely deliver Roper, whatsoever
belongs to me, and he will give you a discharge for the money. For my L. Percy,
we shall speak of it, when we meet at London; which, as I do not much hope
before Christmas, so I do not much fear at beginning of Term; for I have
entreated one of my fellows to preach to my Lord Mayor, at Paul's upon
Christmas day, and reserved Candlemas day to my self for that service, about
which time also, will fall my Lent Sermon, except my Lord Chamberlain believe
me to be dead, and leave me out; for as long as I live, and am not speechless,
I would not decline that service. I have better leisure to write, then you to
read, yet I will not oppress you with too much letter, God bless you, and
your son, as

Your poor friend and humble servant in Christ Jesus J. Done.

To the Lady G.
MADAM,
I Am not come out of England, if I remain in the Noblest part of it, your
mind; yet I confess, it is too much diminution to call your mind, any part
of England, or of this world, since every part even of your body, deserves
titles of higher dignity. No Prince would be loath to die, that were assured of
so fair a tomb to preserve his memory: but I have a greater vantage then so;
for since there is a Religion in friendship, and a death in absence, to make up
an entire frame there must be a heaven too: and there can be no heaven so
proportional to that Religion, and that death, as your favor. And I am
gladder that it is a heaven, then that it were a Court, or any other high place
of this world, because I am likelier to have a room there then here; and better
cheap. Madam my best treasure, is time; and my best employment of that, is to
study good wishes for you, in which I am by continual meditation so learned,
that your own good Angel, when it would do you most good, might be content to
come and take instructions from

Your humble and affectionate servant J. Done.

To your self.
SIR,
THe first of this month I received a Letter from you, no Letter comes so
late, but that it brings fresh news hither. Though I presume, Mr Pore, and
since, Sir Rob. Rich came after the writing of that Letter, yet it was good
news to me, that you thought me worthy of so good a testimony. And you were
subtle in the disguise: for you shut up your Letter, thus, Land. 22. in our
style, but I am not so good a Cabalist, as to find in what month it was
written. But, Sir, in the offices of so spiritual a thing as friendship, so
momentary a thing as time, must have no consideration. I keep it therefore to
read every day, as newly written: to which vexation it must be subject, till
you relieve it with an other. If I ought you not a great many thanks for every
particular part of it, I should yet thank you for the length; and love it, as
my mistresses face, every line and feature, but best all together. All that I
can do toward retribution, is, (as other bankrupts do in prison) to make means
by Commissioners, that a great debt may be accepted by small sums weekly. And
in that proportion I have paid my tribute to you, almost ever since I came, and
shall still do so. You know that they say, those are the strongest, and the
firmest, and most precious things, which are composed of the most, and smallest
parts. I will flatter my self therefore, that the number of my Letters may at
last make a strong argument of my desire to serve you, but because I remember,
out of this Philosophy, that they should be little, as well as many, lest this
Letter should not get into the building, it shall be no bigger; thus much
addition will not much disfigure it, that it swear to you that I am

Your affectionate servant J. Done.
Sir, I cry you mercy for sealing your sisters letter, but I deliver you up my
authority, and I remember you, that you have hers to open it again. You will
the easilier forgive me, that I write no news, when you observe by this
transgression, that I live in a place which has quenched in me even the
remembrance of good manners, By naming her, I have made my postscript the
worthyest place of my letter: and therefore I choose that place to present my
service to all the company at our lodging; in which house, if I cannot get room
for a pallat, at my return, my comfort is, that I can ever hope to be so near
them as the Spittle in the Savoy, where they receive Travelers.



To the Honorable Knight, Sir ROBERT KARRE.
Sir,
THough I have left my bed, I have not left my bedside; I sit there still, and
as a Prisoner discharged, sits at the Prison door, to beg Fees, so sit I here,
to gather crummes. I have used this leisure, to put the meditations had in my
sickness, into some such order, as may minister some holy delight. They arise
to so many sheets (perchance 20.) as that without staying for that furniture
of an Epistle, That my Friends importuned me to Print them, I importune my
Friends to receive them Printed. That, being in hand, through this long Trunk,
that reaches from Saint Paul's, to Saint James, I whisper into your ear this
question, whether there be any uncomlinesse, or unseasonablenesse, in
presenting matter of Devotion, or Mortification, to that Prince, whom I pray
God nothing may ever Mortify, but Holiness. If you allow my purposes in
general, I pray cast your eye upon the Title and the Epistle, and rectify me
in them: I submit substance, and circumstance to you, and the poor Author of
both,

Your very humble and very thankful Servant in Christ Jesus J. Done.

To your self.
SIR,
AGE becomes nothing better then Friendship; therefore your Letters, which are
ever good effects of friendship, delight to be old before I receive them: for
it is but a fortnight since those Letters which you sent by Captain Peter found
me at Spa; presently upon the receipt, I adventured by your leave to bestow the
first minutes upon this Letter to your fair Noble Sister; And because I found
no voice at Spa of any Messenger, I respited my Writing to you, till I came
thus much nearer. Upon the way hither, another Letter from you overtooke me,
which by my L. Chandos love to me for your sake, was sent after me to
Mastricht: He came to Spa within two hours after I went away; which I tell you
to let you see, that my Fortune has still that spiteful constancy, to bring
me near my desires, and intercept me. If I should write to you any news from
this place, I should forestall mine own Market, by telling you beforehand that
which must make me acceptable to you at my coming. I shall sneake into London,
about the end of August. In my remotest distances I did not more need your
Letters then I shall then. Therefore if you shall not be then in London, I
beseech you to think me at Constantinople, and write one large Letter to be
left at my Lady Bartlets my lodging; for I shall come in extreme darkness
and ignorance, except you give me light. If Sir John Brook be within your
reach, present my humble service and thankfulness to him; if he be not, I am
glad, that to my Conscience, which is a thousand witnesses, I have added you
for one more, that I came as near as I could to do it. I shall run so fast
from this place, through Antwerpe, and some parts of Holland, that all that
love which you could perchance be content to express by Letters if I lay
still, may be more thriftily bestowed upon that one Letter, which is by your
favor, to meet me, and to welcome to London

Your unworthy, but very true Friend, J. Done.

SIR,
IT is one ill Affection of a desperate debtor, that he dares not come to an
account, nor take knowledge how much he owes; this makes me that I dare not
tell you how many letters I have received from you since I came to this Town;
I had three the first by the Cook, who brought none but yours, nor ever came
to me, to let me know what became of the rest: the two other of the 7. and 8.
of March, came in a letter which Sir H. Wotton writ to me from Amyens; there is
not a size of paper in the Palace, large enough to tell you how much I esteem
my self honored in your remembrances; nor strong enough to wrap up a heart so
full of good affections toward you, as mine is. When any thing passes between
Sir Thomas Roe and you, tell him I am not the less his Servant, for not saying
so by often letters: for by my troth, I am that so much as he could desire I
should be, when he began to love me. Sir Thomas Lucies business, and perchance
sadness forbid me writing now. I have written to him (whilst I lived in
darkness, whether my Letters came to you or no) by another way; and if my
poor Letters were any degree of service, I should do it often, and rather be
mine own Post, then leave any thing undone, to which he would give such an
interpretation, as that it were an Argument of my Devotion to him. For my
purpose of proceeding in the profession of the Law, so far as to a Title, you
may be pleased to correct that imagination where you find it. I ever thought
the study of it my best entertainment and pastime, but I have no ambition, nor
design upon the Style. Of my Anniversaries the fault which I acknowledge in my
self, is to have descended to print any thing in Verse, which though it have
excuse, even in our times, by example of men, which one would think should as
little have done it, as I; yet I confess I wonder how I declined to it, and
do not pardon my self. But for the other part of the imputation, of having
said so much, my defense is, that my purpose was to say as well as I could: for
since I never saw the Gentlewoman, I cannot be understood to have bound my
self to have spoken just Truth: but I would not be thought to have gone about
to praise any body in rhyme, except I took such a Person, as might be capable
of all that I could say. If any of those Ladies think that Mistress Drury was
not so, let that Lady make her self fit for all those praises in the Book,
and it shall be hers. Nothing is farther from color or ground of Truth, then
that which you write of Sir Robert Druries going to Mass. No man of our Nation
has been more forward to apply himself to the Church of the Religion where he
has come, nor to relieve their wants, where that Demonstration has been
needful. I know not yet whether Sir John Brooks purpose of being very shortly
here, be not a just reason to make me forbear writing to him. I am sure that I
would fainest do that in writing or abstaining which should be most acceptable
to him. It were in vain to put into this letter any relation of the
Magnificence which have been here at publication of these marriages; for at
this time there come into England so many Frenchmen, as I am sure you shall
hear all at least. If they speak not of above eight hundred horse well
caparosond, you may believe it: and you may believe, that no Court in
Christendom had been able to have appeared so brave in that kind. But if
they tell you of any other stuff, then Copper, or any other exercise of arms
then running at the Quintain, and the Ring, you may be bold to say Pardone moy.
Sir, this messenger makes so much haste that I cry you mercy for spending any
time of this Letter, in other employment, then thanking you for yours, and
promising you more before my remove from hence. I pray venture no Letter to me
by any other way then M. John Bruer at the Queens Arms a Mercer in Cheapside,
who is always like to know where we are; And make me by loving me still, worthy
to be

Your friend and servant J. Done.

To my Honored friend Mr George Gerrard.
SIR,
I Cannot choose but make it a presage that I shall have no good fortune in
England, that I mist the honor of enjoying that company, which you brought to
town. But I beseech you let my ill luck determine in that ominousnesse: for if
my not coming should be by her or you interpreted for a negligence or
coldness in me, I were already in actual and present affliction. For that
Ecclesiastical Lady of whom you write, since I presume it is a work of
darkness that you go about, we will defer it for winter. Perchance the cold
weather, may be as good physique to you, as she, for quenching you. I have
changed my purpose of going to Windsor, and will go directly into the Wight:
which I tell you not as a concerning thing, but in obedience to your
commandment, as one poor testimony that I am

Your affectionate servant J. Done.

To my very worthy friend Mr George Gerrard.
SIR,
THis is the fourth of this month, and I receive your Packet so late, that I
have scarce waking time enough to tell you so, or to write any thing but
dreams. I have both your Letters, mother and daughter, and am gladder of them,
then if I had the mother and daughter here in our neighborhood; you know I
mean Sir H. Gooderes parties. Sir, you do me double honor when my name passes
through you to that Noble Lady in whose presence you are. It is a better end
and a better way to that then I am worth. I can give you nothing in recompense
of that favor, but good counsel: which is to speak sparingly of any ability
in me, lest you in danger your own reputation, by overvaluing me. If I shall at
any time take courage by your Letter, to express my meditations of that Lady
in writing, I shall scarce think less time to be due to that employment, then
to be all my life in making those verses, and so take them with me and sing
them amongst her fellow Angels in Heaven. I should be loath that in any thing
of mine, composed of her, she should not appear much better then some of those
of whom I have written. And yet I cannot hope for better expressings then I
have given of them. So you see how much I should wrong her, by making her but
equal to others. I would I could be believed, when I say that all that is
written of them, is but prophecy of her. I must use your favor in getting her
pardon, for having brought her into so narrow, and low-rooft a room as my
consideration, or for adventuring to give any estimation of her, and when I see
how much she can pardon, I shall the better discern how far farther I may dare
to offend in that kind. My noble neighbor is well, and makes me the steward
of his service to you. Before this Letter reaches you, I presume you will be
gathering toward these parts, and then all news will meet you so fast, as
that out of your abundance you will impart some to

Your affectionate friend to serve you J. Done.

To your self.
SIR,
ALl your other Letters, which came to me by more hazardous ways, had
therefore much merit in them; but for your Letter by M. Pory, it was but a
little degree of favor, because the messenger was so obvious, and so certain,
that you could not choose but write by him. But since he brought me as much
Letter as all the rest, I must accept that, as well as the rest. By this time,
M. Garret, when you know in your conscience that you have sent no Letter, you
begin to look upon the superscription, and doubt that you have broken up some
other bodies Letter: but whose so ever it were it must speak the same language,
for I have heard from no body. Sir, if there be a Proclamation in England
against writing to me, yet since it is thereby become a matter of State, you
might have told M. Pory so. And you might have told him, what became of Sir
Tho. Lucies Letter, in my first packet, (for any Letter to him makes any paper
a packet, and any piece of single money a Medall) and what became of my Lady
Kingsmels in my second, and of hers in my third, whom I will not name to you in
hope that it is perished, and you lost the honor of giving it. Sir, mine own
desire of being your servant, has sealed me a Patent of that place during my
life, and therefore it shall not be in the power of your for bidding, (to which
your stiff silence amounts) to make me leave being

Your very affectionate servant J. Done.

To my Honored friend M. George Garrat.
SIR,
I Would I were so good an Alchimist to persuade you that all the virtue of the
best affections, that one could express in a sheet, were in this ragge of
paper. It becomes my fortune to deal thus in single money; and I may hit
better with this hail-shot of little Letters (because they may come thick) then
with great bullets; and trouble my friends less. I confess it were not long
enough if it came to present my thanks for all the favors you have done me;
but since it comes to beg more, perchance it may be long enough, because I
know not how short you will be with an absent friend. If you will but write
that you give me leave to keep that name still, it shall be the gold of your
Letter: and for allay, put in as much news as you will. We are in a place
where scarce any money appears, but base: as, I confess, all matters of
Letters is in respect of the testimonies of friendship; but obey the corruption
of this place, and fill your Letters with worse stuff then your own. Present
my service to all those Gentlemen whom I had the honor to serve at our
lodging, I cannot fly an higher pitch, then to say, that I am so much their
servant as you can say I am. At the Queens arms in Cheapside, which is a
Mercers, you may hear of one M. John Brewer, who will convay any Letter
directed to me at Sir Rob. Druries at Amiens, though he know not me: and I
should be glad to hear that this first that I sent into England had the fortune
to find you.

Yours J. Done.

To your fair sister.
MADAM,
THe dignity, and the good fortune due to your Letter, has preserved a packet
so well, that through France and Germany it is at last come to me at Spa. This
good experience makes me in despite of contrary appearances, hope that I shall
find some messenger for this, before I remove, though it be but two days.
For, even Miracles are but little and slight things, when any thing which
either concerns your worthiness is in consideration or my valuation of it. If
I fail in this hope of a messenger, I shall not grudge to do my self this
service of bringing it into England, that you may hear me say there, that I
have thus much profited by the honor of your conversation, and Contemplation,
that I am, as your virtues are, every where equal; and that, that which I
shall say then at London, I thought and subscribed at Spa, which is, that I
will never be any thing else, then

Your very humble and affectionate servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Henry Goodere.
SIR,
BEcause to remain in this sort guilty in your Lordships opinion does not only
defeat all my future indevours, but lay a heavyer burden upon me, of which I am
more sensible, which is ingratitude toward your Lordship, by whose favors I
have been formerly so much bound; I hope your Lordship will pardon me this care
and diligence which I use to rectify my self toward you. To which purpose I
humbly beseech your Lordship, to admit thus much into your consideration, that
I neither hunted after this business at first, but apprehended it as it was
presented to me, and might perchance have fallen into worse hands, nor
proceeded otherwise therein, then to my poor discretion at that time seemed
lawful and requisite and necessary for my reputation, who held my self bound
to be able to give satisfaction to any who should doubt of the case. Of all
which, if your Lordship were returned to your former favorable opinions of me,
you might be pleased to make this some argument, that after his Majesty had
showed his inclination to the first motion made in my behalf, I was not earnest
to urge and solicit that advantage of priority, but as became me, contented my
self to join with him who had made a later petition therein: and as soon as I
understood how it was opposed or distasted, I threw it down at your Lordships
feet, and abandoned it to your pleasure. Which it is necessary for me to say at
this time, left, if he who was interessed with me in that business shall have
proceeded any farther therein since that time, your Lordship might conceive new
suspicions of me. That your Lordships name was at all used therein, or that any
words of mine occasioned such an error in my servant, I am so sorry as nothing
but a conscience of a true guiltiness of having performed an injury to your
Lordship (which can never fall upon me) could affect me more. But I, who to the
measure of my comprehension, have ever understood your Lordships nobility and
evenness, cannot fear that your Lordship will punish an oversight, like a
crime: which should be effected upon me, if your Lordship should continue your
disfavour toward me, since no penalty could come so burdenous to my mind and
to my fortune as that. And since the repose of both consists in your Lordships
favor, I humbly entreat to be restored to your favor, giving your Lordship my
faith in pawn that I will be as wary of forfeting it by any second occasion, as
I am sorry for this.

Yours J. D.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
I Had rather like the first best; not only because it is cleanlier, but
because it reflects least upon the other party, which, in all jest and earnest,
in this affair, I wish avoided. If my Muse were only out of fashion, and but
wounded and maimed like Free Will in the Roman Church, I should adventure to
put her to an Epithalamion. But since she is dead, like Free Will in our
Church, I have not so much Muse left as to lament her loss. Perchance this
business may produce occasions, wherein I may express my opinion of it, in a
more serious manner. Which I speak neither upon any apparent conjecture, nor
upon any overvaluing of my abilities, but out of a general readinefse and
alacrity to be serviceable and grateful in any kind. In both which poor
virtues of mine, none can pretend a more primary interest, then you may, in

Your humble and affectionate servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Robert Karre Gentleman of his Highnesses
Bedchamber.
SIR,
I Have often sinned toward you, with a presumption of being pardoned, but now
I do it, without hope, and without daring to entreat you to pardon the fault.
In which there are thus many degrees of importunity. That I must beg of you
to christen a child, which is but a daughter, and in which you must be content
to be associated with Ladies of our own alliance, but good women, and all this
upon Thursday next in the afternoon. Sir, I have so many and so indeleble
impressions of your favor to me, as they might serve to spread over all my
poor race. But since I see that I stand like a tree, which once a year bears,
though no fruit, yet this Mast of children, and so am sure, that one year or
other I should afflict you with this request, I had rather be presently under
the obligations and the thankfulness toward you, then meditate such a trouble
to you against another year. I was desirous this paper might kiss your hands
as soon as you came, that if any other diversions made this inconvenient to
you, I might have an other exercise of your favor, by knowing so much from you,
who in every act of yours make me more and more

Your humble and thankful servant J. Done.
17 April.
To the Honorable Knight, Sir ROBERT KARRE.
Sir,
PErchance others may have told you, that I am relapsed into my Fever; but that
which I must entreat you to condole with me, is, that I am relapsed into good
degrees of health; your cause of sorrow for that, is, that you are likely to be
the more troubled with such an impertinencie, as I am; and mine is, that I am
fallen from fair hopes, of ending all; yet I have escaped no better cheap, then
that I have paid death one of my Children for my Ransom. Because I loved it
well, I make account that I dignifie the memory of it, by mentioning of it to
you, else I should not be so homely. Impute this brevitie of writing to you
upon no Subject, to my sickness, in which men use to talk idly: but my
profession of desiring to be retained in your memory, impute to your own
Virtues, which have wrought so much upon

Your humble servant John Done.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
I Make account that it is a day of great distribution of Honors at Court: I
would not therefore lose my part, and increase therein; since every Letter
admitted by you from me, is a new stone in my best building, which is, my room
in your service: so much you add to me, every time you give me leave thus to
kiss your hands. But, Sir, every addition preimagins a being, and the time
of my being and Creation is not yet come: which I am sure you will advance;
because else I am no competent Subject of your favors, and additions. I know,
by your forbearing to tell me so, that my L. has had no commodity to move
the K. and if this Paper speak one word of difference, or impatience in my
name, by my troth it lies. Only give it leave to tell you, that that L. whom
perchance the K. may be pleased to hear in it, is an old and momentanie man,
and it may be late laboring for his assistance, next Winter. Besides, since it
may be possible that the Master of the Rolls may a little resent this suite,
there could be no fitter time, then now, to make him easy, as things stand
with him at this time. If you stay in Town this Night, and no longer, I
beseech you afford me a few of your late Minutes at your own lodging, where I
will wait upon you according to any directions, which by this Gent. or
otherwise I shall receive from you.

Your humble servant John Done.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
IF I would calumniate, I could say no ill of that Gentleman: I know not
whether my L. or my self took the first apprehension of it; but I remember
that very soon we concurred in a good opinion of him; thereupon for
justifying our own forwardness, we observed him more thoroughly, and found
all the way good reason to ratify our first estimation of him. This gave my L.
occasion to send him abroad in his Service after: how he satisfied him in
that employment, indeed I know not. But, that I disguise nothing, I remember my
L. told me sometimes in his absence, that he had not Account from him of some
things, which he had deposed in him. And at his entering into his Coach, at
his last going, I asked my L. Goes not the Gentleman with you? and he told me
with some coldness no. So that if you be not pressed to a Resolution, you may
be pleased to forbear a few days, till I may occasionally discern, whether
he have demerited or sunk in my L. opinion: And then you shall have another
Character of him from

Your very humble and thankful Servant J. Done.
25. Julii.
To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
THE same hour that I received the honor of your commandments, by your letter
left at my poor house, I put my self upon the way hither. So that I am here
in the habit of a Traveller, and (suitable to the rest of my unworthinesses)
unfit for great Presences. Therefore, I abstain from waiting upon you
presently; besides that in this abstinence, (except I misinterpret the last
words of your letter to my advantage) I obey your directions, in sending before
I come to you. Howsoever, Sir, I am entirely at your disposing, if you will be
pleased to add this favor to the rest, that I may understand, wherein you will
use your Authority and Power, which you have over

Your poor and humble servant John Done.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
THis is but a Postscript to the last Letter, and it is only to tell you, that
it was an impertinent jealousy that I conceived of that Gentleman's absence
from my L. for he gives that full Testimony of him, that he never discerned
any kind of unfitness in him for any employment, except too much goodness;
and Conscientiousnesse may sometimes make him somewhat less fit for some
kinds of business, then a man of a looser rain. And this is all, that I
conceive to have been in the commandment wherewith you honored

Your very humble and thankful servant in Christ Jesus John Done:
2. Aug 1622.
To my Honored Friend, Master George Gherard.
SIR,
YOur Letter was the more welcome to me, because it brought your commandment
with it, of sending you perfumes: for it is a Service somewhat like a
Sacrifice. But yet your commandment surprised me, when neither I had enough to
send, nor had means to recover more; that Lady being out of Town which
gavethem me. But Sir, if I had 10000000. I could send you no more then I do;
for I send all. If any good occasion present it self to you, to send to my L.
Clifford, spare my name a room, there where you offer him most of your
Service. I dare contend with you, that you cannot exceed me, in desiring to
serve him. It is a better office from me to you, that I go to bed, then that I
write a longer letter. For if I do mine eyes a little more injury, I shall
lose the honor of seeing you at Michaelmas; for by my troth I am almost
blind: you may be content, to believe that I am always disposed to your
service, without exception of any time, since now just at midnight, when it is
both day, and night, and neither, I tell you that I am

Your affectionate friend and servant J. Done.

To my very much honored friend George Garrard Esquire at Sion.
SIR,
I Know not which of us won it by the hand, in the last charge of Letters. If
you won, you won nothing, because I am nothing, or whatsoever I am, you
won nothing, because I was all yours before. I doubt not but I were better
delivered of dangers of relapses, if I were at London; but the very going would
endanger me. Upon which true debility, I was forced to excuse my self to my
Lord Chamberlain, from whom I had a Letter of command to have Preached the
fifth of November Sermon to the King. A service which I would not have
declined, if I could have conceived any hope of standing it. I beseech you
entreat my Lord Percy in my behalf, that he will be pleased to name George to
my L. Carlisle, and to wonder, if not to inquire, where he is. The world is
disposed to charge my Lords honor, and to charge my natural affection with
neglecting him, and, God knows, I know not which way to turn toward him; nor
upon any message of mine, when I send to kiss my Lords hands, does my Lord
make any kind of mention of him. For the Diamond Lady, when time serves, I
pray look to it; for I would fain be discharged of it. And for the rest, let
them be but remembered how long it has been in my hands, and then leave it to
their discretion. If they incline to any thing, I should choose shirt Hollond,
rather under then above 4 s. Our blessed Savior multiply his blessings upon
that noble family where you are, and your self, and your son; as upon all
them that are derived from

Your poor friend and servant J. Done.

To my very much respected friend Mr George Garrard.
SIR,
I Thank you for expressing your love to me, by this diligence, I know you can
distinguish between the voices of my love, and of my necessity, if any thing in
my Letters sound like an importunity. Besides, I will add thus much out of
counsel to you, that you can do nothing so thriftily as to keep in your
purpose the payment of the rest of this years rent, (though at your
convenience) for Sir E H. curiosity being so served at first, I shall be no
farther cause, but that the rest be related, and you in as good possession of
his love, and to as good use, as your love deserves of him. You mock us when
you ask news from hence. All is created there, or relates thither where you
are. For that book which you command me to send, I held it but half an hour:
which served me to read those few leafes, which were directed upon some few
lines of my book. If you come to town quickly, you may get a fair widow: for
Mris Brown is fallen to that state by death of her husband. No man desires your
coming more, nor shall be readier to serve you, then

Your affectionate friend and servant J. Done.

To my Honored friend M. George Gherard, over against Salisbury house.
SIR,
I Do not make account that I am come to London, when I get within the wall:
that which makes it London is the meeting of friends. I cannot therefore
otherwise bid my self welcome to London, then by seeking of you, which both Sir
H. Goodere and I do, with so much diligence, as that this messenger comes two
days before to entreat you from us both, to reserve your self upon Saturday:
so that I may, at our coming to London that night, understand at my house where
I may send you word of our supping place that night, and have the honor of
your company. So you lay more obligations upon

Your poor unprofitable servant J. Done.

To my very much Honored friend George Garret Esquire.
SIR,
When we think of a friend, we do not count that a lost thought, though that
friend never knew of it. If we write to a friend, we must not call it a lost
Letter, though it never find him to whom it was addressed: for we owe our
selves that office, to be mindful of our friends. In payment of that debt, I
send out this Letter, as a Sentinel Perdue; if it find you, it comes to tell
you, that I was possessed with a Fever, so late in the year, that I am afraid I
shall not recover confidence to come to London till the spring be a little
advanced. Because you did our poor family the favor, to mention our George in
your Letters to Spain, with some earnestness, I should wonder if you never had
any thing from thence concerning him; he having been now, diverse months, in
Spain. If you be in London and the Lady of the Jewel there too, at your
convenience inform me, what is looked for at my hands, in that business; for,
I would be loath to leave any thing in my house, when I die, that were not
absolutely mine own. I have a servant, Roper, at Paul's house, who will receive
your commandments, at all times. God bless you and your son, with the same
blessings which I beg for the children, and for the person of

Your poor friend and humble servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Robert Karre, Gentleman of his Highnesses
Bedchamber.
SIR,
I Am come to that tenderness of conscience, that I need a pardon for meaning
to come to Newmarket in this weather. If I had come, I must have asked you many
real pardons, for the many importunities that I should have used toward you.
But since I have diverse errands thither, (except I belie my self in that
phrase, since it is all one errand to promove mine own business, and to receive
your commands) I shall give you but a short respit, since I shall follow this
paper within two days. And (that I accuse my self, no farther then I am
guilty) the principal reason of my breaking the appointment of waiting upon M.
Rawlins, was, that I understood the King was from Newmarket; and for coming
thither in the Kings absence, I never heard of excuse; except when Butler sends
a desperate Patient in a Consumption thither for good air, which is an ill
errand now. Besides that I could not well come till now, (for there are very
few days past, since I took Orders) there can be no loss in my absence except
when I come, my Lord should have thereby the less latitude, to procure the
Kings Letters to Cambridge. I beseech you therefore, take some occasion to
refresh that business to his Lordship, by presenting my name, and purpose of
coming very shortly: and be content to receive me, who have been ever your
servant, to the addition of

Your poor Chaplain J. Done.
27 January.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Viscount of Rochester.
My most Honorable good Lord,
AFter I was grown to be your Lordships, by all the titles that I could think
upon, it has pleased your Lordship to make another title to me, by buying me.
You may have many better bargains in your purchases, but never a better title
then to me, nor any thing which you may call yours more absolutely and
entirely. If therefore I appear before your Lordship sometimes in these
Letters of thankfulness, it may be an excusable boldness, because they are
part of your evidences by which you hold me. I know there may be degrees of
importunity even in thankfulness: but your Lordship is got above the danger of
suffering that from me, or my Letters, both because my thankfulness cannot
reach to the benefits already received, and because the favor of receiving my
Letters is a new benefit. And since good Divines have made this argument
against deniers of the Resurrection, that it is easier for God to recollect the
Principles, and Elements of our bodies, howsoever they be scattered, then it
was at first to create them of nothing, I cannot doubt, but that any
distractions or diversions in the ways of my hopes, will be easier to your
Lordship to reunite, then it was to create them. Especially since you are
already so near perfecting them, that if it agreed with your Lordships
purposes, I should never wish other station, then such as might make me still,
and only

Your Lordships Most humble and devoted servant J. Done.

To the Hononrable Knight Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
LEst you should think your self too much beholding to your fortune, and so
rely too much upon her hereafter, I am bold to tell you, that it is not only
your good fortune that has preserved you from the importunity of my visits all
this time. For my ill fortune, which is stronger, then any man's good fortune,
has concurred in the plot to keep us asunder, by infecting one in my house
with the Measels. But all that, is so safely overworne, that I dare, not only
desire to put my self into your presence, but by your mediation, a little
farther. For, esteeming my self, by so good a title, as my Lords own words, to
be under his providence, and care of my fortune, I make it the best part of my
studies how I might ease his Lordship by finding out something for my self.
Which, because I think I have done, as though I had done him a service
therein, I adventure to desire to speak with him, which I beseech you to
advance, in addition to your many favors and benefits to, me. And if you have
occasion to send any of your servants to this town, to give me notice, what
times are fittest for me to wait, to enjoy your favor herein. My business is
of that nature, that loss of time may make it much more difficult, and may
give courage to the ill fortune of

Your humble servant J. Done.

To your self.
SIR,
I Make shift to think that I promised you this book of French Satyrs. If I did
not, yet it may have the grace of acceptance, both as it is a very forward and
early fruit, since it comes before it was looked for, and as it comes from a
good root, which is an importune desire to serve you. Which since I saw from
the beginning, that I should never do in any great thing, it is time to begin
to try now, whether by often doing little services, I can come toward any
equivalence. For, except I can make a rule of natural philosophy, serve also
in moral offices, that as the strongest bodies are made of the smallest
particles, so the strongest friendships may be made of often interating small
officiousnesses, I see I can be good for nothing. Except you know reason to the
contrary, I pray deliver this Letter according to the address. It has no
business, nor importunity; but as by our Law, a man may be Felo de se, if he
kill himself, so I think a man may be Fur de se, if he steal himself out of
the memory of them, which are content to harbor him. And now I begin to be
loath to be lost, since I have afforded my self some valuation and price, ever
since I received the stamp and impression of being

Your very humble and affectionate servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Robert Karre, Gentleman of his Highnesses Bed
chamber.
SIR,
I Have always your leave to use my liberty, but now I must use my bondage.
Which is my necessity of obeying a precontract laid upon me. I go to morrow to
Camberwell a mile beyond Southwark. But from this town goes with me my brother
Sir Tho. Grimes and his Lady, and I with them. There we dine well enough I
warrant you, with his father-in-law, Sir Tho. Hunt. If I keep my whole promise,
I shall Preach both forenoon and afternoon. But I will obey your commandments
for my return. If you cannot be there by 10, do not put your self upon the
way: for, Sir, you have done me more honor, then I can be worthy of, in
missing me so diligently. I can hope to hear M. Moulin again: or ruminate what
I have heretofore heard. The only miss that I shall have is of the honor of
waiting upon you; which is somewhat recompensed, if thereby you take occasion
of not putting not your self to that pain, to be more assured of the
inabilities of

Your unworthy servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
I Sought you yesterday with a purpose of accomplishing my health, by the
honor of kissing your hands. But I find by my going abroad, that as the first
Christians were forced to admit some Jewish Ceremonies, only to bury the
Synagogue with honor, so my Fever will have so much reverence and respect, as
that I must keep sometimes at home. I must therefore be bold to put you to the
pain of considering me. If therefore my Lord upon your deliverie of my last
Letter, said nothing to you of the purpose thereof; let me tell you now, that
it was, that in obedience of his commandment, to acquaint him with any thing
which might advantage me, I was bold to present that which I heard, which was
that Sir D. Carlton was likely to be removed from Venice, to the States; of
which if my Lord said nothing to you, I beseech you add thus much to your many
other Favors, to entreat my Lord at his best commodity, to afford me the
favor of speaking with him. But if he have already opened himself so far
to you, as that you may take knowledge thereof to him, then you may ease him of
that trouble of giving me an Audience, by troubling your self thus much more,
as to tell him in my behalf, and from me, that though Sir D. Carlton be not
removed, yet that place with the States lying open, there is a fair field of
exercising his favor toward me, and of constituting a Fortune to me, and
(that which is more) of a means for me to do him particular services. And
Sir, as I do thoroughly submit the end and effect of all Projects to his
Lordships will, so do I this beginning thereof, to your Advice and Counsel,
if you think me capable of it: as, for your own sake, I beseech you to do,
since you have admitted me for

Your humble servant J. Done.

To the Honored Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
I Amend to no purpose, nor have any use of this inchoation of health, which I
find, except I preserve my room, and station in you. I begin to be past
hope of dying: And I feel that a little ragge of Monte Magor, which I read
last time I was in your Chamber, has wrought prophetically upon me, which is,
that Death came so fast toward me, that the over-joy of that recovered me.
Sir, I measure not my health by my appetite, but only by my ability to come
to kiss your hands: which since I cannot hope in the compass of a few days,
I beseech you pardon me both these intrusions of this Letter, and of that
within it. And though Schoolmen dispute, whether a married man dying, and
being by Miracle raised again, must be remarried; yet let your Friendship,
(which is a Nobler learning) be content to admit me, after this Resurrection,
to be still that which I was before, and shall ever continue,

Your most humble and thankful Servant J. Done.
20. Mar.
To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
WHen I was almost at Court, I met the Princes Coach: I think I obeyed your
purposes best therefore, in coming hither. I am sure I provided best for my
self thereby; since my best degree of understanding is to be governed by you.
I beseech you give me an assignation where I may wait upon you at your
commodity this Evening. Till the performance of which commandment from you, I
rest here in the red Lion.

Your very thankful and affectionate Servant J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight, Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
I Was loath to be the only man who should have no part in this great
Festival; I thought therefore to celebrate that well, by spending some part of
it in your company. This made me seek you again this afternoon, though I
were guilty to my self of having done so every day since your coming. I
confess such an importunity is worthy to be punished with such a missing; yet,
because it is the likeliest reparation of my Fortunes to hope upon Reversions,
I would be glad of that Title in you: that, after solemnities, and businesses,
and pleasures be passed over, my time may come, and you may afford some of your
last leisures to

Your affectionate and humble servant J. Done.
4 November.
To the Honorable Knight, Sir ROBERT KARRE.
Sir,
YOur man's haste gives me the advantage, that I am excusable in a short Letter,
else I should not pardon it to my self. I shall obey your commandment of
coming so near you upon Michaelmas day, as by a Message to ask you whether
that or the next morning be the fittest to solicit your further Favor. You
understand all Virtue so well, as you may be pleased to call to mind what
thankfulness and services are due to you from me, and believe them all to be
expressed in this ragge of Paper, which gives you new assurance, that I am ever

Your most humble servant J. Done.

To your self.
SIR,
IF I shall never be able to do you any real service, yet you may make this
profit of me, that you be hereafter more cautelous in receiving into your
knowledge, persons so useless, and importune. But before you come to so
perfect a knowledge of me, as to abandon me, go forward in your favors to me,
so far, as to deliver this Letter according to the address. I think I should
not come nearer his presence then by a Letter: and I am sure, I would come no
other way, but by you. Be you therefore pleased, by these noble favors to me,
to continue in me the comfort which I have in being

Your very humble and thankful servant J. Done.
Drury house, 23 Sept.
To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Karre.
SIR,
A Few hours after I had the honor of your Letter, I had another from my Lord
of Bath and Wells, commanding from the King a Copy of my Sermon. I am in
preparations of that, with diligence, yet this morning I waited upon his
Lordship, and laid up in him this truth, that of the B. of Canterburies Sermon,
to this hour, I never heard syllable, nor what way, nor upon what points he
went: And for mine, it was put into that very order, in which I delivered it,
more then two months since. Freely to you I say, I would I were a little more
guilty: Only mine innocence makes me afraid. I hoped for the Kings approbation
heretofore in many of my Sermons; and I have had it. But yesterday I came very
near looking for thanks; for, in my life, I was never in any one piece, so
studious of his service. Therefore, exceptions being taken, and displeasure
kindled at this, I am afraid, it was rather brought thither, then met there. If
you know any more, fit for me, (because I hold that unfit for me, to appear in
my Masters sight, as long as this cloud hangs, and therefore, this day forbear
my ordinary waitings) I beseech you to intimate it to

Your very humble and very thankful servant J. Done.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Karre, at Court.
SIR,
I Humbly thank you, for this continuing me in your memory, and enlarging me
so far, as to the memory of my Sovereign, and (I hope) my Master. My Tenets are
always, for the preservation of the Religion I was born in, and the peace of
the State, and the rectifying of the Conscience; in these I shall walk, and as
I have from you a new seal thereof, in this Letter, so I had ever evidence in
mine own observation, that these ways were truly, as they are justly,
acceptable in his Majesty's ear. Our blessed Savior multiply unto him all
blessings; Amen.

Your very true and entire servant in Chr. fes. J. Done.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Karre, at Court.
SIR,
I Was this morning at your door, somewhat early; and I am put into such a
distaste of my last Sermon, as that I dare not practice any part of it, and
therefore though I said then, that we are bound to speak aloud, though we
awaken men, and make them froward, yet after two or three modest knocks at the
door, I went away. Yet I understood after, the King was gone abroad, and
thought you might be gone with him. I came to give you an account of that,
which this does as well. I have now put into my Lord of Bath and Wells hands
the Sermon faithfully exscrcibed. I beseech you be pleased to hearken farther
after it; I am still upon my jealousy, that the King brought thither some
disasfection toward me, grounded upon some other demerit of mine, and took it
not from the Sermon. For, as Card. Cusanus writ a Book Cribratio Alchorani, I
have cribrated, and re-cribated, and post-cribated the Sermon, and must
necessarily say, the King who has let fall his eye upon some of my Poems,
never saw, of mine, a hand, or an eye, or an affection, set down with so much
study, and diligence, and labor of syllables, as in this Sermon I expressed
those two points, which I take so much to conduce to his service, the
imprinting of persuasibility and obedience in the subject, And the breaking of
the bed of whisperers, by casting in a bone, of making them suspect and
distrust one another. I remember I heard the old King say of a good Sermon,
that he thought the Preacher never had thought of his Sermon, till he spoke it;
it seemed to him negligently and extemporally spoken. And I knew that he had
weighed every syllable, for half a year before, which made me conclude, that
the King had before, some prejudice upon him. So, the best of my hope is, that
some over bold allusions, or expressions in the way, might divert his Majesty,
from vouchsafing to observe the frame, and purpose of the Sermon. When he sees
the general scope, I hope his goodness will pardon collateral escapes. I
entreated the B. to ask his Majesty, whether his displeasure extended so
far, as that I should forbear waiting, and appearing in his presence; and I
had a return, that I might come. Till I had that, I would not offer to put my
self under your roof. To day I come, for that purpose, to say prayers. And if,
in any degree, my health suffer it, I shall do so, to morrow. If any thing fall
into your observation before that, (because the B. is likely to speak to the
King of it, perchance, this night) if it amount to such an increase of
displeasure, as that it might be unfit for me to appear, I beseech you afford
me the knowledge. Otherwise, I am likely to inquire of you personally, to
morrow before nine in the morning, and to put into your presence then

Your very humble and very true, and very honest servant to God and the King
and you J. Done.
I writ yesterday to my L. Duke, by my L. Carlisle, who assured me of a gracious
acceptance of my putting my self in his protection.



To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Karre, at Court.
SIR,
IF I should refuse the liberty which you enlarge to me, of eating in your
chamber, you might suspect that I reserved it for greater boldnesses, and would
not spend it in this. But, in good faith, I do not eat before, nor can after,
till I have been at home; so much has my this years debility disabled me, even
for receiving favors. After the Sermon, I will steal into my Coach home, and
pray that my good purpose may be well accepted, and my defects graciously
pardoned. Amen.

Yours entirely J. Done.
I will be at your chamber at one after noon.



To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Karre, at Court,
SIR,
I Pursued my ambition of having the honor to kiss your hands some where, so
far, as to inform my self occasionally of my great neighbor. And I perceive
he is under an inundation of uncertain comers, which he cannot divest, except
I had your leave, to speak plain to him. A second inconvenience is, that he is
so deaf, that we must speak to the whole house, if we will speak to him. And
a third is, that I am in a riddling, rather a juggling indisposition, fast and
loose, and therefore dare not stir far. Yet Sir, I am not thereby unfit to
receive the honor of seeing you here, if greater business have not overcome,
or worn out, your former inclinablenesse to come into these quarters. If you
shall be pleased to say to my man, that you will make as though you dined with
me to day, and come, if your business require your going to his Lordship, you
may dine with him, after you have fasted with me. To day, or any day, which may
be more yours, I ask it of you with all earnestness, on this side
importunity, which is the detestation of

Your humblest and thankfullest servant J. Done.

To the Right Honorable Sir Robert Karre, at Court.
SIR,
THis morning I have received a signification from my Lord Chamberlain, that
his Majesty has commanded to morrows Sermon at S. James; And that it is in the
afternoon; (for, into my mouth there must not enter the word, afterdinner,
because that day there enters no dinner into my mouth.) Toward the time of the
service, I ask your leave, that I may hide my self in your out-chamber. Or if
business, or privatenesse, or company make that inconvenient, that you will be
pleased to assign some servant of yours to show me the Closet, when I come to
your chamber. I have no other way there, but you; which I say not, as though I
had not assurance enough therein, but because you have too much trouble
thereby; nor I have no other end there, then the Pulpit: you are my station,
and that my exaltation; And in both, I shall ever endeavor, to keep you from
being sorry for having thought well of, or being ashamed of having testified
well for

Your poor and very true servant in Chr. Jes. J. Done.

To the Honorable Knight Sir Robert Karre, at Court.
SIR,
I Have obeyed the forms of our Church of Paul's so much, as to have been a
solemn Christmas man, and tried conclusions upon my self, how I could sit out
the siege of new faces, every dinner. So that I have not seen the B. in some
weeks. And I know not whether he be in case, to afford that privacy, which you
justly desire. This day, I am in my bondage of entertaining. Suppers I presume,
are inconvenient to you. But this evening I will spy upon the B. and give you
an account to morrow morning of his disposition; when, if he cannot be entire
to you, since you are gone so far downwards in your favors to me, be pleased
to pursue your humiliation so far as to choose your day, and either to suffer
the solitude of this place, or to change it, by such company, as shall wait
upon you, and come as a visitor and overseer of this Hospital of mine, and
dine or sup at this miserable chezmey.

Your humblest and thankfullest servant J. Done.
4 Jan. 1626.
To my Noble friend Mris Cokain at Ashburne.
My noblest sister,
BUt that it is sweetened by your command, nothing could trouble me more, then
to write of my self. Yet, if I would have it known, I must write it my self;
for, I neither tell children, nor servants, my state. I have never good temper,
nor good pulse, nor good appetite, nor good sleep. Yet, I have so much leisure
to recollect my self, as that I can think I have been long thus, or often
thus. I am not alive, because I have not had enough upon me to kill me, but
because it pleases God to pass me through many infirmities before he take me
either by those particular remembrances, to bring me to particular repentances,
or by them to give me hope of his particular mercies in heaven. Therefore have
I been more affected with Coughs in vehemence, more with deafness, more with
toothach, more with the vurbah, then heretofore. All this mellows me for
heaven, and so ferments me in this world, as I shall need no long concoction in
the grave, but hasten to the resurrection. Not only to be nearer that grave,
but to be nearer to the service of the Church, as long as I shall be able to do
any, I purpose, God willing, to be at London, within a fortnight after your
receipt of this, as well because I am under the obligation of preaching at Paul's
upon Candlemas day, as because I know nothing to the contrary, but that I may
be called to Court, for Lent service; and my witness is in heaven, that I
never left out S. Dunstans, when I was able to do them that service; nor will
now; though they that know the state of that Church well, know that I am not so
bound, as the world thinks, to preach there; for, I make not a shilling profit
of S. Dunstans as a Church man, but as my L. of Dorset gave me the lease of the
Impropriation, for a certain rent, and a higher rent, the^ my predecessor had
it at. This I am fain to say often, because they that know it not, have defamed
me, of a defectiveness toward that Church; and even that mistaking of theirs I
ever have, and ever shall endeavor to rectify, by as often preaching there, as
my condition of body will admit. All our company here is well, but not at home
now, when I write; for, lest I should not have another return to London, before
the day of your Carrier, I write this, and rest

Your very affectionate servant, and friend, and brother J. Done.
15 Jan. 1630. Abrey-hatch.

