Fifty SERMONS, PREACHED BY THAT LEARNED AND REVEREND DIVINE, JOHN DONE, Dr IN
DIVINITY, Late Deane of the Cathedral Church of S. PAUL'S London.

The Second Volume.



LONDON, Printed by Ia. Flesher for M. F. I. Marriot, and R. Royston. MDCXLIX.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE BASIL EARL OF DENBY, My very good Lord and Patron.
My Lord,
IN a season so tempestuous, it is a great encouragement to see your Lordship
called to the Helm, who (in your public negociations) having spent so many
years in that so famed Commonwealth of Venice, must of necessity have brought
home such excellent Principles of Government, that if our Fate do not
withstand your Directions, we may reasonably, at last, expect to see our new
British Lady, excel that ancient Adriatique Queen. Neither can I offend much
against the State, in begging your Patronage and perusal of this Book, knowing
that your Lordship first mastered all the Learning of Padoa, before you did
adventure upon that wise Senate: who amongst all her other greatnesses, has
ever had a principal care, that Learning might not be diminished. When these
Sermons were preached, they were terminated within the compass of an hour,
but your acceptance may make them outlive the very Churches that they were
preached in, and give them such a perpetuity that Nec Jovis Ira, nec Amor,
edacior multo, poterit abolere; For, though a fiery zeal in succeeding ages
has often both ruined the Temples, and casheired the gods, that were
worshipped in them: Yet such sacrifices as these, have beemy lays kept
unburnt; and we are suffered to know those religions, that we are not allowed
to practice. Nor can I expect any greater advantage, for the pains I have
taken in publishing this Book, then that posterity may know, I did it, when I
had the favor and protection of your Lordship, and was allowed to style my self

Your Lordships most humble Servant JO. DONE.

FOR THE RIGHT HONORABLE BOLSTRED WHITLOCK, RICHARD KEEBLE, (...) JOHN LEILE.

Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal.
THe reward that many years since was proposed for the publishing these
Sermons, having been lately conferred upon me under the authority of the Great
Seal, I thought my self in gratitude bound to deliver them to the world under
your Lordships protection; both to show, how careful you are in dispensing
that part of the Churches treasure, that is committed to your disposing, and to
encourage all men to proceed in their industry, when they are sure to find so
just and equal Patrons, whose fame and memory must certainly last longer then
Books can find so noble Readers, and whose present favors do not only keep
the Living alive, but the Dead from dying.

Your Lordships most humble Servant JO. DONE.

A Table directing to the several Texts of SCRIPTURE, handled in this Book.
Sermons preached at Marriages.
Sermon I.
Preached at the Earl of Bridgwaters house in London, on MATTHEW. 22. 30. For, in
the Resurrection, they neither mary nor are given in Marriage, but are as the
Angels of God in heaven. p. 1.
Serm'. II.
GENESIS 2. 18. And the Lord God said, It is not good, that the man should be
alone; I will make him a Help, meet for him. p. 9.
Sermon. III.
HOSEA 2. 19. And I will mary thee unto me for ever. p. 15
Sermons preached at Christnings.
Sermon. IV.
REVEL. 7. 17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne, shall govern
them, and shall lead them unto the lively fountains of waters, and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes. p. 23
Sermon. V.
EPHESIANS. 5. 25, 26, 27. Husbands love your wives, even at Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it, and cleanse it,
by the washing of water, through the Word: That he might make it unto himself
a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy, and without blame. p. 31
Sermon. VI.
1 JOHN 5. 7, 8. For there are three which bear record in Heaven, the Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one: And there are three
which bear record in the Earth; The Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and
these three agree in one. p. 39
Sermon. VII.
GAL. 3. 27. For, all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. p.
50.
Sermons preached at Churchings.
Sermon. VIII.
CANT. 5. 3. I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? p. 59.
Sermon. IX.
MICAH 2. 10. Arise and depart, for this is not your rest. p. 67.
Sermon. X.
A second Sermon. on the same Text. p. 74.
Sermons preached at Lincolns-Inne.
Sermon. XI.
GENESIS 28. 16, 17. Then Jacob awoke out of his sleep, and said, Surely the Lord
is in this place, and I was not aware. And he was afraid, and said, How
fearful is this place! This is none other but the House of God, and this is
the gate of Heaven. p. 83
Sermon. XII.
JOH. 5. 22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son. p. 94.
Sermon. XIII.
JOH. 8. 15. I judge no man. p. 101.
Sermon. XIIII.
JOB 19. 26. And though, after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God. p. 106.
Sermon. XV.
1 COR. 15. 50. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God. p. 118.
Sermon. XVI.
COLOS. 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which
is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which
is the Church. p. 128.
Sermon. XVII.
MAT. 18. 7. Woe unto the world, because of offenses. p. 136.
Sermon. XVIII.
A second Sermon. on the same Text. p. 142
Sermon. XIX.
PSALM. 38. 2. For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me
sore. p. 158.
Sermon. XX.
PSA. 38. 3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger,
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. p. 162.
Sermon. XXI.
PSALM. 38. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as a heavy burden,
they are too heavy for me. p. 174.
Sermon. XXII.
A second Sermon. on the same Text. p. 186.
Sermon. XXIII.
A third Sermon. on the same Text. p. 192.
Sermons preached at White Hall.
Sermon. XXIV.
EZEKIEL, 34. 19. And as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with
your feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet. 199.
Sermon. XXV.
A second Sermon. on the same Text. p. 208.
Sermon. XXVI.
ESAI. 65. 20. For the child shall die a hundred years old, but the sinner
being a hundred years old, shall be accursed. p. 218
Sermon. XXVII.
MARK 4. 24. Take heed what you hear. p. 228
Sermon. XXVIII.
GENESIS 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our own Image, after our
likeness. p. 239.
Sermon. XXIX.
A second Sermon. on the same Text. p. 250
Sermons preached to the Nobility.
Sermon. XXX.
JOB 13. 15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. p. 262.
Sermon. XXXI.
JOB 36. 25. Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off. p. 271.
Sermon. XXXII.
APOC. 7, 9. After this, I beheld, and lo, a great multitude, which no man
could number, of all nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood
before the throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and Palms
in their hands. p. 279.
Sermon. XXXIII.
CANT. 3. 11. Go forth ye daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon, with the
Crown, wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart. p. 288.
Sermon. XXXIIII.
LUKE 23. 34. Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. p. 304.
Sermon. XXXV.
MAT. 21. 44. Whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken; but on
whosoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. p. 311.
Sermons preached at S. Paul's.
Sermon XXXVI.
JOH. 1. 8. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that
Light. p. 320.
Sermon. XXXVII.
A second Sermon. on the same Text. p. 334.
Sermon. XXXVIII.
A third Ser. on the the same Text. p. 343.
Sermon. XXXIX.
PHIL. 3. 2. Beware of the Concision. p. 356.
Sermon. XL.
2 COR. 5. 20. We pray ye in Christ's stead, Be ye reconciled to God. p. 364.
XLI.
HOSEA 3. 4. For, the Children of Israel shall abide many days, without a
King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. p. 375.
Sermon. XLII.
PROVE. 14. 31. He that oppresses the poor, reprocheth his Maker, but he that
honors him, has mercy on the (...). p. 385.
Sermon. XLIII.
LAMENT. 4. 20. The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken
in their pits. p. 396.
Sermon. XLIV.
MAT. 11. 6. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. p. 411.
Sermons preached at S. Dunstans.
Sermon. XLV.
DEUTERONOMY. 25. 5. If brethren dwell together, and one of them dye, and have no
child, the Wife of the dead shall not marry without, unto a stranger: her
husbands brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and
perform the duty of an husbands brother unto her. p. 422.
Sermon. XLVI.
PSALM. 34. 11. Come ye children, Hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord. p. 430.
Ser. XLVII.
GENESIS 3. 24. And dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. p. 439.
Ser. XLVIII.
LAMENT. 3. 1. I am the man, that has seen affliction, by the rod of his
wrath. p. 445.
Sermon. XLIX.
GENESIS 7. 24. Abraham himself was ninety nine years old, when the foreskin of
his flesh was Circumcised. p. 456.
Sermon. L.
1 THESE. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore. p. 466.
A SERMON PREACHED At the Earl of Bridgewaters house in London at the marriage
of his daughter, the Lady Mary, to the eldest son of the L. Herbert of
Castle-iland, November. 19. 1627.
The Prayer before the Sermon.
O Eternal, and most gracious God, who have promised to hearken to the prayers
of thy people, when they pray toward thy house, though they be absent from it,
work more effectually upon us, who are personally met in this thy house, in
this place consecrated to thy worship. Enable us, O Lord, so to see thee, in
all thy Glasses, in all thy representations of thy self to us here, as that
hereafter we may see thee face to face, and as thou art in thy self, in thy
kingdom of glory. Of which Glasses wherein we may see thee, Thee in thine
Unity, as thou art One God; Thee in thy Plurality, as thou art More Persons, we
receive this thy Institution of Marriage to be one. In thy first work, the
Creation, the last seal of thy whole work was a Marriage. In thy Sons great
work, the Redemption, the first seal of that whole work, was a miracle at a
Marriage. In the work of thy blessed Spirit, our Sanctification, he refreshes to
us, that promise in one Prophet, That thou will mary thy self to us for ever:
and more in another, That thou have married thy self unto us from the
beginning. Thou have married Mercy and Justice in thy self, married God and Man
in thy Son, married Increpation and Consolation in the Holy Ghost, mary in us
also, O Lord, a Love and a Fear of thee. And as thou have married in us two
natures, mortal and immortal, mary in us also, the knowledge, and the
practice of all duties belonging to both conditions, that so this world may be
our Gallery to the next; And mary in us, the Spirit of Thankfulness, for all
thy benefits already bestowed upon us, and the Spirit of prayer for the
continuance, and enlargement of them. Continue, and enlarge them, O'God, upon
thine universal Church, etc.

SERMON. I.
MATTHEW. 22. 30. For, in the Resurrection, they neither mary nor are given in
Marriage, but are as the Angels of God in heaven.
OF all Commentaries upon the Scriptures, Good Examples are the best and the
livelyest; and of all Examples those that are nearest, and most present, and
most familiar unto us; and our most familiar Examples, are those of our own
families; and in families, the Masters of families, the fathers of families,
are most conspicuous, most appliable, most considerable. Now, in exercises upon
such occasions as this, ordinarily, the instruction is to be directed
especially upon those persons, who especially give the occasion of the
exercise; that is, upon the persons to be united in holy wedlock: for, as
that is a difference between Sermons and Lectures, that a Sermon intends
Exhortation principally and Edification, and a holy stirring of religious
affections, and then matters of Doctrine, and points of Divinity, occasionally,
secondarily, as the words of the text may invite them; But Lectures intend
principally Doctrinall points, and matter of Divinity, and matter of
Exhortation but occasionally, and as in a second place: so that is a difference
between Christening sermons, and Marriage sermons, that the first, at
Christnings, are especially directed upon the Congregation, and not upon the
persons who are to be christened; and these, at marriages, especially upon the
parties that are to be united; and upon the congregation, but by reflection.
When therefore to these persons of noble extraction, I am to say something of
the Duties, and something of the Blessing, of Marriage, what God Commands, and
what God promises in that state, in his Scriptures, I lay open to them, the
best exposition, the best Commentaries upon those Scriptures, that is, Example,
and the nearest example, that is, example in their own family, when, with the
Prophet Esaias, I direct them, To look upon the Rock, 51. 1.
from whence they are hewn, to propose to themselves their own parents, and to
consider there the performance of the duties of marriage imposed by God in S.
Paul, and the blessings proposed by God in David, Thy Wife shall be a fruitful
Vine by the sides of thy Psalm. 128. 3.
House, The children like olive plants round about the table; For, to this
purpose of edifying children by example, such as are truly religious fathers in
families, are therein truly learned fathers of the Church; A good father at
home, is a S ^ugustin, and a S. Ambrose in himself; and such a Thomas may have
governed a (...), as shall, ^ (...) Egerton (...) Chancellor grandfathe^ to the
Brid^.
by way of example, teach children, and childrens children more to this
purpose, then any Thomas Aquinas can. Since therefore these noble persons have
so good a glass to dress themselves in, the useful, as the powerful example
of Parents, I shall the less need to apply my self to them, for their
particular instructions, but may have leave to extend my self upon
considerations more general, and such as may be applyable to all, who have, or
shall embrace that honorable state, or shall any way assist at the solemnizing
thereof; that they may all make this union of Marriage, a Type, or a
remembrancer of their union with God in Heaven. That as our Genesis is our
Exodus, (our proceeding into the world, is a step out of the world) so every
Gospel may be a Revelation unto us: All good tidings (which is the name of
Gospel) all that ministers any joy to us here, may reveal, and manifest to us,
an Interest in the joy and glory of heaven, and that our admission to a Marriage
here, may be our invitation to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb there, where in
the Resurrection, we shall neither mary, nor be given in marriage, but shall be
as the Angels of God in heaven.

These words our blessed Savior spoke to the Sadduces; Divisio.
who not believing the Resurrection of the Dead, put him a Case, that one woman
has had seven husbands, and then whose wife, of those seven should she be in
the Resurrection? they would needs suppose, and prefume, that there could be no
Resurrection of the body, but that there must be to all purposes, a Bodily use
of the Body too, and then the question had been pertinent, whose wife of the
seven shall she be? But Christ shows them their error, in the weakness of the
foundation, she shall be none of their wives, for, In the Resurrection, they
neither mary, etc. The words give us this latitude, when Christ says, In the
Resurrection they mary not, etc. The words give us this latitude, when Christ
says, In the Resurrection they mary not, etc. from thence flows out this
concession, this proposition too; Till the Resurrection they shall mary, and be
given in marriage; no inhibition to be laid upon persons, no imputation, no
aspersion upon the state of marriage. And when Christ says, Then they are as
the Angels of God in heaven, from this flows this concession, this proposition
also, Till then we must not look for this Angelical state, but, as in all
other states and conditions of life, so in all marriages there will be some
encumbrances, betwixt all married persons, there will arise some unkindnesses,
some mis-interpretations; or some too quick interpretations may sometimes
sprinkle a little sournesse, and spread a little, a thin, a dilute and washy
cloud upon them; Then they mary not, till then they may; then their state shall
be perfect as the Angels, till then it shall not; These are our branches, and
the fruits that grow upon them, we shall pull in passing, and present them as
we gather them.

First then, Christ establishes a Resurrection, A Resurrection there shall be,
for, that makes up Gods circle. 1 Part. Resurrectio.
The Body of Man was the first point that the foot of Gods Compass was upon:
First, he created the body of Adam: and then he carries his Compass round, and
shuts up where he began, he ends with the Body of man again in the
glorification thereof in the Resurrection. God is Alpha and Omega, first, and
last: And his Alpha and Omega, his first, and last work is the Body of man too.
Of the Immortality of the soul, there is not an express article of the Creed:
for, that last article of The life everlasting, is rather de proemio, and
poena, what the soul shall suffer, or what the soul shall enjoy, being
presumed to be Immortal, then that it is said to be Immortal in that article;
That article may, and does presuppose an Immortality, but it does not
constitute an Immortality in our soul, for there would be a life everlasting
in heaven, and we were bound to believe it, as we were bound to believe a God
in heaven, though our souls were not immortal. There are so many evidences of
the immortality of the soul, even to a natural man's reason, that it required
not an Article of the Creed, to fix this notion of the Immortality of the
soul. But the Resurrection of the Body is discernible by no other light, but
that of Faith, nor could be fixed by any less assurance then an Article of the
Creed. Where be all the splinters of that Bone, which a shot has shivered and
scattered in the Air? Where be all the Atoms of that flesh, which a Corrasive
has eat away, or a Consumption has breathed, and exhaled away from our arms,
and other Limbs? In what wrinkle, in what furrow, in what bowel of the earth,
ly all the grains of the ashes of a body burnt a thousand years since? In what
corner, in what ventricle of the sea, lies all the jelly of a Body drowned in
the general flood? What cohaerence, what sympathy, what dependence maintains
any relation, any correspondence, between that arm that was lost in Europe, and
that leg that was lost in Afrique or Asia, scores of years between? One
humor of our dead body produces worms, and those worms suck and exhaust all
other humor, and then all dies, and all dries, and molders into dust, and that
dust is blown into the River, and that puddled water tumbled into the sea, and
that ebs and flows in infinite revolutions, and still, still God knows in what
Cabinet every seed-Pearle lies, Zech. 10. 8.
in what part of the world every grain of every man's dust lies; and, sibilat
populum suum, (as his Prophet speaks in another case) he whispers, he hisses,
he beckens for the (...) of his Saints, and in the twinkling of an eye, that
body that was fcattered over all the elements, is sat down at the right hand
of God, in a glorious resurrection. A D^opsie has extended me to an enormous
corpulency, and unwieldinesse; a Consumption has attenuated me to a feeble
macilency and leanness, and God raises me a body, such as it should have been,
if these infirmities had not intervened and deformed it. Psalm. 150. 6.
David could go no further in his book of Psalms, but to that, Let every thing
that has breath praise the Lord; ye, says he, ye that have breath, praise ye
the Lord, and that ends the book: But, that my Dead body should come to praise
the Lord, this is that New Song, which I shall learn, and sing in heaven;
when, not only my soul shall magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoice in God
my Savior; but I shall have mine old eyes, and ears, and tongue, and knees,
and receive such glory in my body my self, as that, in that body, so glorified
by God, I also shall glorify him. So very a body, so perfectly a body shall we
have there, as that Mahomet, and his followers, could not consist in those
heavenly functions of the body, in glorifying God, but mis-imagine a feasting
and banqueting, and all carnal pleasures of the body in heaven too. But there
Christ stoppes; A Resurrection there shall be, but, in the Resurrection we
shall not mary, etc.

They shall not mary, because they shall have none of the uses of marriage; Non
nubent.
not as marriage is physic against inordinate affections; for, every soul
shall be a Consort in itself, and never out of tune: not as marriage is
ordained for mutual help of one another; for God himself shall be entirely in
every soul; And what can that soul lack, that has all God? Not as marriage is a
second and a suppletory eternity, in the continuation and propagation of
Children; for they shall have the first Eternity, individual eternity in
themselves. Therefore does S. Luke assign that reason why they shall not mary,
Luke 20. 35.
Because they cannot die. Because they have an eternity in themselves, they need
not supply any defect, by a propagation of children.

But yet, though Christ exclude that, of which there is clearly no use in
Heaven, Marriage, (because they need no physic, no mutual help, no supply of
children, yet he excludes, not our knowing, or our loving of one another upon
former knowledge in this world, in the next; Christ does not say expressly we
shall, yet neither does he say, that we shall not, know one another there.
Neither can we say, we shall not, because we know not how we should. Adam, who
was asleep when Eve was made, and neither saw, nor felt any thing that God had
done, Genesis 2. 23.
knew Eve upon the very first sight, to be bone of his bone, Mat. 17. 3.
and flesh of his flesh. By what light knew he this? And in the transfiguration
of Christ, Peter, and James, and John knew Moses and Elias, and by what light
knew they them, whom they had never seen? Nor can we, or they, or any, be
imagined to have any degree of knowledge of persons, or actions, though but
occasionally, and transeuntly, in this life, which we shall not have
inherently, and permanently in the next. In the Types of the general
Resurrection, which were particular Resuscitations of the dead in this world,
the Dead were restored to the knowledge of their friends: when Christ raised
the son of the widow of Naim, Luke 7. 15.
he delivered him to his Mother; when Peter raised Tabitha, Acts 9. 41.
he called the Saints and the Widows, Genesis 15. 1^.
and presented her alive unto them. Deuteronomy. 32. 50.
So God says to Abraham, Ibis ad patres, thou shall go to thy fathers; he
should know that they were his fathers: so to Moses, Iungeris populis tuis,
Luke 1. 41.
Thou shall die, and be gathered to thy people, as Aaron thy brother dyed, and
was gathered to his people. John Baptist had a knowledge of Christ, though they
were both in their mothers wombes; and Dives of Lazarus, Luke 16. 23.
though in Hell; and it is not easily told, by what light these saw these.
Whatsoever conduces to Gods glory, or our happiness, we shall certainly know
in heaven: And he that in a rectifyed conscience believes that it does so, may
piously believe that he shall know them there. In things of this nature, where
no direct place of Scripture binds up thy faith, believe so, as most exalts
thine own Devotion; yet with this Caution too, not to condemn uncharitably, and
peremptorily, those that believe otherwise. A Resurrection there shall be: In
the Resurrection there shall be no Marriage, because it conduces to no end; but,
if it conduce to Gods glory, and my happiness, (as it may piously be believed
it does) to know them there, whom I knew here, I shall know them.

Now from this, In the Resurrection they mary not, flows this also, Till the
Resurrection they do, they may, they shall mary. Nay, in Gods first purpose
and institution, They must: For God said, It is not good that the man should be
alone. Genesis 2. 18.
Every man is a natural body, every congregation is a politik body; The whole
world is a Catholic, an universal body. For the sustentation and aliment of
the natural body, Man, God has given Meat; for the Politik, for societies,
God has given Industry, and several callings; and for the Catholic body, for
the sustentation, and reparation of the world, God has given Marriage. They
that scatter themselves in various lusts, commit wast, and shall undergo at
last, a heavy condemnation upon that Action of wast in their souls, as they
shall feel it before in their bodies which they have wasted. They that mary not,
do not keep the world in reparation; And the common law, the law of nature, and
the general law of God binds man in general to that reparation of the world,
to Marriage: for Continency is Privilegtum, a Privilege; that is, Privata lex;
when it is given, it becomes a law too; for he to whom God gives the gift of
Continency, is bound by it: it is Privata lex, a Law, an Obligation upon that
particular man; And then Privilegium, is Privatio Legis, it is a dispensation
upon that Law, which without that privilege, and dispensation would bind him;
so that all those, who have not this privilege, this dispensation, this
continency, by immediate gift from God, or other medicinal Disciplines, and
Mortifications, (which Disciplines and Mortifications, every state and
condition of life is not bound to exercise, because such Mortifications as
would overcome their Concupiscences, would also overcome all their natural
strength, and make them unable to do the works of their callings) all such are
bound by the general law to mary. For, from Nature, and her Law, we have that
voice, ut gignamus geniti; Man is borne into the world, that others might be
born from him: And from Gods general Law, we have that voice, Crescite and
Multiplicamini: Therefore God placed man here, that he might repair and furnish
the world. He is gone at Common Law, that mary's not: Not but that he may have
relief; but it is only in Conscience, and by way of Equity, and as in
Chancery; that is, If in a rectified Conscience he know, that he should be the
less disposed to religious Offices, for marriage, he does well to abstain:
otherwise he must remember that the world is one Body, and Marriage the aliment,
that the world is one Building, and Marriage the Reparation. Therefore the
Emperor Augustus did not only increase the rewards, and privileges which
former Laws had given to married persons, but he laid particular penalties upon
them, that lived unmaryed. And though that State seem to have countenanced
single life, because they afforded dignities to certain Vestall Virgins, yet
the number of those Vestals was small, not above six, and then the dignities
and privileges, which those Vestals had, were no other, but that they were made
equal in the state to married Wives; They were preferred before all that lived
unmaryed, but not before married persons.

This fortification and rampart of the World, Marriage, has the Devil battered
with most artillery, opposed with most instruments: for, as an Army composed of
many Nations, more sects of Heretics have concurred in the condemning of
Marriage, then in any one Heresy. The Adamites, the Tatians, and those whom
Irenaeus calls the Encratites; all within two thousand years after Christ; and
more after. And yet God kept such a hook in the nostril of this Leviathan, such
a bridle in the jaws of these sects of Heretics, as that never any of them so
opposed Marriage, as that they justified Incontinency, or various lust, or
Indifferency, or Community in that kind. Now as in the Pelagian Heresy, those
that came to modify and mollify that Heresy, and to be Semi-Pelagians, were in
some points worse then those that were full Pelagians, (as truly, in many
Cases, the half-papist may do more harm, and be more dangerous, then the
whole Papist that declares himself) so the Semi-Adamites, the Semi-Tatians, and
Semi-Encratites of the Roman Church, who, though they do not as those whole
Heretics did, condemn marriage entirely, yet they condemn it in Certain
persons, and in so many as constitute a great part of the Body of mankind,
that is, in all their Clergy, exceed those very heretics, in favor of
incontinency, and fornication, and various lusts, which those Heretics who
absolutely condemned Marriage, condemned too, as absolutely; whereas in the
Roman Church a Jesuit tells us; that there are diverse Catholics of that opinion,
Lorinus. Act. 15. 20.
That it is not Heresy to say, that Fornication is no deadly sin: And yet it
is Heresy to say, that Marriage in some persons, (only disabled by their
Canons) is not deadly sin. And when they erect and justify their Academies of
Incontinency, and various lust, (various even in the sex) if some Authors among
themselves have not injured them) when they maintain publik stews, and
maintain their dignity by them, and make that a part of the Revenue of the
Church, what Advocate of theirs can deny, but that these Semi-Adamites,
Semi-Tatians, Semi-Encratites, are worse then those Heretics themselves, that
did absolutely oppose Marriage? We depart absolutely from those old Heretics,
Patres.
who did absolutely condemn Marriage; and from those latter men, who though they
be but Semi-Heretiks in respect of them, because they limit their forbidding of
Marriage, to certain persons, yet they are sequi-Heretiks in this, that they
countenance Incontinency, and Fornication, which those very heretics abhorred;
And we must have leave too, (which we are always loath to do) to depart from
the rigidness of some of those blessed Fathers of the Primitive Church, who
found some necessities in their times, to speak so very highly in praise of
Continency and Chastity, as reflected somewhat upon marriage it self, and may
seem to emply some under-valuation of that. Many such things were so said by
Tertullian, many by S. Hierome, as being crudely, and nudely taken, not
decocted and boiled up with the circumstances of those times, not invested with
the knowledge of those persons, to whom they were written, might diminish and
dishonor marriage. But Tertullian in his most vehement persuasion of Continency,
writes to his own wife, and S. Hierome, for the most part, to those Ladies,
whom he had taken into his own discipline, and with one of which, he had so
near a conversation, as that (as himself says) the world was scandalized with
it. and that the world thought him fit to have been made Pope, but for that
misconstruction which had been made of that his conversation with that Lady.
Tertullian writing to his Wife, S. Hierome to those Ladies, may either have had
particular reasons of this vehement proceeding of theirs in advancing
Continency, or they may have conceived that way of persuasion of continency to
those persons, to have been a fit way to convey down to posterity the love
thereof. As Dionysius the Areopagite says, That the Church in those times at
funerals, did convey their thanks to God, for the party deceased, by way of
Prayer: they seemed to pray that those dead persons might be saved; and,
indeed, they did but praise God, that they were saved. So Tertullian and S.
Hierome, when they seem to persuade Continency to those persons, they do but
tell us, how continent those persons were. But howsoever it be for that, no
such magnifying of Virginity before, as should diminish the honor and dignity
of Marriage, no such magnifying of Continency after, as should frustrate the
purpose of Marriage after, or the returning to a second Marriage after a true
dissolution of the first, can subvert, or contract the Apostles Nubant in
Domino, Let them mary in the Lord; where the In Domino, in the Lord, is not to
mary for matter of Title and place; nor, In Domino, In the Lord, is not to mary
for matter of Lordships, and possessions, and worldly preferment; nor, In
Domino, In the Lord, is not in hope to exercise a Dominion and a Lordship over
the other party: but In the Lord, is in the fear of the Lord, In the love of
the Lord, In the Law, that is, in the true Religion of the Lord; for this is
that that makes the marriages of Christians, Contracts of another kind, then
the marriages of other people are; with all people of the world, marriage is as
fully the same Real, and Civil, and Moral Contract, as with us Christians.
The same Obligations of mutual help, of fidelity and loyalty to one another,
and of communication of all their possessions, lies upon marriage in Turkey,
Ephesians. 5. 32.
or China, as with us. But for Marriage amongst Christians, Sacramentum hoc
magnum est, says the Apostle, This is a great secret, a great mystery. Not
that it is therefore a Sacrament, as Baptism, and the Lords Supper are
Sacraments. For, if they will make marriage such a sacrament, because it is
expressed there in that word, Magnum sacramentum, Revel. 17. 5.
they may come to give us an eight sacrament after their seven; They may
translate that name which is upon the mother of Harlots, and abominations of
the earth, sacrament, if they will, for it is the same word, in that place of
the Revelation, which they translate Sacrament in the other place to the
Ephesians; And in the next verse but one, they do translate it so there; I
will tell thee, says the Angel, Sacramentum mulieris, the Sacrament of
Babylon. Now if all the mysteries and secrets of Antichrist, all the confused
practices of that Babylon, all the emergent and occasional articles of that
Church, and that State-religion, shall become Sacraments, we shall have a
Sacrament of Equivocation, a Sacrament of Invasion, a Sacrament of Powder, a
Sacrament of dissolving allegiance, sacraments in the Element of Baptism, in
the water, in navies, and Sacraments in the Elements of the Eucharist, in
Blood, in the sacred blood of Kings. But Marriage amongst Christians, is herein
Magnum mysterium, A Sacrament in such a sense; a mysterious signification of
the union of the soul with Christ, when both persons profess the Christian
Religion, in general, there arises some signification of that spiritual
union: But when they both profess Christ in one form, in one Church, in one
Religion, and that, the right; then, as by the Civil Contract, there is an
union of their estates, and persons, so, as that they two are made one, so by
this Sacramental, this mysterious union, these two, thus made one, between
themselves, are also made one with Christ himself; by the Civil union, common
to all people, they are made Eadem caro; The same flesh with one another, By
this mysterious, this Sacramental, this significative union, they are made
Idem Spiritus cum Domino; The same Spirit with the Lord. And therefore, though
in the Resurrection, they shall not mary, because then all the several uses of
marriage cease, yet till the Resurrection; that is, as long as this world lasts,
for the sustentation of the world, which is one Body, and Marriage the food, and
aliment thereof; for the reparation of the world, which is one Building, and
Marriage the supply thereof, to maintain a second eternity, in the succession
of children, and to illustrate this union of our souls to Christ; we may, and
in some Cases, must marry.

We are come, in our order proposed at first, to our second Part, Erimus sicut
Angeli, we shall be as the Angels of God in heaven; 2 Part. Divisio.
where we consider, first, what we are compared to, those Angels; And then in
what that Comparison lies, wherein we shall be like those Angels; And lastly,
the Proposition that flows out of this proposition, In the Resurrection we
shall be like them, Till the Resurrection we shall not, and therefore, in the
mean time, we must not look for Angelical perfections, but bear with one
another infirmities. Angeli.
Now when we would tell you, what those Angels of God in heaven, to which we
are compared, are, we can come no nearer telling you that, then by telling you,
we cannot tell. The Angels may be content with that Negative expressing, since
we can express God himself in no clearer terms, nor in terms expressing more
Dignity, then in saying we cannot express him. Only the Angels themselves
know one another; and, one good point, in which we shall be like them then,
shall be, that then we shall know what they are; we know they are Spirits in
Nature, but what the nature of a spirit is, we know not: we know they are
Angels in office, appointed to execute Gods will upon us; but, How a spirit
should execute those bodily actions, that Angels do, in their own motion, and
in the transportation of other things, we know not: we know they are Creatures;
but whether created with this world, (as all our later men incline to think) or
long before, (as all the Greek, and some of the Latin Fathers thought) we know
not: we know that for their number ^ and for their faculties also, there may be
one Angel for every man; but whether there be so, or no, because not only
amongst the Fathers, but even in the Reformed Churches, in both sub-divisions,
Lutheran, and Calvinist, great men deny it, and as great affirm it, we know
not: we know the Angels know, they understand, but whether by that way, which
we call in the School, Cognitionem Matutinam, by seeing all in God, or that
which we call Verspertinam, by a clearer manifestation of the species of things
to them, Colos. 1.
then to us, we know not: we know they are distinguished into Orders; the
Apostle tells us so: but what, or how many their Orders are, (since S. Gregory,
and S. Bernard differ from that Design of their nine orders, which S. Denis
the Areopagite had given before, in placing of those nine, and Athanasius adds
more to those nine,) we know not; But we are content to say with S. Augustine,
Esse firmissime credo, quaenam sint nescio; that there are distinct orders of
Angels, assuredly I believe; but what they are, I cannot tell; Dicant qui
possunt; si tamen probare possunt quod dicunt, says that Father, Let them tell
you that can, so they be able to prove, that they tell you true. They are
Creatures, that have not so much of a Body as flesh is, as froth is, as a vapor
is, as a sigh is, and yet with a touch they shall molder a rock into less
Atoms, then the sand that it stands upon; and a millstone into smaller flower,
then it grinds. They are Creatures made, and yet not a minute elder now, then
when they were first made, if they were made before all measure of time began;
nor, if they were made in the beginning of Time, and be now six thousand years
old, have they one wrinckle of Age in their face, or one sobbe of weariness in
their lungs. They are primogeniti Dei, Gods eldest sons; They are
superelementary meteors, they hang between the nature of God, and the nature of
man, and are of middle Condition; And, (if we may offencelessely express it
so) they are anigmata Divina, The Riddles of Heaven, and the perplexities of
speculation. But this is but till the Resurrection; Then we shall be like them,
and know them by that assimilation. We end this branch with this consideration,
If by being like the Angels, we shall know the Angels, we are more then like
ourselves, we are our selves, why do we not know our selves? Why did not Adam
know, that he had a Body, that might have been preserved in an immortality, and
yet submitted his body, and mine, and thine, and theirs, who by this union are
to be made one, and all, that by Gods goodness shall be derived from them, to
certain, to inevitable Death? Why do not we know our own Immortality, that
dwells in us still, for all Adams fall, and ours in him; that immortality which
we cannot divest, but must live for ever, whether we will or no? To know this
immortality, is to make this immortality, which otherwise is the heaviest part
of our Curse, a Blessing unto us, by providing to live in Immortal happiness:
whereas now, we do so little know our selves, as that if my soul could ask
one of those Worms which my dead body shall produce, Will you change with me?
that worm would say, No; for you are like to live eternally in torment; for my
part, I can live no longer, then the putrid moisture of your body will give me
leave, and therefore I will not change; nay, would the Devil himself change
with a damned soul? I cannot tell; As we argue conveniently, that the Devil is
tormented more then man, because the Devil fell from God, without any other
Tempter, then himself, but man had a Tempter, so may it be not inconveniently
argued too, that man may be more tormented then he, because man continued and
relapsed, in his rebellions to God, after so many pardons offered and accepted,
which the Devil never had. Howsoever, otherwise their torments may be equal,
as the Devil is a Spirit, and a condemned soul a spirit, yet that soul shall
have a Body too, to be tormented with it, which the Devil shall not. How
little we know our selves, which is the end of all knowledge! But we have to
the next branch, In the Resurrection we shall be like to the Angels of God in
Heaven; But in what lies this likeness?

In how many other things soever this likeness may ly, Simile's.
yet in this Text, and in our present purpose, it lies only in this, Non
nubent, In the Resurrection they shall not mary. But did Angels never mary, or,
as good, or, at least, as ill, as mary? How many of the ancients take those
words, Genesis 6. 2. Drusius in Sulpit. Sever.
That the sons of God saw the daughters of Men that they were fair, and they
took them wives of all which they chose, to be intended of Angels? They offer
to tell us how many these married Angels were; Origin says, sixty, or seventy.
They offer to tell us some of their names; Aza, was one of these married Angels,
and Azael was another. But then all those, who do understand these words, The
sons of God, to be intended of Angels, who being sent down, to protect Men,
fell in love with Women, and married them, all, I say, agree, that those Angels
that did so, never returned to God again, but fell, with the first fallen,
under everlasting Condemnation. So that still, the Angels of God in Heaven,
those Angels to whom we shall be like in the Resurrection, do not mary, not so
much as in any such mistaking; they do not, because they need not; they need
not, because they need no second Eternity, by the continuation of children;
for, says S. Luke, they cannot die. Adams first immortality was but this, Posse
non mori, that he needed not to have died, he should not have died; The Angels
immortality, and ours, when we shall be like them, in the Resurrection, is, Non
posse mori, that we cannot die, for, whosoever dies, is Homicida sui, says
Tertullian; he kills himself, and sin is his sword: In heaven there shall no
such sword be drawn; we need not say, that the Angels in heaven have, that we
when we shall be like them, in the Resurrection, shall so invest an immortality
in our nature, as that God could not inflict Death upon them, or us there, if
we sinned: But because no sin shall enter there, no Death shall enter there
neither, for, Death is the wages of sin. Not that no sin could enter there,
if we were left to our selves; for, in that place, Angels did sin; (And,
fatendum est Angelos natura mutabiles, says S. Augustine, Howsoever Angels be
changed in their Condition, they retain still the same nature, and by nature
they are mutable) But that God has added another prerogative, by way of
Confirmation, to that state; so, as that that Grace which he gives us here,
which is, that nothing shall put a necessity of sinning upon us, or that we
must needs sin, God multiplies upon us so there, as that we can conceive no
inclination to sin. Therein we shall be like the Angels, that we cannot die;
And the nearer we come to that state in this life, the liker we are to those
Angels here. Now, beloved, only he that is Dead already, cannot die. He that
in a holy mortification is Dead the Death of the righteous, dead to sin, he
lives, (shall we dare to say so? yes, we may) he lives a blessed Death, for
such a Death is true life: And by such a heavenly Death, Death of the
righteous, Death to sin, he is in possession of a heavenly life here, in an
inchoation, though the consummation, and perfection be reserved for the next
world; which is our last circumstance, and the Conclusion of all, At the
Resurrection we shall be like the Angels; Till then we shall not; and therefore
must not look for Angelical perfections here, but bear one another
infirmities.

It is as yet but in Petition, Interim.
fiat voluntas, Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven: And as long as
there is an Earth it will be but in Petition; His will will not be done in
Earth as it is in Heaven; when all is Heaven, to his Saints, all will be well;
but not all till then. In the mean time, remember all, (especially you, whose
Sacramental, that is, Mysterious, and significative union now is a Type of
your union with God in as near, and as fast a band, as that of Angels, for,
you shall be as the Angels of God in Heaven) That the office of the Angels in
this world, is to Assist, and to supply Defects. You are both of noble
extraction; there is no defect in that; you need not supply one another with
Honor: you are both of religious Education; there is no defect in that; you
need not supply one another with fundamental instructions. Both have your
parts in that testimony which S. Gregory gave of your Nation, at Rome, Angli
Angeli, you have a loveliness fit for one another. But, though I cannot Name,
no nor Think any thing, wherein I should wish that Angelical disposition of
supporting, or supplying defects, yet, when I consider, that even he that said
Ego and pater unum sumus, I and the Father are one, yet had a time to say,
utquid dereliquisti? My God, my God why have thou forsaken me? I consider
thereby, that no two can be so made one in this world, but that that unity may
be, though not Dissolved, no nor Rent, no nor Endangered, yet shaked sometimes
by domestique occasions, by Matrimonial encumbrances, by perverseness of
servants, by impertinencies of Children, by private whisperings, and calumnies
of Strangers. And therefore, to speak not Prophetically, that any such thing
shall fall, but Provisionally, if any such thing should fall, my love, and my
duty, and my Text, bids me tell you, that perfect happiness is to be staid
for, till you be as the Angels of God in heaven; here, it is a fair portion of
that Angelical happiness, if you be always ready to support, and supply one
another in any such occasional weaknesses. The God of Heaven multiply the
present joy of your parents, by that way, of making you joyful parents also;
and recompense your obedience to parents, by that way, of giving you obedient
Children too. The God of heaven so join you now, as that you may be glad of
one another all your life; and when he who has joined you, shall separate you
again, establish you with an assurance, that he has but borrowed one of you,
for a time, to make both your joies the more perfect in the Resurrection. The
God of Heaven make you always of one will, and that will always conformable
to his; conserve you in the sincere truth of his Religion; feast you with the
best feast, Peace of conscience; and carry you through the good opinion, and
love of his Saints in this world, to the association of his Saints, and Angels,
and one another, in the Resurrection, and everlasting possession of that
kingdom, which his Son, our Savior, Christ Jesus has purchased for us,
with the inestimable price of his incorruptible Blood, Amen.

SERMON II.
Preached at a Marriage.
GENESIS 2. 18. And the Lord God said, It is not good, that the man should be
alone; I will make him a Help, meet for him.
IN the Creation of the world, when God stocked the Earth, and the Sea, with
those creatures, which were to be the seminary, and foundation and root of all
that should ever be propagated in either of those elements, and when he had
made man, to rule over them, he ^^oke to man, and to other creatures, in one
and the same phrase, and form of speech, Crescite, and Multiplicamini, Be
fruitful and multiply; and thereby imprinted in man, and in other creatures, a
natural desire to conserve, and propagate their kind by way of Generation.
But after God had thus imprinted in man, the same natural desire of
propagation, which he had infused into other creatures too, after he had
communicated to him that blessing, Genesis 1. 22. 28.
(for so it is said, God blessed them, and said, Be fruitful, and multiply)
till an ability and a desire of propagating their kind, was infused into the
creature, there is no mention of any blessing in the creation; after God had
made men partakers of that blessing, that natural desire of propagation, he
takes a farther care of man, in giving him a proper and peculiar blessing, in
contracting and limiting that natural desire of his: He leaves all other
creatures to the^ general use and execution of that Commission, Crescite et
multiplicamini, the Male was to take the Female when and where their natural
desire provoked them; but, for man, Genesis 2. 22.
Add^xit Deus ad Adam; God left not them to go to one another, but God brought
the woman to the man: and so this conjunction, this desire of propagation,
though it be natural in man, as in other creatures, by his creation, yet it is
limited by God himself, to be exercised only between such persons, as God
has brought together in marriage, according to his Institution, and Ordinance.
Though then societies of men do grow up, and spread themselves into Towns,
and into Cities, and into Kingdoms, yet the root of all societies is in
families, in the relation between man and wife, parents and children, masters
and servants: so though the state of the children of God, in this world be
dignified by the name of a Kingdom, (for, so we pray by Christ's own
institution, Luke 17. 22.
Thy kingdom come, and so Christ says, Ecce Regnum, The kingdom of God is
amongst you) and though the state of Gods children here, be called a City, a
new Jerusalem, coming down from heaven, and in David, Apoc. 21. 2.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God, yet for all these glorious
titles of City and Kingdom, Psalm. 87. 3.
we must remember, that it is called a family too^ The Household of the
faithful: And so the Apostle says, in preferring Christ before Moses, That
Christ as the son was over Gods house, whose house we are. Heb. 3. 6.
So that, both of Civil and of Spiritual societies, the first root is a
family; and of families, the first root is Marriage; and of marriage, the first
root, that grows out into words, is in this Text; And the Lord God said, It
is not good etc.

If we should employ this exercise only upon these two general
considerations, first, that God puts even his care and his study to find out
what is good for man, and secondly, that God does provide and furnish
whatsoever he finds to be necessary, faciam, I will make him a Helper, though
they be common places we are bound to thank God that they are so; that it is a
common place to good, that he ever does it toward us, that it is a common
place to us, that we ever acknowledge it in him. But you may be pleased to
admit a more particular distribution. For, upon the first, will be grounded
this consideration, that in regard of the public good, God pretermits
private, and particular respects; for, God does not say, Non bonum homini, it
is not good for man to be alone, man might have done well enough so; nor God
does not say, non bonum hunc hominem, it is not good for this, or that
particular man to be alone; but non bonum, Hominem, it is not good in the
general, for the whole frame of the world, that man should be alone, because
then both Gods purposes had been frustrated, of being glorified by man here, in
this world, and of glorifying man, in the world to come; for neither of these
could have been done, without a succession, and propagation of man; and
therefore, non bonum hominem, it was not good, that man should be alone. And
then upon the second consideration, will arise these branches; first, that
whatsoever the defect be, there is no remedy, but from God; for it is, faciam,
I will do it. Secondly, that even the works of God, are not equally
excellent; this is but faciam, it is not faciamus; in the creation ^f man,
there is intimated a Consultation, a Deliberation of the whole Trinity; in the
making of women, it is not expressed so; it is but faciam. And then, that that
is made here, is but Adjutorium, but an accessory, not a principal; but a
Helper^ First the wife must be so much, she must Help; and then she must be no
more, she must not Govern. But she cannot be that, except she have that
quality, which God intended in the first woman, Adjutoriam simile sibi, a
helper fit for him: for otherwise he will ever return, to the bonum esse
solum, it had been better for him, to have been alone, then in the likeness of
a Helper, to have had a wife unfit for him.

First then, (...)
that in regard of the public good, God pretermits private respects, if we
take examples upon that stage, upon that scene, the face of Nature, we see that
for the conservation of the whole, God has imprinted in the particulars, a
disposition to depart from their own nature: water will clamber up hills, and
air will sink down into vaults, rather then admit Vacuity. But take the
example nearer, in Gods bosom, and there we see, that for the public, for
the redemption of the whole world, God has (shall we say, pretermitted?)
derelicted, forsaken, abandoned, his own, and only Son. Do you so too?
Regnum Dei intra nos; the kingdom of God is within you; planted in your
election; watered in your Baptism; fatned with the blood of Christ Jesus,
ploughed up with many calamities, and tribulations; weeded with often
repentances of particular sins; The kingdom of God is within you; and will ye
not depart from private affections, from Ambition and Covetousness, from
Excess, and voluptuousness, from chambring and wantonness, in which the
kingdom of God does not consist, for the conservation of this kingdom? will
ye not pray for this kigdome, in your private, and public devotions? will ye
not fast for this kingdom, in cutting off superfluities? will ye not fight for
this kingdom, in resisting suggestions? will ye not take Counsel for this
kingdom, in consulting with religious friends? will ye not give subsidies for
this kingdom, in relieving their necessities, for whom God has made you his
stewards? weigh and measure your selves, and spend that, be negligent of that,
which is least, and worst in you. Is your soul less then your body, because
it is in it? How easily lies a letter in a Box, which if it were unfolded,
would cover that Box? unfold your soul, and you shall see, that it reaches to
heaven; from thence it came, and thither it should pretend; whereas the body is
but from that earth, and for that earth, upon which it is now; which is but a
short, and an inglorious progress. To contract this, the soul is larger then
the body, and the glory, and the joys of heaven, larger then the honors, and
the pleasures of this world: what are seventy years, to that latitude, of
continuing as long as the Ancient of days? what is it, to have spent our time,
with the great ones of this time; when, when the Angels shall come and say,
that Time shall be no more, we shall have no being with him, who is yesterday,
and to day, and the same for ever? we see how ordinarily ships go many leagues
out of their direct way, to fetch the wind. Spiritus spirat ubi vult, says
Christ; the spirit blows where he will; and, as the Angel took Habakk^k by the
hair, and placed him where he would, this wind, the spirit of God, can take
thee at last, by thy gray hairs, and place thee in a good station then. Spirat
ubi vult, he blows where he will, and spirat ubi vis, he blows where thou will too, if thou be appliable to his inspirations. They are but hollow
places that return Echoes; last syllables: It is but a hollownesse of heart,
to answer God at last. Be but as liberal of thy body in thy mortifications as
in thy excess, and licentiousness, and thou shall in some measure, have
followed Gods example, for the public to pretermit the private, for the
larger, and better, to leave the narrower, and worser respects.

To proceed, when we made that observation, Non homini.
that God pretermitted the private for the public, we noted, that God did not
say, non bonum Homini, It was not good for man to be alone; man might have done
well enough in that state, so, as his solitariness might have been supplied
with a farther creation of more men. In making the inventaries of those goods
which man possesses in the world, Xenoph.
we see a great Author says, In possessionibus sunt amici, and inimici, not
only our friends, but even our enemies, are part of our goods, and we may
raise as much profit from these, as from those, It may be as good a lesson to a
man's son, Study that enemy, as Observe that friend. As David says, propitius
fuisti, Psalm. 99. 8.
and ulciscens, Thou heardst them o Lord our God, and wast favor able unto
them, and did punish all their inventions: it was part of his mercy, part of
his favor, that he did correct them. So we may say to our enemy, I owe you my
watchfulness upon my self, and you have given me all the goodness that I
have; for you have calumniated all my indifferent actions, and that kept me;
from committing enormous ill ones. And if then our enemies be in
possessionibus, to be inventaried amongst our goods, might not man have been
abundantly rich in friends, without this addition of a woman? Quanto
congruentius, says S. Augustine; how much more conveniently might two friends
live together, then a man and a woman?

God does not then say, non bonum homini, man got not so much by the bargain,
(especially if we consider how that wife carried her self toward him) but
that for his particular, he had been better alone^ nor he does not say now, non
bonum hunc hominem esse solum, It is not good for any man to be alone; for, Qui
potest capere capiat, says Christ: he that is able to receive it, let him
receive it. What? Mat. 19. 12.
That some make themselves Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: that is, the
better to un-entangle themselves from those impediments, which hinder them in
the way to heaven, they abstain from marriage; and let them that can receive
it, receive it. Now certainly few try whether they can receive this, or no. Few
strive, few fast, few pray for the gift of continency; few are content with
that incontinency which they have, but are sorry they can express no more
incontinency. There is a use of marriage now, which God never thought of in the
first institution of marriage; that it is a remedy against burning. The two
maine uses of marriage, which are propagation of Children, and mutual
assistance, were intended by God, at the present, at first; but the third, is a
remedy against that, which was not then; for then there was no inordinatenesse,
no irregularity in the affections of man. And experience has taught us now,
that those climates which are in reputation, hottest, are not uninhabitable;
they may be dwelt in for all their heat. Even now, in the corruption of our
nature, the clime is not so hot, as that every one must of necessity, mary.
There may be fire in the house, and yet the house not on fire: there may be a
distemper of heat, and yet no necessity to let blood. The Roman Church injures
us, when they say, that we prefer marriage before virginity: and they injure the
whole state of Christianity, when they oppose marriage and chastity, as though
they were incompatible, and might not consist together. Heb. 13. 4.
They may; for marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled; and therefore it
may be so. S. Augustine observes in marriage, Bonuam fidei, a trial of one
another truth; and that is good; And bonum prolis, a lawful means of
propagation; and that is good; and bonum Sacramenti, a mystical representation
of that union of two natures in Christ, and of him to us, and to his Church;
and that is good too. So that there are diverse degrees of good in marriage. But
yet for all these goodnesses, God does not say, non bonum, it is not good for
any man to be alone, but Qui capere potest capiat; according to Christ's
comment, upon his Fathers text, He that can contain and continue alone, let
him do so.

But though God do not say, non homini, It is not good for the man, that he be
alone, nor quemvis hominem, it is not good for every man to be alone, yet,
considering his general purpose upon all the world, by man, he says non
bonum; for that end, it is not good, that man should be alone, because those
purposes of God could not consist with that solitude of man. In that
production, and in that survay, which God made of all that he had made, still
he gives the testimony, that he saw all was good, excepting only in his Second
days work, and in his making of Man. He forbore it in the making of the
firmament, because the firmament was to divide between waters and waters; it
was an emblem of division, of disunion. He forbore it also in the making of
man, because though man was to be an emblem of Gods union to his Church, yet
because this emblem, and this representation, could not be in man alone, till
the woman were made too, God does not pronounce upon the making of man, that
the work was good: but upon Gods contemplation, that it was not good, that man
should be alone, there arose a goodness, in having a companion. And from that
time, if we seek bonum, quia licitum, if we will call that good, which is
lawful, marriage is that, If thou take a wife thou sinnest not, says God by
the Apostle. 1 Cor. 7. 28.
If we seek bonum, quia bonus author, if we call that good whose author is
good, Genesis 2. 22.
marriage is that; Adduxit ad Adam, God brought her to man. If we seek such a
goodness, as has good witness, good testimony, marriage is that; Christ was
present at a marriage, John. 2.
and honored it with his first miracle. If we seek such a goodness, as is a
constant, and not a temporary, an occasional goodness, Christ has put such a
cement upon marriage, Mat. 19. 6.
What God has joined, let no man put as under. If we seek such a goodness, as
no man, (that is, no sort nor degree of men) is the worse for having accepted,
we see the holiecst of all, the High Priest, in the old Testament is only
limited, what woman he shall not mary, but not that he shall not mary; and the
Bishop in the new Testament what kind of husband he must have been, but not
that he must have been no husband. To contract this, as marriage in good, in
having the best author, God, the best witness, Christ, the logest term, Life,
the largest extent, even to the highest persons, Priests, and Bishops; as it
is, all these ways, Positively good, so it is good in Comparison of that,
which justly seems the best state, that is, Virginity, in S. Augustines
opinion, Non impar meritum Iohannis and Abrahae: If we could consider merit in
man, the merit of Abraham, the father of nations, and the merit of John, who
was no father at all, is equal. But that wherein we consider the goodness of
it here, is, that God proposed this way, to receive glory from the sons of
men here upon earth, and to give glory to the sons of men in heaven.

But what glory can God receive from man, that he should be so careful of his
propagation? what glory more from man, then from the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, which have no propagation? why this, that S. Augustine observes; Musca
Soli praeferenda, quia vivit, A Fly is a nobler creature then the Sun,
because a fly has life, and the Sun has not; for the degrees of dignity in
the creature are esse, vivere, and intelligere: to have a being, to have life,
and to have understanding: and therefore man, who has all three, is much more
able to glorify God, then any other creature is, because he only can choose
whether he will glorify God or no; the glory that the others give, they must
give, Romans 12.
but man is able to offer to God a reasonable sacrifice. When ye were Gentiles,
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 2.
ye were carried away unto dumb Idols, even as ye were led. This is reasonable
service, out of Reason to understand, and out of our willingness to do God
service. Now, when God had spent infinite millions of millions of generations,
from all un-imaginable eternity, in contemplating one another in the Trinity,
and then (to speak humanly of God, which God in his Scriptures abhors not) out
of a satiety in that contemplation would create a world for his glory, and when
he had wrought the first day, and created all the matter, and substance of the
future creatures, and wrought four days after, and a great part of the sixth,
and yet nothing produced, which could give him any glory (for glory is
rationabile obsequium, reasonable service; and nothing could give that but a
creature that understood it, and would give it,) at last, as the knot of all,
created man; then, to perpetuate his glory, he must perpetuate man: and to that
purpose, non bonum, it was not good for man to be alone; as without man God
could not have been glorified, so without woman man could not have been
propagated.

But, as there is a place cited by S. Paul out of David, Psalm. 68. 18.
which has some perplexity in it, Ep^. 4. 8.
we cannot tell, whether Christ be said to have received gifts from men, or for
men; or to have given gifts to men, (for so S. Paul has it) so it is not easse
for us to discern, whether God had a care to propagate man, that he might
receive glory from man, or that he might give glory to man. When God had taken
it into his purpose to people heaven again, depopulated in the fall of Angels,
by the substitution of man in their places, when God had a purpose to spend as
much time with man in heaven after, as he had done with himself before, (for
our perpetuity after the Resurrection, shall no more have an end, then his
Eternity before the Creation had a beginning:) And when God to prevent that
time of the Resurrection, as it were to make sure of man before, would send
down his own Son to assume our nature here; and, as not sure enough so, would
take us up to him, and set us, in his Son, at his own right hand, whereas he
never did, nor shall say to any of the Angels, Sit thou there: That God might
not be frustrated of this great, and gracious, and glorious purpose of his, non
bonum, it was not good that man should be alone; for without man God could not
give this glory, and without woman there could be no propagation of man. And
so, though it might have been Bonum homini, man might have done well enough
alone; and Bonum hunc hominem, some men may do better alone, yet God, who
ever, for our example, prefers the public before the private, because it
conduced not to his general end, of Having, and of Giving glory, saw, and
said, Non bonum hominem, it was not good that man should be alone. And so we
have done with the branches of our first part.

We are come now to our second general part: 2d Part.
In which, as we saw in the former, that God studies man, and all things
necessary for man, we shall also see, that wherein soever man is defective, his
only supply, and reparation is from God, Faciam, I will do it. Saul wanted
counsel, he was in a perplexity, and he sought to the Witch of Endor, and not
to God; and what is the issue? he Hears of his own, and of his son Ionathans
death the next day. Asa wants health, and he seeks to the Physician, and not to
God, and what is the issue? He dies. Do not say, says S. Chrysostom. Quaero
necessaria, I desire nothing but that which is necessary for my birth,
necessary for my place: Quod non dat Deus, non est necessarium: God has made
himself thy Steward, thy Bayliffe; and whatsoever God provides not for thee, is
not necessary to thee. It was the poor way that Mahomet found out in his
Alchoran, that in the next life all women should have eyes of one bigness, and
a stature of one size; he could find no means to avoid contention, but to make
them all alike: But that is thy complexion, that is thy proportion which God
has given thee. It may be true that S. Hierome notes, who had so much
conversation amongst women, that it did him harm, Mult as insognis pudicitiae,
quamvis nulli virorum, sibi scimus ornari; I know, says he, as honest women as
are in the world, that take a delight in making themselves handsomely ready,
though for no other bodies sake but for their own. Cyprian.
That may be; but, manus Deo inferunt, they take the pencil out of Gods hand,
who go about to mend any thing of his making. Quod nascitur Dei est, quod
mutatur Diaboli, says the same Father; God made us according to his image, and
shall he be put to say to any of us, Non imago mea, this picture was not taken
by the life, not by me, but is a Copy of the present distemper of the time? All
good remedies are of God; none but he would ever have conceived such an
invention as the Ark, without that model, for the reparation of the world; and
he has provided that means for the conservation of the world, marriage, Tertul.
the association of one to one: Plures costae Adae, nec fatig at a manus Dei:
Adam had more ribs then one, neither were Gods hands wearied with making one;
and yet he made no more. For him who first exceeded that, Lamech, Genesis 4. 18.
who had two wives, the first was Adah, and Adah signifies Coetum,
congregationem; there is company enough, society enough in a wife: His other
wife was but Zillah, and Zillah is but umbra, but a shadow, but a ghost, that
will terrify at last.

To proceed; Though God always provide remedies, Faciam.
and supplies of defects, it is not always in the greatest measure, nor in the
presentest manner, that we conceive to our selves. So much may be intimated
even in this, that in this remedy of Gods provision, the woman, God proceeded
not, as he did in the making of man; it is not Faciamus, with such a counsel,
such a deliberation as was used in that case. When the Creation of all the
substance of the whole world is expressed, it is Creavit Dit, Gods created, as
though more Gods were employed; and in the making of him, who was the
abridgement of all, of man, it is faciamus, let us make him, as though more
persons were employed: it is not so in the woman, for though the first
Translation of the Bible that ever were and the Translation of the Roman Church
have it in the plural, yet it is not so in the Original; it is but faci^m. I
press no more upon this, but one lesson to our selves, That if God exercise us
with temporal afflictions, narrowness in our fortunes, infirmities in our
constitutions, or with spiritual afflictions, ignorance in our understandings,
scruples in our conscience, if God come not altogether in his faciamus, to
power down with both hands abundance of his worldly ^reafures, or of his
spiritual light and clearness, let us content our selves with one hand from
him, with that manner and that measure that he gives, and that time and that
leisure which he takes. And then one lesson also to the other sex, That they
will be content, even by this form and change of phrase, to be remembered, 1 Timothy 2. 14.
that they are the weaker vessel, and that Adam was not deceived but the woman
was. For whether you will ease that with Theodorets exposition, Adam was not
deceived first, but the woman was first deceived; Or with Chrys^st^ms
exposition, Adam was not deceived by a Serpent, a creature loathsome, and
unacceptable, but by a lovely person, with whom he was transported: Or with
Oecumenius his exposition; Adam was not deceived, because there is no charge
laid upon him in the Scriptures, no mention that he was deceived in them, as it
is said, that Melchisedek had no Father nor Mother, because there is no record
of his pedigree in the Scriptures: Or in Ambr^se his exposition; That Adam was
not deceived in praevaricationem, not so deceived as that he deceived any body
else: Take it any way, 1 Timothy 2. 11.
and it implies a weakness in the woman, and an occasion of soupling her to
that just estimation of her self, That she will be ^ntent to learn in sitence
with all subjection^ That as she is not a servant, but a Mother in the house,
so she is but a Daughter, and not a Mother of the Church.

This is presented more fully in the next, Adjutorium.
that ^he is but Adjutorium, but a Help: and no body values his staff, as he
does his legges^. It is not an ordinary disease now, to be ^xori^^s that needs
no great disswasion. But if any one man in a congregation be obnoxious to any
one infirmity, one note is not ^ill spent: And let S. Hierome give this note,
Sapi^ns judicio am^t, non affectu, Discretion is the weight of love in a wise
man's hand, and not affection. S. Hier^^^ cannot stay there; he adds thus much
more, Nihil foedius, quam uxorem amare (...) adulteram, There is not a more
uncomely, a poorer thing, then to love a wife lik^ a Mistress. S. Augustine
makes that comparison, That whenever the Apostles preached, they were glad
when their auditory liked their preaching, Non avidita^e consequendae laudis,
sed charitate seminande virtutis; not that they affected the praise of the
people, but that thereby they saw, that they had done more good upon the
people. And in another place he makes that comparison, That a righteous man
desires to be dissolved and to be with Christ, and yet this righteous man
dines, and sups, takes ordinary refections and ordinary recreations: So, for
marriage, says he, in temperate men, officiosum, non libidinesum, it is to pay a
debt, not to satisfy appetite; lest otherwise she prove in Ruinam, who was
given in Adjutorium, and he be put to the first man's plea, Mulier quam dedisti,
The woman whom thou gave me, gave me my death.

So much then she should be, A Helper; for, for that she was made. She is not
so, if she remember not those duties which are intimated in the stipulation and
contract which she has made. Call it Conjugium, and that is derived a Judge, it
is an equal patience in bearing the incommodities of this life. Call it
Nuptias, and that is derived a Nube, a veil, a covering; and that is an
estranging, a withdrawing her self from all such conversation as may violate
his peace, or her honor. Call it Matrimonium, and that is derived from a
Mother, and that implies a religious education of her children. De latere
sumpta, nor-discedat a latere, says A^g. Since she was taken out of his side,
let her not depart from his side, but show her self so much as she was made
for, Adjutorium, a Helper.

But she must be no more; If she think her self more then a Helper, she is not
so much. He is a miserable creature, whose Creator is his Wife. God did not
stay to join her in Commission with Adam, so far as to give names to the
creatures; much less to give essence; essence to the man, essence to her
husband. When the wife thinks her husband owes her all his fortune, all his
discretion, all his reputation, God help that man himself, for he has given
him no helper yet. I know there are some glasses stronger then some earthen
vessels, and some earthen vessels stronger then some wooden dishes; some of the
weaker sex, stronger in fortune, and in counsel too, then they to whom God
has given them, but yet let them not impute that in the eye nor ear of the
world, nor repeat it to their own hearts, with such a dignifying of themselves,
as exceeds the quality of a Helper. S. Hierome shall be her Remembrancer, She
was not taken out of the fo^t; to be trodden upon, nor out of the head, to be an
overseer of him; but out of his side, where she weakens him enough, and
therefore should do all she can, to be a Helper.

To be so, so much, and no more, she must be as God made Eve, fimilis ei, meet
and fit for her husband. She is fit for any if she have those virtues, which
always make the person that has them good; as chastity, sobriety, taciturnity,
verity, and such; for, for such virtues as may be had, and yet the possessor
not the better for them, as wit; learning, eloquence, music, memory, cunning,
and such, these make her never the fitter. There is a Harmony of dispositions,
and that requires particular consideration upon emergent occasions; but the
fitness that goes through all, is a sober continency; for without that,
Matrimonium jurata fornicatio, Marriage is but a continual fornication, sealed
with an oath: And marriage was not instituted to prostitute the chastity of the
woman to one man, but to preserve her chastity from the tentations of more men.
Bathsheba was a little too fit for David, when he had tried her so far before;
for there is no fitness where there is not continency. To end all, there is a
Moral fitness, consisting in those moral virtues, of which we have spoke
enough; And there is a Civil fitness, consisting in Discretion, and
accommodating her self to him; And there is a Spiritual fitness, in the
unanimity of Religion, that they be not of repugnant professions that way. Of
which, since we are well assured in both these, who are to be joined now, I am
not sorry, if either the hour, or the present occasion call me from speaking
any thing at all, because it is a subject too mis-interpretable, and
unseasonable to admit an enlarging in at this time. At this time therefore,
this be enough, for the explication and application of these words.

SERMON III.
Preached at a Marriage.
HOSEA 2. 19. And I will mary thee unto me for ever.
THE word which is the hinge upon which all this Text turns, is Erash, and
Erash signifies not only a betrothing, as our later Translation has it, 2 Samuel 3. 14.
but a marriage; And so it is used by David, Deliver me my wife Michal whom I
married; and so our former Translation had it, and so we accept it, and so shall
handle it, I will mary thee unto me for ever.

The first marriage that was made, God made, and he made it in Paradise: And of
that marriage I have had the like occasion as this to speak before, in the
presence of many honorable persons in this company. The last marriage which
shall be made, God shall make too, and in Paradise too; in the Kingdom of
heaven: and at that marriage, I hope in him that shall make it, to meet, not
some, but all this company. The marriage in this Text has relation to both
those marriages: It is it self the spiritual and mystical marriage of Christ
Jesus to the Church, and to every mariageable soul in the Church: And it has
a retrospect, it looks back to the first marriage; for to that the first word
carries us, because from thence God takes his metaphor, and comparison,
sponsabo, I will mary; And then it has a prospect to the last marriage, for to
that we are carried in the last word, in aeternum, I will mary thee unto me for
ever. Be pleased therefore to give me leave in this exercise, to shift the
scene thrice, and to present to your religious considerations three objects,
three subjects: first, a secular marriage in Paradise; secondly, a spiritual
marriage in the Church; and thirdly, an eternal marriage in heaven. And in each
of these three we shall present three circumstances; first the Persons, Me and
Tibi, I will mary thee; And then the Action, Sponsabo, I will mary thee; And
lastly the Term, In aeternam, I will mary thee to me for ever.

In the first acceptance then, 1t Part. Persons.
in the first, the secular marriage in Paradise, the persons were Adam and Eve:
Ever since they are he and she, man and woman: At first, by reason of
necessity, without any such limitation, as now: And now without any other
limitation, then such as are expressed in the Law of God: As the Apostles say
in the first general Council, Acts 15. 28.
We lay nothing upon you but things necessary, so we call nothing necessary but
that which is commanded by God. If in heaven I may have the place of a man that
has performed the Commandments of God, I will not change with him that thinks
he has done more then the Commandments of God enjoined him. The rule of
marriage for degrees and distance in blood, is the Law of God; but for
conditions of men, there is no Rule given at all. When God had made Adam and
Eve in Paradise, God did not place Adam in a Monastery on one side, and Eve in
a Nunnery on the other, and so a River between them. They that built walls and
cloisters to frustrate Gods institution of marriage, 1 Timothy 4. 3.
advance the Doctrine of Devils in forbidding marriage. The Devil has
advantages enough against us, in bringing men and women together: It was a
strange and super-devilish invention, to give him a new advantage against us,
by keeping men and women asunder, by forbidding marriage. Between the heresy of
the Nicolaitans, that induced a community of women, any might take any; and the
heresy of the Tatians that forbad all, none might take any, was a fair
latitude. Between the opinion of the Manichean heretics, that thought women to
be made by the Devil, and your Colliridian heretics that sacrificed to a
women, as to God, there is a fair distance. Between the denying of them souls,
which S. Ambrose is charged to have done, and giving them such souls, as that
they may be Priests, as your Pepution heretics did, is a fair way for a
moderate man to walk in. To make them Gods is ungodly, and to make them Devils
is devilish; To make them Mistresses is unmanly, and to make them servants is
unnoble; To make them as God made them, wives, is godly and manly too. When in
your Roman Church they dissolved marriage in natural kindred, in degrees where
God forbids it not, when they dissolve marriage upon spitituall kindred, because
my Grandfather Christened that woman's Father; when they dissolve marriage upon
legal kindred, because my Grandfather adopted that woman's Father: they
separate those whom God has joined so, as to give leave to join in lawful
marriage. When men have made vows to abstain from marriage, I would they would
they would be content to try a little longer then they do, whether they could
keep that vow or no: And when men have consecrated themselves to the service of
God in his Church, I would they would be content to try a little farther then
they do, whether they could abstain or no: But to dissolve marriage made after
such a Vow, or after Orders, is still to separate those whom God has not
separated. The Persons are he and she, man and woman; they must be so much; he
must be a man, she must be a woman; And they must be no more; not a brother and
a sister, not an uncle and aneece; Adduxit od eum, was the cause between Adam
and Eve, God brought them together; God will not bring me a precontracted
person, he will not have me defraud another; nor God will not bring me a
mis-beleeving, a superstitious person, he will not have me drawn from himself:
But let them be persons that God has made, man and woman, and persons that God
has brought together, that is, not put asounder by any Law of his, and all
such persons are capable of this first, this secular marriage.

In which our second Consideration is the Action, Sponsabe; Sponsabo.
where the Active is a kind of Passive, I will mary thee, is, I will be married
unto thee, for we mary not our selves. They are somewhat hard driven in the
Roman Church, Bellar. de Matrimo. l. 1. c. 6.
when making marriage a Sacrament, and being pressed by us with this question, If
it be a Sacrament, who administers it, who is the Priest? They are fain to
answer, the Bridegroom and the Bride, he and she are the Priest in that
Sacrament. As marriage is a civil Contract, it must be done so in public, as
that it may have the testimony of men; As marriage is a religious Contract, it
must be so done, as that it may have the benediction of the Priest: In a
marriage without testimony of men they cannot claim any benefit of the Law; In a
marriage without the benediction of the Priest they cannot claim any benefit of
the Church: for how Matrimonially foever such persons as have married themselves
may pretend to love, and live together, yet all that love, and all that life is
but a regulated Adultery, it is not marriage.

Now this institution of marriage had three objects: first, In ustionem, In
ustionem.
it was given for a remedy against burning; And then, In prolem, for
propagation, for children; And lastly, In adjutorium, for mutual help. As we
consider it the first way, In ustionem, every heating is not a burning; every
natural concupiscence does not require a marriage; may every flaming is not a
burning; though a man continue under the flame of carnal tentation, as long as
S. Paul did; yet it needs not come presently to a Sponsabo, I will mary. God
gave S. Paul other Physic, Gratia mea sufficit, grace to stand under that
tentation; And S. Paul gave himself other Physic, Contundo corpus, convenient
disciplines to tame his body. Ambrose.
These will keepa man from burning; for Vriest desideriis vinci, desideria
pati, illustris est, and perfecti; To be overcome by our concupiscences, that
is to burn, but to quench the fire by religious ways, that is a noble, that is
a perfect work. When God at the first institution of marriage had this first use
of marriage in his contemplation, that it should be a remedy against burning,
God gave man the remedy, before he had the disease; for marriage was instituted
in the state of innocence, when there was no inordinatenesse in the affections
of man, and so no burning. But as God created Reubarb in the world, whose
quality is to purge choler, before there was any choler to purge, so God
according to his abundant forwardness to do us good, created a remedy before
the disease, which he foresaw coming, was come upon us. Let him then that
takes a wife in this first and lowest sense, In medicinam, but as his Physic,
yet make her his cordial Physic, take her to his heart, and fill his heart
with her, let her dwell there, and dwell there alone, and so they will be
mutual Antidotes and Preservatives one to another, against all foreign
tentations. And with this blessing, bless thou, o Lord, these whom thou have
brought hither for this blessing: make all the days of their life like this day
unto them; and as thy mercies are new every morning, make them so to one
another; And if they may not die together, sustain thou the survivor of them in
that sad hour with this comfort, That he that died for them both, will bring
them together again in his everlastingnesse.

The second use of marriage was In prolificationem, In prolem.
for children: And therefore as S. August. puts the case, To contract before,
that they will have no children, makes it no marriage but an adultery: To deny
themselves to another, is as much against marriage as to give themselves to
another. To hinder it by Physic, or any other practice; nay to hinder it so
far, as by a deliberate wish, or prayer against children, consists not well
with this second use of marriage. And yet in this second use, we do not so much
consider generation as regeneration; not so much procreation as education, nor
propagation as transportation of children. For this world might be filled full
enough of children, though there were no marriage; but heaven could not be
filled, nor the places of the fallen Angels supplied, without that care of
childrens religious education, which from Parents in lawful marriage they are
likeliest to receive. How infinite, and how miserable a circle of sin do we
make, if as we sinned in our Parents loins before we were born, so we sin in
our childrens actions when we are dead, by having given them, either example,
or liberty of sinning. We have a fearful commination from God upon a good man,
upon Eli, 1. Sam. 3. 11. 4. 18.
for his not restraining the licentiousness of his sons; I will do a thing in
Israel, says God there, at which every man's ears that hears it shall single:
And it was executed, Eli fell down and broke his neck. We have also a
consolation to women for children, 1 Timothy 2. 15.
She shall be saved in Childbearing, says the Apostle; but as Chrysostom and
others of the Ancients observe and interpret that place (which interpretation
arises out of the very letter) it is, Si permanserint, not if she, but if they,
if the children continue in faith, in charity, in holiness, and sobriety: The
salvation of the Parents has so much relation to the childrens goodness, as
that if they be ill by the Parents example, or indulgence, the Parents are as
guilty as the children. Art thou afraid thy child should be stung with a
Snake, and will thou let him play with the old Serpent, in opening himself to
all tentations? Art thou afraid to let him walk in an ill air, and art thou
content to let him stand in that pestilent air that is made of nothing but
oaths, and execrations of blasphemous mouths round about him? It is S.
Chrysostomes complaint, Perditionem magno pretio emunt; Salutem nec done
accipere volunt; we pay dear for our childrens damnation, by paying at first
for all their childish vanities, and then for their sinful insolences at any
rate; and we might have them saved, and our selves to the bargain, (which were
a frugall way, and a debt well hedged in) for much less then ours, and their
damnation stands us in. If you have a desire, says that blessed Father, to
leave them certainly rich, Deumiis relinque Debitorem, Do some such thing for
Gods service, as you may leave God in their debt. He cannot break; his estate
is inexhaustible; he will not break promise, nor break day; He will show mercy
unto thousands in them that love him and keep his Commandments. And here also
may another shower of his benedictions fall upon them whom he has prepared and
presented here; Let the wife be as a fruitful Vine, and their children like
Olive plants: Ps. 128. 3.
To thy glory, let the Parents express the love of Parents, and the children,
to thy glory, the obedience of children, till they both loose that secular name
of Parents and Children, and meet all alike, in one new name, all Saints in thy
Kingdom, and fellow servants there.

The third and last use in this institution of secular marriage, In adjutorium.
was, In adjutorium, for mutual help. There is no state, no man in any state,
that needs not the help of others. Subjects need Kings, and if Kings do not
need their Subjects, they need alliances abroad, and they need Counsel at
home. Even in Paradise, where the earth produced all things for life without
labor, and the beasts submitted themselves to man, so that he had no outward
enemy; And in the state of innocence in Paradise, where in man all the
affections submitted themselves to reason, so that he had no inward enemy, yet
God in this abundant Paradise, and in this secure innocence of Paradise, even
in the survey of his own work, saw, that though all that he had made was good,
yet he had not made all good; he found thus much defect in his own work, that
man lacked a helper. Every body needs the help of others; and every good body
does give some kind of help to others. Even into the Ark it self, where God
blessed them all with a powerful and an immediate protection, God admitted
only such as were fitted to help one another, couples. In the Ark, which was
the Type of our best condition in this life, there was not a single person.
Christ saved once one thief at the last gasp, to show that there may be late
repentances; but in the Ark he saved none but married persons, to show, that he
eases himself in making them helpers to one another. And therefore when we come
to the P^sui Deum adjutorium meum, to rely upon God primarily for our Help, God
comes to the faciam tibi adjutorium, I will make thee a help like thy self: not
always like in complexion, nor like in years, nor like in fortune, nor like in
birth, but like in mind, like in disposition, like in the love of God, and of
one another or else there is no helper. It was no kind of help that David's
wife gave him, when she spoke by way of counsel, but in truth, in scorn and
derision, to draw him from a religious act, as the dancing before the Ark, at
that time was: It is no help for any respect, to slacken the husband in his
Religion. It was but a poor help that Nabals wife was fain to give him by
telling David, Al as my husband is but a fool, like his name, and what will
you look for at a fools hand? It is the worst help of all to raise a husband by
dejecting her self, to help her husband forward in this world, by forfeiting
sinfully, and dishonourably her own interest in the next. The husband in the
Helper in the nature of a foundation, to sustain and uphold all; The wife in
the nature of the roof, to cover imperfections and weaknesses: The husband in
the nature of the head from whom all the sinews flow; The wife in the nature of
the hands into which those sinews flow, and enable them to do their offices.
The husband helps as legs to her, she moves by his motion; The wife helps as
a staff to him, he moves the better by her assistance. And let this mutual
help be a part of our present benediction too; In all the ways of fortune let
his industry help her, and in all the crosses of fortune let her patience help
him; and in all emergent occasions and dangers spiritual, or temporal, O God
make speed to save them, O Lord, make haste to help them.

We have spoken of the persons, In aeternum.
man and woman, him and her; And of the action, first as it is Physic, but
cordial Physic; and then for children, but children to be made the children
of God; and lastly for help, but true help and mutual help; There remains yet
in this secular marriage, the Term, how long, for ever, I will mary thee for
ever. Now though there be properly no eternity in this secular marriage, nor in
any thing in this world, (for eternity is that only which never had ^eginning,
nor ever shall have end) yet we may consider a kind of eternity, a kind of
circle without beginning, without end, even in this secular marriage: for first,
marriage should have no beginning before marriage; no half-mariage, no lending
away of the mind, in conditional precontracts before, no lending away of the
body in unchaste wantonness before. The body is the temple of the Holy Ghost;
and when two bodies, by marriage are to be made one temple, the wife is not as
the Chancell, reserved and shut up, and the man as the walks below, indifferent
and at liberty for every passenger. God in his Temple looks for first fruits
from both, that so on both sides, marriage should have such a degree of
eternity, as to have had no beginning of marriage before marriage. It should have
this degree of eternity too, this quality of a circle to have no interruption,
no breaking in the way by unjust suspicions and jealousies. Where there is
Spiritus immunditei, as S. Paul calls it, a spirit of uncleanness, there will
necessarily be Spiritus zelotypiae, as Moses calls it, a spirit of jealousy.
But to raise the Devil in the power of the Devil, to call up one spirit by
another spirit, by the spirit of jealousy and suspicion, to induce the spirit
of uncleanness where it was not, if a man conjure up a Devil so, God knows
who shall conjure it down again, As jealousy is a care and not a suspicion,
God is not ashamed to protest of himself that he is a jealous God. Exodus 20.
God commands that no idolatry be committed, Thou shall not bow down to a
graven Image; and before he accuses any man to have bowed down to a graven
Image, before any Idolatry was committed, he tells them that he is a jealous
God; God is jealous before there is any harm done. And God presents it as a
curse, when he says, My jealousy shall depart from thee, Ezech. 16. 42.
and I will be quiet, and no more angry; that is, I will heave thee to thy
self, and take no more care of thee. Jealousy that implies care, and honor,
and counsel, and tenderness, is rooted in God, for God is a jealous God, and
his servants are jealous servants, as S. Paul professes of himself, 2 Cor. 11.
2.
I am jealous over you with a gedly jealousy. But jealousy that implies
diffidence and suspicion, and accusation, is rooted in the Devil, for he is the
Accuser of the brethren.

So then, this secular marriage should be in aeternum, eternal, for ever, as to
have no beginning before, and so too, as to have no jealous interruption by the
way; for it is so eternal, as that it can have no end in this life: Those whom
God has joined, no man, no Devil, can separate so, as that it shall not
remain a marriage so far, as that if those separated persons will live together
again, yet they shall not be new married; so far, certainly, the band of
marriage continues still. The Devil makes no marriages; He may have a hand in
drawing conveyances; in the temporal conditios there may be practice, but the
marriage is made by God in heaven. The Devil can break no marriages neither,
though he can by sin break off all the good uses, and take away all the
comforts of marriage. I pronounce not now whether Adultery dissolves marriage or
no; It is S. Augustines wisdom to say, Where the Scripture is silent, let me
be silent too: And I may go lower then he, and say, Where the Church is
silent, let me be silent too; and our Church is so far silent in this, as that
it has not said, That Adultery dissolves marriage. Perchance then it is not the
death of marriage, but surely it is a deadly wound. We have Authors in the
Romanc Church that think fornicationem non vagam, that such an incontinent life
as is limited to one certain person, is no deadly sin, But there is none even
amongst them that diminish the crime of Adultery. Habere quasi non haberes, is
Christ's counsel, To have a wife as though thou had none, that is continency,
and temperance, and forbearance and abstinency upon some occasions; But non
habere quasi haberes, is not so; not to have a wife, and yet have her, to have
her, that is another, that is the Devils counsel. That falutation of the
Angle to the blessed Virgin Mary, Blessed art thou amongst memen, we may make
even this interpretation, not only that she was blessed amongst women, that
is, above women, but that she was Benedicta, blessed amongst women, that all
women blessed her, that no woman had occasion to curse her: And this is the
eternity of this secular marriage as far as this world admits any eternity; that
it should have no beginning before, no interruption of jealousy in the way, no
such approach toward dissolution, as that incontinency, in all opinions, and
in all Churches is agreed to be. And here also without any scruple of fear, or
of suspicion of the contrary, there is place for this benediction, upon this
couple; Build, o Lord, upon thine own foundations, in these two, and establish
thy former graces with future; that no person ever complain of either of them,
nor either of them of one another, and so he and she are married in aeternum for
ever.

We are now come in our order proposed at first, to our second Part; 2d Part.
for all is said that I intended of the secular marriage. And of this second,
the spiritual marriage, much needs not to be said: There is another Priest that
contracts that, another Preacher that celebrates that, the Spirit of God to our
spirit. And for the third marriage, the eternal marriage, it is a boldness to
speak any thing of a thing so inexpressible as the joys of heaven; it is a
diminution of them to go about to heighten them; it is a shadowing of them to
go about to lay any colors or light upon them. But yet your patience may
perchance last to a word of each of these three Circumstances, The Persons, the
Action, the Term, both in this spiritual, and in the eternal marriage.

First then, as in the former Part, the secular marriage, Persons.
for the persons there, we considered first Adam and Eve, and after every man
and woman, and this couple in particular; so in this spiritual marriage we
consider first Christ and his Church, for the Persons, and more particularly
Christ and my soul. And can these persons meet? in such a distance, and in such
a disparagement can these persons meet? the Son of God and the son of man? When
I consider Christ to be Germen Iehovae, the bud and blossom, the fruit and
offspring of Jehovah, Jehovah himself, and my self before he took me in hand,
to be, not a Potters vessel of earth, but that earth of which the Potter might
make a vessel if he would, and break it if he would when he had made it: When I
consider Christ to have been from before all beginnings, and to be still the
Image of the Father, the same stamp upon the same metal, and my self a piece
of rusty copper, in which those lines of the Image of God which were imprinted
in me in my Creation are defaced and worn, and washed and burnt, and ground
away, by my many, and many, and many fins: When I consider Christ in his
Circle, in glory with his Father, before he came into this world, establishing
a glorious Church when he was in this world, and glorifying that Church with
that glory which himself had before, when he went out of this world; and then
consider my self in my circle, I came into this world washed in my own tears,
and either out of compunction for my self or compassion for others, I pass
through this world as through a valley of tears, where tears settle and swell,
and when I pass out of this world I leave their eyes whose hands close mine,
full of tears too, can these persons, this Image of God, this God himself, this
glorious God, and this vessel of earth, this earth it self, this inglorious
worm of the earth, meet without disparagement?

They do meet and make a marriage; Action.
because I am not a body only, but a body and s,oul there is a marriage, Deuteronomy
21. 12.
and Christ mary's me. As by the Law a man might mary a captive woman in the
Wars, if he shaved her head, and pared her nails, and changed her clothes: so
my Savior having fought for my soul, fought to blood, to death, to the death
of the Cross for her, having studied my soul so much, as to write all those
Epistles which are in the New Testament to my soul, having presented my soul
with his own picture, that I can see his face in all his temporal blessings,
having shaved her head in abating her pride, and pared her nails in contracting
her greedy desires, and changed her clothes not to fashion her self after this
world, my soul being thus fitted by himself, Christ Jesus has married my soul,
married her to all the three intendments mentioned in the secular marriage;
first, in ustionem, In ustionem.
against burning; That whether I burn my self in the fires of tentation, by
exposing my self to occasions of tentation, or be reserved to be burnt by
others in the fires of persecution and martyrdom, whether the fires of
ambition, or envy, or lust, or the everlasting fires of hell offer at me in an
apprehension of the judgments of God, yet as the Spirit of God shall wipe all
tears from mine eyes, so the tears of Christ Jesus shall extinguish all fires
in my heart, and so it is a marriage, In ustionem, a remedy against burning.

It is so too, In prolem.
In prolificationem, for children; first, vae soli, woe unto that single soul
that is not married to Christ; that is not come into the way of having issue by
him, that is not incorporated in the Christian Church, and in the true Church,
but is yet in the wilderness of Idolatry amongst the Gentiles, or in the
Labyrinth of superstition amongst the Papists, vae soli, woe unto that single
man that is not married unto Christ in the Sacraments of the Church; and vae
sterili, woe unto them that are barren after this spiritual marriage, Ier. 22.
30.
for that is a great curse in the Prophet Jeremy, Scribe virum istum sterilem,
write this man childlesse, that implied all calamities upon him; And as soon as
Christ had laid that curse upon the Fig Tree, Mat. 21. 19.
Let no fruit grow upon thee for ever, presently the whole tree withered; no
fruit, no leafes neither, nor body left. To be incorporated in the body of
Christ Jesus, and bring forth no fruits worthy of that profession, is a woeful
state too. Vae soli, woe unto the Gentiles not married unto Christ; and vae
sterili, woe unto inconsiderate Christians, that think not upon their calling,
that conceive not by Christ; but there is a vae praegnanti too, Mat. 24. 19.
woe unto them that are with child, and are never delivered; that have good
conceptions, religious dispositions, holy desires to the advancement of Gods
truth, but for some collateral respects dare not utter them, nor bring them to
their birth, to any effect. The purpose of his marriage to us, is to have
children by us: and this is his abundant and his present fecundity, that
working now, by me in you, in one instant he has children in me, and grand
children by me. He has married me, in ustionem, and in prolem, against burning,
and for children; but can he have any use of me, in adjutorium, for a helper?
Surely, if I be able to feed him, and clothe him, and harbor him, (and Christ
would not condemn men at the last day for not doing these, if man could not
do them) I am able to help him too. Great persons can help him over sea,
convey the name of Christ where it has not been preached yet; and they can
help him home again; restore his name, and his truth where superstition with
violence has disseised him: And they can help him at home, defend his truth
there against all machinations to displant and dispossess him. Great men can
help him thus; and every man can help him to a better place in his own heart,
and his own actions, then he has had there; and to be so helped in me and
helped by me, to have his glory thereby advanced, Christ has married my soul:
And he has married it in aeternum, for ever; which is the third and last
Circumstance in this spiritual, as it was in the secular marriage.

And here the aeternum is enlarged; In aeternum.
in the secular marriage it was an eternity considered only in this life; but
this eternity is not begun in this world, but from all eternity in the Book of
life, in Gods eternal Decree for my election, there Christ was married to my
soul. Christ was never in minority, never under years; there was never any time
when he was not as ancient as the Ancient of Days, as old as his Father. But
when my soul was in a strange minority, infinite millions of millions of
generations, before my soul was a soul, did Christ mary my soul in his eternal
Decree. So it was eternal, it had no beginning. Neither does he interrupt ^his
by giving me any occasion of jealousy by the way, but loves my soul as though
there were no other soul, and would have done and suffered all that he did for
me alone, if there had been no name but mine in the Book of life. And as he
has married me to him, in aeternum, for ever, before all beginnings, and in
aeternum, for ever, without any interruptions, so I know, that whom he loves he
loves to the end, and that he has given me, not a presumptuous impossibility,
but a modest infallibility, that no sin of mine shall divorce or separate me
from him, for, that which ends the secular marriage, ends not the spiritual:
not death, for my death does not take me from that husband, but that husband
being by his Father preferred to higher titles, and greater glory in another
state, I do but go by death where he is become a King, to have my part in
that glory, and in those additions which he has received there. And this has
led us to our third and last marriage, our eternal marriage in the triumphant
Church.

And in this third marriage, the persons are, 3 d Part. Persons. Apoc. 19. 7, 9.
Esaias 53. 4.
the Lamb and my soul; The marriage of the Lamb is come, and blessed are they
that are called to the marriage Supper of the Lamb, says S. John speaking of our
state in the general Resurrection. That Lamb that was brought to the slaughter
and opened not his mouth, and I who have opened my mouth and poured out
imprecations and curses upon men, and execrations and blasphemies against God
upon every occasion; That Lamb who was slain from the beginning, and was slain
by him who was a murderer from the beginning; That Lamb which took away the
sins of the world, and I who brought more sins into the world, then any
sacrifice but the blood of this Lamb could take away: This Lamb and I (these
are the Persons) shall meet and mary; there is the Action.

This is not a clandestine marriage, Action.
not the private seal of Christ in the obsignation of his Spirit; and yet such
a clandestine marriage is a good marriage: Nor it is not such a Parish marriage,
as when Christ married me to himself at my Baptism, in a Church here ^ and yet
that marriage of a Christian soul to Christ in that Sacrament is a blessed
marriage: But this is a marriage in that great and glorious Congregation, where
all my fins shall be laid open to the eyes of all the world, where all the
blessed Virgins shall see all my uncleanness, and all the Martyrs see all my
tergiversations, and all the Consessors see all my double dealings in Gods
cause; where Abraham shall see my faithlesnesse in Gods promises; and Job my
impatience in Gods corrections; and Lazarus my hardness of heart in
distributing Gods blessings to the poor; and those Virgins, and Martyrs, and
Confessors, and Abraham, and Job, and Lazarus, and all that Congregation, shall
look upon the Lamb and upon me, and upon one another, as though they would all
forbid those banes, and say to one another, Will this Lamb have any thing to
do with this soul? and yet there and then this Lamb shall mary me, In
aeternum, for ever, which is our last circumstance.

It is not well done to call it a circumstance, In aeternum.
for the eternity is a great part of the essence of that marriage. Consider then
how poor and needy a thing, all the riches of this world, how flat and
tastlesse a thing, all the pleasures of this world, how pallid, and faint, and
dilute a thing, all the honors of this world are, when the very Treasure, and
Joy, and glory of heaven it self were unperfect, if it were not eternal, and
my marriage shall be too, In aeternum, for ever.

The Angels were not married so; they incurred an irreparable Divorce from God,
and are separated for ever, and I shall be married to him, in aeternum, for
ever. The Angels fell in love, when there was no object presented, before any
thing was created; when there was nothing but God and themselves, they fell in
love with themselves, and neglected God, and so fell in aeternum, for ever. I
shall see all the beauty, and all the glory of all the Saints of God, and love
them all, and know that the Lamb loves them too, without jealousy, on his
part, or theirs, or mine, and so be married in aeternum, for ever, without
interruption, or diminution, or change of affections. I shall see the Sun
black as sackcloth of hair, Apoc. 6. 12.
and the Moon become as blood, and the Stars fall as a Fig Tree casts her
untimely Figs, and the heavens rolled up together as a Scroll. I shall see a
divorce between Princes and their Prerogatives, between nature and all her
elements, between the spheres, and all their intelligences; between matter it
self, and all her forms, and my marriage shall be, in aeternum, for ever. I
shall see an end of faith, nothing to be believed that I do not know; and an
end of hope, nothing to be wished that I do not enjoy, but no end of that love
in which I am married to the Lamb for ever. Yea, I shall see an end of some of
the offices of the Lamb himself; Christ himself shall be no longer a Mediator,
an Intercessor, an Advocate, and yet shall continue a Husband to my soul for
ever. Where I shall be rich enough without Jointure, for my Husband cannot die;
and wise enough without experience, for no new thing can happen there; and
healthy enough without Physic, for no sickness can enter; and (which is by
much the highest of all) safe enough without grace, for no tentation that need
particular grace, can attempt me. There, where the Angels, which cannot die,
could not live, this very body which cannot choose but die, shall live, and
live as long as that God of life that made it. Lighten our darkness, we beseech
thee, o Lord, that in thy light we may see light: Illustrate our
understandings, kindle our affections, pour oil to our zeal, that we may come
to the marriage of this Lamb, and that this Lamb may come quickly to this
marriage: And in the mean time bless these thy servants, with making this
secular marriage a type of the spiritual, and the spiritual an earnest of that
eternal, which they and we, by thy mercy, shall have in the Kingdom which thy
Son our Savior has purchased with the inestimable price of his incorruptible
blood. To whom, etc.

SERMON IV.
Preached at a Christning.
REVEL. 7. 17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throns, shall g^vern
them, and shall lead them unto the lively furnteins of matters, and God shall
wipe away all tears from their eyes.
IF our conversation be in heaven, Phil. 3. 30.
as the Apostle says his was, and if that conversation be, (as Testullian reads
that place) Municipatus noster, our City, our dwelling, the place from whence
only we receive our Laws, to which only we direct our services, in which
only we are capable of honors, and offices, where even the office of a
doore-keeper was the subject of a great Kings ambition; if our conversation be
there, even there, there cannot be better company met, then we may see and
converse withal in this Chapter. Upon those words, does the Eagle mount up at
the Cominandement, Job 33. 30.
or make his nest on high; S. Gregory says, Videamus aquilam, nidum sibi, in
arduis construentem; Greg. Moral. 31, 34.
Then we say an Eagle make his nest on high, when we heard S. Petter say so,
Our conversation is in heaven; and then does an Eagle mount up at our
commandment, when our soul, our devotion, by such a conversation in heaven,
associates itself with all this blessed company that are met in this Chapter,
that our fellow ship may be with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1
John 1. 3.
and with all the Court and Quire of the Triumphant Church. If you go to
feasts, if you go to Comedies, fometimes only to meet company, nay if you
come to Church sometimes only upon that errand, to meet company, (as though
the House of God, were but as the presence of an earthly Prince, which upon
solemn Festival days must be filled and furnished, though they that come,
come to do no service there) command year Eagle to mount up, and to build his
nest on high, command your souls to have their conversation in heaven by
meditation of this Scripture, and you shall meet company, which no stranger
shall interrupt, for they are all of a knot, and such a knot as nothing shall
unty, as inseparably united to one another, as that God, with whom they are
made one Spirit, is inseparable in himself.

Here you shall see the Angel that comes from the East, Rev. 7. 2.
(yea, that Angel which is the East, from whence all beams of grace and glory
arise, for so the Prophet calls Christ Jesus himself, Zecha. 6. 12.
(as S. Hierome reads that place) Eccevir, Oriens nomen ejus, Behold him, whose
name is the East) you shall see him come with the seal of the living God, and
hold back those Angels which had power given them to hurt the Sea, and the
Earth, and you shall her him say, Rev. 7. 3.
Hurt not the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the
servants of our God in the forecheads. And as you shall see him forward, so you
shall see him large, and bountiful in imprinting that Seal, verse. 4.
you shall see an hundred and forty four thousand of the Tribes of the Children
of Israel, and you shall see a great multitude, which no man can number, of al
Nations, verse 9. and 10.
and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stand before the Throne, and before the
Lamb, and cry out, and say, Salvation comes of our God, that sits upon the
Throne, and of the Lamb: and you shall see all the Angels stand round about the
Throne, and about the Elders, verse 11.
and the four Beasts, all falling upon their faces, and worshipping God,
saying, verse 12.
Amen, praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and honor, and power, and
might be unto our God, for evermore, Amen. And this is good company, and good
Music.

And lest you should lose any of the Joy of this conversation, of this society,
by ignorance what they were, one of the Elders prevents you; verse 13.
and (as the Text says) answers you, saying, what are these that are araid in
white? he answers by a question, which is some what strange; but he answers
before any question, which is more strange: but God fees questions in our
hearts before he hears them from our lips; and as soon as our hearts conceive a
desire to be informed, he gives a full and a present satisfaction; he answers
before we ask; but yet he answers by a question, that thereby he may give us
occasion of farther discourse, of farther questioning with him. There, this
Elder shall tell thee, that those are they which are come out of the
Tribulations of this world, verse 14.
and have made their Robes white in the blood of the Lamb, that therefore they
are in the presence of the Throne of God, that they serve him day and night in
the Temple, that they shall hunger no more, thrist no more, nor be offended
with heat, or Sun; That is, as many as are appointed to receive this Seal of
the living God upon their foreheads, though they be not actually delivered from
all the incommodities of this life, yet nothing in this life shall deprive them
of the next. For as you see the Seal given in this Chapter, and the promise of
all these blessings annexed to it, so you see in this Text the reason of all
this, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall govern them, and
shall lead them unto the lively fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away
all tears from their eyes.

In which words, we shall consider for order and distincton, Divisio.
first the matter, and then the form: by the matter we mean the purpose and
intention of the Holy Ghost in these words; and by the form, the declaring, the
proving, the illustrating, and the heightning of that purpose of his. For the
matter; we take this imprinting or the Seal of the living God in the forehead
of the Elect, verse. 3.
and this washing in the blood of the Lamb, verse 14.
to be intended of the Sacrament of Baptism: In that which we call the form,
which is the illustrating of this, we shall first look upon the great benefits
and blessings which these servants of God so sealed, and so washed, are made
partakers of; for those blessings which are mentioned in the verses before, are
rooted and enwrapped in this particular of this Text, Quoniam, for; they are
blessed; for the Lamb shall do this and this for them; And then we shall
consider what that is which this Lamb will do for them; first, Reget illos, He
shall govern them, take them into his care, make them heirs of the Covenant,
breed them in a visible Church: secondly, Deducet eos, He shall lead them to
the lively fountains of waters; give them outward and visible means of
Sanctification; thirdly, Absterget omnem lachtymam, He shall wipe away all
tears from their eyes; even in this life he shall settle and establish a
heavenly joy in the faithful appreliension of the joys of heaven here.

First then to speak of the matter, Materia.
that is of the purpose and intention of these words, it is true, they are
diversely understood: They have been understood of the state of the Martyrs,
which are now come to the possesion of their Crown in heaven, because they are
said to have made their long Robes white in the blood of the Lamb; verse 14.
And so S. August. Aug.
and S. Gregory Gregor.
(when, by occasion of the subject which they were then in hand with, they were
full of the contemplation of Martyrdom, and encouragements to that) do seem
to understand these words, of Martyrs. But since it is not said, that they
washed their robes in their own blood, which is proper to Martyrs, but in the
blood of the Lamb, which is communicated to all that participate of the merit
of Christ, the words seem larger then so, and not to be restrained only to
Martyrs. Others have enlarged them farther then so, beyond Martyrs: but yet
limit them to the Triumphant Church; that because it is said, that they are
come out of great tribulation, and that they are in the presence of the Throne
of God, and that they shall hunger no more, they see no way of admitting these
perfections, in this life. But S. Paul saw a way, when he said of the Elect,
even in this life, God which is rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2. 4.
Convivificavit, conresuscitavit, considere fecit, he has quickened us, he has
raised us, he has made us fit together in the heavenly places, in Christ
Jesus: That is, as he is our Head, and is there himself, and we with Christ
Jesus, as we are his Members; we are with him there too. In the same place
where the Apostle says, That we look for our Savior from heaven, Phil. 3. 20.
(there is our future, our expectation) he says also, our conversation is in
heaven, there is our present, our actual possession. That is it which S.
Augustine Aug.
intends, Dilexisti me Domine plusquam te; Lord thou have loved me more then
thou have loved thy self: Not only that thou gave thy self for me, that thou
did neglect thy self to consider me, but whereas thou had a glory with the
Father, before the world was made, thou did admit a cloud, and a slumber upon
that glory, and staiedst for thy glory till thy death, yet thou give us,
(naturally inglorious, and miserable creatures) a real possession of glory,
and of inseparablenesse from thee, in this life. This is that Copiosa
redemptio, Psalm. 130. 7.
there is with the Lord plentiful redemption; though that were Matura
redemptio, a seasonable redemption, if it should meet me upon my deathbed, and
that the Angels then should receive my soul, to lay it in Abraham's bosom, yet
this is my Saviors plentiful redemption, that my soul is in Abraham's bosom
now whilst it is in this body, and that I am already in the presence of his
Throne, now when I am in your sight, and that I serve him already day and night
in his Temple, now when I meditate, or execute his Commission, in this service,
in this particular Congregation.

Those words are not then necessarily restrained to Martyrs, they are not
restrained to the state of the Triumphant Church, they are spoken to all the
Children of righteousness, and of godliness; and godliness has the promises
of the life present, and that, that is to come. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
That which involves all these promises, that which is the kernel, and seed,
and marrow of all, the last clause of the text, God shall wipe all tears from
their eyes, those words, that clause, is thrice repeated entirely in the
Scriptures: When it is spoken here, when it is spoken in the one and twentieth
Chapter of the Revelation, and at the fourth verse, in both places, it is
derived from the Prophet Esaias, 25. 8.
which is an Eacharisticall chapter, a Chapter of thanksgiving for Gods
deliverance of his children, even in this world, from the afflictions, and
tribulations thereof, and therefore this text belongs also to this world.

This imprinting then of the seal in the forehead, this washing of the robes
in the blood of the Lamb, Ambr.
S. Ambrose places conveniently to be accomplished in the Sacrament of
Baptism: for this is Copiosissima Redemptio, this is the most plentiful
redemption, that that be applied to us, not only at last in Heaven, nor at my
last step toward heaven, at my death, nor in all the steps that I make in the
course of my life, but in my first step into the Church, nay before I can make
any step, when I was carried in another arms thither, even in the beginning
of this life; and so do diverse of the later Men, and of those whom we call
ours, understand all this, of baptism; because if we consider this washing
away of tears, as Saint Cyprian says, young children do most of all need this
mercy of God and this assistance of Man, because as soon as they come into
this world Plorantes, ac flentes, nihil aliud faciunt, quam deprecantur, they
beg with tears something at our hands, and therefore need this abstersion,
this wiping. For though they cannot tell us, what they aile, though (if we will
enter into curiosities) we cannot tell them what they aile, that is, we cannot
tell them what properly, and exactly Original sin is, yet they aile something,
which naturally disposes them, to weep, and beg, that something might be done,
for the wiping away of tears from their eyes. And therefore though the other
errors of the Anabaptist be ancient, 1000. year old, yet the denying of
baptism to children, was never heard of till within 100. years, and less. The
Arrians, and the Donatists did rebapsize those who were baptized by the true
Christians, whom they counted Heretics; but yet they refused not to baptize
children: The Pelegians denied original sin in children; but yet they baptized
them. All Churches, Greek, and Russian, and Ethiopique, howsoever they differ
in the body of the Church, yet they meet, they agree in the porch, in Limine
Ecclesiae, in the Sacrament of baptism, and acknowledge that it is
communicable to all children, and to all Men; from the child newborn to the
decrepit old Man, from him that is come out of one mothers womb, to him that
is going into another, into his grave, Sicut nullus prohibendus a baptism,
Augustine.
it a nullus est qui non peccate moritur in baptismo, As baptism is to be
denied to none, so neither is it to be denied, that all, that are rightly
baptized, are washed from sin. Let him that will contentiously say, that there
are some children, that take no profit by baptism, show me which is one of
them, and qui testatur de scientia, testetur de mode scientiae; If he say he
knows it, let him tell us how he knows that which the Church of God does not
know.

We come now to the second part; in which we consider first, this firstword, 2.
Part.
quoniam, for, which is verbum praegnans, a word that includes all those great
blessings, which God has ordained for them, whom in his eternal decree, he
has prepared for this sealing and this washing. Those blessings, which are
immediately before the text, are, that in Gods purpose, they are already come
out of great tribulations, they have already received a whitenes by the blood
of the Lamb, they are already in the presence of the threne of the Lamb, they
have already overcome all hunger, and thirst, and heat. Those particular
blessings we cannot insist upon; that requires rather a Comment upon the
Chapter, then a Sermon upon the text. But in this word of inference, for, we
only will observe this: That though all the promises of God in him, are Yea,
and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
certain, and infallible in themselves, though his Name, that makes them be
Amen, (Thus says Amen, the faithful and true witness) and therefore there
needs no better security, Revel. 3. 14.
then his word, for all those blessings, yet God is pleased to give that
abundant satisfaction to Man, as that his reason shall have something to build
upon, as well as his faith, he shall know why he should believe all these
blessings to belong to them who are to have these Seals, and this washing. For
God requires no such faith, nay he accepts, nay he excuses no such faith, as
believes without reason; believes he knows not why. As faith witout fruit,
witout works, is no faith; to faith without a roct, without reason, is no
faith, but an opinion. All those blessings by the Sacrament of Baptism, and all
Gods other promises to his children, and all the mysteries of Christrian
Religion, are therefore believed by us, becuase they are grounded in the
Scriptures of God; we believe them for that reason; and then it is not a work
of my faith primarily, but it is a work of my reason, that assures me, that
these are the Scriptures, that these Scriptures are the word of God. I can
answer other Men's reasons, that argue against it, I can convince other men by
reason, that my reasons are true: and therefore it is a work of reason, that I
believe these to be Scriptures.

To prove a beginning of the world, I need not the Scriptures, reason will
evict it forceibly enough against all the world; but, when I come beyond all
Philosophy, that for Adams fault six thousand year ago, I should be condemned
now, because that fault is naturally in me, I must find reason, before I
believe this, and my reason is, because I find it in the Scrpiture; Nascimur
filii Irae, and therefore, nifi renatus, we are borne children of wrath, and
therefore must be borne again. That a Messiah should come to deliver Mankind
from this sin, and all other fins, my reason is, the Semen mulieris, the seed
of the woman, for the promise, and the Ecce agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God,
for the performance. That he should come, I reft in that, The seed of the woman
shall bruise the Serpents head; And that he is come, I rest in this, that John
Baptist showed the Lambs of God that takes away the sins of the world. That
this merit of his should be applied to certain Men, my reason is in the Semini
two, Gods Covenant, to Abraham, and to his seed; That we are of that number,
included in that Covenant to Abraham, my reason is, in spiritu adoptionis, the
spirit of adoption has ingraffed us, inserted us into the same Covenant. When
my reason tells me that the Seal of that Covenant, Circumcision is gone, (I am
not circumcised, and therefore might doubt) my reason tells me too, that in the
Scriptures, there is a new Seals, Baptism: when my reason tells me, that
after that regeneration, I have degenerated again, I have fallen from those
graces which I received in Baptism, my reason leads me again to those
places of Scripture, where God has established a Church for the remession and
absolution of sins. If I have been negligent of all these helps, and now my
reason begins to work to my prejudice, that I begin to gather and heap up
all those places of the Law, and Prophets, and Gospel, which threaten certain
condemnation unto such sinners, as I find my self to be, yet if my reason can
see light at the Nolo mortem peccatoris, at the Quandocunque resipiscct; That
God would not the death of any sinner, That no time is unseasonable for
repentance: That scatters the clands of witnesses again; and to till my reason
can tell me (which it can never do) that it has found places in Scripture, of
a measure, and finitenesse in God, (that his mercy can go no farther) and then
of an infiniteness in Man (that his finne can go beyond God) my reason will
defend me from desperation; I mean the reason, that is grounded upon the
Scripture; still I shall find there, that Quia, which David delighted in so
much, as that he repears it almost thirty times, in one Psalm, 136.
For his mercy endures for ever.

God leaves no way of satisfaction unperformed unto us; sometimes he works
upon the fantasy of Man; as in those often ^isions, which he presented to his
Prophets in dreams; sometimes he works upon the senses, by preparing objects
for them; So he filled the Mountain round about with horses, 2 Reg. 6. 17.
and chariots, in defense of Elisha; but always he works upon our reason; he
bids us fear no judgment, he bids us hope for no mercy, except it have a Quia,
a reason, a foundation, in the Scriptures. For God is Logos, speech and reasone
He declares his will by his Word, and he proved it, he confirms it, he is
Logos, and he proceeds Logically. It is true, that we have a Sophistry, which
as far as concerns our own destruction, frustrates his Logique; If Peter
make a Quia, a reason why his fellows could not be drunk, Because it was but
nine a Clock, Act. 2. 15.
we can find Men that can overthrow that reason, and rise drunk out of their
beds; If Christ make a Quia, a reason against fashionall, and Circumstantiall
christians, that do sometimes some offices of religion, Mat. 9. 16. v. 17.
out of custom, or company, or neighborhood, or necessity, because no man
peecethan old garment with new cloth, nor puts new wine into old vessels, yet
since S. Augustine Augustine.
says well, Carnalitas vetustas, gratia novitas, our carnal delights, are our
old garments, and those degrees and beams of grace, which are shed upon us,
are the new, we do piece this old with this new, that is, long habits of sin,
with short repentances; flames of concupiscence, with little sparks of remorse;
and into old vessels, (our sin-worne bodies) we put in once a year, some
drops, of new wine, of the blood of our Savior Christ Jesus, in the Sacrament,
(when we come to his table, as to a vintage, because of the season, and we
receive by the Almanac, because it is Easter) and this new wine so taken in,
breaks the vessels, (as Christ speaks in that similitude) And his breaking
shall be, Esaias 30. 14.
as the breaking of a Potters pot, which is broken without pity, and in the
breaking thereof is not found a shard, to take fire at the hearth, nor to take
water out of the pit; No way in the Church of God, to repair that Man, because
he has made either a Mockery, or at best, but a Civil action of Gods
institution in the Church. To conclude this, all sin is but fallacy and
Sophistry; Religion is reason and Logique; The devil hides, and deludes,
Almighty God demonstrates and proves: That fashion of his goes through all his
precepts, through all his promises, which is in Esaias, Esaias 1. 8.
Come now, and let us reason together; that which was in Job, Job. 31. 13.
is a bundantly in God, That he did not contemn the judgment of his servant,
nor of his maid, when they did contend with him. Nec decet Dei judicium
quicquid habere affine tyrannidi, Basil.
we may not think that here is any thing in God, like a Tyran; and it is a
Tyrannical proceeding, as to give no reason of his cruelties, so to give no
assurance of his benefits; and therefore God seals his promises with a Quia, a
reason, an assurance.

Now much of the strength of the assurance, consists in the person, Persona.
whose seal it is; and therefore as Christ did, we ask next, Cujus
inscriptio, whose Image, whose inscription is upon his seal, who gives this
assurance? And it is the Lamb that is in the midst of the throne; If it
werethe Lion, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, is able to perform his promises:
but there are more then Christ, out of this world, that bear the Lion; The
devil is a Lion too, that seeks whom he may devour: but he never seals
with that Lamb, with any impression of humility; to a Lamb he is never
compared; in the likeness of a lamb, he is never noted to have appeared, in
all the Legends.

It is the Lamb, that is in the midst, thereby disposed to shed, and dispense
his spiritual benefits on all sides; The Lamb is not immured in Rome, not
coffined up in the ruins, and tubbidge of old walls, nor thrust into a corner
in Conventicles. The Lamb is in the midst; and he is in the midst of the
throne; though al his great, and glorious company be round about him, one
hundred and forty four thousand Israelites, innumerable multitudes of all
Nations, Angels, and Elders, yet it is the Lamb, that is in the midst of them,
and not they that are about him, that sheds down these blessings upon us; And
it is the Lamb, that is there still, in the midst of the throne; not kneaded
into an Agnus Dei, of wax, or wafer here, not called down from heaven, to an
Altar, by every Priests charm, to be a witness of secrecy in the Sacrament,
for every bloody, and feditious enterprise, that they undertake; It is Agnus
qui est in medio Throni, the Lamb that is there, and shall be so, till he come
at last, as a Lion also, to devour them, who have made false opinions of him
to serve their mischievous purposes here.

This is the person then, that gives the assurance, that all these blessings
belong to them who are ordained to be so sealed, and so washed; this is he that
assures us, and approves to us, that all this shall be, first, Quia reget,
because he shall govern them, secondly, Quia deducet, because he shall lead
them to the fountains of waters; thirdly, Quia absterget, because he shall
wipe all tears from their eyes.

First, he shall govern them; Reget.
he shall establish a spiritual Kingdom for them in this world; for to govern,
which is the word, of the first translation, and to feed, which is in the
second, is all one in Scriptures. Dominabitur gentium, he shall be Lord of the
Gentiles; but Rex Israelis, he shall govern his people Israel, as a King, by a
certain, and a clear law; So that, as we shall have interest in the Covenant,
as well as the Israclites, so we shall have interest in that glorious
acclamation of theirs; Unto what nation are their Gods come so near unto them,
as the Lord our God, is come near unto us; what nation has Laws, and
ordinances so righteous as we have? for in that Paul and Barnabas express the
heaviest indignation of God upon the Gentiles, Act. 14. 16.
that God suffered the Gentiles to walk in their own ways; he showed them not
his ways, he settled no church, no kingdom, amongst them, he did not govern
them. Except one of those Eight persons whom God preserved in the Arc, were
here to tell us, the unexpressible comfort, that he conceived in his safety,
when he saw that flood wash away Princes from their thrones, misers from their
bags, lovers from their embracements, Courtiers from their wardrobes, no man
is able to express that true comfort, which a Christian is to take, even in
this, That God has taken him into his Church, and not left him in that
desperate, and irremediable inundation of Idolatry, and paganisace that
overflowes all the world beside. For beloved, who can express, who can
conceive that strange confusion, which shall overtake, and oppress those
infinite multitudes of Souls, which shall be changed at the last day, and
shall meet Christ Jesus in the clouds, and shall receive an irrevocable
judgment, of everlasting condemnation, dut of his mouth, whose name they never
heard of before, that must be condemned by a Judge, of whom they knew nothing
before, and who never had before any apprehension of torments of Hell, till by
that lamentable experience they began to learn it? What blessed means of
preparation against that fearful day does he afford us, even in this, that he
governes us by his law, delivered in his Church.

The first thing, that the householder in the parable, Mat. 21. 33.
is noted to have done for his Vineyard was, Sepe circumdedit, he hedged it in.
That, God has done for us, in making us his Church; Eccles. 10. 8.
he has inlaid us, he has hedged us in. But he that breaks the hedge, a
Serpent shall bite him, he that breaks this hedge, the peace of the Church,
by his Schism, the old Serpent has bitten, and poisoned him, and shall bite
worse hereafter: and if God, having thus severed us, and hedged us in, have
expected grapes, and we bring none, though we break no hedge here amongst our
selves, that is, no Papist breaks in upon us, no Separatist breaks out from
us, we enjoy security enough, yet even for our own barrennes, Godwill take away
the hedge, Esaias 5. 5.
and it shall be eaten up, he will break the wall, and it shall be trodden
down. Surely, says the Prohet there, The Vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the
house of Israel, and the Men of Indah are his pleasant plans: Surely we are the
Church, which God has hedged in; but yet if we answer not his expectation,
certainly the confusion of the Gentiles, at the last day, (when they shall say
to themselves of Christ Nescivi te, do thou condemn us, and we know thee
not?) shall not be so great, as out confusion shall be, when we shall hear
Christ say to us, whom he bred in his Church, Nesiciovos, I know not whence you
are. Even this, that the ill use of this mercy of having been bred in his
Church, shall aggravate our condemnation then, shows the great benefit, which
we may receive now by this Quod regit nos, that he takes care of us in his
Church; for how many in the world would have lived ten times more christianly
then we do, if they had but half that knowledge of Christ, which we have?

When he has then brought us into his kingdom, Deducet.
that we are his subjects, (for all the heathen are in the condition of slaves)
he brings us nearer, into his service; he gives us outward distinctions,
liveries, badges, names, visible marks in Baptism: yea he incorporates us
more inseparably to himself, then that which they imagine to be done in the
Church of Rome, where their Canonists, say; that a Cardinal is to incorporated
in the Pope, he is so made one flesh, and blood with him, as that he may not
let blood without his leave, because he bleeds not his own, but the Popes
blood: But of us it is true, that by this Sacrame^s we are so incorporated into
Christ, that in all our afflictions after we fulfill the sufferings of Christ
in our flesh, and in all afflictions, which we lay upon any of our Christian
brethren, our consciences hear Christ crying to us, Quid me persequerts? why
persecutest thou me? Christ's body is wounded in us, when we suffer, Christ's
body is wounded by us, when we violate the peace of the Church, or offend the
particular members thereof.

First then deducet, he shall lead them, it is not he shall force them, he
shall thrust them, he shall compel them; it implies a gentle, and yet an
effectual way, he shall lead them. Those which come to Christianity, from
Iudaisme, or Gentisme, when they are of years of discreation, he shall lead
them by instruction, by Catechism, by preaching of his word, before they be
baptized, for they that are of years and are baptized, without the word, that
is, without understanding, or considering the institution, and virtue of
baptisime, expressed in Gods word, and so receive baptism only for temporal,
and natural respects, they are not led to the waters, but they fall into them:
and so, as a Man may be drowned in a wholesome bath, so such a Man, may perish
eternally in baptism, if he take it, for satisfaction of the State, or any
other by respect, to which that Sacrament is not ordained, in the word of God.
He shall lead Men of years, by Instruction; and he shall lead young children in
good company, and with a strong guard, he shall lead them by the faith of his
Church, by the faith of their Parents, by the faith of their sureties and
undertakers.

He shall lead them; and then, when he has taken them into his government; for
first it is Reget, he shall govern them, and then Deducet, that is, he shall
lead them, in his Church; and therefore they that are led to baptism, any
other way then by the Church, they are misled; nay they are miscarried,
misdriven, Spiritu vertiginis, Esaias 19. 14.
with the spirit of giddiness. They that join any in commission with the
Trinity, though but as an asstsant, (for so they say in the Church of Rome,
baptism may be administered, Aquin.
in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and the virgin Mary) they
follow not, as Christ led in his Church, Non fuit sic ab initio, it was not so
from the beginning: for quod extra hos tres est, totum Conservum est; though
much dignity belong to the memory of the Saints of God, yet whosoever is none
of the three Persons, ^asil.
Conservus est, he is our fellow servants: though his service lie above stairs,
and ours below, his in the triumphant, ours in the militant Church, Conservus
est, yet he, or she, is in that respect, but our fellow servants, and not
Christ's fellow-redeemer. Exodus 15.
So also, if we be led to Marah, to the waters of bitterness, that we bring a
bitter taste, of those institutions of the Church for the decency, and
signification in Sacramental things, things belonging to Baptism, if we bring
a misinterpretation of them, an indisposition to them, an averseness from them,
and so nourish a bitterness, and uncharitableness toward one another, for
these Ceremonies, if we had rather cross one another, and cross the Church,
then, cross the child, as God showed Moses, a tree, which made those waters in
the wilderness sweet, when it was cast in, so remember that there is the tree
of life, the cross of Christ Jesus, and his Merits, in this water of baptism,
and when we all agree in that, that all the virtue proceeds from the cross of
Christ, the God of unity and peace and concord, let us admit any representation
of Christ's cross, rather then admit the true cross of the devil, which is a
bitter and schismatic crossing of Christ in his Church: for it is there in
his Church, that he leads us to these waters.

Well then, Eos.
they to whom these waters belong, have Christ in his Church to lead them; and
therefore they need not stay, till they can come alone, till they be of age and
years of discretion, as the Anabaptists say: for it is Deducet, and Deducet
cos; generally, universally; all that are of this government, all that are
appointed for the Seal, all the one hundred and forty four thousand, all the
Innumerable multitudes of all Nations Christ leads them all. Act. 2. 39.
Be Baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission
of sins; for the promise is made unto you, and your children. Now all
promises of God, are sealed in the holy Ghost; To whom soever any promise of
God belongs, he has the holy Ghost; and therefore Nunquid aquam quis prohibere
potest? Can any Man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which
havereceived the holy Ghost, as well as we? says S. Peter. And therefore the
Children of the Covenant which have the promise, Act. 10. 47.
have the holy Ghost, and all they are in this Regiment, Deducet cos, Christ
shall lead them all.

But whither? Ad aquas.
unto the lively, (says our first edition) unto the living, (says our last
edition) fountains of waters; In the original, unto the fountains of the
water of life; now in the Scriptures nothing is more ordianry, then by the name
of waters to design and mean tribulations: so, amongst many other, God says
of the City of Tire, Ezekiel. 16. 19.
that he would make it a desolate: City, and bring the deep upon it, and great
waters should cover it. But then there is some such addition, as leads to that
sense; either they are called Aqua multae, great waters, or Profunda aquarum,
deep waters, or Absorbebit aqua, whirlepooles of waters, or Tempestas aquae,
tempestuous waters, Ier. 8. 14.
or Aqua Fellis, bitter water, (God bath mingled gall in our water:) but we
shall never read fontes aquarum, Ier. 2. 13.
fountains of waters, but it has a gracious sense, and presents Gods
benefits. So, they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters; So, the
water, that I shall give, Ioh. 4. 14.
shall be in him, a well of water, springing up unto everlasting life; and so,
every where else, when we are brought to the fountains, to this water, in the
fountain, in the institution, howsoever we puddle it with impertinent questions
in disputation, however we soul it with our finnes, and all conversation, the
fountain is pure; Baptism presents, and offers grace, and remission of sins
to all.

Nay not only, this fountain of water, but the greatest water of all, the
flood it self, Saint Basil Basil.
understands, and applies to Baptism, as the Apostle himself does, 1 Pet. 3.
21.
Baptism was a figure, of the flood, and the Arc, Psalm. 29. 10.
for upon that place, The Lord sitseth upon the flood, and the Lord does
remain King for ever, he says, Baptismi gratiam Diluvium nominat, nam deles
and purgat; David calls Baptism the flood, because it destroys all that was
sinful in us; and so also he referrs to Baptism, those words, (when David had
confessed his sins) I thought I would confess against my self my
wickedness, unto the Lord; and when it is added, Surely in the flood of great
waters, they shall not come near him, peccato non appropinquabunt; says he,
original sin shall not come near him, that is truly baptized; nay all the
actual sins in his future life, shall be drowned in this baptism, as often,
as he does religiously, and repentantly consider, that in Baptism, when the
merit of Christ was communicated to him, he received an Antidote against all
poison, against all sin, if he applied them together, sin and the merit of
Christ; for so also he says, of that place, God will subdue all our iniquities,
and cast our sins into the bottom of the Sea, Hoc est, in mare Baptismi,
Mic. 7. 19.
says Basil, into the Sea of Baptism; There was a Brazen Sea in the Temple; 1
Reg. 7. 24.
and there is a golden Sea in the Church of Christ, which is Baptistrisum, the
font, the Sea, into which God flings all their sins, who rightly, and
effectually receive that Sacrament.

These fountains of waters then in the text, are the waters of baptisime: and
if we should take them also, in that sense, that waters signify tribulations,
and afflictions, it is true too, that in baptism, (that is, in the profession
of Christ,) we are delivered over to many tribulations; Luke 24.
The rule is general, Castigat omnes, he chastises all; The example, the
precedent is peremptory, Opertuit pati, Christ ought to suffer, and so enter
into glory: but howsoever waters be affictions, they are waters of life, too,
says the text; Though baptism imprint a cross upon us, that we should not be
ashamed of Christ cross, that we should not be afraid of our own crosses, yet
by all these waters, by all these Cross ways, we go directly to the eternal
life, the kingdom of heaven, for they are lively fountains, fountains of
life.

And this is intended, and promised, Absterget.
in the last words, Absterget omnem Lachrymam, God shall wipe all tears from
our eyes; God shall give us a joyful apprehension of heaven, here in his
Church in this life. But is this a way to wipe tears from the childs face, to
sprinkle water upon it. Is this a wiping away, to power more on? It is the
powerful, and wonderful way of his working; for as his red blood, makes our
red souls, white, that his redness, gives our redness a candor, so his
water, his baptisime, and the powerful effect thereof; shall dry up, and wipe
away Omnem ^achrymam, all tears from our Eyes, howsoever occasioned. This
water shall dry them up; Christ had many occassion of tears; we have more;
some of our own, which he had not: we must weep because we are not so good, as
we should be: we cannot perform the law. We must weep, because we are not so
good, as we could be; our free will is lost; but yet every Man finds, he might
be better, if he would: but the sharpest, and saltest, and smartest occasion of
our tears, is from this, that we must not be so good, as we would be; that the
prosanenesse of the Libertine, the reproachful slanders, the contumelious
scandalls, the seornfull names, that the wicked lay upon those, who in their
measure desire to express their zeal to Gods glory, makes us afraid, to
profess our selves so religious as we could find in our hearts to be, and
could truly be if we might. Christ went often in contemplation of others;
foreseeing the calamities of Ierualem, he wept over the City. coming to the
grave of Lazarus, he wept with them, but in his own Agony in the garden, it is
not said that he weps; If we could stop the stood of tears, in our
afflictions, yet there belongs an excessive grief to this, that the ungodly
disposion of other Men, is slacking of our godliness, of our sanctification
too. Heb. 12.
Christ Jesus for the joy that was set before him endured the Cross; we for
the joy of this promise, that God will wipe all tears from our eyes; must
suffer all this, whether they be tears of Compunction, or tears of
Compassion, tears for our selves, or tears for others; whether they be
Magdalens tears, or Peter's tears; tears for sins of infirmity of the
flesh, or tears for weakness of our faith; whether they be tears for thy
parents; because they are improvident toward thee, or tears for thy children,
because they are disobedient to thee, whether they be tears for Church,
because our Sermons, or our Censures pinch you, or tears for the State, that
penal laws, pecuniary, or bloody, lie heavy upon you, Deus absterget omneni
lachryman, here is your comfort; that as he has promised inestimable blessings
to them, that are sealed, and washed in him, so he has given you security,
that these blessings belong to you: for, if you find, that he has govened you,
(bred you in his visible Church) and led you to his fountain of the water of
lifein baptism, you may be sure, that he will in his due time, wipe all tears
from your eyes, establish the kingdom of heaven upon you, in this life, in a
holy, and modest infallibility.

SERMON V.
Preached at a Christning.
EPHESIANS. 5. 25, 26, 27. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctisie it, and cleanse it,
by the washing of water, through the Word: That he might make it unto himself
a glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, on any such thing; but that it
should be holy, and without blame.
ALmighty God ever loved unity, but he never loved singularity; God was always
alone in heaven, there were no other Gods, but he; but he was never singular,
there was never any time, when there were not three persons in heaven; Pater
and ego unum summi; The father and I are one, says Christ: one in Esseuct, and
one in Consent; our substance is the same, and our will is the same; but yet,
Tecum fui ab initio, says Christ, in the person of Wisdom, I was with thee,
disposing all things, at the Creation, As then God seems to have been
eternally delighted, with this eternal generation, (with persons that had ever
a relation to one another, Father, and Son) so when he came to the Creation
of this lower world, he came presently to those three relations, of which the
whole frame of this world consists; of which, (because the principal
foundation, and preservation of all States that are to continue, is power) the
first relation was between Prince and Subject, Genesis 1. 28.
when God said to Man, Subjecite and dominamini, subdue and govern all
Creatures; The second relation was between husband and wife, 2. 23.
when Adam said, This now is house of my bone, and flesh of my flesh; And the
third relation was between parents and children, when Eve said, that she had
obtained a Man by the Lord, that by the plentiful favor of God, 4. 1.
she had conceived and borne a son: from that time, to the dissolution of
that frame, from that beginning to the end of the world, these three relations,
of Master and Servant, Man's and Wife, Father and Children, have been, and ever
shall be the materials, and the elements of all society, of families, and of
Cities, and of Kingdoms. And therefore it is a large, and a subtle philosophy
which S. Paul professes in this place, to show all the qualities, and
properties of these several Elements, that is, all the duties of these several
callings; but in this text, he handles only the mutual duties of the second
couple, Man, and Wife, and in that consideration, shall we determine this
exercise, because a great part of that concerns the education of Children,
(which especially occasions our meeting now.)

The general duty, that goes through all these three relations, v. 12.
is expressed, Subditi estate invicevs, Submit your selves to one another, in
the fear of God; for God has given no Master such imperiousness, no husband
such a superiority, no father such a soverainty, but that there lies a burden
upon them too, to consider with a compassionate sensiblenesse, the grievances,
that oppress the other part, which is coupled to them. For if the servant, the
wife, the son be oppressed, worn out, annihilated, there is no such thing
left as a Master, or a husband, or a father; They depend upon one another, and
therefore he that has not care of his fellow, destroys himself.

The wife is to submit herself; and so is the husband too: They have a burden
both, There is a greater subjection lies upon her, then upon the Man, in
respect of her transgression toward her husband at first: Eyes before there
was any Man in the world, to solicit, or tempt her chastity, she could sinde
another way to be salfe and treacherous to her husband: both the husband, and
the wife offended against God, but the husband offended not toward his wife,
but rather eat the Apple, Hier.
Ne contristaretur delicias suas, as S. Hierome assigns the cause, left by
refusing to cate, when she had done so, he should deject her into a desperate
sense of her sin. And for this fault of hers, her Subjection was so much
aggravated, Thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule over
thee, But if she had not committed that fault, yet there would have been a
mutual subjection between them; as there is even in Nature, between both the
other couples; for if Man had continued in innocence, yet it is most probably
thought, that as there would certainly have been Marriage, and so children, so
also there would have been Magistracy, and propriety, and authority, and so a
mutual submitting, a mutual assisting of one another, in all these three
relations.

Now, that submitting, of which the Apostle speaks of here; is a submitting to
one another, a bearing of one another burdens: what this submission is on the
wives part, is expressed in the two former verses; And I forbear that, because
husbands at home, are likely enough to remember them of it; but in the duty, in
the submitting of the husband, we shall consider first, what that submitting
is, and that is love, Husbands love your wives; Even the love of the husband to
the wife, is a burden, a submitting, a descent; and secondly, the pattern and
example of this love, Even as Christ loved his Church.

In which second part, as sometimes the accessory is greater then the
principal, the Symptom, the accident, is greater then the disease, so that
from which the comparison is drawn in this place, is greater then that which is
illustrated by it; the love of Christ to his Church requires more
consideration, then the love of the husband to the wife; and therefore it will
become us to spend most of our thoughts upon that; and to consider in that,
Quod factum, and Quis sinis; what Christ did for his Church; and that was, a
bounty, which could not be exceeded, seipsum tradidit, he gave, he delivered
himself for it; And then, secondly, what he intended that should work; and
that was, first, that he might make it to himself a glorious Church, and
without spot and wrinkle, in the Triumphant state of the Church at last; And
then, that whilst it continues in a Militant state upon Earth, it might have
preparations to that glory, by being sanctified and cleansed by the washing of
water, through his Word; he provides the Church means of sanctification here,
by his Word, and Sacraments.

First then De Amoremaritali, Amor.
of this contracting a Man's love to the person of a wife, of one woman, as we
find an often exclamation in the Prophets, Onus visionis, The burden of my
prophecy upon Nineveh, and Onus verbi Domini, The burden of the word of God
upon Israel, so there is Onus amoris, a burden of love, when a Man is appointed
whom he shall love. Genesis 38.
When Onan was appointed by his father Judah, to go in to his brothers widow,
and to do the office of a kinsman to her, he conceived such an unwillingnesse
to do so, when he was bid, as that he came to that detestable act, for which
God slew him. And therefore the Panegyrique, that raised his wit as high as he
could, to praise the Emperor Constantine, and would express it, in praising
his continence, and chastity, he expressed it by saying that he waried young;
that as soon as his years endangered him, formavit animum maritalem, nihil de
concessu atati voluptatibus admittens: he was content to be a husband, and
accepted not that freedom of pleasure, which his years might have excused. He
concludes it thus, Novum jam tum miraculum, Iuvenis ^xorius; Behold a miracle,
such a young Man, limiting his affections, in a wife. At first the heates and
lusts of youth overflow all, as the waters overflowed all at the beginning; and
when they did so, the Earth was not only barren, (there were no Creatures, no
herbs produced in that) but even the waters themselves, that did overflow all,
were barren too; there were no fishes, no fowls produced out of that; as long
as a Man's affections are scattered, there is nothing but accursed barrenness;
but when God says, and is heard, Genesis 1. 9.
and obeyed in it, Let the waters be gathered into one place, let all thy
affections be settled upon one wife, then the earth and the waters became
fruitful, then God gives us a type, and figure of the eternity of the joys of
heaven, in the succession, and propagation of children here upon the earth. It
is true, this contracting of our affections is a burden, it is a submitting of
our selves; All States that made Laws, and proposed rewards for married Men,
conceived it so; that naturally they would be loath to do it. God married his
first couple, as soon as he made them; he dignified the state of Marriage, by
so many Allegories, and figures, to which he compares the uniting of Christ to
his Church, and the uniting of our souls to Christ, and by directing the first
Miracle of Christ, to be done at a Marriage. Many things must concur to the
dignifying of Marriage, because in our corrupt nature, the apprehension is
general, that it is burdenous, and a submitting, and a descending thing, to
mary. And therefore Saint Hierome argues truly out of these words, Hier.
Husbands love your Wifes, Audiant Episcopi, audiant presbyteri, audiant
doctores, subjectis suis se esse subjectos, let Bishops, and Priests, and
Doctors learn in this, that when they have married themselves to a charge, They
are become subject to their Subjects. For by being a husband, I become subject,
to that sex which is naturally subject to Man, though this subjection be no
more in this place, but to love that one woman.

Love then, when it is limited by a law, is a subjection, but it is a
subjection commanded by God; Plinius Trajano.
Nihil majus a te subjecti animo factum est, quam quod imper are coepisti^ A
Prince does nothing so like a subject as when he puts himself to the pain to
consider the profit, and the safety of his Subjects; and such a subjection is
that of a Husband, who is bound to study his wife, and rectify all her
infirmites; Her infirmities he must bear; but not her sins; if he bear them
they become his own. The pattern, the example goes not so far; Christ married
himself to our Nature, and he bare all our infirmities, hunger, and weariness,
and sadness, and death, actually in his own person; but so, he contracted no
sin in himself, nor encouraged us to proceed in sin. Christ was Salvator
corporis, A Savior of his body, of the Church, v. 23.
to which he married himself, but it is a tyranny, and a devastation of the
body, to whom we mary our selves, if we love them so much, as that we love
their Sin too, suffer them to go on in that, or if we love them so little, as
to make their sin our way to profit, or preferment, by prostituting them, and
abandoning them to the solicitation of others. still we must love them so, as
that this love be a subjection; not a neglecting, to let them do, what they
will, nor a tyrannizing, to make them do what we will.

You must love them then, first, Quia vestrae, because they are yours; As we
said at first, God loves Couples; He suffers not our body to be alone, Genesis 2.
20.
nor our soul alone, but he mary's them together; when that is done, to remedy
the vae soli, left this Man should be alone, he mary's him to a help meet for
him^ and to avoid fornication, (that is, if fornication cannot be avoided
otherwise) Every Man is to have his wife, 1 Cor. 7. 1.
and every woman her own husband. When the love comes to exceed these bounds,
that it departs a vestris, from a Man's own wife, and settles upon another,
though he may think he discharges himself of some of his subjection which he
was in before, yet he becomes much more subject, subject to household and forain
Iealousies, subject to ill grounded quarrels, subject to blasphemous
protestations, to treacherous misuse of a confident friend, to ignoble an
unworthy disguises, to base satisfactions; subject, lastly, either to a
clamorous Conscience, or that which is worse slavery, to a seared and obdurate,
and stupefied Conscience, and to that Curse, which is the heavier because it
has a kind of scorn in it, Be not deceived, (as though we were co^sened of our
souls) Be not deceived, for no adulterer shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.
All other things, that are ours, we may be the better for leaving; Vade and
vende, which Christ said to the young Man, that seemed to desire perfection,
reached to all his goods; Go and sell them says Christ, and thou shall follow
me the better. But there is no selling, nor giving, nor lending, nor borrowing
of wives; we must love them Quia nostrae, because they are ours; and if that be
not a ty, and obligation strong enough, that they are Nostrae, ours, we must
love them Quia nos, because they are our selves; v. 29.
for no man yet ever hated his own flesh.

We must love them then, Quia nostrae, Vxor.
because they are ours, those whom God has given us, and Quia uxores, because
they are our wives. Saint Paul does not bid us love them here, Quanquam uxores,
but Quia, not though they be, but because they are our wives; Saint Paul never
thought of that indisposition, of that disaffection, of that impotency, that a
Man should come to hate her, whom he could love well enough, but that she is
his wife. Were it not a strange distemper, if upon consideration of my soul,
finding it to have some seeds of good dispositions in it, some compassion of
the miseries of others, some inclination of the glory of God, some possibility,
some interest in the kingdom of heaven, I should say of this soul, that I
would fast, and pray, and give, and suffer any thing for the salvation of this
Soul if it were not mine own soul, if it were any bodies else, and now
abandon it to eternal destruction, because it is mine own? If no Man have felt
this barbarous inhumanity toward his own soul, I pray God no man have felt it
toward his own wife neither, That he loves her the less, for being his own
wife. For we must love them, not Quanquam, says Saint Paul, though she be so;
That was a Caution, which the Apostle never thought he needed, but Quia,
because in the sight of God, and all the Triumphant Church, we have bound our
selves, that we would do so. Here Marriages are sometimes clandestine, and
witnesses dye, and in that case no Man can bind me to love her^ Quia ux^r,
because she is my wife, because it lies not in proof, that she is so; Here
sometimes things come to light, which were concealed before, and a Marriage
proves no Marriage, Decepta est Ecclesia, The Church was deceived, and the poor
woman loses her plea, Quia ux^r, because she is his wife, for it falls out that
she is not so; but, if thou have married her, in the presence of God, and all
the Court, and Quire of heaven, what will thou do to make away all these
witnesses? who shall be of thy Council to assign an Error in Gods judgment?
whom wilt thoubribe to embezill the Records of heaven? It is much that thou are
able to do in heaven; Thou art able, by thy sins, to blot thy name out of the
book of life, but thou are not able to blot thy wifes name out of the Records
of heaven, but there remains still the Quia ux^r, because she is thy wife. And
this Quia ux^r is Qua^diu ux^r; since thou art bound to love her because she is
thy wife, it must be as long as she is so. You may have heard of that
quinqu^nnium Neronis; The worst tyran that ever was, was the best Emperor that
ever was for five years; the most corrupt husbands may have been good at first:
but that love may have been for other respects: satisfaction of parents,
establishing of hopes, and sometimes Ignorance of evil; that ill company had
not taught them ill conditions; it comes not to be Quia uxor, because she is
thy wife, to be the love which is commanded in this text, till it bring some
subjection, some burden. Till we love her then, when we would not love her,
except she were our wife, we are not sure, that we love her Quia uxor, that is,
for that, and for no other respect. How long that is, how long she is thy wife,
never ask wrangling Controverters, that make Gypsie-knots of Marriages; ask thy
Conscience, and that will tell thee that thou wast married till death should
depart you. If thy marriage were made by the D^vill (upon dishonest Conditions)
the Devil may break it by sin; if it were made by God, Gods way of breaking of
Marriages, is only by death.

It is then a Subjection, and it is such a subjection, as is a love; and such a
love, as is upon a Reason, (for love is not always so.) This is; Quiauxor,
because our wife, and that implies these three uses; God has given Man a wife,
Ad adjutorium, ad sobolem, ad medicinam; for a Help, for Children, and for a
Remedy, and Physic. Now the first, Society, and increase, we love naturally;
we would not be banished, we would not be robbed, we would not be alone, we
would not be poor; Society and increase, every Man loves; but does any Man love
Physic? he takes it for necessity; but does he love it; Husbands therefore are
to love wives Ad Sobolem, as the Mothers of their Children; Ad adjutorium, as
the comforters of their lives; but for that, which is Ad medicinam, for
physic, to avoid burning, to avoid fornication, that is not the subject of our
love, our love is not to be placed upon that; for so it is a love, Quia mulier,
because she is a woman, and not Quia uxor, because she is my wife. A Man may be
a drunkard at home, with his own wine, and never go out to Taverns; A man may
be an adul^erer in his wives bosom, though he seek not strange women.

We come now to the other part, 2. Part.
the pattern of this love, which is Christ Jesus: we are commanded to be holy,
and pure, as our Father is holy, and pure; but that is a proportion of which we
are incapable; And therefore we have another Commandment, from Christ, Discite
a me, learn of me; there is no more looked for, but that we should still be
Scholars, and learners how to love; we can never love so much as he has loved:
It is still Discite; still something to be learnt, and added; and this
something is, Quia mitis, learn of me, make me your pattern, because I am meek,
and gentle; not suspicious, not forward, not hard to be reconciled; not apt to
discomfort my spouse, my Church; not with a sullen silence, for I speak to her
always in my Word; not apt to leave her unprovided of apparel, and decent
ornaments, for I have allowed her such Ceremonies, as conduce to edification;
not apt to pinch her in her diet; she has her two Courses, the first, and the
second Sacrament: And whenever she comes to a spiritual hunger and thirst
under the heat, and weight of sin, she knows how, and where there is
plentiful refreshing and satisfaction to be had, in the absolution of sin.
Herein consists the substance of the Comparison, Husbands love your wives, as
Christ did his Church: that is, express your loves in a gentle behavior
toward them, and in a careful providence of Conveniences for them. The
comparison goes no farther, but the love of Christ to his Church goes farther.
In which we consider first, Quid factum, what Christ did for his spouse, for
his Church.

It were pity to make too much have, in considering so delightful a thing,
Quid factu^.
as the expressing of the love of Christ Jesus to his Church. It were pity to
ride away so fast from so pleasant, so various a prospect, where we may behold
our Savior, in the Act of his liberality, Giving; in the matter of his
liberality, Giving himself; and in the poor exchange that he took, a few
Contrite hearts, a few broken spirits, a few lame, and blind, and leprous
sinners, to make to himself, and his Spirit a Church, a house to dwell in; no
more but these, and glad if he can get these.

First then, Ille dedit, Iile
He gave, it was his own act; as it was he, that gave up the ghost, he that
laid down his soul, and he that took it again; for no power of Man had the
power, or disposition of his life. It was an insolent, and arrogant question in
Pilate to Christ, Nescis, quia potestatem habc^, Know not thou that I have
power to Crucify thee, and have power to loose thee? If Pilate thought that
his power extended to Christ, Ioh. 19. 10.
yet Tua damnaris sententia qui potestate latrone^ abs^lvis, autorem vitae
interficis. His own words and actions condemned him, when having power to
condemn and absolve, Ambr. Sermon. 20 in P^. 119. v. 4.
he would condemn the Innocent, and absolve the guilty. A good Judge does
nothing, says he. Do^^estice proposito voluntatis, according to a resolution
taken at home; Nihil meditatum deem defert, he brings not his judgment from
his chamber to the bench, but he takes it there according to the Evidence. If
pilate thought he had power, his Conscience told him he misused that power; but
Christ tells him he could have none, Nisi datum desuper, Except it had been
given him from above; that is, except Christ had given him power over himself:
for Christ speaks not in that place of Pilates general power and Jurisdiction,
(for so, also, all power is Desuper, from above) but for this particular power
that Pilate boasts to have over him, Christ tells him that he could have none
over him, except himself had submitted himself to it. So, before this passage
with Pilat, Iud^s had delivered Christ; and there arose a sect of Heretics,
Iudaists, Philaster.
that magnified this act of Iudes, and said that we were beholden to him for
the hastening of our salvation, because when he was come to the knowledge that
God had decreed the Crucifying of Christ for Mankind, Judas took compassion of
Mankind, and hastened their Redemption, by delivering up of Christ to the Jews.
But Judas had no such good purpose in his have; though our Jesus permitted
Judas to do it, and to do it quickly, when he said Quod facis fac cito. For
out of that ground in the Schools, Missia in divinis ^st mov^ operacio in
Creatura, When any person of the Trinity, Job. 13. 27. Aug.
is said to be sent, that only denotes an extraordinary manner of working of
that person: Saint Augustine says truly, that as Christ Misit seipsum, he sent
himself, and Sanitificavit seipsum, he sanctified himself, so tradidit
seipsum; Judas could not have given him, if he had not given himself, Pilate
could not give him, Judas could not give him; nay, if we could consider
several wills in the several Persons of the Trinity, we might be bold to say,
That the Father could not have given him, if he had not given himself. We
consider the unexpressible mercy of the Father, in that he would accept any
satisfaction at all for all our Sins. We consider the unexpressible working
of the Holy Ghost that brings this satisfaction and our souls together; for
without that, without the application of the Holy Ghost, we are as far from
Christ's love now, as we were from the Father's before Christ suffered. But the
unexpressible and unconceiveable love of Christ is in this, that there was in
him a willingness, a propensnesse, a forwardness to give himself to make
this great peace and reconciliation, between God and Man; It was himself that
gave himself; Nothing inclined him, nothing wrought upon him, but his own
goodness.

It was then his Deed; and it was his gift; it was his Deed of gift: and it
has all the formalities and circumstances that belong to that; for here is a
seal in his blood; and here is a delivering, pregnantly implied in this word,
which is not only Dedit, Dedit.
he gave, but Tradidit, he delivered. First, Dedit, he gave himself for us to
his Father, in that eternal Decree, by which he was Agnus occisus ab origin
mundi, The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world. And then Tradidit, he
delivered possession of himself to Death, and to all humane infirmities, when
he took our Nature upon him, and became one of us. Yea this word implies a
further operativenesse, and working upon himself, then all this; for the word
which the Apostle uses here, for Christ giving of himself, is the same word,
which the Evangelists use still, for Judas betraying of him: so that Christ did
not only give himself to the will of the Father, in the eternal Decree; nor
only deliver himself to the power of death in his Incarnation, but he
offered, he exhibited, he exposed, (we may say) he betrayed himself to his
enemies; and all this, for worse enemies; to the Jews, that Crucified him
once, for us, that make finne our sport, and so make the Crucifying of the Lord
of life a Recreation.

It was a gift then, free, and absolute; He keeps us not in fear of
Resumption; Seipsum.
of ever taking himself from the Church again; nay he has left himself no
power of Revocation: I am with you, says he, to the end of the world. To
particular men, he comes, and he knocks, and he enters, and he stays, and
hesups, and yet for their unworthiness goes away again; but with the Church he
is usque ad consummationem, till the end; It is a permanent gift; Dedit, and
Dedit seipsum; It was he that did it; That which he did was to give; and that
which he gave, was himself. Now since the Holy Ghost, that is the God of unity
and peace, has told us at once, that the satisfaction for our sins is Christ
himself, and has told us no more, Christ entirely, Christ altogether, let us
not divide and mangle Christ, or tear his Church in pieces, by froward and
frivolous difputations, whether Christ gave his divinity for us, or his
humanity; whether the divine Nature, or the humane Nature redeemed us; for
neither his divinity nor his humanity, is Ipse, He himself, and Dedit seipsum,
He gave himself: Let us not subdivide him into less pieces, then those, God,
and Man; and enquire contentiously, whether he suffered in soul, as well as in
body, the pains of H^ll, as well as the sting of Death; the Holy Ghost has
presented him unite, and knit together. For neither soul nor body was Ipse. He
himself, and Dedit seipsum, He gave himself; let us least of all shred Christ
Jesus into less scruples and atoms then these, Soul, and body; and dispute
whether consisting of both, it were his active, or his passive obedience that
redeemed us; whether it were his death and passion only, or his innocence, and
fulfilling of the Law too; let us only take Christ, himself, for only that
is said, he gave himself, It must be an Innocent person, and this Innocent
person must die for us; separate the Innocence, and the Death, and it is not
Ipse, it is not Christ himself: and Dedit seipsum, it was himself. Let us
abstain from all such curiosities, which are all but forced dishes of hot
brains, and not sound meat, that is, from all perverse wranglings, whether God,
or Man redeemed us; and then, whether this God, and Man suffered in soul, or
in body; and then whether this person, consisting of soul and body, redeemed
us, by his action, or by his passion only; for as there are spiritual
wickednesses, so there are spiritual wantonnesses, and unlawful and dangerous
dallyings with mysteries of Divinity. Money that is changed into small pieces
is easily lost; gold that is beat out into leaf-gold, cannot be coined, nor
made current money: we know the Heathens lost the true God, in a thrust; they
made so many false gods, of every particular quality, and attribute of God,
that they scattered him, and evacuated him, to an utter vanishing; so does
true, and sound, and nourishing Divinity vanish away, in those impertinent
Questions. All that the wit of Man adds to the Word of God, is all quicksilver,
and it evaporates easily. Beloved, Custodi Depositum, says the Apostle, keep
that which God has revealed to thee; for that God himself calls thy Talent; it
has weight and substance in it. Depart not from thy old gold; leave not thy
Catechism-divinity, for all the Schooldivinity in the world; when we have all,
what would we have more? if we know that Christ has given himself for us,
that we are redeemed, and not redeemed with corruptible things but with the
precious blood of Christ Jesus, we care for no other knowledge but that,
Christ, and Christ crucified for us; for this is another, and a more peculiar
and profitable giving of himself for thee, when he gives himself to thee,
that is, when he gives thee a sense, and apprehension, and application of the
gift, to thy self, that Christ has given himself, to thy self.

We are come now to his exchange; Pro Ecclesia.
what Christ had for himself when he gave himself; And he had a Church. So
this Apostle, which in this place, writes to the Ephesians, Act. 20. 28.
when he preached personally to the Ephesians, he told them so too, The Church
is that Quam acquisivit sanguine suo, which he purchased with his blood. Here
Christ bought a Church, but I would there were no worse Simony then this.
Christ received no profit from the Church, and yet he gave himself for it; and
he stays with it to the end of the world; Here is no such Non-residency, as
that the Church is left unserved: other men give enough for their Church, but
they withraw themselves, and necessary provision; And if we consider this
Church that Christ bought, and paid so dearly for, it was rather an Hospital,
then a Church: A place where the blind might recover sight; that is, Men borne
in Paganism, or Superstition, might see the true God, truly worshipped: and
where the lame might be established; that is, those that Halted between two
Religions, might be rectified in the truth: where the Deaf might receive so
quick a hearing, as that they might discern Music in his Thunder, in all
his fearful threatenings; that is, mercy in his Judgments, which are still
accompanied with conditions of repentance; and they might find Thunder, in his
Music, in all his promises; that is, threatenings of Judgments, in our misuse
of his mercies. Where the hereditary Leper, the newborn Child, into whose
marrow, his fathers transgression, cleaves in original sin, and he that has
enwrapped Implicatos morbos, one disease in another, in Actual sins, might
not only come, if he would but be entreated to come, yea compelled to come, as
it is expressed in the Gospel, when the Master of the feast sends into the
streets, and to the hedges to compel blind and lame to come in to his feast.
Luke 14. 21.
A fountain breaks out in the wilderness, but that fountain cares not,
whether any Man come to fetch water, or no; A fresh, and fit gale blows upon
the Sea, but it cares not whether the Mariners hoise sail or no; A rose blows
in your garden, but it calls you not to smell to it. Christ Jesus has done all
this abundantly; he has bought an Hospital, he has stored it with the true
balm of Palestine, with his blood, which he shed there, and he calls upon you
all to come for it, Hoe every one that thirsts; you that have no money, come
buy Wine, and Milk without money: eat that which is good, and let your souls
delight in fatness, Esaias 55. 1.
and I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. This Hospital, this way, and means to cure spiritual diseases, was
all that Christ had for himself: but he improved it, he makes it a Church, and
a glorious Church: which is our last consideration, Quis sinis, to what end, he
bestowed all this cost.

His end was, Quis finis.
that he might make it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot, or
wrinkle; Augstin. Retrac. l. 1. c. 7.
but that end, must be in the end of all; here it cannot be: Cum tot a dicat
ecclesia, quamdiu hic est, Dimitte debita nostra, non utique hic est sine
macula et ruga, Since as yet the whole Church says, forgive us our Trespasses,
the Church as yet is not without spots or wrinkles. The wrinkles are the
Testimonies of our age; that is, our sin derived from Adam; and the spots are
the sins, which we contract our selves; and of these spots, and wrinkles, we
cannot be delivered in this world. And therefore the Apostle says here, that
Christ has bestowed all this cost on this purchase, ut sisteret sibi
Ecclesiam, that he might setle such a glorious, and pure Church to himself:
first, ut sisteret, that he might setle it; which can only be done in heaven;
for here in Earth, the Church will always have earthquakes. Opartet haereses
esse; storms, and schisms must necessarily be; the Church is in a warfare,
the Church is in a pilgrimage, and therefore here is no settling. And then he
does it, ut sisteret sibi, to setle it to himself; for, in the tyranny of
Rome, the Church was in some sort settled, things were carried quietly enough;
for no Man durst complain; but the Church was settled all upon the Vicar, and
none upon the Parson: the glory of the Bishop of Rome, had eclipsed, and
extinguished the glory of Christ Jesus. In other places we have seen the Church
settled, so as that no man has done or spoken any thing against the government
thereof; but, this may have been a settling by strong hand, by severed
discipline, and heavy Laws; we see where Princes have changed the Religion,
the Church may be settled upon the Prince, or settled upon the Prelates, that is,
be serviceable to them, and be ready to promote and further any purpose of
theirs, and all this while, not be settled upon Christ: this purpose, ut
sisteret sibi, to setle such a glorious Church, without spot, or wrinkle, holy
to himself, is reserved for the Triumphant time when she shall be in
possession of that beauty, which Christ foresaw in her, long before when he
said, Thou art all fair my love, and there is no spot in thee; Cant. 4.6.
and when we that shall be the Children of the Marriage Chamber^ shall be glad
and rejoice, and give glory to him, because the Marriage of the Lamb is come,
and his wife has made her self ready; Apoc. 19 7.
that is, we that are of that Church, shall be so clothed, as that our own
clothes shall not defile us again; as Io^ complains that they do, as long as
we are in this world; for, though I make me never so clean, yet mine own
clothes defile me again, as it is in that place.

But yet, Beloved, Christ has not made so improvident a bargain, as to give
so great a rate, himself, for a Church, so far in reversion, as till the day
of Judgment: That he should enter into bonds for this payment, from all
eternity, even in the eternal decree between the Father, and him, that he
should really pay this price, his precious blood, for this Church, one thousand
six hundred years ago, and he should receive no glory by this Church till the
next world^ Here was a long lease, here were many lives; the lives of all the
men in the world, to be served before him; But it is not altogether so; for he
gave himself, that he might settle such a Church then, a glorious, and a pure
Church: but all this while, the Church is building in heaven, by continual
access of holy Souls, which come thither, and all the way he works to that
end, He sanctifies it, and cleanses it, by the washing of water, through the
word, as we find in our Text.

He therefore stays not so long, for our Sanctification, but that we have
means of being sanctified here; Christ stays not so long for his glory, but
that he has here a glorious Gospel, his Word, and mysterious Sacraments here.
Here then is the writing, and the Seal, the Word, and the Sacrament; and he
has given power, and commandment to his Ministers to deliver both writing,
and Seal, the Word and Baptism to his children. This Sacrament of Baptism is
the first; It is the Sacrament of inchoation, of Initiation; The Sacrament of
the Supper, is not given but to them, who are instructed and presumed to
understand all Christian duties, and therefore the Word, (if we understand the
Word, for the Preaching of the Word) may seem more necessary at the
administration of this Sacrament, then at the other. Some such thing seems to
be intimated in the institution of the Sacraments. In the institution of the
Supper, it is only said, Mat. 26. 26.
Take, and eat and drink, and do that in remembrance of me; and it is only
said that they sand a Pslame, and s^ departed. In the institution of Baptism
there is more solemnity, Luke 11. 19.
more circumstance; for first, it was instituted after Christ's Resurrection,
and then Christ proceeds to it, Mat. 28. 18.
with that majesticall preamble, All power is given unto me in heaven, and in
earth^ and therefore, upon that title he gives power to his Apostles, to join
heaven and earth by preaching, and by baptism: but here is more then singing
of a Psalm; for Christ commands them first to teach, and then to baptize, and
then after the commandment of Baptism, he refreshes that commandment again
of teaching them, whom they baptized, to observe all things, that he had
commanded them. I speak not this, as though Baptism were uneffectuall without
a Sermon; S. Angustines words, Accedat yerbum, and fiat Sacramentum, when the
Word is joined to the element, or to the Action, then there is a true
Sacrament, Augustine.
are ill understood by two sorts of Men^ first by them, that say that it is not
verbum Deprecatorium, nor verbum Conci^nat^riu^, not the word of Prayer, nor
the word of preaching, but verbum Consecratorium, and verbum Sacramentale, that
very phrase, and form of words, by which the water is sanctified, and enabled
of it self to cleanse our Souls; and secondly, these words are ill understood
by them, who had rather their children dyed unbaptized, then have them baptized
without a Sermon; whereas the use of preaching at baptism is, to raise the
whole Congregation, to a consideration, what they promised by others, in their
baptism; and to raise the Father and the Sureties to a consideration, what
they undertake for the child, whom they present then to be baptized; for
therefore says Saint Augustine, Acoeda^ verbum, there is a necessity of the
word, Non qu^a dicitur, sed quia creditur, not because the word is pr^ached,
but because it is believed; and That, Beleese, faith, belongs not at all to the
incapacity of the child, but to the disposition of the rest; A Sermon is
useful for the congregation, not necessary for the child, and the
accomplishment of the Sacrament.

From hence then arises a convenience, little less, then necessary, (in a
kind) that this administration of the Sacrament be accompanied with preaching;
but yet they that would evict an absolute necessity of it, out of these words,
force them too much, for here the direct meaning of the Apostle is, That the
Church is cleansed by water, through the word, when the promises of God
expressed in his word, are sealed to us by this Sacrament of Baptism: for so
Saint Augustine answers himself in that objection, which he makes to himself,
Cum per Baptis^^^ fundati sint, quare sermoni tribuit radicem. He answers, In
Sermon intelligendus Baptismus^ Quia sine Sermon non perficitur. It is
rooted, it is grounded in the word; and therefore true Baptism, though it be
administered, without the word, that is, without the word preached, yet it is
never without the word, because the whole Sacrament, and the power thereof is
rooted in the word, in the Gospel. And therefore since this Sacrament belongs
to the Church, as it is said here (that Christ does cleanse his Church by
Baptism) as it is argued with a strong probability, That because the Apostles
did baptize whole families, therefore they did baptize some children, so we
argue with an invincible certainty, that because this Sacrament belongs
generally to the Church as the initiatory Sacrament, it belongs to children,
who are a part, and for the most part, the most innocent part of the Church.

To conclude, As all those Virgins which were beautiful, were brought into
Susan, Ad domum mulierum, to be anointed, Esther 2.
and persumed, and prepared there for Assuerus delight, and pleasure, though
Assuerus took not delight, and pleasure in them all, so we admit all those
children which are within the Covenant made by God, to the elect, and their
seed, In domum Sanctorum, into the household of the faithful, into the
communion of Saints: whom he chooses for his Marriage day, that is, for that
Church which he will settle upon himself in heaven, we know not; but we know
that he has not promised, to take any into that glory, but those upon whom he
has first shed these fainter beams of glory, and sanctification, exhibited in
this Sacrament: Neither has he threatened to exclude any but for sin after.
And therefore when this blessed child derived from faithful parents, and
presented by sureties within the obedience of the Church, shall have been so
cleansed, by the washing of water, through the word, it is presently sealed to
the possession of that part of Christ's purchase, for which he gave himself,
(which are the means of preparing his Church in this life) with a faithful
assurance, I may say of it and to it, Iam mundus es, Now you are clean^.
through the word, John 15. 3.
which Christ has spoken unto you: The Seal of the promises of his Gospel
has sanctified, and cleansed you; but yet, Mandatus mundandus, says Saint
Augustine upon that place, It is so sanctified by the Sacrament, here, that it
may be farther sanctified by the growth of his graces, and be at last a member
of that glorious Church, which he shall settle upon himself, without spot, or
wrinkle; which was the principal, and final purpose of that great love of his,
whereby he gave himself for us, and made that love, first a pattern of Men's
loves to their wives here, and then a means to bring Man, and wife, and child,
to the kingdom of heaven. Amen.

SERMON VI.
Preached at a Christning.
1 JOHN 5. 7, 8. For there are three which bear record in heaven; The Father,
the Word, and the Holy Ghost; and these three are one: And there are three
which bear record in the Earth; The Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and
these three agree in one.
IN great and enormous offenses, we find that the law, in a well governed
State, expressed the punishment upon such a delinquent, in that form, in that
curse, Igni and aqua interdicitor; let him have no use of fire, and water, that
is, no use of any thing, necessary for the sustentation of life. Beloved, such
is the miserable condition of wretched Man, as that we come all into the world
under the burden of that curse; Aqua, and igni interdicim^r; we have nothing to
do, naturally, with the spiritual water of life, with the fiery beams of the
holy Ghost, till he that has wrought our restitution from this banishment,
restore us to this water, by pouring out his own blood, and to this lively
fire, by laying himself a cold, and bloudlesse carcass in the bowels of the
Earth: till he who haptized none with wa^er, direct his Church to do that
office toward us; and he without whom, none was baptized with fire, perfect
that Ministerial work of his Church with the effectual seals of his grace;
for this is his testimony, the witness of his love.

Yea, that law, in cases of such great offenses, expressed it self in another
Malediction, upon such offenders, appliable also to us, Intestabiles sunte, let
them be Intestable. Now, this was a sentence, a Condemnation so pregnant, so
full of so many heavy afflictions, as that he, who by the law was made
intestable, was all these ways intestable: First, he was able to make no
Testament of his own, he had lost all his interest in his own estate, and in
his own will; Secondly, he could receive no profit by any testament of any
other Man, he had lost all the effects of the love, and good disposition of
other Men to him; Thirdly, he was Intestable, so, as that he could not
testify, he should not be believed in the behalf of another; and lastly the
testimony of another could do him no good, no Man could be admitted to speak
for him. After that first, and heavy curse of Almighty God upon Man, Morte
morieris, If thou eat, thou shall die, and die twice, thou shall die a bodily,
thou shall die a spiritual death (a punishment which no sentence of any law,
or lawmakers could ever equal, to deter Men from offending, by threatening to
take away their lives twice, and by inflicting a spiritual death eternally
upon the Soul,) after we have all incurred that malediction, Morte moriemur,
we shall die both death, we cannot think to escape any less malediction of any
law, and therefore we are all Intestabiles we are all intestable, in all these
senses, and apprehensions, which we have touched upon.

We can make no testament of our own; we have no good thing in us to dispose;
we have no good inclination, no good disposition, in our Will; we can make no
use of another testament; not of the double testaments of Almighty God; for in
the Old testament, he gives promises of a Messiah, but we bring into the world
no Faith, to apprehend those promises; and in the New testament, he gives a
performance, the Messiah is come, but he is communicable to us, no way but by
baptism, and we cannot baptize our selves; we can profit no body else by our
testimony, we are not able to endure persecution, for the testimony of Christ,
to the edification of others, we are not able to do such works, as may shine
before Men, to the glorifying of our God. Neither does the testimony of others
do us any good; for neither the Martyrdom of so many Millions, in the
primitive Church, nor the execution of so many judgments of God, in our own
times, do restifie any thing to our Consciences; neither at the last day, when
those Saints of God, whom we have accompanied in the outward worship of God
here in the visible Church, shall be called to the right hand, and we detruded
to the left, shall they dare to open their mouths for us, or to testify of
us, or to say, Why Lord, these Men, when they were in the world, did as we did,
appeared, and served thee in thy house, as we did, they seemed to go the same
way that we did upon Earth, why go they a sinister way now in heaven? We are
utterly intestable; we can give nothing; we can take nothing; nothing will be
believed from us, who are all falsehood it self; nor can we be releeved by any
thing, that any other will say for us. As long, as we are considered under the
penalty of that law, this is our case; Interdicti, intestabiles, we are
accursed, and so, as that we are intestable.

Now as this great malediction, Morte marieris, in volves all other
punishments, (upon whom that falls, all fall) so when our Savior Christ Jesus
has a purpose to take away that, or the most dangerous part of that, the
spiritual death, when he will reverse that judgment, Aqua and igni
interdicitur, to make us capable of his water, and his fire; when he will
reverse the intestabiles, the inte^^ability, and make us able to receive his
graces by faith, and declare them by works; then, as he that will reedifie a
demolished house, begins not at the top but at the bottom, so Christ Jesus,
when he will make this great preparation, this great reedification of mankind,
he begins at the lowest step, which is, that we may have use of the testimony
of others, in our behalf: and he proceeds strongly, and effectually; he
produces three witnesses from heaven, so powerful, that they will be heard,
they will be believed; and three witnesses on earth, so near us, so familiar
so domestique as that they will not be denied, they will not be discredited;
Three are three that bear Record in heaven, and three that bear record in
earth.

Since then Christ Jesus makes us all our own Jury, able to conceive, and
judge upon the Evidence, and testimony of these three heavenly, and three
earthly witnesses, let us draw near, and hearken to the evidence, and consider
three things; Testimonium esse. Quid sit, and Qui testes. That God descends to
means proportionable to Man; Divisio.
he affords him witness; and secondly, the matter of the proof, what all
these six witnesses testify, what they establish; Thirdly, the quality, and
value of the witnesses, and whether the matter be to be believed, for their
sakes, and for their reasons. God requires nothing of us, but Testimony: for
Martyrdom is but that; A Martyr is but a witness. God offers us nothing
without testimony: for his Testament, is but a witness. Test ipso, is shrewd
evidence; when God says, I will speak, and I will testify against thee; I am
God, Psalm. 50. 7.
even thy God: when the voice of God testifies against me in mine own
conscience. It is more pregnant evidence then this, when his voice testifies
against me in his word, in his Scriptures: The Lord testified against Israel,
by all the Prophets and by all the Seers. 2. Reg. 17. 13.
When I can never be alone, but that God speaks in me, but speaks against me;
when I can never open his book, but the first sentence mine eye is upon, is a
witness against me, this is fearful evidence. But in this text, we are not in
that storm, for he has made us Testabiles, that is, ready to testify for
him, to the effusion of our blood; and Testabiles, that is, fit to take benefit
by the testament, that he has made for us, The effusion of his blood; which
is our second branch: what is testified for us, what these witnesses establish.

First then, that which a sinner must be brought to understand, and believe, 2.
Part. Integritas Christi.
by the strength of these witnesses, is Integritas Christi; not the Integrity,
as it signifies the Innocence of Christ: but integrity, as it signifies
Intireness, not as it is Integer vitae, but Integra vita; not as he kept an
integrity in his life, but as he only, is entirely our life. That Christ was a
person composed of those two Natures, divine, and humane, whereby he was a fit,
and a full satisfaction for all our sins, and by death could be our life: for
when the Apostle writ this Epistle, it seems there had been a schism, not
about the Mystical body of Christ, the Church, but even about the Natural;
that is to say, in the person of Christ, there had been a schism, a separation
of his two natures: for, as we see certainly before the death of this Apostle,
that the Heresy of Ebion and of Cerinthus, (which denied the divine nature of
Christ) was set on foot, (for against them purposely was the Gospel of Saint
John written) so by Epiphanius his ranking of the Heresies, as they arose,
where he makes Basilides his Heresy, (which denied that Christ had any
natural body) to be the fourth herefie, and Ebions, to be the tenth, it
seems, that they denied his humanity, before they denied his Divinity. And
therefore it is well collected, that this Epistle of Saint John, being written
long before his Gospel, was written principally, and purposely against the
opposers of Christ's humanity, but occasionally also, in defense of his divine
nature too. Because there is Solutio Jesus, a dissolving of Jesus, a taking of
Jesus in pieces, a dividing of his Natures, or of his Offices, which
overthrowes all the testimonies of these six great witnesses when Christ said,
Solvite templum hoc, destroy, dissolve this temple, and in three days I will
raise it, he spoke that but of his natural body; there was Solutio corporis,
Christ's body and soul were parted, but there was not Solutio Jesus; the divine
nature parted not from the humane, no not in death, but adhered to, and
accompanied the soul, even in hell, and accompanied the body in the grave.

And therefore, says the Apostle, Omnis spiritus qui solvit Iesum, ex deo non
est; 1 John 4. 3.
(for so Irenaeus, and Saint Augustine, and Saint Cyrill with the Grecians,
read those words) That spirit which receives not Jesus entirely, which
dissolves Jesus and breaks him in pieces, that spirit is not of God. All this
then is the subject of this testimony; first that Christ Jesus is come in the
flesh; 4. 2.
(there is a Recognition of his humane nature) And then that this Jesus is the
son of God; 5. 5
(there is a subscription to his divine nature:) he that separates these, and
thereby makes him not able, or not willing to satisfy for Man, he that
separates his Nature, or he that separates the work of the Redemption, and
says, Christ suffered for us only as Man, and not as God, or he that separates
the manner of the work, and says that the passive obedience of Christ only
redeemed us, without any respect at all, to his active obedience, only as he
died, and nothing as he died innocently, or he that separates the perfection,
and consummation of the work, from his work, and finds something to be done
by Man himself, meritorious to salvation, or he that separates the Prince, and
the Subject, Christ and his members, by nourishing Controversies in Religion,
when they might be well reconciled, or he that separates himself from the body
of the Church, and from the communion of Saints, for the fashion of the
garments, for the variety of indifferent Ceremonies, all these do Solvere
Iesum, they slacken, they dissolve that Jesus, whose bones God provided for,
that they should not be broken, whose flesh God provided for, that it should
not see Corruption, and whose garments God provided, that they should not be
divided.

There are other luxations, other dislocations, of Jesus, when we displace him
for any worldly respect, and prefer preforment before him; there are other
woundings of Jesus, in blasphemous oaths, and exerations; there are other
maimings of Jesus, in pretending to serve him entirely, and yet retain one
particular beloved sin still; there are other rackings, and extendings of
Jesus when we delay him and his patience to our deathbed, when we stretch the
string so far, that it cracks there, that is, appoint him to come then, and
he comes not; there are other dissolutions of Jesus, when men will melt him,
and power him out, and mold him up in a waser Cake, or a piece of bread; there
are other annihilations of Jesus when Men will make him, and his Sacraments, to
be nothing but bare signs; but all these will be avoided by us, if we be
gained by the testimony of these six witnesses to hold fast that integrity,
that intirensse of Jesus, which is here delivered to us by this Apostle.

In which we believe first I^sum, a Savior; which implies his love, and his
will to save us; and then we believe Christum, the anointed, that is God and
man, able, and willing to do this great work, and that he is anointed, and
sealed for that purpose; and this implies the decree, the contract, and
bargain, of acceptance by the Father, that Pactum salis, that eternal
covenant which seasons all, by which, that which he meant to do, as he was
Jesus, should be done, as he was Christ. And then as the entireness of Jesus
is expressed, in the verse before the text, we believe, Quod venit, that as all
this might be done, if the Father and Son would agree, as all this must be
done, because they had agreed it, so all this was done, Qu^a venit, because
this Jesus is already come; and that, for the father entireness, for the
perfection, and consummation, and declaration of all, venit per aquam and
sanguinem, He came by water, and blood.

Which words Saint Bernard understands to imply but a difference between the
coming of Christ, and the coming of Moses; Bernard.
who was drawn out of the water, and therefore called by that name of Moses.
But before Moses came to be a leader of the people, he passed through blood
too, through the blood of the Egyptian, whom he slew; and much more when he
established all their bloody sacrifices, so that Mases came not only by water.
Neither was the first Testament ordained without blood. Heb. 9. 18.
Others understand the words only to put a difference between John Baptist,
and Christ: because John Baptist is still said to baptize with water^ Because
he should be declared to Israel; therefore am I come, baptizing with water:
John 1. 31.
but yet John Baptists baptism had not only a relation to blood, but a
demonstration of it, when still he pointed to the Lamb, Ecce Agnus, for that
Lamb was sl^ine from the beginning of the world. So that Christ, which was
this Lamb, came by water, and blood, when he came, in the risuall types, and
figures of Moses; and when he came in the baptism of John: for in the Law of
Moses, there was so frequent use of water, as that we reckon above fifty
several Immunditi as uncleanness, which might receive their expiation by
washing, without being put to their bloody sacrifies for them: And then there
was so frequent use of blood, that almost all things are by the Law purged with
blood, Heb. 9. 22.
and without shedding of blood, is no Remission, But this was such water, and
such blood, as could not perfect the work, but therefore was to be renewed
every day. The water that Jesus comes by, is such a water, as he that arinketh
of it, shall thirst no more; nay there shall spring up in him a well of water;
that is, his example shall work to the satisfaction of others; (we do not say
to a satisfaction for others.) And then this is that blood, that perfected the
whole work at once, By his own blood entered he once into the holy place, Heb.
19. 12.
and obtained eternal Redemption for us. So that Christ came by water, and
blood, (according to the old ablutions, and old sacrifices) when he wept, when
he sweat, when he powered out blood; precious, incorruptible, inestimable blood,
at so many channels, as he did, all the while that he was upon the altar,
sacrificing himself in his passion. But after the immolation of this
sacrifice, after his Consummatum est; when Christ was come and gone for so much
as belonged to the accomplishing of the types of the old law, then Christ came
again to us by water and blood, in that wound, which he received upon his
side, from which there flowed out miraculously true water, and true blood. This
wound Saint Augustine calls Ianuam utriusque Sacramenti, Augustine.
the door of both sacraments; where we see he acknowledges but two, and both
presented in this water, and blood and so certainly do most of the fathers,
make this wound if not the foundation, yet at least a sacrament of both the
sacraments. And to this water and blood does the Apostle here, without doubt,
aim principally; which he only of all the Evangelists has recorded; and with
so great asseveration, and assuredness in the recording thereof, He that saw
it bare record, and his record is true, and he knows that he says truth,
John 19. 34.
that ye might believe it. Here then is the matter which these six witnesses
must be believed in, here is Integritas Jesus, quae non solvenda, the
entireness of Christ Jesus, which must not be broken, That a Savior, which is
Jesus, appointed to that office, that is Christ, figured in the law, by
ablutions of water, and sacrifices of blood, is come, and has perfected all
those figures in water, and blood too; and then, that he remains still with us
in water, and blood, by means instituted in his Church, to wash away our
uncleanness, and to purge away our iniquities, and to apply his work unto
our Souls; this is Integritas Jesus, Jesus the son of God in heaven, Jesus
the Redeemer of man, upon earth, Jesus the head of a Church to apply that to
the end, this is Integritas Jesus; all that is to be believed of him.

Take thus much more, that when thou come to hearken what these witnesses
shall say to this purpose, thou must find something in their testimony, to
prove him to be come not only into the world, but into thee; He is a mighty
prince, and has a great train; millions of ministering spirits attend him, and
the whole army of Martyrs follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: Though the
whole world be his Court, thy soul is his bedchamber; there thou may
contract him, there thou may lodge, and entertain Integrum Iesum, thy whole
Savior. And never trouble thy self, how another shall have him, if thou have
him all; leave him, and his Church to that; make thou sure thine own
salvation. When he comes to thee, he comes by water and by blood; If thy heart,
and bowels have not yet melted in compassion of his passion for thy soul, if
thine eyes have not yet melted, in tears of repentanc^ and contrition, he is
not yet come by water into thee; If thou have suffered nothing for sin, nor
found in thy self a cheerful disposition to suffer, if thou have found no
wresting in thy self, no resistance of Concupiscences, he that comes not to
set peace, but to kindle this war, is not yet come into thee, by blood. Christ
can come by land, by purchases, by Revenues, by temporal blessings, for so he
did still convey himself to the Jews, by the blessing of the land of promise,
but here he comes by water, by his own passion, by his sacraments, by thy
tears: Christ can come in a marriage and in Music, for so he delivers himself
to the spouse in the Canticles; but here he comes in blood; which coming in
water, and blood (that is, in means for the salvation of our souls, here in
the militant Church) is the coming that he stands upon and which includes all
the Christian Religion; and therefore he proves that coming to them, by these
three great witnesses in heaven, and three in earth. For there are three which
bear record in heaven. The Father, the word, and the holy Ghost: and these
three are one. And there are three which bear record in the earth; The spirit,
and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one.

By the mouth of two, or three witnesses every word shall be confirmed, 2 Part.
Mat. 18. 16.
says Christ out of the law. That Is as much as can be required, in any Civil,
or Criminal business; and yet Christ gives more testimony of himself, for
here he produces not Duos testes, but Duas Classes; two ranks of witnesses;
and the fullest number of each, not two, but three in heaven, and three in
earth. And such witnesses upon earth, as are omni exceptione majores, without
all exception. It is not the testimony of earthly men; for when Saint Paul
produces them in abundance, (The Patriarch, the Judges, the Prophets, the
elders of the old times; of whom he exhibits an exact Catalogue,) yet he calls
all them but Nubes testium clouds of witnesses; Heb. 11. Heb. 12.
for though they be clouds in Saint Chrysostomes sense, (that they invest us,
and enwrap us, and so defend us from all diffidence in God,) (we have their
witness what God did for them, why should we doubt of the like?) though they
be clouds in Athanasius sense, they being in heaven, shower down by their
prayers, the dew of Gods grace upon the Church; Though they be clouds, they
are but clouds; some darkness mingled in them, some controversies arising
from them; but his witnesses here, are Lux inaccessibilis, that light, that no
eye can attain to, and Pater Luminum, the father of lights, from whom all
these testimonies are derived. When God employed a man, to be the witness of
Christ, because men might doubt of his testimony, God was content to assign
him his Compurgators; Mat. 3. 3
when John Baptist must preach, that the kingdom of God, was at hand, God
fortifies the testimony of his witness, then, Hic enim est, for this is he of
whom that is spoken by the prophet Esaias; Mar.1.2.
and lest one were not enough, he multiplies them, as it is written, in the
prophets. John Baptist might be thought to testify as a man, and therefore men
must testify for him; but these witnesses are of a higher nature; these of
heaven are the Trinity, and those of earth, are the sacraments and seals of
the Church. The prophets were full of favor with God, Abraham full of faith,
Stephen full of the Holy Ghost, many full of grace, and John Baptist a prophet,
and more then a prophet, yet never any prophet, never any man, how much soever
interessed in the favor of Almighty God was such an instrument of grace, as a
sacrament or as Gods seals and institutions in his Church: and the least of
these six witnesses, is of that nature, and therefore might be believed without
more witnesses.

To speak then first of the three first, 3 In Caelis.
the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, it was but a poor plot of the
devil, to go about to rob us, of their testimony; for as long as we have the
three last, the spirit, the water, and blood, we have testimony enough of
Christ, because God is involved in his ordinance; and though he be not tied to
the work of the Sacrament, yet he is always present in it. Yet this plot, the
devil had upon the Church: And whereas this first Epistle of Saint John was
never doubted to be Canonical, (whereas both the other have been called into
some question) yet in this first Epistle, the first verse of this text, was for
a long time removed, or expunged, whether by malice of Heretics, or
negligence of transcribers. The first Translation of the new testament, (which
was into Syriaque) has not this verse; That which was first called Vulgata
editio, had it not, neither has Luther it in his Germane translation: very
many of the Latin Fathers have it not; and some very ancient Greek Fathers
want it, though more ancient then they, have it; for Athanasius in the Council
of Nice cites it, and makes use of it; and Cyprian, beheaded before that
Council, has it too. But now, he that is one of the witnesses himself, the
Holy Ghost has assured the Church, that this verse belongs to the Scripture;
and therefore it becomes us to consider thankfully, and reverently, this first
rank of witnesses, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost.

The Father then has testified De integritate Christi, of this entireness,
Pater.
that Christ should be all this and do all this, which we have spoken of,
abundantly: he begun before Christ was borne; in giving his name, Mat^ 1. 21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from sin. Well;
how shall this person be capable to do this office of saving his people from
sin? Why, in him say God the father, (in the representation of an Angel) 23.
shall be fulfilled that prophecy, A virgin shall bear a Son, and they shall
call his name Emanuel, which is by interpretation God with us: This seems
somewhat an incertaine testimony, of a Man, with an Alias dictus, with two
names. God says he shall be called Jesus, that the prophecy may be fulfilled
which says he shall be called Emanuel: but therein consists, Integritas
Christi, this entireness; he could not be Jesus, not a Savior, except he were
Emanuel, God with us, God in our nature. Here then is Jesus, a Savior, a
Savior that is God, and Man, but where is the Testimony De Christo; that he
was anointed, and prepared for this sacrifice; that this work of his was
contracted between the Father, and him, and acceptable to him? It is twice
testified by the Father; both in Christ's act of humiliation, when he would be
Baptized by John; when he would accept an ablution, who had no uncleanness,
then God says, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Mat. 3. ult.
he was well pleased in his person, and he was well pleased, in his act, in his
office. And he testifies it again in his first act of glory, in his
transfiguration; where the Father repeates the same words with an addition,
Mat. 17.5.
Hear him: God is pleased in him, and would have Men pleased in him too. He
testified first, only for Joseph's sak that had entertained, and lodged some
scrupulous suspicion against his wife, the Blessed Virgin; His second
testimony at the baptism, had a farther extent; for that was for the
confirmation of John Baptist, of the preacher himself, who was to convey his
doctrine to many others; His third testimony in the transfiguration, was larger
then the Baptism; for that satisfied three, and three such as were to carry it
far, Peter, and James, and John: All which no doubt made the same use of his
testimony, as we see Peter did, who preached out of the strength of his
manifestation, 2 Pet. 1. 16.
we followed not deceivable fables, but with our own eyes we saw his Majesty;
for he received of God the Father, honor, and glory, when there came such a
voice to him, from the Excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. But yet the Father gave a more free, a more liberal testimony of
him, then this, at his Conception, or Baptism, or Transfiguration: when upon
Christ's prayer, Father glorify thy Name, there came a voice from heaven, John
19. 28.
I have both glorified it and will glorify it again. For this all the people
apprehended; some imputed it to Thunder, some to an Angel; but all heard it;
and all heard Christ's comment upon it, That that voice came not for him, but
for their sakes; so that when the Father had testified of a Jesus, a Savior,
and a Christ, a Savior sent to that purpose, and a Son in whom he is
pleased, and whom we must hear, when it is said of him, moreover, Gratificavit
^^s in Dilect^, he has made us accepted in his beloved, Ephesians. 1.6
this is his way of coming in water, and blood, that is, in the sacraments of
the Church, by which we have assurance of being accepted by him; and this is
this Integritas Christi, the entireness of Christ, testified by our first
witness, that bears record in heaven. The father.

The second witness in heaven, is ver^um, The Word: and that is a welcome
message, Verbum, Esa. 9. 8.
for it is Christ himself: It is not so when the Lord sends a word; The Lord
sent a word unto Jacob, and it lighted upon Israel^ there the word is a
judgment, and an execution of the Judgment: for that word, that signifies, 2
word there, in the same letters exactly signifies, a pestilence, a Calamity; It
is a word, and a blow; but the word here, is verbum cara, that Word which for
our sakes was made our selves. The word then in this place, is the second
person in the Trinity, Christ Jesus, who in this Court of heaven, where there
is no corruption, no falsification, no passion, but fair and just proceeding,
is admitted to be a witness in his own cause; It is Jesus, that testifies for
Jesus now, when he was upon earth, and said, If I should bear witness of my
self, my witness were not true, whether we take those words to be spoken, per
Co^nlventiam, by an allowance, and concession, (It is not true, that is, I am
content that you should not believe my witness of my self to be true) (as
Saint Cyrill understand them) or whether we take them, Humana mare, that Christ
as a man, acknowledged truly, and as he thought, that inlegall proceeding a
man's own testimony ought not to be believed in his own behalf, (as
Athan^^ius and Saint Ambrose understand them) yet Christ might safely say as he
did, John 8. 14.
Though I bear a record of my self, yet my record is true; why? because I
know whence I come, and whither I go. Christ could not be Singularis ^^stis, a
single witnesse^ He was always more then one witness, because he had always
more then (...); God and man; and therefore Christ instructing Nicodemus,
speaks plurally, we speak, that (...) know, we testify that we have seen,
and you receive not Testimoni^^ n^strum, our witnesse^ he does not say my
witness, but ours, because although a singular, yet he was a plural person
too.

His testimony then was credible, but how did he testify Integritatem, this
entireness, all that belonged to our faith^ All consists in this, that he was
Jesus, capable in his nature, to be a Savior, that he was Christus, ordained,
and sent for that office, and then Quod venit, that be was come, and come, in
aqus and sanguine, in water and blood, in sacraments, which might apply him to
us. That he was Jesus a person capable, his miracles testified aloud and
frequently: that he was Christ, anointed, and sent for that, his reference of
all his actions to his Father testified; both these were enwrapped in that,
that he was the Son of God; and that he professed himself upon the earth to
be so; for so it appears plainly, that he had plainly done: We have a law,
John 9. 7.
say the Jews to Pilate, and by our law, he ought to die, because he made
himself the Son of God. And for the last part, that he came In aqua and
sanguine, in water, and blood, in such means, as were to continue in the
Church, for our spiritual reparation, and sustentation, he testified that, in
preaching so piercing Sermons, in instituting so powerful Sacraments, in
assuring us, that the love of God expressed to mankind in him, extended to all
persons, John 3. 16.
and all times, God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that whoseever believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting.
And so the words bear record, De Integritate, of this Entireness, of the
whole work of our Redemption: and therefore, Christ is not only truly called
a Martyr, in that sense, as Martyr signifies a witness, but he is truly called
a Martyr, in that sense, as we use the word ordinarily; for he testified this
truth, and suffered for the testimony of it: and therefore he is called Jesus
Christ, Apoc. 1. 5.
Martyr, a faithful witness. And there is Martyrium, a Martyrdom attributed
to him, where it is said, Jesus Christ under Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good
confession; Tim. 6. 13.
so he was a speaking, and a doing, and a suffering witness.

Now for the third witness in heaven, Spiritus sanctus.
which is the holy Ghost; we may contract our selves in that; for the whole
work was his; Before Joseph and Mary came together, Mat. 1. 18.
she was found with Child of the holy Ghost: which (if we take it, as Saint
Basil, and diverse others of the Fathers do) that Joseph found it, by the holy
Ghost, that is, the holy Ghost informed him of it, then here the holy Ghost was
a witness to Joseph, of this Conception: but we rather take it (as it is most
ordinarily taken) that the Angel intimated this to Joseph, v. 20.
That that which was conceived in her, was of the holy Ghost; and then the holy
Ghost did so primarily testify, this decree of God, to send a Jesus, and a
Christ, for our Redemption, that himself was a blessed and bountiful actor in
that Conception, he was conceived by him, by his overshadowing. So that the
holy Ghost did not only testify his coming, but he brought him: And then,
for his coming in Aqua and sanguine, in water and blood, that is, in
Sacraments, in means, by which he might be able to make his coming useful,
and appliable to us, first the holy Ghost, was a pregnant witness of that, at
his Baptism; for the holy Ghost had told John Baptist beforehand, That upon
whomsoever he should descend, and tarry still, that should be he, that should
baptize with the holy Ghost: John 1. 31.
and then according to those Marks, he did descend, and tarry still upon
Christ Jesus, in his baptism. And after this falling upon him, and tarrying
upon him, (which testified his power) in all his life, expressed in his
doctrine, and in his Sermons, after his death, and Resurrection, and Ascension,
the holy Ghost gave a new testimony, when he fell upon the Apostles in
Cloventongues, and made them spiritual channells, in which this water and
blood, the means of applying Christ to us, should be conveyed to all Nations;
and thus also the third witness in heaven, testified De integritate, of this
entireness of Jesus.

Of these three witnesses then, 3. Vnum.
which are of heaven, we shall need to add no more, but that which the text
adds, that is, That these three are one; that is, not only one in Consent,
(they all testify of one point, they all speak to one Intergatory; Ad
integritatem Christi, to prove this entireness of Christ;) but they are Vnum
Essentia, The Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost are all one Godhead, and so
meant and intended to be in this place. And therefore as Saint Hierome
complained, when some Copies were without this seventh verse, that thereby we
had lost a good argument for the unity of the three Persons, because this verse
said plainly that the three witnesses were all one, so I am sorry, when I see
any of our later expositors deny, that in this place, there is any proof, of
such an unity, but that this Vnum sunt, (They are one) is only an unity of
consent, and not of essence. It is an unthrifty prodigality (howsoever we be
abundantly provided with arguments, from other places of Scriptures, to prove
this Unity in Trinity) to cast away so strong an argument, against Jew, and
Turk, as is in these words, for that, and for the consubstantiality of Christ,
which was the Tempest, and the Earthquake of the Primitive Church, raised by
Arius; and his followers then, and (God knows) not extinguished yet.

Thus much I add of these three witnesses, that though they be in heaven,
their testimony is upon the earth; for they need not to testify to one
another, this matter of Jesus: The Father hears of it every day, by the
continual intercession of Christ Jesus: The Son feels it every day; in his
new crucifying by our sins, and in the perfecution of his Mystical body
here: The holy Ghost has a bitter sense of it, in our sins against the holy
Ghost, and he has a loving sense of it, in those abundant seas of graces,
which flow continually from him upon us; They need no witnesses in heaven; but
these three witnesses testify all this, to our Consciences. And therefore the
first author, that is observed to have read, and made use of this seventh verse
(which was one of the first Bishops of Rome) he reads the words thus, Higinus.
Tres in nobis, there are three in us, which bear witness in heaven; they
testify for our sakes, and to establish our assurance, De Integritate Jesus;
that Jesus is come, and come with means, to save the world, and to save us.
And therefore upon these words, Saint Bernard collects thus much more, Bernard.
that there are other witnesses in heaven, which restifie this work of our
Redemption, Angels, and Saints, all the Court, all the Quire of heaven testify
it; but catera nobis occults, says he, what all they do we know not: but
(according to the best dispositions here in this world) we acquaint our selves,
and we choose to keep company with the best, and so not only the poor Church
s the earth, but every poor soul in the Church, may hear all these three
witnesses testifying to him, Integrum Iesum suum, that all, which Christ Jesus
has done, and suffered, appertains to him: but yet, to bring it nearer him,
in visible and sensible things, There are, tres de terra, three upon earth too.

The first of these three upon earth, is the Spirit: Spiritus.
which Saint Augustine understands of the spirit, the soul of Christ: for when
Christ commended his spirit, into the hands of his Father, this was a
testimony, that he was Verus hemo, that he had a soul; and in that he laid
down his spirit, his soul, (for no Man could take it from him) and took it
again, at his pleasure, in his resurrection, this was a testimony, that he was
Verus Deus, true God; And so says Saint Augustine, Spiritus, The spirit, that
is anima Christi, the soul of Christ, did testify De integritate Jesus, all
that belonged to Jesus, as he was God, and as he was Man. But this makes the
witnesses in heaven, and the witnesses in earth all one; for the personal
testimony of Christ's preaching, and living, and dying, the testimony which was
given by these three Persons of the Trinity, was all involved in the first rank
of witnesses: Those three which are in heaven. Other later Men understand by
the Spirit here the Spirit of every Regenerate Man; and that in the other
heavenly witnesses, the spirit is Spiritus sanctus, the spirit that is holy in
it self, the holy Ghost, and here it is Spiritus sanctificatus, that spirit of
Man, which is made holy by the holy Ghost, Romans 8. 16.
according to that, The same spirit, bears witness, with our spirit, that we
are the children of God. But in this sense, it is too particular a witness,
too singular, to be intended here; for that speaks but to one Man, at once;
The spirit therefore here is; Spiritus oris, the word of God, the Gospel; and
the preaching, and ministration thereof. 2 Cor. 3. 6. Ibid.
We are made Ministers of the New testament of the spirit, that gives life:
And if the ministration of death were glorious, how shall not the ministration
of the spirit, be more glorious? It is not therefore the Gospel merely, but
the preaching of the Gospel, that is this spirit. Spiritus sacerdotis
vehioulum Spiritus Dei; The spirit of the Minister, is not so pure, as the
spirit of God, but it is the chariot, the means, by which God will enter into
you. The Gospel is the Gospel, at home, at your house; and there you do well
to read it, and reverence it, as the Gospel: but yet it is not Spiritus, it is
not this Spirit, this first witness upon earth, but only there, where God
has blessed it with his institution, and ordinance, that is, in the preaching
thereof. The stewardship, and the dispensation of the graces of God, the
directing of his threatenings against refractary, and wilful sinners, the
directing of his promises to simple, and supple, and con^rite penitents, the
breaking of the bread, the applying of the Gospel according to their
particular indigences, in the preaching thereof, this is the first witness.

The second witness here is The water, Aqua.
and I know there are some Men which will not have this to be understood of the
water of Baptism; but only of the natural effect of water; that as the
abtutions of the old law, by water did purge us, so we have an inward
testimony, that Christ does likewise wash us clean; so the water here, must
not be so much as water; but a metaphorical, and figurative water. These men
will not allow water, in this place, to have any relation to the sacrament; and
Saint Ambrose was so far from doubting that water in this place belonged to the
sacrament, that he applies all these three witnesses to the Sacrament of
Baptism: Spiritus mentem renovat, All this is done in Baptism, says he; The
Spirit renewes and disposes the mind; Aqua perficit ad Lavacrum; The water is
applied to cleanse the body; Sanguis Spectat ad pre^lium; and the blood
intimates the price, and ransom, which gives force, and virtue to this
sacrament: And so also (says he in another place) In sanguine mors, in the
blood there is a representation of death, in the water, of our burial, and in
the spirit, of our own life. Some will have none of these witnesses on earth
to belong to baptism, not the water; and Ambrose will have all, spirit, and
water, and blood to belong to it.

Now both Saint Ambrose, who applies all the three witnesses to Baptism, and
those later men which deny any of the witnesses to belong to baptism, do both
depart from the general acceptance of these words, that water here, and only
that, signifies the Sacrament of baptism. For as in the first creation, the
first thing, that the spirit of God, is noted to have moved upon, was the
waters, so the first creature, that is sanctified by Christ's institution, to
our Salvation, is this element of water. The first thing that produced any
living sensible creature was the water; Primus liquor qnod viveret edidit; ne
mirum sit quod in Baptismo, aquae a^nimare noverunt; water brought forth the
first creatures, Tertullian.
says Tertullian; That we should not wonder, that water should bring forth
Christians. The first of Gods afficting miracles in Egypt, was the changing of
water into blood; Exodus 3.
and the first miracle of grace, in the new Testament, was the changing of
water into wine at the marriage. So that water has still been a subject, and
instrument of Gods conversation with man: So then Aqua janua ecclesiae, we
cannot come into the Church, but by water, by baptism: for though the Church
have taken knowledge of other Baptismes, (Baptisma sanguinis, which is
Martyrdom, and Baptisma Flaminis, which is a religious desire to be baptized
when no means can be got) yet there is no other sacrament of Baptism, but
Baptisma Fluminis, the Baptism of water; for the rest, Convenient in causando,
sed non in significando, says the School; that is, God does afford a
plentiful retribution to the other baptismes Flaminis and Sanguinis, but God
has not ordained them, to be outward seals, and significations of his grace,
and to be witnesses of Jesus his coming upon earth, as this water is. And
therefore they that provide not duly to bring their children to this water of
life, (not to speak of the essential necessity thereof) they take from them
one of the witnesses, that Jesus is come into them; and (as much as they can)
they shut the Church door against them, they leave them out of the Arc, and
for want of this water, cast them into that general water, which overflowes
all the rest of the world, which are not brought within the Covenant, by this
water of baptism. For, though in the first Translation of the new Testament,
into Syriaque, that be said in the sixth verse, that Jesus is come per manus
aquarum, by the power of waters, many waters, and in this verse, this witness
is delivered in the plural, spirit and waters, (and so, waters in that
signification, (which signification they have often in the Scriptures) that is,
affliction, and tribulation, be good testimonies that our Lord Jesus does visit
us) though the waters of Co^trition, and repentant tears be another good
testimony of that too, yet that water, which testifies the presence of Jesus
so, as that it does always infallibly bring Jesus with it, (for the Sacraments
are never without Grace) whether it be accepted or no, there it is)^ That water
which is made equal with the preaching of the Word, (so far as to be a
fellow-witnesse with the Spirit) that is only the Sacrament of baptism,
without which (in the ordinary dispensation of God) no soul can be surer that
Jesus is come to him, then if he had never heard the Word preached; he mistakes
the spirit, the first witness; if he refuse the water the second.

The third witness upon earth, Sanguinis.
is blood: and that is briefly the Communion of the body, and blood of Jesus,
in the Lords Supper. But how is that blood upon earth? I am not ashamed to
confess, that I know not how, but the blood of Christ is a witness upon
earth, in the Sacrament, and therefore, upon the earth it is. Now this Witness
being made equal with the other two, with preaching, and with baptism, it is
as necessary, that he that will have an assurance^ that Jesus is come into him,
do receive this Sacrament, as that he do hear Serm^n^, and that he be
baptized. An over vehement urging of this necessity, brought in an erroneous
custom in the Primitive Church: That they would give the Sacrament of the body
of Christ to Children, as soon as they were baptized; yea, and to dead man too.
But because this Sacrament is accompanied with precepts, which can belong only
to Men of understanding, (for they must do it in Remembrance, and they must
discern the Lords body) therefore the necessity lies only upon such, as are
come to those graces, and to that understanding. For they that take it, and do
not discern it, (not know what they do) they take it dangerously. But else,
for them, to whom this Sacrament belongs, if they take it not, their hearing of
Sermons, and their baptism does them no good; for what good can they have done
them, if they have not prepared themselves for it? And therefore, as the
Religion of the Church holds a stubborn Recusant at the table, at the
Communion board, as far from her, as a Recusant at the Pew, that is, a
Non-communicant as ill, as a not commer, or a not hearer, so I doubt not but
the wisdom of the state weighs them in the same balance; For these three agree
in one, says the text: that is, first they meet in one Man, and then they
testify the same thing, that is, Integritatem Jesus, that Jesus is come to him
in outward Means, to save his soul. If his conscience find not this
testimony, all these avail him nothing. If we remain vessels of anger, and
of dishonor still, we are under the Vae v^bis Hypocritis: woe unto you
Hypocrites, that make clean only the outside of your cups and Platters.
Mat. 25. 23.
That baptize, and wash your own, and your childrens bodies, but not their
minds with instructions. When we shall come to say Docuisti in plateis, we
have heard thee preach in our streets, Luke 13. 25.
we have continued our hearing of thy Word, when we say Manducavimus coram te,
we have eat in thy presence, at thy table, yea Manducavimus t^, we have eaten
thee thy self, Ibid.
yet for all this outward show of these three witnesses, of Spirit, and Water,
and blood, Preaching, and Baptism and Communion, we shall hear that fearful
disclaiming from Christ Jesus, Nescio vos, I know not whence you are. But these
witnesses, he will always hear, if they testify for us, that Jesus is come
unto us; for the Gospel, and the preaching thereof, is as the deed that
conveys Jesus unto us; the water, the baptism, is as the Seal, that assures
it; and the blood, the Sacrament, is the delivery of Christ into us; and this
is Integritas Jesus, the entire, and full possession of him.

To this purpose therefore, as we have found a Trinity in heaven, and a Trinity
in earth, so we must make it up a Trinity of Trinities, and find a third
Trinity in our selves. God created one Trinity in us; (the observation, and the
enumeration is Saint Bernards) which are those three faculties of our soul,
the reason, the memory, the will; That Trinity in us, by another Trinity too,
(by suggestion toward sin, by delight in sin, by consent to sin) is fallen
into a third Trinity; The memory into a weakness, that that comprehends not
God, it glorifies him not for benefits received; The reasen to a blindness,
that that discernes not what is true; and the will to a perverseness, that that
wishes not what is good; But the goodness of God, by these three witnesses on
earth regenerates, and reestablishes a new Trinity in us, faith, and hope, and
charity; Thus far that devout Man carries it; And if this new Trinity, faith,
and hope, and charity, witness to us Integritatem Christi, all the work of
Christ, If my faith testify to me, that Christ is sealed to my soul; and my
hope, testify, that at the Resurection, I shall have a perfect fruition in
soul, and body, of that glory which he purchased for every believer; and my
charity testifies to the world, that I labor to make sure that salvation, by a
good life, then there is a Trinity of Trinities, and the six are made nine
witnesses: There are three in heaven that testify that this is done for all
Mankind, Three in the Church that testify, this may be done for me, and three
in my soul, that testify, that all this is applied to me; and then the
verdict, and the Judgment must necessarily go for me. And beloved, this
Judgment will be grounded upon this entireness of Jesus, and therefore let me
dismiss you with this note, That Integritas is in continuitate, not in
contignitate; It is not the touching upon a thing, nor the coming near to a
thing, that makes it entire; a faggot, where the sticks touch, a piece of cloth,
where the threads touch, is not entire; To come as near Christ as we can
conveniently, to try how near we can bring two Religions together, this is
not to preserve Integritatem Jesus: In a word, Entireness excludes deficiency,
and redundancy, and discontinuance; we preserve not entireness, if we preserve
not the dignity of Christ, in his Church, and in his discipline, and that
excludes the defective Separatist; we do not preserve that entirenesse if we
admit traditions, and additions of Men, in an equality to the word of God, and
that excludes the redundant Papist; neither do we preserve the entirenesse, if
we admit a discontinuance, a slumbring of our Religion for a time, and that
excludes the temporisers, the Statist, the Politician. And so, beloved, I
recommend unto you Integritatem Jesus, Jesus, and his truth, and his whole
truth, and this whole Truth, in your whole lives.

SERMON VII.
Preached at a Christning.
GAL. 3. 27. For, all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.
THis text is a Reason of a Reason; an Argument of an Argument; The proposition
undertaken by the Apostle to prove, is, That after faith is come, we are no
longer under the Schoolmaster, v. 25. 26.
the law. The reason, by which he proves that, is: For ye are all the Sons
of God by faith, in Christ Jesus; And then the reason of that, is this text,
for all ye that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

Here then is the progress of a sanctified Man, and here is his standing
house; here is his journey, and his Lodging; his way, and his end. The house,
the lodging, the end of all is faith; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin.
To be sure that you are in the right way to that, you must find your selves to
be the Sons of God; And you can prove that, by no other way to your selves,
but because you are baptized into Christ.

So that our happiness is now at that height, and so much are we preferred
before the Jews, that whereas the chiefest happiness of the Jews was to have
the law, (for without the law they could not have known sin, and the law was
their Schoolmaster to find out Christ) we are admitted to that degree of
perfection, that we are got above the law; It was their happiness to have had
the law, but it is ours, not to need it: They had the benefit of a guide, to
direct them, but we are at our journies end; They had a schoolmaster to lead
them to Christ; but we have proceeded so far, as that we are in possession of
Christ. The law of Moses therefore, binds us not at all, as it is his Law;
Whatsoever binds a Christian, in that law, would have bound him, though there
had been no law given to Moses. The Ceremonial part of that law, which was in
the institution, Mortale, (it was mortal, It might die) and by Christ's
determination of those Typical things, Mortuum, (It did die) is now also
Mortiferum, (deadly) so that it is sin to draw any part of that law, into a
necessity of observation; because the necessary admission of any Type, or
figure, implies a confession, that that which was signified, or figured, is not
yet come; So that that law, and Christ cannot consist together. The Judicial
law of Moses, was certainly the most absolute, and perfect law of government,
which could have been given to that people, for whom it was given; but yet to
think, that all States are bound to observe those laws, because God gave
them, has no more ground, then that all Men are bound to go clothed in beasts
skins, because God apparelled Adam, and Eve in that fashion.

And for the moral part of that law, and the abridgement of that moral part,
the decalogue, that begun not to have force, and efficacy then, when God writ
it in the tables; but was always, and always shall be written in the hearts of
Men; And though God of his goodness, was pleased to give that declaration of
it, and that provocation to it, by so writing it, yet if he had not written it,
or if (which is impossible) that writing could perish, yet that moral law,
those commandments, would bind us, that are Christians, after the expiration
of that law, which was Moses law, as it did (de Iure) bind all those which
lived, before any written law was. So that he that will perfectly understand,
what appertains to his duty in any of the ten Commandments; he must not
consider that law, with any limitation, as it was given to the Jews, but
consider what he would have done, if he had lived before the Tables had been
written. For certainly, even in the Commandment of the Sabbath, which was
accompanied with so many Ceremonies amongst the Jews, that part only is
moral, which had bound us, though that Commandment had never been given; and
he that performs that part, keeps the Sabbath; the Ceremonial part of it, is
not only not necessary; but when it is done with an opinion of necessity, it
is erroneous, and sinful. For neither that Commandment nor any other of the
ten, began to bind them, when they were written, nor does bind now, except it
bound before that.

Thus far then we are directed by this Text, (which is as far, as we can go in
this life) To prove to our selves, that we have faith, we must prove, that we
need not the law; To prove that emanecipation, and liberty, we must prove, that
we are the sons of God; To prove that ingraffing, and that adoption, we must
prove, that we have put on Christ Jesus; And to prove that apparelling of our
selves, our proof is, that we are baptized into him.

All proofs must either arrest, and determine in some things confessed, and
agreed upon, or else they proceed in infinitum. That which the Apostle takes to
be that which is granted on all sides, and which none can deny, is this, that
to be baptized is to put on Christ: And this putting on of Christ, does so far
carry us to that Infinitissimum, to God himself, that we are thereby made
Semen Dei, the seed of God; The field is the world, Mat. 13.
and the good seed are the Children of the kingdom; And we are translated even
into the nature of God, 2 Pet. 1.
By his precious promises we are made partakers of the Divine nature; yea, we
are discharged of all bodily, and earthly incombrances, and we are made all
spirit, 1 Cor. 6.
yea the spirit of God himself, He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit
with him. All this we have, if we do put on Christ: and we do put on Christ,
if we be baptized into him.

These then are the two actions which we are now to consider: Baptizari, To be
washed. Divisio:
Induere, To be clothed.

Induere, is to cover so far, as that Covering can reach; A hat covers the
head; a glove the hand; and other garments, more; But Christ, when he is put
on, Covers us all. If we have weak heads, shallow brains, either a silexce,
and a reservednes, which make the fool and the wise equal, or the good
interpretation of friends, which put good Constructions upon all that we say,
or the dignity of authority, and some great place, which we hold, which puts an
opinion in the people, that we are wise, or else we had never been brought
thither, these cover our heads, and hide any defect in them. If we have foul
hands, we can cover them, with excuses; If they be foul with usurious
Extortion, we can put on a glove, an excuse, and say, He that borrowed my
money, got more by it, then I that lent it; If, with bribery in an office, we
can cover it and say, He that knew, that I bought my office, will be content to
let me be a saver by it; If our hands be foul with shedding of innocent blood,
as Saint Hierome says that Adam eat the Apple, Ne contristaretur Delicias
suas, left he should over grieve his wife, by refusing it, Ne contristaremur
Delicias nostras, either because we would not displease another, or because our
beloved sin, to which we had married our selves, did solicit us to it.
Particular excuses cover our particular defects, from the sight of men, but to
put on Christ, covers us all over, even from the sight of God himself. So that
how narrowly so ever he search into us, he sees nothing but the whiteness of
his Sons innocence, and the redness of his Sons blood.

When the prodigal child returned to his father, his father clothed him
entirely, and all at once; he put a robe upon him, to cover all his defects:
which Robe, when God puts upon us, in clothing us with Christ, that robe is not
only Dignitaes quam perdidit Adam, as Augustine says, but it is Amictus
sapientiae, Augustine. Ambrose.
as Ambrase enlarges it, It does not only make us as well, as we were in Adam,
but it enables us better, to preserve that state; It does not only cover us,
that is, make us excusable, for our past, and present sins, but it indues us
with grace; and wisdom to keep that robe still, and never to return to our
former foulnesses, and deformities.

Our first parents Adam and Eve were naked all over; but they were not sensible
of all their nakedness, but only of those parts whereof they were ashamed.
Nothing but the shame of the world makes us discern our deformities; And only
for those faults, which shame makes us take knowledge of, we go about to
provide; And we provide nothing but short Aprons, as that word signified; and
those but of fig leaves; That which comes first to hand, and that which is
withered before it is made, that do we take for an excuse, for an aversion of
our own conscience, when she begins to cast an eye, or to examine the
nakedness, and deformities of our souls.

But when God came to cloth them, their short aprons were extended to coats,
Genesis 3. 21.
that covered them all over, and their fig leaves to strong skins; for God saw
that not only those parts, of which they were already ashamed, needed
covering, but that in all their other parts, if they continued, naked, and
still exposed to the Injury, and violence of the weather, they would contract
diseases, and infirmities; and therefore God covers them so thoroughly, as he
does not only provide for reparation of former inconveniences, but prepare
against future.

And so perfect effects does this garment, Christ Jesus, work upon us, if we
put him on; He does not only cover Original sins, (which is the effect of
those disobedient Members, which derive sin, upon us, in the sinful
generation of our parents) but he covers all our actual sins, which we
multiply every day: and not only those, which the world makes us ashamed of,
but which we hide from the world; yea which we hide from our selfs; that is,
sins, which by a long custom of practice, we commit so habitually, and so
indifferently, as that we have forgot, that they are sins.

But as it was in Adams Clothing there, so must it be in our spiritual putting
on of Christ. The word used there, Labash, does not signify that God clothed
Adam, nor that Adam clothed himself; but as the Grammarians call it, it is in
Hiphil, and it signified Induere fecit eos; God caused them to be clothed, or
God caused them to cloth themselves; which is also intimated, nay evidently
expressed in the words of this text; we are our selves poor, and impotent
creatures, we cannot make our selves ready; we are poor and beggarly
creatures, we have nothing to put on; Christ is that garment; and then Christ
is the very life, by which we stretch out our arms and our legs, to put on
that garment; yea he puts it on upon us, he does the whole work: but yet he
does not thrust it on: He makes us Able to put it on: but if we be not willing,
then he puts no necessity upon our will: but we remain naked still.

Induere then, to put on, is an extension, a dilatation over all; And sometimes
it signifies an abundant, and overflowing, and overwhelming measure of Gods
judgments upon us, Princeps Induetur desolatione, Ezech. 7. 27. and 16. 16.
The prince shall be (...) with desolation and with astonishment: But most
commonly, the rich and all-sufficient proportion of his mercies and spiritual
benefits: as he expressed it to his Apostles, at his ascension, Stay you in the
City, quousque Induamini virtute ex alto; till ye be endued (so we translate
it) that is, clothed with power from on high. And this was per fidem ei
innitends, Luke 24. 49.
and per opera cum declar ando, says Saint Augustine, He only has pat on
Christ, which has Christ in himself by faith, and shows him to others by his
works, which is Lucern^ ardens, (as Christ said of John Baptist) a burning
lamp, and a shining lamp, profitable to others, as well as to himself.

There is a degree of vanity, and pride, whereby some Men delight to wear
their richest clothes innermost, and most out of sight; But in this double
garment of a Christian, it is necessarily so; for faith is the richest, and
most precious part of this garment; an this, which is our Holy Day garment, is
worn innermost; for that (our faith) is only seen by God; but our outward
garment, of works, which is our workyday garment, that is our sanctification
is seen of all the world. And that also must be put on, or else we have not put
on Christ: and it must cover us all over; that is, our sanctification must go
through our whole life in a constant, and an even perseverance; we must not
only be Hospitale, and feed the poor at Christmas, be sober, and abstinent,
the day that we receive, repent, and think of amendment of life, in the day of
visitation, and sickness; but as the garment, which Christ wore, was
seamlesse, and entire, so this garment, which is Christ Jesus, that is, our
sanctification, should be entire, and uninterrupted, in the whole course of our
lives, we must remember, that at the Marriage which figured the kingdom of
heaven, the master of the feast reprehended, Mat. 22.
and punished him, that was come in, not expressly because he had not a wedding
garment, but Qu^modo intrasti, says he, how came thou in not having on thy
wedding garment? So that (if it could be possible) though we had put on the
inside of this garment, which is Christ, that is, if we had faith, yet if we
have not the outside too, that is sanctification, we have not put on Christ, as
we should; for this is Indui virtute ex alto; to have both inside, faith, and
outside, sanctification: and to put it on so, that it may cover us all over,
that is all our life; because it is not in our power, if we put it off, by new
sins, to put it on again, when we will. I have put off my coat, how shall I
put it on, 5. 3.
was the doubt of the spouse, in the Canticles, even when Christ had called
her: So hard a thing is it, if we divest the righteousness of Christ, after we
have put it on, to cloth our selves again in that garment.

As then this word, Induere, to put on, to be clothed, signifies a largeness,
and an abundance, according to that, The pastures are clothed with sheep, and
the valleys with corn: Psalm. 65.
So is this garment, Christ Jesus, such a garment, as is alone so all
sufficient, as that if we do put on that, we need no other; Put ye on the
Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 13.
and take no thought for the flesh; if ye have put on that, you are clothed,
and armed, and adorned sufficiently.

In the first creation, in the Faciamus hominem ad Imaginem nostrum, when God
seems to have held a consultation about the making of Man, man put on all the
Trinity, all God; and in the redemption God put on all Man; not only all the
nature of Mankind in general, but in particular, every Man. But as the spirit
of God, I^d: 6. 34.
is said to have put on a particular Man, Spiritus Domini induit Gedeon, the
spirit of the Lord, clothed, or put on Gedeon, when he selected him for his
service, so must the spirit of every particular Man, put on Christ, he must not
be content, to be under the general cover, (either under his general
providence, because he is a Creature, or a member of his Mystical body,
because he adheres to a visible Church) he must not say, I am as warm clothed,
as another, I have as much of Christ in me, as a great many, that do well
enough in the world, but he must so inwrap himself in Christ, and in his
Merits, as to make all that to be his own. No man may take the frame of
Christ's merit in pieces; no Man may take his forty days fasting and put on
that, and say, Christ has fasted for me, and therefore I may surfeit; No man
may take his Agony, and pensiveness, and put on that, and say, Christ has
been sad for me, and therefore I may be merry. He that puts on Christ, must put
him on all^ and not only find, that Christ has dyed, nor only that he has
died for him, but that he also has died in Christ, and that whatsoever Christ
suffered, he suffered in Christ.

For, as Christ's merit, and satisfaction, is not too narrow for all the world,
so is it not too large for any one Man; Infinite worlds might have been saved
by it, if infinite worlds had been created; And, if there were no more Names in
the book of life, but thine, all the Merit of Christ were but enough to save
thy one sinful soul, which could not have been redeemed, though alone, at any
less price, then his death.

All that Christ did, and suffered, he did and suffered for thee, as thee; not
only ^s Man, but as that particular Man, which bears such, or such a name; and
rather, then any of those, whom he loves, should appear naked before his
Father, and so discover to his confusion, those scarres, and deformities, which
his sins have imprinted upon him, (as his love is devoutly, and plously
extended by the Schools and some contemplative Men) Christ would be content to
do, and suffer, as much as he has done, for any one particular Man yet: But
beyond Infinite, there is no degree: and his merit was infinite, both because
an infinite Majesty resided in his person, and because an infinte Majesty
accepted his sacrifice for infinite.

But this act of Christ, this redemption makes us only servants; servi a
servand^, we are servants to him, that preserved, and saved us, is the
derivation of the Law. But the application of this redemption (which is the
putting on of Christ,) makes us s^ns; for we are not to put on Christ, only as
a Livery, to be distinguished by external marks of Christianity; but so, as
the son puts on his father; that we may be of the same nature and substance
as he; and that God may be in us, Non tanquam in denario, not as the King is in
a piece of coin, or a medall, but tanquam in filio, as he is in his son, in
whom the same nature both humane, and Royal does reside.

There is then a double Induere, a twofold clothing; we may (...) 1. Vestem,
put on a garment; 2. Personam, put on a person. We may put on Christ so, as we
shall be his, and we may put him on so, as we shall be He. And even to put him
on as a garment is also twofold; The first is to take only the outward name,
and profession of Christians upon us; Hag. 1.
and this does us no good; ye cloth ye, but are not warm, says the Prophet,
of this kind of putting on of Christ. For this may be done only to delude
others; Zach. 13.
which practice God discovered, and threatened, in the false Prophets, The
Prophets shall not wear a rough garment to deceive; As God himself cannot be
deluded, so for the encouragement of his Church, he will take off this garment
of the Hypocrite, and discover his nakedness, and expose him to the open shame
of the world; He shall not wear arough garment to deceive.

For this is such an affront and scorn to Christ, as Han^^ cutting off of
David's servants clothes at the middle, 1 Chronicles. 19. 4.
was; we make this garment of what stuff, and what fashion we list; As Hanun
did, we cut it off in the middle; we will be Christians till noone, (in the
outward acts of Religion) and Liberti^es in the afternoon, in putting off
that garment again; we will be Christians all day, and return to wanto^nesse,
and licentiousness at night; we do that which Christ says, no Man does, (that
is, no Man should do) Mat. 9.
we put new pieces to an old garment; and to that habit of sin, which covers
us as a garment, we put a few new patches of Religion, a few flashes of
repentance, a few shreds of a Sermon, but we put not on, that entire and
feamlesse garment Christ Jesus.

And can we hope, that these disguises, these half coats, these imperfect
services will be acceptable to God, when we our selves would not admit this, at
our children, or at our servants hands? It is the argument by which the Prophet
convinces the Israelites, Mal 1.
about their unclean sacrifices; offer this now unto the Prince; will he be
content with thee, and accept thy person? If thou should wear the princes
Livery, in a scantler proportion, or in a different fashion, or in a courset
stuff, then belongs to thy place, would he accept it at thy hands? No more
will Christ if thou put him on, (that is, take his profession upon thee) either
in a co^^ser stuff, (Traditions of Men, in stead of his word) or in scantler
measure, (not to be always a Christian, but then, when thou have use of being
one) or in a different fashion, (to be singular and Schis^aticall in thy
opinion) for this is one, but an ill manner of putting on of Christ as a
garment.

The second, and the good way is, to put on his righteousness, and his
innocence, by imitation, and conforming our selves to him. Now when we go
about earnestly to make our selves Temples, and Altars, and to dedicate our
selves to God, we must change our clothes; Began. 35.
As when God bad Jacob, to go up to Bethel, to make an Altar, he commanded all
his family to change their clothes; In which work, we have two things, to do;
first, we must put off those clothes which we had; and appear naked before
God, without presenting any thing of our own; (for when the Spirit of God came
upon Saul, and that he prophesied, his first act was, 1 Samuel 19.
to strip himself naked: And then s^condly, we come to our transfiguration,
and to have those garments of Christ communicated to us which were as white, as
the light; and we shall be admitted into that little number, Mat. 17.
of which it is said, Thou have a few Namees in Sardis, which have not defiled
their garments, Revel. 3.
and they shall walk with ^e in white.

And from this (which is Induere vestem,) Personam.
from this putting on Christ as a garment, we shall grow up to that perfection,
as that we shall In^^ere personam, put on hi^, his person; That is, we shall so
appear before the Father, as that he shall take us for his own Christ; we
shall bear his name and person; and we shall every one be so accepted, as if
every one of us were all Mankind; yea, as if we were he himself. He shall find
in all our bodies his wounds, in all our minds, his (...); in all our hearts,
and actions his obedience. And as he shall do this by imp^tation, so really in
all our Agonies, he shall send his Angels to minister unto us, as he did to
Eli^s; In all our tentations he shall furnish us with his Scriptures to
confo^^d the Tempter, as be in person, did in his tentation, and in our
heaviest tribulation, which may ex^^^^ from us the voice of diffidence, My God,
My God, why have (...) forsaken me? He shall give us the assurance to say, In
manus tuas etc^ Into thy ^ands O Lord have I co^^^^nded my spirit, and there I
am safe; He shall use us in all things, as his son; and we shall find
restored in us, the Image of the whole Trinity, imprinted at our creation; for
by this Regeneration, we are adopted by the Father in the blood of the Son by
the sanctification of the holy Ghost.

Now this putting on of Christ, Baptismus.
whereby we stand in his place at Gods Tribunal, implies, as I said, both our
Election, and our sanctification; both the eternal purpose of God upon us, and
his execution of that purpose in us. And because by the first (by our Election)
we are members of Christ, in Gods purpose, before baptism, and the second,
(which is sanctification) is expressed after baptism, in our lives, and
conversation, therefore Baptism intervenes, and comes between both, as a seal
of the first, (of Election) and as an instrument, and conduit of the second,
Sanctification.

Now, Abscendita Domin^, Dea nostro, quae manifesta su^s nobis; let no Man be
too curiously busy, to search what God does in his hedchamber; we have all
enough to answer, for that, which we have done in our bedchamber. For Gods
eternal decree, himself is master of those Rolls; but out of those Rolls he
does exemplify those decrees in the Sacrament of baptism; by which Copy, and
exemplification of his invisible and unsearchable decree, we plead to the
Church, that we are Gods children, we plead to our own consciences, that we
have the Spirit of adoption, and we plead to God himself, the obligation of
his own promise, that we have a right to this garment, Christ Jesus, and to
those graces, which must sanctify us; for from thence comes the reason of this
text, for all ye^ that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ.

As we cannot see the Essence of God, but must see him in his glasses, in his
Images, in his Creatures, so we cannot see the decrees of God, but must see
them in their duplicats, in their exemplification, in the sacraments. As it
would do him no good, that were condemned of treason, that a Bedchamber man
should come to the Judge, and swear he saw the king sign the prisoners pardon,
except he had it to plead: so what assurance soever, what pri^y mark soever,
those men, which pretend to be so well acquainted, and so familiar with the
decrees of God, to give thee to know, that thou art elect to eternal
salvation, yea if an Angel from heaven comedowne and tell thee, that he saw thy
name in the book of life, if thou have not this Exemplification of the decree,
this seal, this Sacrament, if thou be not baptized, never delude thy self
with those imaginary assurances.

This Baptism then is so necessary, that first, as Baptism (in a large
acceptance) signifies our dying, and burial with Christ, and all the acts of
our regeneration, so in that large sense, our whole life is a baptism: But the
very sacrament of Baptisme^ the actual administration, and receiving thereof,
was held so necessary, that even for legal and Civil uses, (as in the law,
that child, that dyed without circumcision, had no interest in the family, no
participation of the honor, nor name thereof) So that we see in the reckning of
the Genealogy, 1 Chronicles. 3.
and pedigree of David, that first son of his, which he had by Bathshebae,
which dyed without circumcision is never mentioned, nor touched upon.) So also,
since the time of M^ses law, in the Imperial law, by which law, a posthume
child, borne after the fathers death, is equal with the rest in division of
the state, yet if that child dye before he be baptized, no person which should
derive a right from him, (as the mother might, if he dyed) can have any title
by him; because he is not considered to have been at all, if he dye unbaptized.
And if the State will not believe him to be a full Man, shall the Church
believe him to be a full Christian, before baptism? Yea, the apprehension of
the necessity of this Sacrament, was so common, and so general, even in the
beginning of the Christian Church, that out of an excessive advancing of that
trnth, they came also to a falshood^ to an error, That even they that dyed
without baptism, might have the benefit of baptism, if another were baptized
in their name, after their death^ And so, out of a mistaking of those words, 1
Cor. 15. 29.
Else what shall they do, Qui baptizantur pro mortuis (which is, that are
ready to dye, when they are baptized) the Marcionites induced a custom, to lay
one under the dead bodies bed, that he, in the name of the dead man, might
answer to all the questions usually asked, in administering of Baptism.

But this was a corrupt effect of pure, and sincere doctrine, which doctrine
is, That Baptism is so necessary, as that God. has placed no other ordinary
scale, nor conveyance of his graces in his Church, to them that have not
received that, then buptisme. And they, who do not provide duly, for the
Baptism of their children, if their children die, have a heavier account to
make to God for that child, then if they had not provided a Nurse, and suffered
the child to starve. God can preserve the child without Milk; and he can save
the child without a sacrament; but as that mother that throws out, and
forsakes her child in the field, or wood, is guilty before God of the Temporal
murder of that child, though the child die not, so are those parents of a
spiritual murder, if their children, by their fault die unbaptized, though God
preserve that child out of his abundant, and miraculous mercy, from spiritual
destruction.

When the custom of the Christian Church was to baptize but twice in the year,
at Easter, and Whi^sontide, for the greater solemnity of that action, yea when
that ill custom was grown (as it was even in the Primitive Church) that upon
an opinion, that all sins were absolutely forgiven in Baptism, Men did defer
their Baptism, till their deathbed, (as we see the Ecclesiastical histories
full of such examples, even in some of the Christian Emperors: and according to
this ill custom, we see Tertullian chides away young children for coming so
soon to Baptism, quid festinat innocens aetas, ad rem^ssionem peccatorum, why
should this child, that as yet has done no sin, make such have to be washed
from sinnce?) which opinion had got so much strength, that Saint Basil was
feign to oppose it, in the Eastern Church, and both the Gregory's, Nazianzen
and Nissen, and Saint Ambrose in the Western; yet, in the height of both their
customs, of seldom baptizing, and of late baptizing, the case of insants,
that might be in danger of dying without baptism, was ever excepted, So that
none of those old customs, (though some of them were extremely ill) went ever
so far, as to an opinion, that it were all one, whether the child were
baptized or no.

I speak not this, as though the state of children that died without baptism
were desperate; God forbid, for who shall shorten the Arm of the Lord? God is
able to rain down Manna and Quails into the souls of these children, though
negligent parents turn them out into the wilderness, and put God to that
extraordinary work. They may have Manna, and Quails, but they have not the
Milk, and Honey, of the Land of promise; They may have salvation from God, but
they have not those graces, so sealed, and so testified to them, as God has
promised they should be in his Sacraments. When God in spiritual offenses,
makes Inquisition of blood, he proceeds not, as Man proceeds; for we, till
there appear a Man to be dead, never inquire who killed him; but in the
spiritual Murder, of an unbaptized child, though there be no child spiritually
dead, (though Gods mercy have preserved the child from that) yet God imputes
this as such a murder to them, who endangered the child, as far as they
could, by neglecting his ordinance of baptism.

This is then the necessity of this Sacrament; not absolutely necessary, but
necessary by Gods ordinary institution; and as it is always necessary, so is it
always certain; whosoever is baptized according to Christ's institution,
receives the Sacrament of baptism; and the truth is always infallibly annexed
with the sign; Nec fieri potest visio hominis, ut non sit Sacramentum quod
figurat; Though the wicked may feel no working by the Sacrament, yet the
Sacrament does offer, and present grace as well to the unworthy as to the
worthy Receiver: Calvin.
Nec fallaciter promittit; The wicked may be a cause, that the Sacrament shall
do them no good; but that the Sacrament, become no Sacrament, or that God
should be false in his promises, and offer no grace, where he pretends to offer
it, this the wicked cannot do; baptism does truly, and without collusion,
offer grace to all; and nothing but baptism, by an ordinary institution, and
as an ordinary means, does so: for when baptism is called a figure, yet both
that figure is said there to save us, 1 Pet. 3. 21.
(The figure that now saves us, baptism; and it is a figure of the Arc; it
has relation to it, to that Arc which did save the world, when it is called a
figure; So it may be a figure; but if we speak of real salvation by it,
baptism is more then a figure.

Now as our putting on of Christ was double, by faith, and by sanctification,
so by this Sacrament also, we are baptized in Nomen Christi, into the Name of
Christ, and in mortem Christi, into the death of Christ: we are not therefore
baptized into his Name, because names are imposed upon us in our baptism: for
that was not always permanently accustomed, in the Christian Church, to give a
name at baptism. To men who were of years, and well known in the world already
by their name^ if they were converted to the Christian faith, the Church did
not use to give new names at their baptism: neither to Children always; but
sometimes as an indifferent thing, they left them to the custom of that
country, or of that family, from which they were derived. When Saint Augustine
says, that he came to Milan, to S. Ambrose, at that time, qu^ dari nomina
oportuit, when Names were to be given, it is true, that he speaks of a time,
when Baptism was to be administered, but that phrase of Giving of Names, was
not a receiving of Names at Baptism, (for neither Ambrose, nor Augustine,
received any new name at their Baptism) but it was a giving up of their Names,
a Registring, a Matriculating of their Names in the book of the profession of
the Christian Religion, and a public declaration of that profession.

To be baptized therefore into the name of Christ, is to be translated into his
Family, by this spiritual adoption, in which adoption (when it was legal) as
they that were adopted, had also the name of the family into which they were
adopted, as of octavius Octavianus, and the rest, so are we so baptized, into
his name, that we are of Christus Christiani; and therefore to become truly
Christians, to live Christianly, this is truly to be baptized into his name.

No other name is given under heaven, whereby we can be saved; nor must any
other name accompany the name of God, in our Baptism. When therefore they
teach in the Roman Church, that it is a good Baptism, which is administered in
this form, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and Son, and holy
Ghost, and the virgin Mary, if he which baptizes so, do not mean in his
intention, that the virgin Mary is equal to the Trinity, but only an
assistant, this is not only an impertinent, but an impious addition to that
God, that needs no assistant. And as in our baptism, we take no other name
necessarily, but the name of Christ: So in our Christian life, we accept no
other distinctions of Jesuits, or Franciscans; but only Christians: for we are
baptized into his name, and the whole life of a regenerate man is a Baptism.
For as in putting on Christ, sanctification does accompany faith, so in
baptism, the imitation of his death (that is, mortification) and the
application of his passion, (by fulfilling the sufferings of Christ in our
flesh) is that baptism into his death. Which do so certainly follow one
another, (that he that is truly baptized into the name of Christ, is also
baptized into his death) as that Saint Paul couples them together, 1 Cor. 1. 13.
Was Paul crucified for you, or were you baptized into the name of Pa^l? If you
were not baptized into his name, then you have no interest, no benefit by his
death, nor by any thing which he suffered, that his merits, or his works of
supereragation should be applied to you: And if he did not suffer for you, (if
all that any Paul (much less any Ignatins) could do, were but enough, and too
little for himself) then you are not baptized into his name, nor to be
denominate by him.

This is then to be Baptized into Christ's death, Habere, and reddere
testimonium, Christam pro me mortuum, to be sure that Chirst dyed for me; and
to be ready to dye for him; so that I may fulfill his sufferings, and may think
that all is not done, which belongs to my Redemption, except I find a
mortification in my self. Not that any mortification of mine, works any thing,
as a cause of my redemption, but as an assurance and testimony of it; (...) sit
pignus and sigillu^ redemptionis; It is a pledge, and it is a Seal, of my
redemption.

Christ calls his death a Baptism; So Saint Augustine calls our Baptism a
death, Quod crux Christo, and Sep^lcr^m, id nobis Baptisma; Baptism to us,
says he, is our Croffe, and our passion, and our burial; that is, in that, we
are conformed to Christ as he suffered, dyed, and was buried. Because if we be
so baptized into his Name, and into his death, we are thereby dead to sin,
and have dyed the death of the righteous.

Since then Baptism is the death of sin, and there cannot be this death,
this conquest, this victory over sin, without faith, there must necessarily
faith, concur with this baptism; for if there be not faith, (none in the
child, none in the parents, none in the sureties, none in the Church) then
there is no baptism performed; Now, in the Child there is none actually; In
the sureties, we are not sure, there is any; for their infidelity cannot
impeach the sacrament; The child is well baptized though they should be
misbeleevers; for, when the Minister shall ask them, Do thou believe in
God? do thou renounce the Devil? perchance they may ly in their own
behalfes; perchance they do not believe, they do not renounce, but they
speak truth in the behalf of the child, when they speak in the voice of the
Church who receives this child for her child, and binds her self to exhibit,
and reach out to that child, her spiritual paps, for her future nourishment
thereof. How comes it to pass, says Saint Augustine, that when a man presents
another man's child at the font, to be baptized, if the Minister should ask
him, Shall this man child be a valiant man, or a wise man, shall this woman
child, be a chaste, and a continent woman? the surety would answer, I cannot
tell, and yet, if he be asked, of that child, of so few days old, Does that
child believe in God now, will he renounce the Devil hereafter? the surety
answers confidently, in his behalf, for the belief, and for the renouncing:
How comes this to pass, says Saint Augustine? He answers to this, that as
Sacramentum Corporis Christi, est secundum modum Corpus Christi, so Sacramentum
fidei est fides; As the Sacrament of the body, and blood of Christ is, in some
sense, and in a kind, the body, and blood of Christ, says Augustine, so in the
sacrament of faith, says he, (that is, Baptism) there is some kind of faith.
Here is a child borne of faithful parents; and there is the voice of God, who
has sealed a Covenant to them, and their seed; Here are sureties, that live
(by Gods gracious spirit) in the unity, and in the bosom of the Church: and
so, the parents present it to them, they present it to the Church, and the
Church takes it into her care; It is still the natural child, of her parents,
who begot it, it is the spiritual child of the Sureties that present it; but
it is the Christian child of the Church, who in the sacrament of Baptism,
gives it a new inanimation, and who, if either parents, or sureties, should
neglect their parts, will have a care of it, and breed it up to a perfection,
and full growth of that faith, whereof it has this day, an inchoation and
beginning.

As then we have said, that Baptism is a death, a death of sin, and as we
said before, sin dies not without faith, so also can there be no death of
sin, without sorrow, and contrition, which only washes away sin: as
therefore we see the Church, and Christ's institution, furnishes this child,
with faith, which it has not of it self, so let us bring to this action, that
sorrow and that condoling, that we produce into the world such miserable
wretches, as even by peccatum involuntarium, by that sin, to which no act,
nay no will of theirs concurred, that is, Original sin, are yet put into the
state of damnation.

But let us also rejoice, in our own, and this childs behalf, that as we
that have been baptized, so this child, that shall be, have, and shall put on
Christ Jesus in Baptism. Augustine.
Both as a garment, for Sacramenta sunt vestimenta, As Christ is a garment, so
the Sacraments are Christ's garment, Idem.
and as such a garment; as Ornat militem, and convincit desertores, It gives
him, that continues in Gods battles, a dignity, and discovers him that
forsakes Gods tents, to be a fugitive; Baptism is a garland, in which two ends
are brought together, he begins aright, and perseveres, so, Ornat militem, It
is an honor to him, that fights out in Gods battle, but Convincit
Desertorem, Baptism is our prest-money, and if we forsake our colors, after
we have received that, even that forfaits our lives; our very having been
baptized, shall aggravate our condemnation. Yea it is such a garment, as those
of the children of Israel in the wilderness, which are (by some expositors)
thought to have grown all the forty years, with their bodies; for so by Gods
blessed provision, shall grace grow with this infant, to the life's end. And
both we and it, shall not only put on Christ, as a garment, but we shall put
on his person, and we shall stand before his Father, with the confidence, and
assurance of bearing his person, and the dignity of his innocence.

SERMON VIII.
Preached at Essex house, at the Churching of the Lady Doncaster.
CANT. 5. 3. I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
ALL things desire to go to their own place, and that is but the effect of
Nature; But if Man desires to go the right way, that is an effect of grace, and
of Religion. A stone will fall to the bottom naturally, and a flame will go
upwards naturally; but a stone cares not whether it fall through clean water,
or through Mud; a flame cares not whether it pass through pure air, or
cloudy; but a Christian, whose end is heaven, will put himself into a fair
way toward it, and according to this measure, be pure as his father in heaven
is pure. That which is our end, salvation, we use to express in Schools by
these two terms, we call it visionem Dei, the sight of God, and we call it
unionem, an union with God; we shall see God, and we shall be united to God:
for our seeing, we shall see him Sicuti est, as he is; which we cannot
express, till we see him; 1 John 3. 2.
Cognoscam ut cognitus, I shall know as I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
which is a knowledge reserved for that School, and a degree for that
Commencement, and not to be had before. Moses obtained a sight of God here,
that he might see, Posterior a, Gods hinder parts; Exodus 33. 23.
and if we consider God in posterioribus, in his later works, in the fulfilling
of all his Prophecies, concerning our Redemption, how he has accomplished in
novissimis, in the later times, all that which he spoke ab initio, by the mouth
of his Prophets, which have been since the world began, if we see God in them,
it is a great beam of that visio beatifica, that beautificall sight of God in
heaven; for herein we see the whole way of our salvation, to be in Christ
Jesus; all promise, all performance, all prophecy, all history concern us, in
and by him. And then for that union with God, which is also our salvation (as
this vision is) when we shall be so united, as that we shall follow the Lamb
whither soever he goes, though that union be unexpressible here, yet here,
there is an union with God, which represents that too. Such an union, as that
the Church of which we are parts, is his spouse, and that is Eadem care, the
same body with him; and such an union as that the obedient children of the
Church, are Idem spiritus cum Domin^, we are the same body, and the same
spirit: So united, as that by being sowed in the visible Church, we are Semen
Dei, the seed of God, 1 John 3. 9.
and by growing up there in godliness, and holiness, we are participes
Divinae naturae, partakers of the divine Nature it self. Now these two unions,
which represent our eternal union with God (that is, the union of the Church
to him, and the union of every good soul in the Church to him) is the subject
of this Song of songs, this heavenly Poem, of Solomon's; and our baptism, at
our entrance into this world, is a Seal of this union; our marriage, in the
passage of this world, is a Sacrament of this union; and that which seems to be
our dissolution, (our death) is the strongest ^and of this union, when we are
so united, as nothing can disunite us more. Now, for uniting things in this
world, we are always put to employ baser, and courser stuff, to unite them
together, then they themselves; If we lay Marble upon Marble, how well soever
we polish the Marble, yet we must unite them with mortar: If we unite riches to
riches, we temper a mortar (for the most part) of our own covetou^nesse, and
the loss, and opressing of some other Men; if we unite honors to honors,
titles to titles, we temper a mortar, (for the most part) of our own Ambition,
and the supplanting, or excluding of some other Men; But in the uniting of a
Christian soul to Christ Jesus, here is no mortar, all of one Nature; Nothing
but spirit, and spirit, and spirit, the soul of Man to the Lord Jesus, by the
holy Ghost. Worldly unions have some corrupt foulnesses in them, but for this
spiritual union, Lavi pedes, I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?

Which words, though in the rigor of the coherence, Divisio.
and connection of this Scripture, they imply a delay in the spouse of Christ,
and so in every soul too, that when Christ called here, the soul was not
ready to come forth to him, but made her excuses, that she had put off her
coat, and was loath to rise to put it on, that she had washed her feet, and
was loath to rise, and foul them again, yet because the excuse it self, (if
it were an excuse) has a piety, and a Religious care in it, the Fathers for
the most part, pretermit that weakness that produced an excuse, and consider
in their expositions, the care that the soul had, not to defile her self
again, being once washed. Gregory.
Saint Gregory says, that the soul had laid off, Omnia externa, quae non tam
ornant quam ^nerant, all outward ornaments, which are rather encumbrances, then
ornaments; And Saint Ambrose says, Pedes lavi, dum egrederer de corporis
contubernio, when I departed from the confederation of my body, and the (...)
that, I washed my feet, Quomod^ in tenebr^sum carcerem reverterer? And (...) I
return into that dark, and durty prison, again, the love of mine own body^
(...) suing therefore their pious acceptance of these words, we have in them,
two festivalls of the soul, a Resurrection, and an ascension of it; This soul
has raised it self, from the dirt and Mud of this world, Lavit pedes, she
has washed her feet, and then she has ascended to a resolution, of keeping
herself in that state, Quom^do inquinab^eos, how shall I defile them? Call
these two parts a Gratulation of the soul, and an Indignation; first she
congratulates with her good, and gracious God, that she is cleansed from
worldly corruptions, Lavi pedes, I have washed my feet^ and then she conceives
a Religious scorn and indignation, of setting her foot in the same foul way
again. Quom^do, how, how is it possible that I should descend, to so low a
disposition, as to foul them again? This Resurrection then of the soul, and
grat^lation, and this Ascension of the soul and Indignation, will be our two
parts. And in the first, we shall stop a little, upon every one of these five
branches; There is abluti^ necessaria; There is a washing, that is necessary to
all; for we enter in foulness, and corruption into this world; and that we
have in Baptism for Original sin; Secondly, there is abluti^ pedum, a
washing of our feet, of our steps, and walks in this world, and that is by
repentance, sealed in the other Sacrament, and properly, that is for actual
sins; Thirdly, in this ablution, there is an Ego lavi, there is a washing,
and I my self do something toward this cleansing of my self; And fourthly,
it is Lavi, it is, I have washed, not Lavabo, it is not, I will wash; it is
already done, it is not put off to mine age, nor to my death bed, but Lavi, I
have washed; And lastly, it is Pedes meas, I have washed mine own feet; for if
by my teaching, I cleanse others, and remain, by my bad life, in foul ways my
self, I am not within this text, Lavi pedes meos; I have not washed my feet;
But if we have sincerely performed the first part, we shall perform the other
too, Quomodo, we shall come into a religious detestation, and indignation of
falling into the same foulness again.

To pass then through all these (for of all these that is true which Saint
Basil says of all words in the Scriptures, First Part.
Habent minutissime particulae suae mysteria, Basil.
Every word has force and use, as in Pearl, every seed Pearl is as
medicinal, as the greatest, so there is a restorative nature in every word of
the Scriptures, and in every word, the soul finds a rise, and help for her
devotion,) To begin with the first, the necessity of washing, consider us in
our first beginning, Psalm. 51. 5.
Concepti in peccatis, our Mothers conceived us in sin; and being wrapped up in
uncleanness there, can any Man bring a clean thing out of filthiness? Job
14. 4.
There is not one; for as we were planted, in our Mothers womb, in conception,
so we were transplanted from thence into this world, in our Baptism, Nascimur
filii ^rae, Ephesians. 2. 3.
for we are by nature the children of wrath, as well as others. And as in the
bringing forth, and bringing up, of the best, and most precious, and most
delicate plants, Men employ most dung, so the greatest persons, where the
spirit and grace of God, does not allay that intemperance, which naturally
arises, out of abundance, and provocation, and out of vanity, and ambitious
glory, in outward oftentations; there is more dung, more uncleanness, more
sin in the conception, and birth of their children, then of meaner and poorer
parents; It is a degree of uncleanness, to fix our thoughts too earnestly
upon the uncleanness of our conception, and of our birth: when we call that a
testimony of a right coming, if we come into the world with our head forward,
in a headlong precipitation; and when we take no other testimony of our being
alive, but that we were heard cry; and for an earnest, and a Prophecy, that we
shall be viri sanguinum, et d^losi, bloody, and deceitful Men, false and
treacherous, to the murdering of our own souls we come into this world, as
the Egyptians went out of it, swallowed, and smothered in a red sea, Pueri
sanguinum, and infirmi, weak, and bloody infants at our birth. But to carry
our thoughts from material, to sptrituall uncleanness, In peccat^ concepti,
we were conceived in sin, but who can tell us how? That flesh in our mothers
womb, which we are, having no sin in it self, (for that mass of flesh
could not be damned, if there never came a soul into it) and that soul, which
comes into that flesh from God^ having no sin in it neither, (for God creates
nothing infected with sin, neither should that soul be damned, if it came
not into that body) The body, being without sin, and the soul being without
sin, yet in the first minute, that this body and soul meet, and are united,
we become in that instant, guilty of Adams sin, committed six thousand years
before. Such is our sin and uncleanness, in Original sin, as the
subtillest Man in the Schools, is never able to tell us, how, or when we
contracted that sin, but all have it; And therefore if there be any, any
any-where, of that generation, that are pure in their own eyes, Prove. 30. 12.
Bernard.
and yet are not washed from their filthiness, Basil.
as Solomon speaks, Erubesce vas stercorum, says good Saint Bernard, If it be
a vessel of gold, it is but a vessel of excrements, if it be a bed of curious
plants, it is but a bed of dung; as their tombs hereafter shall be but
glorious covers of rotten carcasses, so their bodies are now, but pampered
covers of rotten souls; Erubescat vas stercorum, let that vessel of
uncleanness, that barrel of dung, confess a necessity of washing, and seek
that, and rejoice in that, for thus far, (that is, to the pollution of
Original sin,) in peccato concepti, and nas^imur filii ira^, we are
conceived in sin, first, and then we are borne the children of wrath.

But where is our remedy? Why for this, for this original uncleanness, is the
water of Baptism. Op^rtet nos renasci; we must be borne again; we must; There
is a necessity of Baptism: John 3. 7.
As we are the children of Christian parents, we have Ius ad rem, a right to
the Covenant, we may claim baptism, the Church cannot deny it us; And as we
are baptized in the Christian Church, we have Ius in re, a right in the
Covenant, and all the benefits thereof, all the promises of the Gospel: we are
sure that we are conceived in sin, and sure that we are borne children of
wrath, but not sure that we are cleansed, or reconciled to God, by any other
means then that, which he has ordained, Baptism. The Spirit of God moved
first upon the water; and the spirit of life grew first in the water; Primus
liquor, quod viveret edidit: Tertullian.
The first living creatures in the first creation, were in the waters; and the
first breath of spiritual life, came to us, 1 Reg. 7.24.
from the water of baptism. In the Temple there was Mare aeneum, a brazen sea;
In the Church there is Mare aureum, a golden sea, which is Baptisterium, the
font, in which we discharge our selves, of all our first uncleanness, of all
the guiltiness of Original sin; but because we contract new uncleanness,
by our unclean ways here; therefore there must be Ablutio pedum, a washing of
our feet, of our ways, of our actions, which is our second branch.

Cecidimus in lutum, 2. Pedes. Bern.
and super acervum lapidum, says Saint Bernard; we fell by Adams fall, into the
dirt; but from that, we are washed in baptism; but we fell upon a heap of
sharp stones too; and we feel those wounds, and those bruises, all our lives
after; Impingimus meridie, we stumble at noone day; In the brightest light of
the Gospel, Esaias 59. 10.
in the brightest light of grace, in the best strength of Repentance, and our
resolutions to the contrary, yet we stumble, and fall again. Duo nobis pedes,
says that Father, Natura, and Cons^e^^do; we stand, says he, upon two feet,
Nature, and Custom; and we are lame of one foot hereditarily, we draw a
corrupt Nature from our parents; and we have lamed the other foot, by crooked,
and perverse customs. Now, as God provided a liquor in his Church, for
Original sin, the water of Baptism, so has he provided another for those
actual sins; that is, the blood of his own body, in the other Sacrament. In
which Sacrament, besides the natural union, (that Christ has taken our
Nature,) and the Mystical union, (that Christ has taken us into the body of
his Church) by a spiritual union, when we apply faithfully his Merits to our
souls, and by a Sacramental union, when we receive the visible seals
thereof, worthily, we are so washed in his blood, as that we stand in the sight
of his Father, as clean, and innocent, as himself, both because he and we are
thereby become one body, and because the garment of his righteousness covers
us all. But, for a preparation of this washing in the blood of Christ, in that
Sacrament, Christ commended to his Apostles, and in them, to all the world, by
his practice, and by his precept too, ablutionem pedam, a washing of their
feet; before they came to that Sacrament he washed their feet; John 13.
And in that exemplary action of his, his washing of their feet, Bernard.
he powered water into a Basin, says the text: Aqua spiritus sanctus, pelvis
Ecclesia,; These preparatory waters are the gift of the holy Ghost, the working
of his grace in repentance; but pelvis Ecclesia, the basin is the Church; that
is, these graces are distributed, and dispensed to us, in his institution, and
ordinance in the Church: No Man can wash himself at first, by Baptism; no Man
can baptize himself; no Man can wash in the second liquor, no Man, (that is
but a Man) can administer the other Sacrament to himself: Pelvis ecclesia, the
Church is the basin, and Gods Minister in the Church, washes in both these
cases. And, in this ablutione pedum, in the preparatory washing of our feet, by
a survey of all our sinful actions and repentance of them, no Man can absolve
himself, but pelvis ecclesia, the basin of this water of absolution, is in the
Church and in the Minister thereof.

First then this washing of the feet, which prepares us for the great washing,
in the blood of Christ, requires a stripping of them, a laying of them naked;
covering of the feet in the Scriptures, is a phrase, that denotes a foul, and
an unclean action; Judge. 3. 2^.
Saul was said to cover his feet, in the Cave, and Eglon was said to cover his
feet in his Parler; and we know the unclean action, that is intended here: but
for this clean action, for washing our feet, we must discover all our sinful
steps, in a free and open confession to almighty God. This may be that which
Solomon calls, Prove. 3. 21.
sound wisdom; My son keep sound wisdom, and discretion. There is not a
more silly folly, then to think to hide any sinful action from God. Nor
sounder wisdom then to discover them to him, by an humble, and penitent
confession; This is sound wisdom, and then, discretion is, to wash, and
discern, and debate, and examine all our future actions, and all the
circumstances, that by this spirit of discretion we may see, where the sting,
and venom of every particular action lies: My son keep sound wisdom, and
discretion, says he, And then shall thou walk in thy way safely, and thy foot
shall not stumble; If thy discretion be not strong enough, (if thou can not
always discern, Psalm. 91. 11.
what is, and what is not sin) he shall give his Angels charge over thee,
that thou dash not thy foot against a stone; and that is good security; and if
all these fail, though thou do fall, thou shall not be utterly cast down,
Psalm. 37. 24.
for the Lord shall uphold thee with his hand, says David; God shall give that
Man, that loves this found wisdom, (humble confession of sins past) this
spiritual discretion, the spirit of discerning spirits, that is, power to
discern a tentation, and to overcome it; confess that which is past with true
sorrow, that is sound wisdom, and God shall enlighten thee for the future, and
that is holy discretion.

The washing of our feet then, being a clean, and pure and sincere examination
of all our actions, we are to wash all the instruments of our actions, in
repentance; Lavanda facies, Genesis 43. 31.
we are to wash our face, as Joseph did, after he had wept, before he looked
upon his brethren again: If we have murmured, and mourned, for any cross,
that God has laid upon us, we must return to a cheerful countenance toward
him, in embracing whatsoever he found best for us; we must wash our Intestina,
Exodus 29. 17.
our bowels, (as it is after commanded in the law) when our bowels, which
should melt at the relation, and contemplation, and application of the passion
of our Savior, do melt at the apprehension, or expectation, or fruition of
any sinful delight, Exodus 19. 10.
Lavanda intestina, we must wash those bowels* Lavanda vestimenta, we must
wash our clothes; when we apparel and palliate our sins with excuses, of our
own infirmity, or of the example of greater Men, these clothes must be washed,
these excuses; Lavanda currus and arma, as Ahabs chariot and armor were
washed; 1 Reg. 2 2. 38.
If the power of our birth or of our place, or of our favor, have armed us
against the power of the law, or against the clamor of Men justly incensed,
Lavandi currus, these chariots, and arms, this greatness must be washed;
Lavanda retia; Luke 1. 2.
what Nets soever we have fished with, by what means soever we raise, or
sustain our fortune, Lavanda retia, These nets must be washed. Bernard.
Saint Bernard has drawn a great deal of this heavenly water together, for
the washing of all, when he presents, (as he calls it) Martyrium, sine sanguine,
triplex, a threefold Martyrdom, and all without blood; and that is, Largitas
in paupertate, a bountiful disposition, even in a low fortune; parcitas in
ubertate, a frugall disposition in a full fortune; and Castitas in Iuventute, a
pure, and chaste disposition, in the years, and places of tentation. These are
Martyrdomes, without blood, but not without the water that washes our feet;
This is sound wisdom, and discretion, to strip, and lay open our feet, our
sinful actions, by Confession; To cover them, and wrap them up by precaution,
from new uncleanness; and then to tie and bind up all safe, by participation
of the blood of Christ Jesus, in the Sacrament; for that is the seal of all;
And Christ in the washing of his disciples feet, took a towell to dry them, as
well, as water to wash them; so when he has brought us to this washing of our
feet, to a serious consideration of our actions, and to repentant tears, for
them, Absterget omnem lachrymam, he will wipe all tears from our eyes; all
tears of confusion toward Men, or of diffidence toward him; Absterget omnem
lachrymam, and deliver us over to a settled peace of conscience.

There is a washing then, absolutely, generally necessary, the water of
Baptism; Ego.
and a washing occasionally necessary, because we fall into actual sins, the
blood of our Savior in the Sacrament; and there is a washing between these,
preparatory to the last washing, the water of Contrite, and repentant tears,
in opening our selves to God, and shutting up of our selves against future
tentations: of the two first, the two Sacraments, sons in Ecclesia, the whole
spring, and river is in the Church, there is no baptism, no blood of Christ,
but in the Church; And of this later, which is most properly ablutio pedum, the
washing of the feet, that is, tears shed in repentance of our sinful lives,
of this water, there is Pelvis in Ecclesia, the Basin is in the Church; for our
best repentance (though this repentance be at home in our own hearts) does yet
receive a Seal, from the absolution of Gods Ministers in the Church. But yet
though there be no cleansing, but from the spirit of God, no ordinary working
of Gods spirit, but in the Church, and his ordinances there, yet we our selves
are not so left out, in this work, but that the spouse here, and every careful
soul here says, truly, Ego lavi, I my self have washed my feet; which is our
third branch.

It is said often in Philosophy, Nihil in intellectu, quod non prius in sensu;
till some sense apprehend a thing, the Judgment cannot debate it, nor discourse
it; It may well be said in Divinity too, Nihil in gratia, quod non prius in
natura, there is nothing in grace, that was not first in nature, so far, as
that grace always finds nature, and natural faculties to work on; though that
nature be not disposed to the receiving of grace, when it comes, yet that
nature, and those faculties, which may be so disposed by grace, are there,
before that grace comes. And the grace of God does not work this cleansing, but
where there is a sweet, and souple, and tractable, and ductile disposition
wrought in that soul. This disposition is no cause why God gives his grace;
for there is no cause, but his own mere, and unmeasurable goodness; But yet,
without such a disposition, God would not give that; and therefore let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness, says the Apostle; 2 Cor. 7. 1.
There is something, which we ourselves may do. A Man that had powered out
himself in a vehement, and corrupt solicitation of the chastity of any woman,
if he found himself surprised by the presence of a husband, or a father, he
could give over in the midst of a protestation; A Man that had set one foot
into a house of dangerous provocations, if he saw ^ bill of the plague, upon
the door, he could go back; A Man that had drawn his sword to rob a
passenger, if he saw a hue and cry come, could give over that; and all this is
upon the Ego lavi, I have washed; without use of grace, his own natural
reason declines him from that sin then. How long shall we make this bad use,
of this true doctrine, that, because we cannot do enough, for our salvation,
therefore we will do nothing? Shall I see any Man shut out of heaven, that did
what he could upon earth? Thou that can mourn for any worldly loss, mourn
for thy sin; Thou that love meetings of company for society, and
conversation, love the meeting of the Saints of God, in the Congregation, and
communion of Saints; Thou that love the Rhetorique, the Music, the wit, the
sharpness, the eloquence, the elegancy, of other authors, love even those
things in the Scriptures, in the word of God, where they abound more, then in
other authors. Put but thy affections out of their ordinary sinful way, and
then Lavasti pedes, thou have washed thy feet; and God will take thy work in
hand, and raise a building far beyond the compass, and comprehension of thy
foundation; that which the soul began, but in good nature, shall be perfected
in grace.

But do it quickly; for the glory of this soul here was in the Lavi; It is
not Lavabo; that she had already; not that she would wash her feet; Lavi.
since thou art come to know thy natural uncleanness, and baptism for that,
and thine actual uncleanness; and that for that, there is a River, that
brings thee into the maine Sea, (the water of repentance leads thee to the
bottomless Sea of the blood of thy Savior, in the Sacrament) continue not in
thy foulness, in confidence that all shall be drowned in that at last,
whenever thou will come to it. It was a common, but an erroneous practice,
even in the Primitive Church, to defer their baptism, till they were old;
because an opinion prevailed upon them, that baptism discharged them of all
sins, they used to be baptized then, when they were past sinning, that so
they might pass out of this world, in that innocence, which their baptism
imprinted in them: And out of this custom; Men grew to be the more careless
all their lives, because all was done at once in baptism. But says Saint
Augustine in that case, (and it was his own case) It were uncharitably said,
Augustine.
Vulneretur amplius, that if we saw a Man welter in his blood, and wounded in
diverse places, it were uncharitably said, Vulneretur amplius, give him two or
three wounds more, for the Surgeon is not come yet; It is uncharitably said to
thine own soul, Vulneretur amplius, take thy pleasure in sin yet, when I
come to receive the Sacrament, I will repent altogether, do not think to put
off all to the washing week; all thy sins, all thy repentance, to Easter,
and the Sacrament then; There may be a washing then, and no drying; thou may
come to weep the tears of desperation, to seek mercy with tears, and not find
it; tears for worldly losses, tears for sin, tears for bodily anguish, may
overflow thee then; and whereas Gods goodness to those, that are his, is, ut
abstergat omnem Lachrymam, to wipe all tears from their eyes; absterget nullam
Lachrymam, he may leave all unwiped upon thee, he may leave thy soul to sink,
and to shipwreck, under this tempest, and inundation, and current of diverse
tides; tears of all kinds, and ease of none: for those of whom it is said,
Deus absterget omnem lachrymam, God shall wipe all tears from their eyes, are
they Qui laverunt Stolas, (as we see there) who have already washed their long
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb: who have already by
tears of repentance, become worthy receivers of the seal of reconciliation,
in the Sacrament of his body, and blood; To them, God shall wipe all tears
from their eyes; but to the unrepentant sinner, he shall multiply tears; from
tears, for the loss, of a horse, or of a house, to tears for the loss of a
soul, and wipe no tear from his eyes.

But yet though this Lavi, exclude the Lavabo, as it is dilatory, that is, I
will wash, but not yet, yet it excludes not the Lavabo, I will wash, as it is
an often washing; I must come to that, Lavi, I have washed, but yet I will wash
again: for till our feet be so washed, as that they be wrapped up in our last
linen, and so raised from the ground, as that they be laid upon other Men's
shoulders, our feet will touch the ground again and need new washing. When
Christ washed his disciples feet, there is agreat difference amongst the
Fathers, where he began, whose feet he washed first: Saint Augustine, and
Saint Bernard think he began with Peter; they think Christ respected the
dignity of his person: origin, Augustine and Bernard. Origin and Chrysostom.
and Chrysostom think he began with Judas; they think Christ respected the
necessity of the Patient, and applied the Physique soonest, where the disease
was most malignant, and venomous. None of them say he began with John, whom
it is clear he loved most. If any soul have apprehended that Christ came late
to her washing, not till now, let her not argue, to her own danger, that he
loved her the less for that: if he have suffered sin to abound, that grace
might abound, what Patient shall dare to appoint, that Physician his Dosis, or
his times; whomsoever he washed first of his Apostles, he washed them all; and
to him that was forwardest ever in his own strength, to Peter, he said, Non
habebis partem, If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me; If we come
not to this washing of our feet, this preparatory washing by tears of
repentance, we can have no part in him, that is, in the participation of his
body, and his blood; but when he has brought us to this Jordan, which is
Fluvius Iudicii, the water of Judgment, and that we have judged, and condemned
our selves of this Leprosy of sin, Lavemur septies, let us often call our
selves to account, implore the council often, often accept the absolution of
Gods Minister, and often settle our souls, in a true peace, by a worthy
receiving of the seal thereof, in the Sacrament: And as in that we come to the
Lavi, (a peaceful testimony, that we have washed our consciences) so let us
pursue it with a Lavabo, with an humble acknowledgment, that we fall every day,
and every day need a new washing; for as from poor tenants, Landlords are not
content to receive their rent at the years end, but quarterly, or in shorter
terms, so from such beggarly and bankrupt souls as ours are, God is not
content with an anniversary repentance once a year, at Easter; but we shall
find our rent, our payment heavy enough, if we pay every day, and wash our
feet every night, for the uncleanness of that one day.

To shut up this part then; This washing of the feet, is the spirit of
discerning, Meos.
and censuring particular actions: but it is pedes meos, a discerning, and
censuring of my actions, not only, or not principally the actions of other
Men; Quam speciosi pedes Evangelizantium, how beautiful are the feet of them,
that preach peace, Romans 10.
says Saint Paul, out of the mouth of two witnesses, two Prophets, that had
said so before. If we will preach peace, that is, relieve the consciences of
others, by presenting them their sins, Isay 52. 7.
we must have speciosos pedes, Nab. 1. 15.
clean ways, and a clean life of our own; so it is with us, and our
profession; But Gens sancta, regale Sarcerdotium, as the Apostle joines them,
If you be a holy people, you are also a royal preisthood; If you be all Gods
Saints, 1 Pe^. 2. 9.
you are all Gods Priests; and if you be his priests, it is your office to
preach too; as we by words, you by your holy works; as we by contemplation, you
by conversation; as we by our doctrine, so you by your lives, are appointed by
God to preach to one another: and therefore every particular Man, must wash his
own, feet, look that he have speciosos pedes, that his example may preach to
others, for this is truly Regale Sacerdotium, a regal preisthood, not to work
upon others by words, but by actions. If we love one another, as Christ loved
us, we must wash one another feet, as he commanded his Apostles; There is a
preistly duty lies upon every Man, brotherly to reprehend a brother, whom he
sees trampling in foul ways, wallowing in foul sins; but I may preach to
others and be my self a reprobate^ (as Saint Paul speaks with terror to Men
of our coat) in his own person, I may bring others to heaven, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
and be shut out my self; And thou may preach that a Man should not steal,
and steal, That a Man should not commit adultery, and commit it; And in these
cases, Non speciosi pedes, Romans 2. 21.
here are no clean, no fair feet, and therefore no edifying. Nay if, in
either kind, we, or you, abhor Idols, and yet commit sacrilege, that is,
reprehend a sin in another, which we are free from our selves, but yet are
guilty our selves, of another sin as great, here is no clean feet no
profitable preaching; And therefore the only way to do God service, is, to
wash and to censure the feet, (that is, particular actions) but principally,
our own feet, that which we do our selves. 2. Part.


There remains yet a second part: and perchance but a little time for it; and
I shall proportion, and fit my self to it. It is, That as this soul had a
Resurrection, she has an ^scension; As she had vocem gratulantis, a
thanksgiving, that she has washed her feet, so she has vocem indignantis, a
religious scorn and indignation, to fall into those foul ways again. For
this holy indignation, is one link in the Apostles chain of Repentance,
where, upon Godly sorrow, depends care, and upon that, cleansing of our selves,
and upon that indignation, 2 Cor. 7. 11.
and so fear, and so desire, and so zeal, and so punishments of our selves:
every link worthy of a longer consideration; but here we consider only this
indignation; when that soul that is washed, and thereby sees, to what a fair
conformity with her Savior she is come, is come also to a scorn, to a
disdain to compare any beauty in this world, to that face, which Angels
desire to look upon; any nearenesse to great persons in this world, to the
following of the Lamb wheresoever he goes; any riches of this world, to that
riches wherewith the poverty of Christ Jesus has made us rich; any length of
life in this world, to that union which we shall have, to the Ancient of days;
where even the everliving God, shall not overlive us, but carry out our days to
the unmeasured measure of his own, to eternity. This indignation, this soul
expresses here, in this question, Quomodo, how shall I defile them? First then,
this voice of indignation, has this force; Quomodo, how shall I defile them,
is, how is it possible, that I should defile them? I have washed my feet,
repented my sins and taken the seal of my Reconciliation, the Sacrament,
Bernard.
and that has this effect, ut sensum minuat in minimis, and toliat consensum
in magnis peccatis, That grace, that God gives in the Sacrament, makes us less
sensible of small tentations, (they move us not) and it makes us resist, and
not yield to the greatest tentations; since I am in this state, Quomodo
inquinubo? How shall I defile them? The difference will be, of whom thou ask
this question: If thou ask the world, the world will tell thee, well enough.
Quomodo, How; It will tell thee, that it is a Melancholy thing, to sit thinking
upon thy sins; That it is an unsociable thing, to seek him, who cannot be
seen, an invisible God; That it is poor company, to pass thy time with a
Priest; Thou may defile thy self again, by forgetting thy sins, and so
doing them over again: And thou may defile thy self again by remembering
thy sins, and so sin over thy sins again, in a sinful delight of thy
passed sins, and a desire that thou could commit them again. There are
answers enough to this Quomodo, How, how should I defile them, if thou ask the
world: but ask thy Savior, and he shall tell thee, John 4. 11.
That whosoever has this water, shall never thirst more, but that water shall
be in him an everlasting spring; that is, he shall find means to keep himself
in that cleanness, Romans 8.
to which he is come; and neither things present, nor things to come shall
separate him from the love of God.

Thus the voice of this religious indignation, Quomodo, is, how is it possible,
but it is also, Quomodo, how, that is, why should I? The first is, how should I
be so base, the other, how should I be so bold? Though I have my pardon,
written in the blood of my Savior; sealed to me in his Sacrament, brought home
to me in the testimony of the holy Ghost, pleaded for me, at the tribunal of
the Father, yet as Princes pardons have, so Gods pardons have too, this clause,
It a quod se been gerat; He that is pardoned must continue of good behavior;
for whenever he breaks the peace, he forfeits his pardon; When I return to
my repented sins again, I am under the burden of all my former sins, and
my very repentance, contracts the nature of a sin: and therefore Quomodo, how
should I, that is, why should I defile them? To restore you to your liberty,
and to send you away with the meditation, which concerns you most, consider,
what an astonishment this would be, that when Christ Jesus shall lay open the
great volumes of all your sins, to your sight, who had forgot them, and to
their sight, from whom you had disguised them, at the last judgment, when you
shall hear all the wantonnesses of your youth, all the Ambitions of your
middle years, all the covetous desires of your age, published in that presence,
and think then, this is the worst that can be said, or laid to my charge, this
is the last indictment, and the last evidence, there shall follow your very
repentances in the list of your sins, and it shall be told you, and all the
world then, Here, and here you deluded that God, that forbore to inflict his
Judgments, upon new vows, new contracts, new promises, between you and him;
even your repentances shall bind up that book, and tie your old sins, and
new relapses into one body. And let this meditation bring you ad vocem
gratulantis, to rejoice once again in this Lavi pedes, that you have now
washed your feet, in a present sorrow, and ad vocem indignantis, to a stronger
indignation, and faster resolution, then heretofore you have had, never to
defile them again.

SERMON IX.
Preached at a Churching.
MICAH 2. 10. Arise and depart, for this is not your Rest.
ALL that God asks of us, is, that we love him with all our heart: All that he
promises us, is, that he will give us rest, round about us; Judah sought the
Lord with a whole desire, and he gave her rest, round about her. Now a Man
might think himself well disposed for Rest, when he lies down, I will lay me
down, and sleep in peace, says David; but it is otherwise here; Psalm. 4. 8.
Arise, and depart; for here, (that is, in lying, and sleeping) is not your
Rest, says this Prophet. These words have a threefold acceptance, and admit
a threefold exposition; for, first, they are a Commination, the Prophet
threatens the Jews; Secondly, they are a Commonition, the Prophet instructs
all future ages; Thirdly, they are^a Consolation, which has reference to the
Consummation of all, to the rising at the general Judgment. First, he
foretells the Jews of their imminent captivity; Howsoever you build upon the
pactum salis, the Covenant of salt, the everlasting Covenant, that God will be
your God, and this land your land, yet since that confidence sears you up in
your sins, Arise and depart, for this is not your rest, your Jerusalem must be
changed into Babylon; there is the Commination: Secondly, he warns us, who are
bedded and bedrid in our sins; howsoever you say to your selves, Soul take thy
rest, enjoy the honors, the pleasures, the abundances of this world, Tush the
Lord sees it not, The Master will not come, we may ly still safely, and rest in
the fruition of this Happiness, yet this Rest will betray you, this rest will
deliver you over to eternal disquiet: And therefore arise and depart, for this
is not your Rest, and that is the Commonition. And in the third acceptance of
the words as they may have relation to the Resurrection, they may well admit a
little inversion; Howsoever you feel a Resurrection by grace from the works of
death, and darkness in this life, yet in this life, there is no assuredness,
that he that is risen, and thinks he stands, shall not fall; here you arise and
depart, that is, rise from your sins, and depart from your sinful purposes,
but you arise, and depart so too, that you fall, and depart again into your
sinful purposes, after you have risen; and therefore Depart and arise, for
here is not your rest; till you depart altogether out of this world, and rise
to Judgment, you can have no such rest, as can admit no disquiet no
perturbation; but then you shall; and that is the Consolation.

First then, as the words concern the Jews; Here is first an increpation, 1.
Part. Divisio.
a rebuke, that they are fallen from their station, and their dignity, implied
in the first word, Arise, for then they were fallen; Secondly, here is a
demonstration in the same word, That though they liked that state into which
they were fallen, which was a security, and stubbornness in their sins, yet
they should not enjoy even that security, and that stubbornness, that fall of
theirs, but they should lose that; though it were but a false contentment, yet
they should be rou^'d out of that, Arise; first arise, because you are fallen,
and then, arise, though you think your selves at ease^ by that fall. And then
thirdly, here is a continuation of Gods anger, when they are risen; for they
are not raised to their former state and dignity, from which they were fallen,
they are not raised to be established, but it is arise, and depart; And in all
this (which is a fourth Consideration) God precludes them from any hope by
solicitation, he reveals his purpose his Decree, and consequently his
inexorablenesse evidently, in that word, for; never murmur, never dispute,
never entreat, you must depart, For it is determined, it is resolved, and here
is not your Rest; In which also the Commination is yet more and more
aggravated; first, in that they lose their Rest, which God has sold them so
dearly, by so many battles, and so many afflictions, and which God had sworn
to them so solemnly by so many ratifications; they must lose their Rest, they
must have no Rest, Here; not there; not in the Land of Promise it self; And
then lastly, as they are denied all rest there; There, where was the womb, and
Center of their Rest, so there is no intimation, no hope given, that they
should have rest any where else, for as they were to rise, only to depart, so
they were to depart into Captivity.

The first is an increpation, they were fallen; but from whence? It was once
said, Increpatio. Ceciderunt.
Qui jacet in terra, non habet unde cadat, but he that is earth it self,
whither can he fall? whither can Man, derived from earth before his life,
enamored of the earth, embracing it, and married to it in his life, destined to
the earth, betrothed to it for a second marriage after this life, whither can he
fall? It is true of us all, I shall say to corruption, Thou art my father, and
to the worm, Thou art my Mother, and my sister; Job 16. 14.
and can we fall into worse company, contract an alliance with a more base, and
beggarly kindred then this? Not if we were left there; then we could not: but
when we consider a nation, of whom God has said, sponsabo te mihi, I will mary
thee, without any respect of disparagement in thy lowness, I will not refuse
thee for it, I will not upbraid thee with it, I will mary thee for ever, and
without any purpose of divorce (sponsabo in aeternum,) of this nation thus
assumed, thus contracted, thus endowed, thus assured, why may not we wonder as
vehemently, as the Prophet did, of the fallen Angels, Quomodo cecidisti de
caelo, Lucifer filius Orientis, how did this nation fall out of Gods arms, out
of Gods bosom? Himself tells us how; what he had done to exalt them, what
they had done to divest his favors: for their natural lownes, he says, In thy
nativity when thou wast born, thy Navell was not cut, thou wast not washed,
thou wast not salted, thou wast not swadled; No eye pitied thee, but thou wast
cast into the open fields in contempt, I passed by, Ezekiel. 16. 3.
and saw thee in thy blood, and said thou shall live; I swear unto thee, and
entered into a covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine; I washed thee,
anointed thee, and adorned thee: and thou wast perfect through my beauty, which
I set upon thee; well then, in this state, Quomodo cecidisti de caelo; how fell
she out of Gods arms, out of his bosom? thus; Thou did trust in thine own
beauty, because of thy renown, and so playedst the harlor. When that nation
was in massa damnata, a loaf of Adams dow, through all which the infectious
leaven of sin had passed without difference, when that nation had no more
title, nor pretense to Gods mercy, then any of their fellow worms, when God
had heaped, and accumulated his tempor all blessings upon them, and above all,
dwelt with them, in the alliance, and in the familiarity of a particular
Religion, which contracted God and them, and left out all the world beside,
when God had imprinted this beauty in them, and that they had a renown, and
reputation for that, they trusted to their own beauty, (to worship whom they
would, and how they would) they followed their own invention; yea they trusted
in beauty, which was not their own, in borrowed beauty, in painted beauty, and
so took in, and applied themselves to all the spiritual fornications, to all
the Idolatries of the nations about them; some that were too absurd to be
hearkened to; some too obscene, and foul to be named now by us, though the
Prophets, (to their farther reproach, and confusion) have named them; some, too
ridiculous to fall into any Man's consideration, that could seriously think of
a Majesty, in a God, which should be worshipped; yet all these, absurd, and
obscene, and ridiculous Idolatries, they prostituted them selves unto.

Take them in their lowness, for any disposition toward the next world, and
this was their state, Their navell was not cut; that is, they were still
incorporated into their mother, to earth, and to sin; and they were not one
step higher, then all the world beside, in Jacobs ladder, whose top is in
heaven. Take them in their dignity in this world, and then we find them in
Egypt, where they were not Personae, but Res, they were not their Masters Men,
but their Masters goods; they were their cattle, to vex, and wear out, with
their labors spent upon the delights of others; They must go far for straw;
a great labor, for a little matter; and they must burn it, when they had
brought it; they must make brick, but others must build houses, with their
materials, and they perish in the fields; they must beget children, but only
for the slaughter, and to be murdered as soone^^ they were borne; what nation,
what Man, what beast, what worm, what weed, if it could have understood their
state, would have changed with them then?

This was their dejection, their exinanition in Egypt, if we shall begin
there to consider, what he did for them: As after, in the Christian Church, he
made the blood of the Martyrs, the seed of the Church, so in Egypt, he
propagated, and multiplied his Children, in the midst of their cruel
oppressions, and slaughters, as though their blood had been seed to increase
by; under the weight of their depressions, he gave them growth, and stature,
and strength, as though their wounds had been playsters, and their vexations
cordials; when he had made Egypt as a Hell, by kindling all his plagues, in her
bosom, yet Non dereliquit in Inferno, he left not his beloved in this Hell, he
paled in a Paradise in this Hell, a Goshen in Egypt, and gave his servants
security; briefly, those whom the sword should have lessened, whom labor
should have creepled, whom contempt should have beggered, he brought out,
numerous, and in multitudes, strong, and in courage, rich, and in abundance;
and he opened the Red Sea, as he should have opened the book of life, to show
them their Names, their security, and he shut the sea, as that book, upon the
Egyptians, to show them their irrecoverable exclusion. If we consider, what he
did for them, what he suffered from them, in their way, the battles, that he
fought for them, in an outstretched arm, the battails, that they fought
against him, in the stiffness of their necks, and their murmuring, we must, to
their confusion, acknowledge, that at a great deal a less price, then he paid
for them, he might have gained all the people of the earth; all the Nations of
the earth, (in app^arance) would have come in to his subjection, upon the
thousand part of that which he did for the Israelites in their way. But for
that which he did for them, at home, when he had planted them in the Land of
Promise, as it were an ungrateful thing, not to remember those blessings, so
it is some degree of ingratitude, to think them possible to be numbered.
Consider the narrowness of the Land, (scarce equal to three of our shires)
and their innumerable armies; consider the barrenness of many parts of that
Country, and their innumerable sacrifices of Cattle; consider their little
trade, in respect, and their innumerable treasures; but consider especially,
what God had done for their souls, in promising, and ratifying so often a
Messiah unto them, and giving them Law and Prophers, in the mean time, and
there you see their true height; and then consider the abominations, and
Idolatries, in which they had plunged, and buried themselves, and there you see
their lowness, how far they were fallen.

This then was their descent; Non gaudebunt.
and as Saint Paul says (when he describes this descent of the Jews, into all
manner of abominations) one step of this stayre, of this descent, is,
unnatural affection, they were unnatural to themselves; that is, not sensible
of their own misery, but were proud of their fall, and thought themselves at
ease in their ruin; and another stayre in this fall is, Romans 1. 28.
that God had delivered them up to a reprobate mind, to suffer them to think so
still. And then for their farther vexation, God would take from them, even that
false, that imaginary comfort of theirs. Surgite, says God, since you have
made that perverse shift, to take comfort in your fall, Arise from that, from
that security, from that stupidity, for you shall not choose but see your
misery; when all the people were descended to that baseness, (as nothing is
more base, then to court the world, and the Devil, for poor and wretched
delights, when we may have plentiful, and rich abundance in our confidence in
God) when the people were all of one mind, and one voice, omnes unius labii,
their hearts, Genesis 11. Aug.
and tongues spoke all one language, and, (populus tanto deterior, quanto in
deterioribus concors, Men are the worse, the more they are, and the more
unanime, and constant they are in ill purposes) when they were all come to that
Venite comburamus, Come, and let us burn brick, and trust in our own work, and
Venite, aedificemus, Come, and let us build a tower, and provide a safety for
our selves; since they would descend from their dignity, (which dignity
consists in the service of God, whose service is perfect freedom) God would
descend with them, Venite descendamus, says God; but what to do? Descendamus,
ut confundamus, let us go down to confound their language, and to scatter them
upon the earth. Ascensio mendax, descensio crudelis, Bern.
says holy Bernard, A false ascending, is a cruel descending: when we lie
weltring in our blood, secure in our sins, and can flatter our selves, that we
are well, and where we would be, this deceitful ascension, is a cruel descent
into hell; we lie still, we feel no pain, but it is because we have broke our
necks; we do not groan, we do not sigh, but it is, because our breath is
gone, the spirit of God is departed from us. They were descended to a flatnesse
of taste, Egyptian Onions had a better savor, then the Manna of heaven; They
were descended to a new-fanglednesse in Civil government, they liked the form
of government amongst their neighbors, better then that of Judges, which God
had established for them then; They were descended to a newfanglednesse in
matter of Religion, to the embracing of a foraine, and a frivolous, and an
Idolatrous worship of God: but then being in their descent, when they delighted
in it, as Sea-sick men, who had rather be trodden upon, then rise up, then God
frustrate that false joy and false ease of theirs, he rouses them from all
that, which they had proposed to themselves, Surgite, arise, arise from this
security, because you are fallen, you should rise, but because you love your
misery, you shall rise, you shall come to a sense, and knowledge of it, you
shall not enjoy the ease of an ignorance.

But he raised them not, Depart.
to reestablish them, to restore them to their former dignity; there was no
comfort in that Surgite, which was accompanied with an Ite, arise and depart:
and depart into captivity. If we compare the captivity, which they were going
into, (that of Babylon) with the other bondage, which they had been delivered
from, (that of Egypt) it is true, there were many, and real, and important
differences. That of Egypt was Ergastulum, Exodus 6. 6. Deuteronomy. 4. 20.
a prison; and it was fornax ferrea, an Iron furnace; but in Babylon, they were
not slaves, as they were in Egypt, but they were such a kind of prisoners, as
only had not liberty, to return to their own country. But yet, if we
consider their state in Egypt in their root, in Jacob, and in his sons, they
came for food thither in a time of necessity; and consider them in that branch
that overshadowed, and refreshed them, in Joseph, he came thither as a bondsman,
in a servile condition. So that they were but few persons, and not so great, as
that their pressures could be aggravated, or taste much more the bitterly, by
comparing it, with any greatness which they had before; Though they were
fallen into great misery, they were not fallen from any remarkable greatness.
But between the two captivities of Egypt, and Babylon, they were come to that
greatness, and reputation, as that they had the testimony of all the world,
Deuteronomy. 4. 6.
Only this people is wise, and of understanding, and a great nation. Now
wherein? In that which follows; what nation is so great, as to have the Lord
come so near unto them; so great, as to have Laws, and Ordinances, so
righteous, as they had? Now this peculiar greatness, they lost in this
captivity; whether they lost absolutely the books of the Law, or not, and that
they were reinspired, and redictated again by the holy Ghost to Esdras, or
whether Esdras did but recollect them, and recompile them, Saint Hierome will
not determine: He will not say whether Moses, or Esdras, be author of the first
five books of the Bible; but it is clear enough, that they were out of that
ordinary use wherein they had been before: and though they kept their
Circumcision, and their Sabbaths in Babylon, yet being cast thither for their
sins, they had lost all ordinary expiations of their sins, for they had no
sacrifices there; (as the Jews, which are now in dispersion, are everywhere
without their sacrifices) They were to rise, but not to stay, Arise and depart;
And they were to depart, both from their Imaginary comforts, which they had
framed, and proposed to themselves (when they were fallen from God, they should
be deceived in their trust in themselves) and they were to depart even with the
law, and ordinances, in which their pre-eminence, and prerogative above all
nations consisted: when Man comes to be content with this world, God will take
this world from him: when Man frames to himself imaginary pleasures, God will
inflict real punishments; when he would lie still, he shall not sleep; but God
will take him and raise him, but to a farther vexation.

And this vexation has another heavy weight upon it, Quia.
in this little word, for; for this draws a Curtain between the face of God,
and them: this locks a door between the Court of mercy, and them, when God
presents his judgments with such an assuredness, such a resolution, as leaves
no hope in their heart, that God will alter it, no power in themselves to
solicit God to a pardon, Prove.
or a reprieve; but as he was led as a fool to the stocks, when he hearkened
to pleasant sins before, so he is led as an ox to the slaughters, when he
hears of Gods Judgments now; his own Conscience prevents God, and tells him,
there is a for, a reason, a necessity, an irrecoverablenesse in his
condemnation. God had iterated, and multiplied this Quia, this for, oftentimes
in their ears: This Prophet was no upstart, no sudden, no transitory Man, to
pass through the streets with a Vae, Vae, Woe, woe unto this City, and no more;
but he prophesied constantly, v. 1.
during the reign of three Kings, of Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah: He was no
suspicious Man out of his singularity; but he prophesied jointly with Isaiah,
without separation, and he held the communion of his fellow-Prophets; He was no
particular man, (as many Interpreters have taken it) so, as that he addressed
his prophecies upon Judah only; but he extended it to all, to all the Tribes.
It is not a prophecy limited to Idolatry, and the sins against the first Table,
but to robbery, and murder, and fornication, and oppression, and the sins
between Man, and Man: It is not a timorous prophecy, directed only to persons,
whom a low fortune, and a miserable estate, or a sense of sin, and a wounded
Conscience, had depressed, and dejected, but principally bent upon rulers and
Magistrates, and great persons. So that no Man has a Quia against this Quia, a
for against this for, to say, we need not heed him, for he is an upstart, a
singular person, and all these his threatenings are rather Satyricall, then
Prophetical, or Theological; but this thunderbolt, this Quia, this reason,
why these judgments must necessarily fall upon them, fell upon them with so
much violence, as that it stupefied with the weight, and precluded all ways of
escape. These be the heaviest Texts that a Man can light upon in the Scriptures
of God, and these be the heaviest Commentaries, that a Man can make upon these
Texts, that when God wakens him and raises him from his dream, and bed of sin,
and pleasure, and raises him with the voice of his judgments, he suffers him
to read to the Quia, but not to come to the Tamen; He comes to see reason why
that Judgment must fall, but not to see any remedy. His inordinate Melancholy,
and half desperate sadness carries his eye, and mind upon a hundred places of
Commination, of threatening in the Prophets, and in them all he finds quickly
that Quia, This curse must fall upon me, for I am fallen into it; but he comes
not to the Tamen, to that relief, yet turn to the Lord, and he will turn to
thee. This was a particular step in their misery, that when they were awaked,
and risen, that is, taken away from all taste, and comfort, in their own
imaginations, and pleasures, when God was ready to give fire to all that
artillery, which he had charged against them, in the service of all the
Prophets, they could see no refuge, no sanctuary, nothing but a quia, an
irresistibleness, an irremediablenesse, a necessity of perishing; a great
while there was no such thing, as Judgment, (God cannot see us) Now, there is
no such thing as Mercy, (God will not see us.)

What then is this heavy Judgment, Quies.
that is threatened ^ It is the deprivation of Rest. Though there be no war, no
pestilence, no new positive calamity, yet privative calamities are heavy
Judgments; to lose that Gospel, that Religion, which they had, is a heavy
loss; Deprivations are heavy Calamities; and here they are deprived of Rest;
Here is not your Rest: Now, besides that betwixt us and heaven, there is
nothing that rests, (all the Elements, all the planets, all the spheres are in
perpetual motion, and vicisitude) and so the Joys of heaven are expressed
unto us, in that name of Rest; Certainly this blessing of Rest was more
precious, more acceptable to the Jews, then to any other Nation; and so they
more sensible of the loss of it, then any other. For as Gods first promise,
and the often ratification of it, had ever accustomed them to a longing for
that promised rest, as their long, and laborious peregrinations, had made them
ambitious, and hungry of that Rest, so had they (which no other Nation had but
they) a particular feast of a Sabhath, appointed for them, both for a ^^all
cessation and rest from bodily labors, and for a figurative expressing of the
eternal Rest, their imagination, their understanding, their faith, was filled
with this apprehension of Rest. When the contentment and satisfaction, which
God took in (...) sacrifice, after he came out of the Ark, is expressed, it is
expressed thus, The Lord (...) a savor of Rest; Genesis 8. 21.
our services to God, are a Rest to him; he rests in our devotions; And when
the Idolatrous service, and forbidden sacrifices of the people are expressed,
Ezck. 20. 28.
they are expressed thus, When I had brought them into the Land, Po^u^runt ibi
^dorem quieturn suarum, they placed there the sweet savors of their own Rest;
not of Gods Rest, (his true Religion) but their own Rest, a Religion, which
they, for collaterll respects, rested in. And therefore when God threatens
here, that there shall be no rest, that is, none of his rest, he would take
from them their Law, their Sacrifices, their Religion, in which he was pleased,
and rested gracious toward them, he will change their Religion: And when he
says, Here is not your Rest, he threatens to take from them, that Rest, that
Peace, that Quiet which they had proposed, and imagined to themselves; when
they say to themselves, Why, it is no great matter; we may do well enough for
all that, though our Religion be changed; he will impoverish them, he will
disarm them, he will infatuate them, he will make them a prey to their enemies,
and take away all true, and all imaginary rest too.

Briefly, Tertul.
it is the mark of all men, even natural men, Rest: for though Tertullian
condemn that, to call Quietis Magisterium Sapientiam, The act of being, and
living at quiet, wisdom, therein seeming to exclude all wisdom, that conduces
not to rest, as though there were no wisdom, in action, and in business;
Though in the person of Epicurus he condemn that, and that saying, Nemo alii
nascitur, moriturus sibi, It is no reason, that any Man should think himself
born for others, since he cannot live to himself, or to labor for others,
since himself cannot enjoy rest, yet Tertullian leaving the Epicures, that
placed felicity in a stupid, and unsociable retiring, says in his own person,
and in his own opinion, almost as much, Vnicum mihi negotium, nec aliud curo,
quam ne curem, All that I care for, is that I might care for nothing; and so,
even Tertullian, in his Christian Philosophy, places happiness in rest; Now,
he speaks not only of the things of this world, they must necessarily be cared
for, in their proportion; we must not decline the businesses of this life, and
the offices of society, out of an aerie, and imaginary affection of rest: our
principal rest is, in the testimony of our Conscience, and in doing that which
we were sent to do; And to have a Rest, and peace, in a Conscience of having
done that religiously, and acceptably to God, is our true Rest: and this was
the rest, which the Jews were to lose in this place, the testimony of their
consciences, that they had performed their part, their Conditions, so, that
they might rely upon Gods promises, of a perpetual rest in the Land of Canaan;
and that rest they could not have; not that peaceful testimony of their
Consciences.

They could not have that rest, Hic.
no Rest, not there, not in Canaan; which was the highest degree of the misery,
because they were confident in their term, their state in that Land, that it
should be perpetual; and they were confident in the goodness of the Land,
that it should evermore give them all conveniences in abundance, conducing to
all kind of rest: for, this Land, God himself calls by the name of rest, and of
his rest; Psalm. 95. 11. Aug. Ser. 105. de tempore.
I swear they should not enter into my rest; So that, rest was proper to this
Land, and this Land was proper to them. For, (as St. Augustine notes well)
though God recovered this Land for them, and reestablish'd miraculously their
possession, yet they came but in their Remitter, and in postliminio, the
inheritance of that Land, was theirs before: for, Sem the son of Neah, was in
possession of this Land; and the sons of Cham, the Canaanites, expelled his race
out of it; and Abraham of the race of Sem, was restored unto it again: So that,
as the goodness of the Land promised rest, so the goodness of the title
promised them the Land; and yet they might have no rest there.

They had a better title then that; Those often oaths, which God had sworn
unto them, that that land should be theirs forever, was their evidence; If then
that land were Requies Domini, the rest of the Lord, that is, the best, and the
safest Rest, and that land were their land, why should they not have that rest
here, when the Lord had sworn they should? Why, because he swore the contrary
after; but will God swear contrary things? Aug.
why, s^lus securus jurat, qui falli^non potest, says Saint Augustine, only he
can swear a thing safely, that sees all circumstances, and foresees all
occurrances; only God can swear safely, because nothing can be hid from him.
God therefore that knew upon what conditions he had taken the first oath, and
knew again how contemptuously those conditions were broken, he takes knowledge
that he had sworn, he denies not that, Psalm. 95. 11.
but he swears again, and in his anger, I swear in my wrath, that they should
not enter into my rest. Those Men (says he) which have seen my glory and my
Miracles, and have tempted me ten times, and not obeyed my voice, certainly
they shall not see the land whereof I swear unto their fathers; Numb. 14. 23.
neither shall any that provoke me see it; He pleads not Non est factum, but he
pleads conditions performed; he denies not that he swore but he justifies
himself, that he had done as much as he promised; for his promise was
conditional. The Apostle seems to assign but one reason of their exclusion,
from this Land, and from this rest, and yet he expresses that one Reason so, as
that it has two branches; Heb. 3. 18, 19.
He says, we see that they could not enter, because of unbeleef and yet he
asks the question; To whom swear he, that they should not enter into his Rest,
but unto them, that obeyed not? Unbelief is assigned for the cause, and yet
they were shut out for disobedience; now, if the Apostle make it all one,
whether want of faith, or want of works, exclude us from the Land of Rest, let
not us be too curious enquirers, whether faith or works bring us thither; for
neither faith, nor works bring us thither, as a full cause; but if we consider
mediate causes, so they may be both causes; faith, isntrumental, works,
declaratory; faith may be as evidence, works as the scale of it; but the cause
is only, the free election of God. Nor ever shall we come thither, if we leave
out either; we shall meet as many Men in heaven, that have lived without faith,
as without works.

This then was the case; God had sworn to them an inheritance permanently
there, but upon condition of their obedience; If they had not had a privity in
the condition, if they had not had a possibility to perform the condition,
their exclusion might haveseemed unjust: and it had been so; for though God
might justly have forborne the promise, yet he could not justly break the
promise, if they had kept the conditions; therefore he expressed the condition
without any disguise, at first, Deuteronomy. 30. 17.
If thy heart turn away, ^^pr^nounce unto you this day that you shall surely
perish^ you shall not prolong your days in the land. And then, when those
conditions were made, and made known, and made easy, and accepted, when they
so rebelliously broke all conditions, his first oath lay not in his way, Ezekiel.
17. 19.
to stop him from the second, As I live, says the Lord, I will surely bring
mine oath that they have broken, and my covenant that they have despised upon
their head, shall they break my covenant, and he delivered, says God there. v.
15.
God confesses the oath and the covenant, to be his covenant and his oath, but
the breach of the oath, and covenant, was theirs, and not his.

He expresses his promise to them, and his departing from them together, in
another Propher; God says to the Propher, Buy thee a girdle, bury it in the
ground, and fetch it again; And then it was rotten, and good for nothing: for
says he, as the girdle cleaves to the loins, so have I tied to me the house
of Israel, and Judah, that they might be my people, that they might have a name
and a praise, and a glory, but they would not hear; Therefore, say unto them,
Every bottle shall be filled with wine; (Here was a promise of plenty:) and
they shall say unto thee, Do not we know, that every bottle shall be filled
with wine^ (that God is bound to give us this plenty?) because he has tied
himself by oath, and covenunt, and promise.) But behold, I fill all the
inhabitants with drunkenness; (since they trust in their plenty, that shall be
an occasion of sin to them) and I will dash them against one another, even
the father, and sons together; I will not spare, I will not pity, I will not
have compassion, but destroy them. God could not promise more, then he did in
this place at first; he could not depart farther from that promise, then by
their occasion, he came to at last. Gods promise goes no farther with Moses
himself; My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest; Exodus 24.
14.
If we will steal out of Gods presence, Prove. 4. 1.
into dark and sinful corners, there is no rest promised. Receive my words,
Psalm. 37. 3.
says Solomon, and the years of thy life shall be many; Trust in the Lord, says
David, and do good, (perform both, stand upon those two legs, faith, and
works; not that they are alike; there is a right, and a left leg: but stand
upon both; upon one in the sight of God; upon the other in the sight of Man;)
Trust in the Lord, and do good, and then shall dwell in the land, and be fed
assuredly. That paradise, that peace of Conscience, which God establishes in
thee, by faith, has a condition, of growth, and increase, from faith to faith;
heaven it self, in which the Angels were, had a condition; they might, they
did fall from thence; The land of Canaan, was their own land, and the rest of
that land, their Rest by Gods oath, and covenant; and yet here was not their
rest: not here; nor for any thing expressed, or intimated in the word, any
where else. Here was a Nunc dimittis, but not in pace; The Lord lets them
depart, and makes them depart, but not in peace, for their eyes saw no
salvation; they were sent away to a heavy captivity. Beloved, we may have had a
Canaan, an inheritance, a comfortable assurance in our bosoms, in our
consciences, and yet hear that voice after, that here is not our rest, except,
as Gods goodness at first moved him to make one oath unto us, of a
conditional rest, as our sins have put God to his second oath, that he swear
we should not have his rest, so our repentance bring him to a third oath, as I
live I would not the death of a sinner, that so he do not only make a new
contract with us, but give us withal an ability, to perform the conditions,
which he requires.

SERMON X.
Preached at the Churching of the Countess of Bridgewater.
MICAH 2^ 10. [second Sermon.] THus far we have proceeded in the first
acceptance of these words, according to their principal, and literal sense,
as they appertained to the Jews, and their sta^e; so they were a Commination;
As they appertain to all succeeding Ages, and to us, so they are a Commonition,
an alarm, to raise us from the sleep, and death of sin: And then in a third
acceptance, they are a Consolation, that at last we shall have a rising, and a
departing into such a state, in the Resurrection, as we shall no more need this
voice, Arise, and depart, because we shall be no more in danger of falling, no
more in danger of departing from the presence, and contemplation; and service,
and fruition of God; And in both these latter senses, the words admit a just
accommodation to this present occasion, God having raised his honorable
servant, and handmaid here present, to a sense of the Curse, that lies upon
women, for the transgression of the first woman, which is painful, and
dangerous Childbirth; and given her also, a sense of the last glorious
resurrection, in having raised her, from that Bed of weakness, to the ability
of coming into his presence, here in his house.

First then to consider them, in the first of these two latter senses, Divisio.
as a Commonition to them, that are in the state of sin, first there is an
increpation implied in this word Arise; when we are bid arise, we are told,
that we are fallen: sin is an unworthy descent, and an ignoble fall; Secondly, we
are bid to do something, and therefore we are able to do something, God
commands nothing impossible so, as that that degree of performance, which he
will accept, should be impossible, to the man, whom his grace has affected;
That which God will accept, is possible to the godly; And thirdly, that which
he commands here, is derived into two branches; We are bidden to rise^ that is,
to leave our bed, our habit of sin; and then not to be idle, when we are up,
but to depart; not only to depart from the Custom^, but from tentations of
Recidi^ation; and not only that but to depart into another way, a habit of
Actions, contrary to our former Sins. And then, all this is pressed, and urged
upon us, by a Reason; The Holy Ghost appears not like a ghost in one sudden
glance, or glimmering, but he testifies his presence, and he presses the
business, that he comes for; And the reason that he uses here, is, Quia non
requies, because otherwise we lose the Pondus animae, the weight, the ballast
of our soul, rest, and peace of Conscience: for how^ever there may be some
rest, some such show of Rest, as may serve a carnal man a little while, yet,
says our Text, it is not your Rest, it conduces not to that Rest, which God
has ordained for you, whom he would direct to a better Rest. That Rest, (your
Rest) is not here; not in that, which is spoken of here; not in your lying
still, you must rise from it; not in your standing still, you must depart from
it; your Rest is not here: but yet, since God sends us away, because our Rest
is not here, he does tacitly direct ^s thereby, where there is Rest; And that
will be the third acceptance of these words; to which we shall come anon.

For that then, which rises first; the increpation of our fall implied in the
word, Arise, Increpatio.
there is nothing, Bernard.
in which, that which is the mother of all virtues, discretion, is more tried,
then in the conveying, and imprinting profitably a rebuke, an increpation, a
knowledge, and sense of sin, in the conscience of another. The rebuke of sin,
is like the fishing of Whales; the Mark is great enough; one can scarce miss
hitting; but if there be not sea room and line enough, and a dexterity in
letting out that line, he that has fixed his harping Iron, in the Whale,
endangers himself, and his boat; God has made us fishers of Men; and when we
have struck a Whale, touched the conscience of any person, which thought
himself above rebuke, and increpation, it struggles, and strives, and as much
as it can, endeavors to draw fishers, and boat, the Man and his fortune into
contempt, and danger. But if God tie a sickness, or any other calamity, to the
end of the line, that will wind up this Whale again, to the boat, bring back
this rebellious sinner better advised, to the mouth of the Minister, for more
counsel, and to a better souplenesse, and inclinablenesse to conform
himself, to that which he shall after receive from him; only calamity makes
way for a rebuke to enter. There was such a tenderness, amongst the orators,
which were used to speak in the presence of the people, to the Roman
Emperors, (which was a way of Civil preaching) that they durst not tell them
then their duties, nor instruct them, what they should do, any other way then
by saying, that they had done so before; They had no way to make the Prince
wise, and just, and temperate, but by a false praising him, for his former acts
of wisdom, and justice, and temperance, which he had never done; and that
served to make the people believe, that the Princes were so; and it served to
teach the Prince, that he ought to be so. And so, though this were an express,
and a direct flattery, yet it was a collateral increpation too; And on the
other side, our later times have seen, another art, another invention, another
workmanship, that when a great person has so abused the favor of his Prince,
that he has grown subject to great, and weighty increpations, his own
friends have made Libells against him, thereby to lay some light aspersions
upon him, that the Prince might think, that this coming with the malice of a
Libell, was the worst that could be said of him: and so, as the first way to
the Emperors, though it were a direct flattery, yet it was a collater all
Increpation too, so this way, though it were a direct increpation, yet it was a
collater all flattery too. If I should say of such a congregation as this, with
acclamations and shows of much joy, Blessed company, holy congregation, in
which there is no pride at all, no vanity at all, no prevarication at all, I
could be thought in that, but to convey an increpation, and a rebuke mannerly,
in a wish that it were so altogether. If I should say of such a congregation as
this, with exclamations and show of much bitterness, that they were sometimes
somewhat too worldly in their own business, sometimes somewhat too remiss,
in the businesses of the next world, and add no more to it, this were but as a
plot, and a faint libelling, a publishing of small sins to keep greater from
being talked of: slight increpations are but as whisperings, and work no
farther, but to bring men to say, Tush, no body hears it, no body heeds it, we
are never the worse, nor never the worse thought of for all that he says. And
loud and bitter increpations, are as a trumpet, and work no otherwise, but to
bring them to say, Since he has published all to the world already, since all
the world knows of it, the shame is past, and we may go forward in our ways
again: Is there then no way to convey an increpation profitably? David could
find no way; Vidi praevaricatores and tabescebam, says he, I saw the
transgressors, Psalm. 119. 158.
but I languished and consumed away with grief, because they would not keep
the law; he could not mend them, and so impaired himself with his compassion:
but God has provided a way here, to convey, to imprint this increpation, this
rebuke, sweetly, and succesfully; that is, by way of counsel: by bidding them
arise, he chides them them for falling, by presenting the exaltation and
exultation of a peaceful conscience, he brings them to a foresight, to what
miserable distractions, and distortions of the soul, a habit of sin will
bring them to. If you will take knowledge of Gods fearful judgments no other
way, but by hearing his mercies preached, his Mercy is new every morning, and
his dew falls every evening; and morning, and evening we will preach his
mercies unto you. If you will believe a hell no other way, but by hearing the
joys of heaven presented to you, you shall hear enough of that; we will
receive you in the morning, and dismiss you in the evening, in a religious
assurance, in a present inchoation of the joys of heaven. It is Gods way, and
we are willing to pursue it; to show you that you are Enemies to Christ, we
pray you in Christ's stead, that you would be reconciled to him: to show you,
that you are fallen, we pray you to arise, and si audieritis, if you hear us so,
if any way, any means, convey this rebuke, Mat. 18. 15.
this sense into you, Si audieritis, lucrati sumus fratrem, If you hear, we
have gained a brother; and that is the richest gain, that we can get, if you may
get salvation by us.

Gods rebukes and increpations then are sweet, and gentle, to the binding up,
not to the scattering of a Conscience; And the particular Rebuke in this place,
conveyed by way of counsel, is, That they were fallen; and worse could not be
said, how mild, Dejectio.
and easy soever the word be. The ruin of the Angels in heaven, the ruin of
Adam in Paradise, is still called by that word, it is but the fall of Angels,
and the fall of Adam; and yet this fall of Adam cost the blood of Christ, and
this blood of Christ, did not rectify the Angels after their fall. Inter
objectos, objectissimus peccator; Chrysostom.
amongst them that are fallen, he falls lowest, that continues in sin: for (says
the same Father,) Man is a king in his Creation; he has that Commission,
Subjicite, and dominamini; Idem.
the world, and himself, (which is a less world, but a greater dominion) are
within his Jurisdiction; and then servilly, he submits himself, and all, to
that, Qua nihil magis barbarum, then which nothing is more tyrannous, more
barbarous. All persons have naturally, all Nations ever had, a detestation of
falling into their hands who were more barbarous, more uncivil then
themselves, and peccato nihil magis barbarum; (says that Father) sin does not
govern us by a rule, by a Law, but tyrannically, impetuously, and
tempestuously; It has been said of Rome, Romae regulariter male agitur; There
a man may know the price of a sin, before he do it; and he knows what his
dispensation will cost; whether he be able to sin at that rate, whether he have
wherewithal, that if not, he may take a cheap sin. Thou can never say that
of thy soul, Intus regulariter male agitur; Thou can never promise thy self
to sin safely, and so to elude the Law, for the Law is in thy heart; nor to sin
wisely, and so to escape witnesses, for the testimony is in thy Conscience; nor
to sin providently, and thriftily, and cheaply, and compound for the penalty,
and stall the fine, for thy soul, that is the price, is indivisible, and
perishes entirely, and eternally at one payment, and yet ten thousand thousand
times over and over. Thou can not say: Thou will sin, that sin, and no more;
or so far in that sin, and no farther; If thou fall from an high place, thou
may fall through thick clouds, and through moist clouds, but yet through
nothing that can sustain thee, but thou fall'st to the earth; If thou fall from
the grace of God, thou may pass through dark Clouds, oppression of heart,
and through moist Clouds, some compunction, some remorsefull tears; but yet,
(of thy self) thou have nothing to take hold of, till thou come to that
bottom, which will embrace thee cruelly, to the bottomless bottom of Hell it
self. Our dignity, and our greatest height, is in our interest in God, and in
the world, and in our selves; and we fall from all, either non utend^, or
abutendo; either by neglecting God, or by over-valuing the world; our greatest
^all of all is, into Idolatry; and yet Idolatry is an ordinary fall; Hieron:
for tot habemus Deas recentes, quot habemus vitia, As many habitual sins as
we embrace, so many Idols we worship; If all sins could not be called so,
Idols, yet for those sins, which possess us most ordinarily, and most
strongly, we have good warrant to call them so; which sins are Licentiousness
in our youth, and Cov^tousnesse in our age, and voluptuousness in our middle
time. For, for Licentiousness, Idolatry, and that, are so often called by one
another names in the Scriptures, as many times we cannot tell, when the
Propehts mean spiritual Adultery, and when Carnal; when they mean Idolatry,
and when Fornication. For Covetousness, that is expressly called Idolatry by
the Apostle: and so is voluptuousness too, in those men, whose belly is their
God. We fall then into that desperate precipitation of Idolatry, by (...), when
by fornication, we profane the temple of the Holy Ghost, and make even his
temple, our bodies, a Stews: And we fall into Idolatry by Covetousness, when
we come to be, tam putidi minutique animi, Basil.
of so narrow, and contracted a soul; and of so sick, and dead, and buried,
and putrefied a soul, as to lock up our soul, in a Cabinet where we lock up
our money, to ty our soul in the corner of a handkerchiefe, where we ty our
money, to imprison our soul, in the imprisonment of those things, Quae te ad
gloriam ^^bvectur^e, the dispensation, Idem.
and distribution whereof, would carry thy soul to eternal glory. And when by
our voluptuousness, we raise the prices of necessary things, Et eorum vulnera,
qui a Deo flagris caeduntur, adangemus; and thereby scourge them with deeper
lashes of famine, whom God has scourged with poverty before, we fall into
Idolatry by voluptuousness; Numismatis inscriptiones inspicuis, and non
Christi in sratre, thou take a pleasure, Idem.
to look upon the figures, and Images of Kings in their several coyns; and
thou despisest thine own Image in thy poor brother, and Gods Image in thy
ruinous, and defaced soul, and in his Temple, thy body, demolished by thy
Licentiousness, and by all these Idolatries. This is the fall, when we fall so
far into those sins, which have naturally a tyranny in them, and that that
sin becomes an Idol to us; which fall of ours, God intimates unto us, and
rebukes us for, by so mild a way, as to bid us rise from it.

Now when God bids us rise, as the Apostle says, Be not deceived, Gal. 6. 7.
Non irridetur Deus, God cannot be mocked by any man, so we may boldly say, Be
not afraid, Non irridet Deus; God mocks no man; God comes not to a miserable
bedrid man, as a man would come in scorn to a prisoner, and bid him shake off
his fetters, or to a man in a Consumption, and bid him grow strong; when God
bids us arise, he tells us, we are able to rise; God bad Moses go to Pharaoh;
Moses said he was Incircumcisus labiis, Exodus 4. 10.
heavy, and slow of tongue; but he did not deny, but he had a tongue: God bade
him go, and I will be with thy mouth, says he; He does not say, I will be thy
mouth; but, thou have a mouth, and I will be with thy Mouth. It was Gods
presence, that made that mouth serviceable, and useful, but it was Moses
mouth; Moses had a mouth of his own; we have faculties, and powers of our own,
to be employed in Gods service. So when God employed Jeremy, the Prophet says,
O Lord God, behold, Ier. 1. 6.
I cannot speak, for I am a child; but God replies, say not thou, I am a child;
for whatsoever I command thee, thou shall speak: When God bids thee rise from
thy sin, say not thou it is too late, or that thou art bedrid in the custom of
thy sin, and so can not rise; when he bids thee rise, he enables thee to
rise; and thou may rise, by the power of that will which only his mercy, and
his grace, has created in thee; for as God conveyes a rebuke in that
counsel, Surgite, arise, so he conveyes a power in it too; when he bids thee
rise, he enables thee to rise.

That which we are to do then, is to rise; to leave our bed, our sleep of Sin.
Surgite.
Saint Augustine takes knowledge of three ways, Aug.
by which he escaped sins; first, occasionis substractione; and that is the
safest way, not to come within distance of a tentation; secondly, resistendi
data virtute, That the love, and the fear of God, imprinted in him, made him
strong enough for the sin; Can I love God, and love this person thus? thus,
that my love to it, should draw away my love from God? Can I fear God, and
fear any Man, (who can have power but over my body) so, as for fear of him, to
renounce my God, or the truth, or my Religion? Or affectionis sanitate, that
his affections, had, by a good diet, by a continual feeding upon the
Contemplation of God, such a degree of health, and good temper, as that some
sins he did naturally detest, and, though he had not wanted opportunity, and
had wanted particular grace, yet he had been safe enough from them. But, for
this help, this detestation, of some particular sins, that will not hold out;
We have seen men infinitely prodigal grow infinitely Covetous at last. For the
other way, (the assistance of particular grace) that we must not presume upon;
for, he that opens himself to a tentation, upon presumption of grace to
preserve him, forfaits by that, even that grace, which he had. And therefore
there is no safe way, but occasionis substractio, the forbearing of those
places, and that Conversation, which ministers occasion of tentation to us.
First therefore, let us find, that we are in our bed, that we are naturally
unable to rise; We are not born Noble: 2 Timothy 1. 3.
Saint Paul considers himself, and his birth, and his Title to grace, at best;
That he was a Jew, and of the Tribe of Benjamin, and of holy parents, and
within the Covenant; yet all this raised him not out of his bed, for, says he,
Ephesians. 2. 3.
we were by nature the Children of wrath, as well as others. But where then was
the rising? that is, in the true receiving of Christ. To as many as received
him, he gave, Potestatem praerogativae, Ioh. 1. 12.
to be the sons of God; yea, power to become the sons of God, as it is in our
last Translation. Christianus non de Christiano nascitur, nec facit generatio,
sed regeneratio Christianum; Tertullian.
A Christian Mother does not conceive a Christian; only the Christian Church
conceives Christian Children. Iudaeus circumcisus generat filium incircumcisum,
Aug.
A Jew is circumcised, but his child is born uncircumcised: The Parents may be
up, and ready, but their issue abed, and in their blood, till Baptism have
washed them, and till the spirit of Regeneration have raised them, from that
bed, which the sins of their first Parents have laid them in, and their own
continuing sins continued them in. This rising is first, from Original sin, by
baptism, and then from actual sin, best, by withdrawing from the occasions of
tentation to future sins, after repentance of former.

But it is not, Arise, and stand still: But Surgite, and ite, arise, and
depart; Ite.
But whither? Into actions, contrary to those sinful actions, and habits
contrary to those habits. Let him that is righteous, be righteous still, and
him that is holy, be holy still; Apoc. 22. 11, 12
and that cannot be, without this; for it is but a small degree of
Convalescence, and reparation of health, to be able to rise out of our bed, to
be able to forbear sin: Qui febri laborat, post morbum infirmior est; though
the fever be off, we are weak after it; though we have left a sin, there is
a weakness upon us, that makes us reel, and lean toward that bed, at every
turn; decline toward that sin, upon every occasion. And therefore according
to that example, and pattern, of Gods proceeding at the creation, who first
made all, and then digested, and then perfected them; Ambros.
Primo faciamus, deinde venustemus, says Saint Ambrose; first let us make us up
a good body, a good habitude, a good constitution, by leaving our beds, our
occasions of tentations; and then venustemus, let us dress our selves, adorn
our selves, yea, arm our selves, with the whole armor of God, which is faith
in Christ Jesus, and a holy and sanctified conversation. Memento peregisse te
aliquid, restare aliquid: Remember, Augusti.
(and do not deceive thy self, to remember that, which was never done) but
remember truly, that thou have done something, toward making sure thy
salvation already, and that thou have much more to do; Divertisse te ad
Refectionem, non ad defectionem, that God has given thee a bayting place, a
resting place; peace in conscience, for all thy past sins, in thy present
repentance; but it is, to refresh thy self with that peace; it is not to take
new courage, and strength to sin again. Let not the ease which thou have
found in the remission of sins now embolden thee to commit them again; not
to trust to that strength which thou have already recovered; but arise and
depart; avoid old tentations, and apply thy self to a new course in the world,
and in a calling; for there may be as much sin, to leave the world, as to
cleave to the world: and he may be as inexcusable at the last day, that has
done Nothing in the world, as he that has done some ill.

Now, we noted it to be a particular degree of Gods mercy, that he insisted
upon it, Quia.
that he pressed it, that he urged it with a reason; do thus, says God, for,
it stands thus with you. It is always a boldness, to ask a reason of those
decrees of God, which were founded, and established only in his own gracious
will, and pleasure; In those cases, Exitiales vaculae, our and quomodo; to
ask, why God elected some, Luther.
and how it can consist with his goodness, to leave out others there the how,
and why are dangerous, and deadly Monosyllables. But of Gods particular
purposes upon us, and revealed to us, which are so to be wrought and executed
upon us, as that we our selves have a fellow-working, and cooperation with
God, of those, it becomes us to ask, and to know the reason. When the Angel
Gabriel promised such unexpected blessings to Zachary, Zachary asks, whereby
shall I know this? Luke 1. 18.
and the Angel does not leave him unsatisfied. When that Angel promises a
greater miracle to the blessed Virgin Mary, she says also, Quomodo, how shall
this be? and the Angel settles, and establishes the assurance in her:
Whatsoever we are bid to believe, whatsoever we are bid to do, God affords us
a reason for it, and we may try it by reason, but because that sinner, whom in
this text, he speaks to, to arise and depart, is likely to stand upon false
reasons, against his rising, to murmur, and ask Cur or quomodo, why should I
arise, since me thinks I lie at my ease, how shall I arise, that am already at
the top of my wishes? God who is loath to lose any soul, that he undertakes,
follows him with this reason. Quia non requies, Arise, and depart, for here is
not your rest.

Now this rest, is in it self, so grateful, so acceptable a thing, Requies.
as all the service, which David, and Solomon, could express toward God, in
the dedication of the Temple, (which was then in intention, and project) is
described in that phrase, Psalm. 132. 8.
Arise O Lord, and come into thy rest, thou and the Arc of thy strength; God
himself has a Sabbath, in our Sabbaths; It is welcome to God, and it is so
welcome to Man, as that Saint Augustine preaching upon those words, Augusti.
Qui posuit fines tuos pacem, He maneth peace in thy borders, Psalm. 147. 14.
(as we translate it) he observed such a passion, such an alteration in his
auditory, as that he took knowledge of it in his Sermon; Nihil dixeram, nihil
exposuerans, verbum pronunciavi and exclamastis, says he; I have entered into no
part of my text; I have scarce read my text; I did but name the word, Rest, and
Peace of conscience, and you are all transported, affected, with an exultation,
with an acclamation, in the hunger, and ambition of it; That, that the
natural, that, that the supernatural Man affects, is Rest; Inquire pacem, and
persequere eam; Psalm. 36.
it is not only seque^t, but persequere; seek peace and ensue it; follow this
rest, this peace so, as if it fly from you, if any interruption, any heaviness
of heart, any warfare of this world, come between you, and it, yet you never
give over the pursuit of it, till you overtake it. Persquere, follow it, but
first Inquire, says David, seek after it, find where it is, for here is not
your rest.

Vnaqu^que res in sua patria fortior; If a Star were upon the Earth, Non hic.
it would give no light; If a tree were in the Sea, Chrysostom.
it would give no fruit; every tree is fastest rooted, and produces the best
fruit, in the soil, that is proper for it. Heb. 13. 14.
Now, here we have no continuing City, but we seek one; when we find that, we
shall find rest. Here how shall we hope for it? for our selves, Intus pugnae,
foris timores; 2 cor. 7. 5.
we feel a war of concupiscencies within, aand we fear a battery of
tentations without: Si dissentiunt in domo uxor and maritus: pericul^sa
molestia, says Saint Augustine; If the Husband, and wife agree not at home, it
is a troublesome danger; and that is every man's case; Augusti.
for Care conjux, our flesh is the wife, and the spirit is the husband, and
they two will never agree. But si dominetur uxor, perversa pax, says he, and
that is a more ordinary case, then we are aware of, that the wife has got the
Mastery, that the weaker vessel, the flesh, has got the victory; and then,
there is a show of peace, but it is a stupidity, a security, it is not peace.
Let us depart out of our selves, and look upon that, in which most ordinarily
we place an opinion of rest, upon worldly riches; They that will be rich, fall
into tentations, and snares, and into many foolish, and noisome lusts, 1 Timothy
6. 9.
which drown Men in perdition, and in destruction, for the desire of money is
the root of evil; Not the having of Money, but the desire of it; for it is
Theophylacts observation, Theophyl.
that the Apostle does not say this, of them that are rich, but of them, that
will be made rich; that set their heart upon the desire of riches, and will be
rich, what way soever. As the Partridge gathers the young, which she has not
brought forth, Ier. 17. 11.
so he that gathers riches, and not by right, shall leave them in the midst
of his days, and at his end shall be a fool; (he shall not make a wise will)
But shall his folly end, at his end, or the punishment of his folly? We see
what a restless fool he is, all the way; first, because he wants room, he
says, he will pull down his barnes, and build new; Luke 12. 10.
(thus far there is no rest; in the Diruit, and adificat, in pulling down,
and building up;) Then he says to his soul, live at ease; he says it, but he
gives no ease; he says it as he shall say to the Hills, fall down, and cover
us^ but they shall stand still; and his soul shall hear God say, whilst he
promises himself this case, O fool, this night, they shall fetch away thy
soul; God does not only not tell him, who shall have his riches, but he does
not tell him, who shall have his soul. He leaves him no affurance, no ease, no
peace, no rest, Here.

This rest is not then in these things; not in their use; Vestra.
for they are got with labor, and held with fear; and these, labor and fear,
admit no rest; not in their nature; for they are fluid, and transitory, and
moveable, and these are not attributes of rest. If that word do not reach to
Land, (the land is not movable,) yet it reaches to thee; when thou make thine
Inventory, put thy self amongst the movables, for thou must remove from it,
though it remove not from thee. So that, what rest foever may be imagined in
these things, it is not your rest, for howsoever the things may seem to rest,
yet you do not. It is not here at all: not in that Here, which is intimated in
this Text; not in the falling, that is Here; for sin is a stupidity, it is
not a rest; not in the rising that is Here, for this remorse, this repentance,
is but as a surveying of a convenient ground, or an emptying of an inconvenient
ground, to erect a building upon; not in the departing that is here, for in
that, is intimated a building of new habits, upon the ground so prepared, and
so a continual, and laborious travail, no rest; falling, and rising, and
departing, and surveying, and building, are no words of rest, for give these
words their spiritual sense, that this sense of our fall, (which is remorse
after sin) this rising from it, (which is repentance after sin) this
departing into a safer station, (which is the building of habits contrary to
the former) do bring an ease to the conscience, (as it does that powerfully,
and plentifully) yet, as when we journey by Coach, we have an ease in the way,
but yet our rest is at home, so in the ways of a regenerate Man, there is an
unexpressible ease, and consolation here, but yet even this is not your rest;
for, as the Apostle says, If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet doubtless I
am unto you, so what rest soever others may propose unto themseleves, for you,
whose conver sation is in heaven, (for this world to the righteous is Atrium
templi, and heaven is that Temple it self, the Militant Church, is the porch,
the Triumphant, is the Sanctum Sanctorum, this Church and that Church are all
under one roof, Christ Jesus) for you, who appertain to this Church, your
rests is in heaven; And that consideration brings us to the last of the three
interpretations of these words.

The first was a Commination, a departing without any Rest, proposed to the
Jews: 3. Part.
The second was a Commonition, a departing into the way toward Rest, proposed
to repentant sinners; And this third is a Consolation, a departing into Rest it
self, proposed to us, that believe a Resurrection. It is a consolation, and
yet it is a funeral; for to present this eternal Rest, we must a little
invert the words, to the departing out of this world, by death, and so to arise
to Judgment; Depart, and arise; for, etc.

This departing then, is our last Exodus, our last passover, our last
transmigration, Depart.
our departing out of this life. And then, the Consolation is placed in this,
that we are willing, and ready for this departing; Chrysostom.
Qua gratia breve nobis tempus praescripsit Deus? How mercifully has God
proceeded with Man, in making his life short? for by that means he murmurs the
less at the miseries of this life, and he is the less transported upon the
pleasures of this life, because the end of both is short. It is a weakness,
says Saint Ambrose, to complain, De immaturitate mortis, of dying before our
time; Ambr.
for we were ripe for death at our birth; we were born mellow: Idem.
Secundum aliquem modum, immortalis dici posset homo, si esset tempus intra
quod mori non posset, is excellently said by the same Father; If there were any
one minute in a man's life, in which he were safe from death, a man might in
some sort be said to be immortal, for that minute; but Man is never so;
Nunquam ei vicinius est, posse vivere, quam posse mori: Idem.
That proposition is never truer, This man may live to morrow, then this
proposition is, This man may die this minute. Though then shortness of life be
a malediction to the wicked, (The bloody and deceitful men shall not live
half their days) there is the sentence, Psalm. 55. 23.
the Judgment, Job 22. 16.
the Rule, (And they were cut down before their time) there is the execution,
the example, God has threatened, God has inflicted, shortness of days to the
wicked, yet the Curse consists in their indisposition, in their over-loving of
this world, in their terrors concerning the next world, and not merely in the
shortness of life; for this Ite, depart out of this world, is part of the
Consolation. I have a Reversion upon my friend, and (though I wish it not) yet
I am glad, if he die; Men that have inheritances after their fathers, are glad
when they dye; though not glad that they die, yet glad when they die: I have a
greater, after the death of this body, and shall I be loath to come to that?
Yet, it is not so a Consolation, as that we should by any means, be occasions
to hasten our own death; Aug.
Multi Innocents ab aliis occiduntur, a seipso nemo; Many men get by the
malice of others, if thereby, they die the sooner; for they are the sooner at
home, and die innocently: but no man dies innocently, that dies by his own hand,
or by his own have. We may not do it, never; we may not wish it, always, nor
easily. Before a perfect Reconciliation with God, it is dangerous to wish
death. David apprehended it so, Psalm. 102. 24.
I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days. In an over tender
sense, and impatience of our own Calamities, it is dangerous to desire death
too. Very holy men have transgressed on that hand: Elias in his persecution
came inconsiderately to desire that he might die; 1 Reg. 14. 4.
It is enough, o Lord, take away my soul; He would tell God how much was
enough. Job 7. 15.
And so says Job, My soul chooses rather to be strangled and to die, then to
be in my bones; He must have that that his soul chooses. But to omit many cases
wherein it is not good, nor safe to wish Death, certainly, when it is done
primarily in respect of God, for his glory, and then, for the respect which is
of our selves, it is only to enjoy the sight, and union of God, and that also
with a Conditional submission to his will, and a tacit, and humble
reservation of all his purposes, we may think David's thought, and speak
David's words, Psalm. 42. 2.
My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God, Phil. 1.
when shall I come, and appear before the presence of my Living God? Saint
Paul had David's example for it, when he comes to his Cupio dissolvi, Aug.
to desire to be dissolved; And Saint Augustine had both their examples, when
he says so affectionately, Eia Domine videam, ut hic moriar, O my God, let me
see thee in this life, that I may die the death of the Righteous, die to sin;
and moriar ut te videam, let me die absolutely, that I may see thee essentially.
Here we may be in his Presence, we see his state; there we are in his
Bedchamber, Idem.
and see his eternal and glorious Rest. The Rule is good, given by the same
Father, Non injustum est justo optare mortem, A righteous man, may righteously
desire death^ Si Deus non dederit, injustum erit, non tolerare vitam
amarissimam, but if God affords not that ease, he must not refuse a laborious
life; So that, this departing, is not a going before we be called: Christ
himself stayed for his ascension, till he was taken up. But when these comes a
Lazare veni for as, that God calls us, from this putrefaction, which we think
life, let us be not only obedient, but glad to depart.

For without such an Ite, there is no such Surgite, as is intended here;
Surgite.
without this departing there is no good rising, without a joyful
Transmigration, no joyful Resurrection; He that is loath to depart, is afraid
to rise again; and he that is afraid of the Resurrection, had rather there
were none; and he that had rather there were none, a^t ^aecitate, aut
animos^tate, says S. Augustine, either he will make himself believe, that
there is none, or if he cannot overcome his Conscience so absolutely, he will
make the world believe, that he believes there is none: and truly to lose our
sense of the Resurrection, is as heavy a loss, as of any one point of
Religion; It is the knot of all, and has this privilege, above all, that
though those Joys of heaven, which we shall possess immediately after our
death, be infinite, yet even to these infinite Joys, the Resurrection given an
addition, and enlarges even that which was infinite. And therefore is Job so
passionately desirous, that this doctrine of the Resurrection, might be
imparted to all, imprinted in all; 19. 13.
Oh that my words more now written, Oh that they were written in a book; and
graven with an Iron pen in lead, and stone, for ever: what is all this, that
Job recommends with so much devotion to all? I am sure that my Redeemer lives,
and be shall stand the last on Earth, and though after my skin, worms destroy
this body, yet I shall see God in my flesh; whom I my self shall see; and mine
eyes shall behold, and none either for me. This doctrine of the Resurrection,
had Job, so vehement, and so early a care of. Neither could the malicious, and
pestilent inventions of man, no not of Satan himself, abolish this doctrine of
the Resurrection: Hiero. Ep. 13. ad Paulinum.
for, as Saint Hierome observes, from Adrian's time, to Constantin's, for 180
years, in the place of Christ's birth, they had set up an Idol, a statue of
Adonis: In the place of his Crucifying, they had set up an Idol of Venus; and
in the place of his Resurrection, they had erected a I^^p^ter: in opinion, that
these Idolatrous provisions of theirs, would have abolished the Mysteries of
our Religion; but they have outlived all them, and shall outlive all the world,
eternally beyond all Generations. Ambros.
And therefore does Saint Ambrose apply well, and usefully to our Death, and
Resurrection, to our departing, and rising, these words, Esa. 26. 20.
Come my people, enter then into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors after thee;
Hide thy self for a very little while, until the Indignation passover thee;
that is, Go quietly, to your graves, attend your Resurrection, till God have
executed his purpose upon the wicked of this world; Murmur not to admit the
dissolution of body, and soul, upon your deathbeds, nor the resolution, and
putrefaction of the body alone in your graves, till God be pleased to repair
all, in a full consummation, and reuniting of body and soul, in a blessed
Resurrection. Ite and Surgite, depart so, as you may desire to rise; Depart
with an In manus tuas, and with a Veni Domi^e Jesus; with a willing surrendering
of your souls, and a cheerful meeting of the Lord Jesus.

For else, all hope of profit, and permanent Rest is lost: Requies.
for, as Saint Hierome interprets these very words; Here we are taught that
there is no rest, in this life, Sed quasi^^ ^ mortuis resurgentes; ad sublime
tendere, and ambulare post Daminum Iesum; we depart Hier.
when we depart from sin, and we rise, when we raise our selves to a conformity
with Christ: And not only after his example, but after his person, that is, to
hasten thither, whither he is gone to prepare us a Room. For, this Rest, in the
Text, though it may be understood of the Land of Promise; and of the Church,
and of the Arc, and of the Sabbath, (for, if we had time to pursue them, we
might make good use of all these acceptations) yet we accept Chrysost^me's
acceptance best, Chrysostom.
Requies est ipse Christus, our rest is Christ himself. Not only that rest
that is in Christ, (peace of conscience in him) but that Rest, that Christ is
in; eternal rest in his kingdom, Heb. 4. 7.
There remains a Rest, to the people of God; besides that inchoation of Rest,
which the godly have here, there remains a fuller Rest. Jesus is entered into
his Rest, 10.
says the Apostle there; his Rest was not here, in this world; and, 11.
Let us study to enter into that^ Rest, says he; for no other can accomplish
our peace. 1 These. 1. 6
It is righteousness with God, is recompense tribulation to them, that trouble
you, and, to you, which are troubled, Rest; but, when? in this world? no: when
the Lord Jesus shall she^ himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels, then
comes your Rest; for, for the grave, the body lies still, but it is not a Rest,
because it is not sensible of that lying still; In heaven the body shall rest,
rest in the sense of that glory.

This Rest then is not here, Not only not Here, Non hic.
at this Here was taken in the first interpretation, Here in the Earth; but not
Here in the second interpretation, not in Repentance it self; for all the Rest
of this life, even the spiritual Rest, is rather a Truce, then a peace, rather
a Cessation, then an end of the war. For when these words, ( I will set the
Egyptians against the Egyptians, Every one shall fight against his brother,
Esa. 19. 2.
and every one against his neighbor, City against City, and Kingdom against
Kingdom) may be interpreted, and are so interpreted of the time of the Gospel
of Christ Jesus, when Christ himself says, Nolite putare quod venerim mittere
pacem in terra, Mat. 10. 34.
Never think that I came to settle peace, or Rest in this world; Nay, when
Christ says, None of them that were bidden shall come to his supper, Luke 14.
34.
and that may be verified of any Congregation, none of us that are called now,
shall come to that Rest, a Man may be at a security in an opinion of Rest, and
be far from it; A man may be nearer Rest in a troubled Conscience, then in a
secure.

Here we have often Resurrections, that is, purposes to depart from sin: but
they are such Resurrections, as were at the time of Christ's Resurrection: when
(as the strongest opinion is) Resurrexerunt iterum morituri, Many of the dead
rose, but they died again; we rise from our sins here, but here we fall again;
Monumenta aperta sunt; (it is Saint Hierome's note,) The graves were opened,
presently upon Christ's death; Hier.
but yet the bodies did not arise, Mat. 27.
till Christ's Resurrection: The godly have an opening of their graves, they see
some light, some of their weight, some of their Earth is taken from them, but a
Resurrection to enter into the City, to follow the Lamb, to come into an
established security, that they have not, till they be united to Christ in
heaven. Here we are still subject to relapses, and to looking back; Aug.
Memento uxoris Let, Ipsa in loco manet, transeuntes monet, She is fixed to a
place, that she might settle those, that are not fixed; Vt quid in statuam
salis conversa, si non homines, ut sapiant, condiat? to teach us the danger of
looking back, till we be fixed, she is fixed. When the Prophet^ Eliah^ was at
the door of Desperation, an Angel touched him, and said, 1 Reg. 19. 5.
Up, and eat: and there was bread, and water provided, and he did eat; but he
slept again; and we have some of these excitations, and we come, and eat, and
drink, even the body, and blood of Christ, but we sleep again, we do not
perfect the work. Our Rest Here then, is never without a fear of losing it:
This is our best state, Hebr. 4. 1
To fear le^t at any time, by forsaking the promise of entering into his rest,
we should seem to be deprived. The Apostle disputes not, (neither do I)
whether we can be deprived or no; but he assures us, that we may fall back so
far, as that to the Church, and to our own Consciences we may seem to be
deprived; and that is argument enough, that here is no Rest. To end all, Alicubi.
though there be no Rest in all this world, no not in our sanctification here,
yet this being a Consolation, there must be rest some where; And it is, Aug.
In superna Civitate, unde amicus non exit, qua inimicus non intrat, In that
City, in that Jerusalem, where there shall never enter any man, whom we do
not love, nor any go from us, whom we do love. Which, though we have not yet,
yet we shall have: for upon those words, (because I live, ye shall live also)
Saint Augustine says, John 14. 19.
that because his Resurrection was to follow so soon, Aug.
Christ takes the present word, because I do live. But because their life was
not to be had here, he says, Vivetis, you shall live, in heaven; not Vivitis;
for here, we do not live. So, 1 Cor. 35. 22.
as in Adam we all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive; says the
Apostle: All our deaths are here, present now; now we die; our quickening is
reserved for heaven, that is future. And therefore let us attend that Rest, as
patiently as we do the things of this world, and not doubt of it therefore,
because we see it not yet: even in this world we consider invisible things,
more then visible; Vidimus pelagus, non autem mercedem, Chrysostom
The Merchant sees the tempestuous Sea, when he does not see the commodities,
which he goes for: Videmus terram, non autem messem, The Husbandman sees the
Earth, and his labor, when he sees no harvest; and for these hopes, that there
will be a gain to the Merchant, and a harvest to the Labourer, Naturae fidimus,
we rely upon Creatures; for our Resurrection, fide us^orem habemus Coranatum;
Not Nature, not Sea, nor Land, is our surety, but our surety is one, who is
already crowned, with that Resurrection. Number in hominibus terrae legenera^,
quae omnia regenerat, says Saint Ambrose, will the earth, Ambr.
that gives a new life to all Creatures, fail in us, and hold us in an
everlasting winter, without a spring, and a Resurrection? Certainly no; but if
we be content so to depart into the womb of the Earth, our grave, as that we
know that, to be but the Entry into glory, as we depart contentedly, so we
shall arise gloriously, to that place, where our eternal Rest shall be, though
here there be not our Rest; for he that shoots an arrow at a mark, yet means to
put that arrow into his Quiver again; and God that glorifies himself, in
laying down our bodies in the grave, means also to glorify them, in
reaffirming them to himself, at the last day.

SERMON XI.
Preached at Lincolns Inn, preparing them to build their Chapel.
G^N. 28. 16, 17. Then Jacob aw^ke out of his sleep, and said, Surely the Lord
is in this place, and I was not aware. And he was afraid, and said, Now
fearful us this place! This is none other but the House of God, and this is
the gate of Heaven.
IN these verses Jacob is a Surveyor, he considers a fit place for the house of
God; and in the very next verse, he is a Builder, he erects Bethel, the house
of God it self. All was but a drowsinesse, but a sleep, till he came to this
Consideration; as soon as he awoke, he took knowledge of a fit place; as soon
as he found the place, he went about the work. But to that we shall not come
yet. But this Text, being a preparation for the building of a house to God,
though such a house as Jacob built then, require no contribution, yet because
such Churches, as we build now, do, we shall first say a little, of that great
virtue of Charity; and then somewhat of that virtue, as it is exercised by
advancing the house of God, and his outward worship; And thirdly we shall
consider Jacob's steps, and proceedings, in this action of his.

This virtue then, Charity, is it, that conducts its in this life, 1. Part.
and accompanies us in the next. In heaven, where we shall know God, there may
be no use of faith; Charitas.
In heaven, where we shall see God, there may be no use of hope; but in heaven,
where God the Father, and the Son, love one another in the Holy Ghost, the bond
of charity shall everlastingly unite us together. But Charitas in patria, and
Charitas in via, differ m this, That there we shall love one another because we
shall not need one another, for we shall all be full^ Here the exercise of our
charity is, because we do stand in need of one another. Dives and pauper duo
sunt sibi contraria; sed iterum duo sunt sibi necessaria; August.
Rich, and poor are contrary to one another, but yet both necessary to one
another; They are both necessary to one another; but the poor man is the more
necessary; because though one man might be rich, though no man were poor, yet
he could have no exercise of his charity, he could send none of his riches to
heaven, to help him there, except there were some poor here.

He that is too fat, would fain divest some of that, though he could give that
to no other man, that lacked it; And shall not he that is wantonly pampered,
nay, who is heavily laden, and encombred with temporal abundances, be content
to discharge himself of some of that, wherewith he is over-straighted, upon
those poor souls, whom God has not made poor for any sin of theirs, or of
their fathers, but only to present rich men exercise of their charity, and
occasions of testifying their love to Christ; who having given himself, to
convey salvation upon thee, if that conveyance may be sealed to thee, by giving
a little of thine own, is it not an easy purchase? When a poor wretch beggs
of thee, and thou give, thou do but justice, it is his. But when he begs of
God for thee, and God gives thee, this is mercy; this was none of thine.

When we shall come to our Read rationem villicationis, to give an account of
our Stewardship, when we shall not measure our inheritance by Acres, but all
heaven shall be ours, and we shall follow the Lamb, wheresoever he goes, when
our estate, and term shall not be limited by years, and lives, but, as we shall
be in the presence of the Ancient of days, so our days shall be so far equal
to his, as that they shall be without end; Then will our great Merchants, great
practisers, great purchasers, great Contracters, find another language, another
style, then they have been accustomed to, here. There no man shall be called a
prodigal, but only the Covetous man; Only he that has been too diligent a
keeper, shall appear to have been an unthrift, and to have wasted his best
treasure, the price of the blood of Christ Iesue, his own soul. There no man
shall be called good security, but he that has made sure his salvation. No man
shall be called a Subsidy man, but he that has relieved Christ Jesus; in his
sick, and hungry Members. No man shall be called a wise Steward, but he that
has made friends of the wicked Mammon; Nor provident Merchant, but he that
sold all to buy the pearl; Nor a great officer, but he that desires to be a
dore-keeper in the kingdom of Heaven.

Now, every man has a key to this door of heaven. Every man has some means to
open it; every man has an oil to anoint this key, and make it turn easily; he
may go with more case to Heaven, then he does to Hell. Every man has some
means to pour this oil of gladness and comfort into another heart; No man
can say, Quid retribuam tibi Domine; Lord what have I to give thee? for every
man has something to give God: Money, or labor, or counsel, or prayers. Every
man can give, and he gives to God, who gives to them that need it, for his
sake. Come not to that expostulation, When did we see thee hungry, or sick, or
imprisoned, and did not minister? Nor to that, Quid retribuam, What can I give,
that lack my self: lest God come also to that silence, and weariness of
asking at thy hands, to say, as he says in the Psalm, If I be hungry, I will
not tell thee; That though he have given thee abundance, though he lack
himself in his children, yet he will not tell thee, he will not ask at thy
hands, he will not enlighten thine understanding, he will not awaken thy
charity, he will not give thee any occasion of doing good, with that which he
has given thee.

But God has given thee a key: yea as he says to the Church of Philadelphia,
Revel. 3. 8.
Behold I set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it. Thou have a
gate into Heaven in thy self; If thou be not sensible of others men's
poverties, and distresses, yet Miserere animae tuae, have mercy on thine own
soul; thou have a poor guest, an Inmate, a sojourner, within these mudwals,
this corrupt body of thine; be merciful and compassionate to that Soul;
cloth that Soul, which is stripped and left naked, of all her original
righteousness; feed that Soul, which thou have starved; purge that Soul,
which thou have infected; warm, and thaw that Soul; which thou have frozen with
indevotion; cool, and quench that Soul which thou have inflamed with
licentiousness; Miserere animae tuae, begin with thine own Soul; be charitable
to thy self first, and thou will remember, that God has made of one blood, all
Mankind, and thou will find out thy self, in every other poor Man, and thou will find Christ Jesus himself in them all.

Now of those diverse gates, which God opens in this life, 2. Part.
those diverse exercises of charity, the particular which we are occasioned to
speak of here, is not the clothing, nor feeding of Christ, but the housing of
him, The providing Christ a house, a dwelling; whether this were the very
place, where Solomon's Temple was after built, is perplexedly, and perchance,
impertinently controverted by many; but howsoever, here was the house of God,
and here was the gate of Heaven. It is true, God may be devoutly worshipped any
where; Ubique.
In omni loco dominationis ejus benedic anima mea Domino; In all places of his
dominion, my Soul shall praise the Lord, says David. It is not only a
concurring of men, a meeting of so many bodies that makes a Church; If thy
soul, and body be met together, an humble preparation of the mind, and a
reverent disposition of the body, if thy knees be bent to the earth, thy hands
and eyes lifted up to heaven, if thy tongue pray, and praise, and thine ears
hearken to his answer, if all thy senses, and powers, and faculties, be met
with one unanime purpose to worship thy God, thou art, to this intendment, a
Church, thou art a Congregation, here are two or three met together in his
name, and he is in the midst of them, though thou be alone in thy chamber. The
Church of God should be built upon a Rock, and yet Job had his Church upon a
Dunghill; The bed is a scene, and an emblem of wantonness, and yet Hezekiah
had his Church in his Bed; The Church is to be placed upon the top of a Hill,
and yet the Prophet Jeremy had his Church in Luto, in a miry Dungeon;
Constancy, and setlednesse belongs to the Church, and yet Jonah had his Church
in the Whales belly; The Lion that roares, and seeks whom he may devour, is an
enemy to this Church, and yet Daniel had his Church in the Lions den; Aquae
quietudinum, the waters of rest in the Psalm, were a figure of the Church, and
yet the three children had their Church in the fiery furnace; Liberty and life
appertain to the Church, and yet Peter, and Paul had their Church in prison,
and the thief had his Church upon the Cross. Every particular man is himself
Templum Spiritus sancti, a Temple of the holy Ghost; yea, Solvite templum hoc,
destroy this body by death, and corruption in the grave, John 10.
yet there shall be Festum encaeniorum, a renewing, a reedifying of all those
Temples, in the general Resurrection: when we shall rise again, not only as
so many Christians, but as so many Christian Churches, to glorify the Apostle,
and High Priest of our profession, Heb. 3. 1.
Christ Jesus, in that eternal Sabbath. In omni loco domi^ationis ejus, Every
person, every place is fit to glorify God in.

God is not tied to any place; not by essence; Implet and continendo implet, In
templo. Augustine.
God fills every place, and fills it by containing that place in himself; but
he is tied by his promise to a manifestation of himself, by working in some
certain places. Though God were long before he required, or admitted a
sumptuous Temple, (for Solomon's Temple was not built, in almost five hundred
years after their return out of Egypt) though God were content to accept their
worship, and their sacrifices, at the Tabernacle, (which was a transitory, and
moveable Temple) yet at last he was so careful of his house, as that himself
gave the model, and platform of it; and when it was built, and after repaired
again, he was so jealous of appropriating, and confining all his solemn
worship to that particular place, as that he permitted that long schism, and
dissension, between the Samaritans, and the Jews, only about the place of the
worship of God; They differed not in other things: but whether in Mount Sion,
or in Mount Garizim. And the feast of the dedication of this Temple, which was
yearly celebrated, received so much honor, as that Christ himself vouchsafed
to be personally present at that solemnity; though it were a feast of the
institution of the Church, and not of God immediately, as their other festivalls
were, yet Christ forbore not to observe it, upon that pretense, that it was but
the Church that had appointed it to be observed. So that, as in all times, God
had manifested, and exhibited himself in some particular places, more then
other, (in the Pillar in the wilderness, and in the Tabernacle, and in the
poole, which the Angel troubled) so did Christ himself, by his own presence,
ceremoniously, justify, and authorize this dedication of places consecrated to
Gods outward worship, not only once, but anniversarily by a yearly celebration
thereof.

To descend from this great Temple at Jerusalem, Synagogue.
to which God had annexed his solemn, and public worship, the lesser
Synagogues, and Chappells of the Jews, in other places, were ever esteemed
great testimonies of the sanctity and piety of the founders, for Christ accepts
of that reason which was presented to him, Luke 7. 4.
in the behalf of the Centurion, He is worthy that thou should do this for
him, for he loves our Nation; And how has he testified it? He has built us a
Synagogue. He was but a stranger to them, and yet he furthered, and advanced
the service of God amongst them, of whose body he was no member. This was that
Centurions commendation; Ambros.
Et quanto commedatior qui adificat Ecclesiam, How much more commendation
deserve they, that build a Church for Christian service? And therefore the
first Christians made so much haste to the expressing of their devotion, that
even in the Apostles time, for all their poverty, and persecution, they were
come to have Churches: as most of the Fathers, and some of our later
Expositors, understand these words, (Have ye not houses to eat and drink, or
do ye despise the Church of God?) to be spoken, 1 Cor.
not of the Church as it is a Congregation, but of the Church as it is a
Material building. Abdias Anaclet. Durant. d^it l. 1. c. l.
Yea, if we may believe some authors, that are pretended to be very ancient,
there was one Church dedicated to the memory of Saint John, and another by
Saint Mark, to the memory of Saint Peter, whilst yet both Saint John, and
Saint Peter were alive. Howsoever, it is certain, that the purest and most
innocent times, even the infancy of the Primitive Church, found this double way
of expressing their devotion, in this particular of building Churches, first
that they built them only to the honor, and glory of God, without giving him
any partner, and then they built them for the conserving of the memory of those
blessed servants of God, who had sealed their profession with their blood, and
at whose Tombs, God had done such Miracles, as these times needed, for the
propagation of his Church. They built their Churches principally for the glory
of God, but yet they added the names of some of his blessed servants and
Martyrs; L^o.
for so says he, (who as he was Peter's successor, so he is the most sensible
feeler, and most earnest, and powerful promover and expresser, of the
dignities of Saint Peter, of all the Fathers) speaking of Saint Peter's Church,
Beato Petri Basilica, quae uni Deo vero and vivo dicata est, Saint Peter's
Church is dedicated to the only living God; They are things compatible enough
to bear the name of a Saint, and yet to be dedicated to God. There the bodies
of the blessed Martyrs, did peacefully attend their glorification; There the
Histories of the Martyrs were recited and proposed to the Congregation, for
their example, and imitation; There the names of the Martyrs were inserted into
the public prayers, and liturgies, by way of presenting the thanks of the
Congregation to God, for having raised so profitable men in the Church; and
there the Church did present their prayers to God, for those Martyrs, that God
would hasten their glory, and final consummation, in reuniting their bodies,
and souls, in a joyful resurrection. But yet though this diverse mention were
made of the Saints of God, in the house of God, Non Martyrs ipsi, sed Deus
^orum, nobis est Deus, only God, Augustine.
and not those Martyrs, is our God; we and they serve all one Master; we dwell
all in one house; in which God has appointed us several services; Those who
have done their days work, God has given them their wages, and has given them
leave to go to bed; they have laid down their bodies in peace to sleep there,
till the Sun rise again; till the Sun of grace and glory, Christ Jesus,
appear in judgment; we that are yet left to work, and to watch, we must go
forward in the services of God in his house, with that moderation, and that
equality, as that we worship only our Master, but yet despise not our fellow
servants, that are gone before us: That we give to no person, the glory of God,
but that we give God the more glory, for having raised such servants: That we
acknowledge the Church to be the house only of God, and that we admit no
Saint, no Martyr, to be a lointenant with him; but yet that their memory may be
an encouragement, yea and a seal to us, that that peace, and glory, which they
possess, belongs also unto us in reversion, and that therefore we may
cheerfully gratulate their present happiness, by a devout commemoration of
them, with such a temper, and evennesse, as that we neither dishonor God, by
attributing to them, that which is inseparably his, nor dishonor them in taking
away that which is theirs, in removing their Names out of the Collects, and
prayers of the Church, or their Monuments, and memorialls out of the body of
the Church: for, those respects to them, the first Christian founders of
Churches did admit in those pure times, Damase.
when Illa obsequia, ornamenta memoriarum, n^n sacrificia mortuorum, when those
devotions in their names, were only commemorations of the dead, not sacrifices
to the dead, as they are made now in the Roman Church: when Bellarmine will
needs falsify Chrysostom, to read Adoramus monumenta, in stead of Adornamus;
and to make that which was but an Adorning, an adoring of the Tombs of the
Martyrs.

This then was in all times, a religious work, an acceptable testimony of
devotion, to build God a house; to contribute something to his outward glory.
The goodness, and greatness of which work, appears evidently, and shines
gloriously, even in those several names, by which the Church was called, and
styled, in the writings, and monuments of the Ancient Fathers, and the
Ecclesiastique story. It may serve to our edification (at least) and to the
axalting of our devotion, to consider some few of them: First then the Church
was called Ecclesia, that is, a company, a Congregation; Ecclesia.
That whereas from the time of John Baptist, the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and every violent Man, that is, every earnest, and zealous, and
spiritually valiant Man, may take hold of it, we may be much more sure of doing
so, in the Congregation, Tertul.
Quando ag^^ine fact^ Deum obsidemus, when in the whole body, we Muster our
forces, and besiege God. For, here in the congregation, not only the kingdom
of heaven, is fallen into our hands, The kingdom of heaven is amongst you, (as
Christ says) but the King of heaven is fallen into our hands; When two, or
three are gathered together in my Name, I will be in the midst of you; not
only in the midst of us, to encourage us, but in the midst of us, to be taken
by us, to be bound by us, by those hands, those covenants, those contracts,
those rich, and sweet promises, which he has made, and ratified unto us in his
Gospel.

A second name of the Church (...) in use, was Dominicum: Dominicum.
The Lords possession; It is absolutely, it is entirely his; And therefore, as
to shorten, and contract the possession and inheritance of God, the Church, so
much, as to confine the Church only within the obedience of Rome, (as the
Donatists imprisoned it in Afrique) or to change the Landmarks of Gods
possession, and inheritance, which is the Church; either to set up new works,
of outward prosperity, or of personal, and Local succession of Bishops, or to
remove the old, and true marks, which are the Word, and Sacraments, as this is
Injuria Dominico mystico, a wrong to the mystical body of Christ, the Church,
so is it Injuria Dominico materiali, an injury to the Material body of Christ
sacrilegiously to dilapidate, to despoile, or to demolish the possession of the
Church, and so far to remove the marks of Gods inheritance, as to mingle that
amongst your temporal revenues, that God may never have, nor ever distinguish
his own part again.

And then (to pass faster over these names) It is called Domus Dei, Domus.
Gods dwelling house. Now, his most glorious Creatures are but vehicula Dei;
they are but chariots, which convey God, and bring him to our sight; The
Tabernacle it self was but Mobilis domus, and Ecclesia portatilis, a house
without a foundation; a running, a progress house: but the Church is his
standing house; there are his offices fixed: there are his provisions, which
fat the Soul of Man, as with marrow and with fatness, his precious blood, and
body: there work his seals; there beats his Mint; there is absolution, and
pardon for past sins, there is grace for prevention of future in his
Sacraments. But the Church is not only Domus Dei, but Basilica; not only his
house, Basilica.
but his Court: he does not only dwell there, but reign there: which
multiplies the joy of his household servants: The Lord reigns, let all the
earth rejoice, yea let the multitude of the Islands be glad thereof. That the
Church was usually called Martyrium, that is, Martyrium.
a place of Confession, where we open our wounds and receive our remedy,
Oratorium.
That it was called Oratorium, where we might come, and ask necessary things
at Gods hands, all these teach us our several duties in that place, and they
add to their spiritual comfort, who have been Gods instruments, for providing
such places, as God may be glorified in, and the godly benefited in all these
ways.

But of all Names, which were then usually given to the Church, the name of
Temple seems to be most large, and significant, as they derive it a Tuendo; for
Tueri signifies both our beholding, and contemplating God in the Church: and it
signifies Gods protecting, and defending those that are his, in his Church:
Tueri embraces both; And therefore, though in the very beginning of the
Primitive Church, to depart from the custom, and language, and phrase of the
Jews, and Gentiles, as far as they could, they did much abstain from this
name of Temple, and of Priest, so that till Ireneus time, some hundred eighty
years after Christ, we shall not so often find those words, Temple, or Priest,
yet when that danger was overcome, when the Christian Church, and doctrine was
established, from that time downward, all the Fathers did freely, and safely
call the Church the Temple, and the Ministers in the Church, Priests, as names
of a religious, and pious signification; where before out of a loathnesse to
do, or say any thing like the Jews, or Gentiles, where a concurrence with
them, might have been misinterpretable, and of ill consequence, they had called
the Church by all those other names, which we passed through before; and they
called their Priests, by the name of Elders, Presbyteros: but after they
resumed the use of the word Temple again, as the Apostle had given a good
pattern, who to express the principal holiness of the Saints of God, he
chooses to do it, in that word, 2 Cor. 6. 16.
ye are the Temples of the holy Ghost: which should incline us to that
moderation, that when the danger of these ceremonies which corrupt times had
corrupted, is taken away, we should return to a love of that Antiquity, which
did purely, and harmelesly induce them: when there is no danger of abuse, there
should be no difference for the use of things, (in themselves indifferent) made
necessary by the just commandment of lawful authority.

Thus then you see as far (as the narrowness of the time will give us leave
to express it) the general manner of the best times, to declare devotion
toward God, to have been in appropriating certain places to his worship; And
since it is so in this particular history of Jacobs proceeding in my text, I
may be hold to invert these words of David, Nisi Deus aedificaverit domum,
unless the Lord do build the house, in vain do the laborers work, thus
much, as to say, Nisi Domino aedificaveritis domum, except thou build a house
for the Lord, in vain do thou go about any other buildings, or any other
business in this world. I speak not merely literally of building Material
Chappells; (yet I would speak also to further that;) but I speak principally
of building such a Church, as every man may build in himself: for whenever
we present our prayers, and devotions deliberately, and advisedly to God, there
we consecrate that place, there we build a Church. And therefore, beloved,
since every master of a family, who is a Bishop in his house, should call his
family together, to humble, and power out their souls to God, let him
consider, that when he comes to kneel at the side of his table, to pray, he
comes to build a Church there; and therefore should sanctify that place, with
a due, and penitent consideration how voluptuously he has formerly abused Gods
blessings at that place, how superstitiously, and idolatrously he has
flattered and humored some great and useful ghests invited by him to that
place, how expensively, he has served his own ostentation and vainglory, by
excessive feasts at that place, whilst Lazarus has lien panting, and gasping
at the gate; and let him consider what a dangerous Mockery this is to Christ
Jesus, if he pretend by kneeling at that table, fashionally to build Christ a
Church by that solemnity at the table side, and then crucify Christ again, by
these sins, when he is sat at the table. When thou kneelest down at thy bed
side, to shut up the day at night, or to begin it in the morning, thy
servants, thy children, thy little flock about thee, there thou buildest a
Church too: And therefore sanctify that place; wash it with thy tears, and
with a repentant consideration; That in that bed thy children were conceived in
sin, that in that bed thou have turned marriage which God afforded thee for
remedy, and physique to voluptuosnesse, and licenciousnesse; That thou have
made that bed which God gave thee for rest, and for reparation of thy weary
body, to be as thy dwelling, and delight, and the bed of idleness, and
stupidity. Briefly, you that are Masters, continue in this building of
Churches, that is, in drawing your families to pray, and praise God, and
sanctify those several places of bed, and board, with a right use of them;
And for you that are servants, you have also foundations of Churches in you, if
you dedicate all your actions, consecrate all your services principally to God,
and respectively to them, whom God has placed over you. But principally, let
all of all sorts, who present themselves at this table, consider, that in that
receiving his body, and his blood, every one does as it were conceive Christ
Jesus anew; Christ Jesus has in every one of them, as it were a new
incarnation, by uniting himself to them in these visible signs. And therefore
let no Man come hither, without a search, and a privy search, without a
consideration, and re-consideration of his conscience. Let him that began to
think of it, but this morning, stay till the next. When Moses pulled his hand
first out of his bosom, it was white as snow, but it was leprous; Exodus 1. 4.
6.
when he pulled it the second time, it was of the color of flesh, but it was
sound. When thou examinest thy conscience but once, but flightly, it may
appear, white as snow, innocent; but examine it again, and it will confess
many fleshly infirmities, and then it is the sounder for that; though not for
the infirmity, yet for the confession of the infirmity. Neither let that hand,
that reaches out to this body, in a guiltiness of pollution, and uncleanness,
or in a guiltiness of extortion, or undeserved see, ever hope to sign a
conveyance, that shall fasten his inheritance upon his children, to the third
generation, ever hope to assign a will that shall be observed after his death;
ever hope to lift up it self for mercy to God, at his death; but his case
shall be like the case of Judas, if the devil have put in his heart, to betray
Christ, to make the body and blood of Christ Jesus false witnesses to the
congregation of his hypocritical sanctity, Satan shall enter into him, with
this sop, and seal his condemnation. Beloved, in the bowels of that Jesus, who
is coming into you, even in spiritual riches, it is an unthrifty thing, to
anticipate your moneys, to receive your rents, before they are due: and this
treasure of the soul, the body, and blood of your Savior, is not due to you
yet, if you have not yet passed, a mature, and a severe examination, of your
conscience. It were better that your particular friends, or that the
congregation, should observe in you, an abstinence and forbearing to day, and
make what interpretation, they would of that forbearing then that the holy
Ghost should deprehend you, in an unworthy receiving; lest, as the Master of
the feast said to him that came without his wedding garment, then when he was
set, Amice quomodo intrasti, friend how came you in? so Christ should say to
thee, then when thou art upon thy knees, and have taken him into thy hands,
Amice quomodo intrabo, friend how can I enter into thee, who have not swept thy
house, who have made no preparation for me? But to those that have, he knocks
and he enters, and he ^ups with them, and he is a supper to them. And so this
consideration of making Churches of our houses, and of our hearts, leads us to
a third part, the particular circumstances, in Jacobs action.

In which there is such a change, such a dependence, 3. Part.
whether we consider the Metal, or the fashion, the several doctrines, or the
sweetness, and easiness, of raising them, as scarce in any other place, a
fuller harmony. Divisio.
The first link is the Tunc Jacob, then Jacob; which is a Tunc consequentiae,
rather then a Tunc temporis; It is not so much, at what time Jacob did, or said
this, as upon what occasion. The second link is, Quid operatum, what this
wrought upon Jacob; It awaked him out of his sleep, A third is Quid ille, what
he did, and that was, Et dixit, he came to an open profession of that, which he
conceived, he said; and a fourth is, Quid dixit, what this profession was; And
in that, which is a branch with much fruit, a pregnant part, a part containing
many parts, thus much is considerable, that he presently acknowledged, and
assented to their light which was given him, the Lord is in this place; And he
acknowledged his own darkness, till that light came upon him, Et ego
nesciebam, I knew it not; And then upon this light received, he admitted no
scruple, no hesitation, but came presently to a confident assurance, Vere
Dominus, surely, of a certainty, the Lord is in this place; And then another
doctrine is, Et timuit, he was afraid; for all his confidence he had a
reverentiall fear; not a distrust, but a reverent respect to that great
Majesty; and upon this fear, there is a second, Et dixit, he spoke again;
this fear did not stupifie him, he recovers again and discerned the
manifestation of God, in that particular place, Quam terribilis, how fearful
is this place; And then the last link of this chain is, Quid inde, what was
the effect of all this; and that is, that he might erect a Monument, and mark
for the worship of God in this place, Quia non nisi domus, because this is none
other then the house of God, and the gate of heaven. Now I have no purpose to
make you afraid of enlarging all these points: I shall only pass through some
of them, paraphrastically, and trust them with the rest, (for they insinuate
one another) and trust your christianly meditation with them all.

The first link then is, the Tunc Jacob, the occasion, (then Iocob did this)
which was, Tunc.
that God had revealed to Iocob, that vision of the ladder, whose foot stood
upon earth, and whose top reached to heaven, upon which ladder God stood, and
Angels went up and down. Now this ladder is for the most part, understood to be
Christ himself; whose foot, that touched the earth, is his humanity, and his
top that reached to heaven, his Divinity; The ladder is Christ, and upon him
the Angels, (his Ministers) labor for the edifying of the Church; And in this
labor, upon this ladder, God stands above it, governing, and ordering all
things, according to his providence in his Church. Now when this was revealed
to Jacob, now when this is revealed to you, that God has let fall a ladder, a
bridge between heaven, and earth, that Christ, whose divinity departed not from
heaven, came down to us into this world, that God the father stands upon this
ladder, as the Original has it, Nitzab, that he leanes upon this ladder, as
the vulgar has it, Innixus scalae, that he rests upon it, as the holy Ghost
did, upon the ^ame ladder, that is, upon Christ, in his baptism, that upon
this ladder, which stretches so far, and is provided so well, the Angels
labor, the Ministers of God do their offices, when this was, when this is
manifested, then it became Jacob, and now it becomes every Christian, to do
something for the advancing of the outward glory, and worship of God in his
Church: when Christ is content to be this ladder, when God is content to govern
this ladder, when the Angels are content to labor upon this ladder, which
ladder is Christ, and the Christian Church, shall any Christian Man forbear
his help to the necessary building, and to the sober and modest adorning of the
material Church of God? God studies the good of the Church, Angels labor for
it; and shall Man, who is to receive all the profit of this, do nothing? This
is the Tunc Jacob; when there is a free preaching of the Gospel, there should
be a free, and liberal disposition, to advance his house.

Well; to make haste, the second link is Quid operatum, Quid operatum.
what this wrought upon Jacob: and it is, Jacob awoke out of his sleep. Now in
this place, the holy Ghost imputes no sinful sleep to Jacob; but it is a
natural sleep of lassitude and weariness after his travel, there is an ill
sleep, an indifferent, and a good sleep, which is that heavenly sleep, that
tranquillity, which that soul, which is at peace with God, and divided from the
storms, and distractions of this world, enjoys in it self. That peace, which
made the blessed Martyrs of Christ Jesus sleep upon the rack, upon the burning
coals, upon the points of swords, when the persecutors were more troubled to
invent torments, then the Christians to suffer. That sleep, from which,
ambition, not danger, no nor when their own house is on fire, (that is, their
own concupiscences) cannot awaken them; not so awaken them, that it can put
them out of their own constancy, and peaceful confidence in God. That sleep,
which is the sleep of the spouse, Ego dormio, sed cor meum vigil^t, I sleep,
but my heart is awake; Cant. 5.
It was no dead sleep when she was able to speak advisedly in it, and say she
was asleep, and what sleep it was: It was no stupid sleep, when her heart was
awake. This is the sleep of the Saints of God, which Saint Gregory describes,
Sancti non t^rpore; Gregory.
sed virtue s^piuntur; It is not sluggishnesse, but innocence, and a good
conscience, that casts them asleep. Laboriosi^s dormium, they are busier in
their sleep, nay, Vigita^^ius, dor^^iunt; they are more awake in their sleep,
then the watchful men of this world; for when they close their eyes in
meditation of God, even their dreams are services to him, S^mniant se dicere
Psalmos, says Saint Ambrose; Ambros.
they dream that they sing psalms; and they do more then dream it, they do
sing.

But yet even from this holy, and religious sleep (which is a departing from
the allurements of the world, and a retiring to the only contemplation of
heaven, and heavenly things) Jacob may be conceived to have awaked, and we must
awake; It is note enough to shut our selves in a cloister, in a Monastery, to
sleep out the tentations of the world, but since the ladder is placed, the
Church established, since God, and the Angels are awake in this business, in
advancing the Church, we also must labor, in our several vocations, and not
content our selves with our own spiritual sleep; the peace of conscience in
our selves; for we cannot have that long, Mar. 4. 37.
if we do not some good to others. When the storm had almost drowned the ship,
Christ was at his ease in that storm, asleep upon a pillow. Now Christ was in
no danger himself; All the water of Noah's flood, multiplied over again by every
drop, could not have drowned him. All the swords of an Army could not have
killed him, till the hour was come, when he was pleased to lay down his soul.
But though he were safe, yet they awaked him, and said, Master car'st thou not
though we perish? So though a man may be in a good state, in a good peace of
conscience, and sleep confidently in it, yet other men's necessities must awaken
him, and though perchance he might pass more safely, if he might live a
retired life, yet upon this ladder some Angels ascended, some descended, but
none stood still but God himself. Till we come to him, to sleep an eternal
Sabbath in heaven, though this religious sleep of enjoying or retiring and
contemplation of God, be a heavenly thing, yet we must awake even out of this
sleep, and contribute our pains, to the building, or furnishing, or serving of
God in his Church.

Out of a sleep (conceive it what sleep soever) Jacob awaked; and then, Quid
ille dixit.
Quid ille? what did he? Dixit, he spoke, he entered presently into an open
profession of his thoughts, he smothered nothing, he disguised nothing. God is
light, and loves cleernesse; thunder, and wind, and tempests, and chariots, and
roaring of Lions, and falling of waters are the ordinary emblems of his
messages, and his messengers in the Scriptures. Christ who is Sapientia Dei,
the wisdom of God, is Verb^^, Serm^ Dei, the word of God, he is the wisdom,
and the uttering of the wisdom of God, as Christ is expressed to be the word,
so a Christians duty is to speak dearly, and profess his religion. With how
much scorn and reproach Saint Cyprian fastens the name of Libellatices upon
them, who in time of persecution durst not say they were Christians, but
underhand compounded with the State, that they might live unquestioned,
undiscovered, for though they kept their religion in their heart, yet Christ
was defrauded of his honor. And such a reproach, and scorn belongs to them,
who for fear of losing wordly preferments, and titles, and dignities, and rooms
at great Tables, dare not say, of what religion they are. Beloved, it is not
enough to awake out of an ill sleep of sin, or of ignorance, or out of a good
sleep, out of a retiredness, and take some profession, if you wink, or hide
your selves, when you are awake, you shall not see the Ladder, not discern
Christ, nor the working of his Angels, that is, the Ministry of the Church,
and the comforts therein, you shall not hear that Harmony of the quire of
heaven, if you will bear no part in it; an inward acknowledgment of Christ is
not enough, if you forbear to profess him, where your testimony might glorify
him. Chrysostom.
Si sufficeret fides cordis, non creasset tibi Deus ^s, If the heart were
enough, God would never have made a mouth; And to that, we may add, Si
sufficeret os, non creasset manus, if the mouth were enough, God would never
have made hands; for as the same Father says, Omni tuba clarior est per opera
(...), no voice more audible, none more credible, then when thy hands speak as
well as thy heart or thy tongue; Thou art then perfectly awaked out of thy
sleep, when thy words and works declare, and manifest it.

The next is, Quid dixit; be spoke, Quid.
but what said he ^ first, he assented to that light which was given him. The
Lord is in his place. He resisted not this light, he went not about to blow it
out, by admitting reason, or disputation against it. He imputed it not to
witchcraft, to illusion of the Devil; but Dominus est in loco isto, The Lord
is in this place; O how many heavy sins, how many condemnations might we
avoid, if we would but take knowledge of this, Dominus in loco isto, That the
Lord is present, and sees us now, and shall judge hereafter, all that we do,
or think. It keeps a man sometimes from corrupting, or soliciting a woman, to
say, Peter, Maritus in loco, the Father, or the Husband is present; it keeps a
man from an usurious contract to say, Lex in loco, the Law will take knowledge
of it; it keeps a man from slandering or calummating another, to say, Testis in
loco, here is a witness by; but this is Catholica Medicina, and Omni morbia,
an universal medicine for all, to say, Dominus in loco, The Lord is in this
place, and sees, and hea^es, and therefore I will say, and think, and do, as if
I were now summoned by the last^ Trumpet, to give an account of my thoughts,
and words, and deeds to him.

But the Lord was there and Jacob knew it not. Nesciebam.
As he takes knowledge by the first light of Gods presence, so he acknowledges
that he had none of this light, of himself, Ego nesciebam, Jacob a Patriarch
and dearly beloved of God, knew not that God was so near him. How much less
shall a sinful man, that multiples sins, like clouds between God and him,
know, that God is near him? As Saint Augustine said, when he came out of
curiousty to hear Saint Ambrose preach at Mila^, without any desire of
profiting thereby, Appropinquavi, and vesciebam, I came (...) God, but knew it
not; So the customary and habitual sinners, may say, Elo^gavi, and nisciebam,
I have ^loyn'd my self, I have gone farther, and farther from my God, and was
never sensible of it; It is a desperate Ignorance, not to be sensible of Gods
absence; but to acknowledge with Jacob, that we cannot see light, but by that
light, that we cannot know Gods presence but by his revealing of himself, is a
religious, and a Christian humility. To know it by Reason, by Philosophy, is a
dim and a faint knowledge, but only by the testimony of his own spirit, and
his own revealing, we come to that confidence, Vere.
Vere Domine, Surely the Lord is in this place.

Est apud (...), sed de^^^^lans, God is with the wicked, but he dissembles his
being there, that is, B^rn.
conceals it, he will not be known of it; Et (...), mal^rum dissi^^^latio
quodammodo Veritas non est, when God winks at men's sins, when he dissembles,
or disguises his knowledge, we may almost say, says Saint Bernard, Veritas non
est, Here is not direct dealing, here is not entire truth, his presence is
scarce a true presence. And therefore as the same Father proceeds, Si dicere
licet, if we may be bold to express it so, Apud impios est, sed in
dissimulatione, he is with the wicked, but yet he dissembles, he disguises his
presence, he is there to no purpose, to no profit of theirs; but Est apud
justos in veritate, with the righteous he is in truth, and in clearness. Est
apud Angel^s in foelicitate, with the Angels and Saints in heaven, he is in an
established happiness, Est apud inferos in feritate, he is in Hell in his
^ury, in an irrevocable, and undeterminable execution of his severity: God was
surely, and truly with Jacob, and with all them, who are sensible of his
approaches, and of his gracious manifestation of himself. Vere non erat apud
eos quibus dixit, quid vocati^^ me Dominum, and non facitis qua dixi vobis? God
is not truly with them, Idem.
whom he rebukes for saying; Why call ye (...) Lord, and do not my
Commandments? but ubi in ejus nomive Angeli simul and homines congregantur,
When Angels and men, Priest and people, Idem.
the Preacher and the congregation labor together upon this Ladder, study the
advancing of his Church (as by the working of Gods gracious Spirit we do at
this time) (...) vere est and ibi vere Dominus est, surely he is in this place,
and surely he is Lord in this place, he possesses, he fills us all, he governs
us all: and as, though we say to him, Our Father which art in heaven, yet we
believe that he is within these walls, so though we say Adveniat regnum tuum,
thy kingdom come, we believe that his kingdom is come, and is amongst us in
grace now, as it shall be in glory hereafter.

When he was now thoroughly awake, when he was come to an open profession,
Timnit.
when he acknowledged himself to stand in the sight of God, when he confessed
his own ignorance of Gods presence, and when after all he was come to a settled
confidence, Vere Dominus, surely the Lord is here, yet it is added, Et timuit,
and he was afraid. No man may think himself to be come to that familiar
acquaintance with God, as that it should take away that reverentiall fear
which belongs to so high and supreme a Majesty. Judge. 13.
When the Angel appeared to the wife of Manoah, foretelling Samsons birth, she
says to her husband, the fashion of him was like the fashion of the Angel of
God; what is that? Exceeding fearful. When God appears to thy soul, even in
mercy, in the forgivenes of thy sins, yet there belongs a fear even to this
apprehension of mercy: Not a fearful diffidence, not a distrust, but a
fearful consideration, of that height, and depth; what a high Majesty thou
have offended, what a desperate depth thou wast falling into, what a fearful
thing it had been, to have fallen into the hands of the living God, and what an
irrecoverable wretch thou had been, if God had not manifested himself, to
have been in that place, with thee And therefore though he have appeared unto
thee in mercy, yet be afraid, lest he go away again; As Manoab prayed, and
said, I beseech thee my Lord, let the Man of God, whom thou sentest, come
again unto us, and teach us, what we shall do with the child; when he is
born, so when God has once appeared to thy soul in mercy, pray him to come
again, and tell thee what thou should do with that mercy, how thou
should husband those first degrees of grace and of comfort, to the farther
benefit of thy soul, and the farther glory of his name, and be afraid that thy
dead flies may putrefie his ointment; those relics of sin, Job 4. 14.
(though the body of sin, be crucified in thee) which are left in thee, may
overcome his graces: for upon those words, Pavor tenuit me and tremor, and
emni^^ssa mea perterrita sunt, fear came upon me, and trembling, Gregory.
which made all my bones to shake, Saint Gregory says well, Quid per ^ssa nisi
fortia act a designantur, our good deeds, our strongest works and those which
were done in the best strength of grace, are meant by our bones, and yet ossa
perterrita our strongest works tremble at the presence and examination of God.
Psalm. 35. 10.
And therefore to the like purpose (upon those words of the Psalm) the same
Father says, Omnia ossa mea dicent, Domine quis similis tibi, all my bones say,
Lord who is like unto thee? Carnes meae, verba non habent, (my fleshly parts,
my carnal affections) Infirma mea funditus silent, my sins; or my
infirmities dare not speak at all, not appear at all, Sed ossa mea, quae fortia
credidi, sua consideratione tremiscunt, my very bones shake, there is no
degree, no state neither of innocence, nor of repentance, nor of faith, nor of
sanctification, above that fear of God: and he is least acquainted with God,
who things that he is so familiar, that he need not stand in fear of him. Et
dixit.


But this fear has no ill effect. It brings him to a second profession, Et
dixit; and he spoke again. He waked, and then he spoke, as soon as he came out
of ignorance; He was afraid, and then he spoke again that he might have an
increase of grace. The earth stands still: and earthly Men may be content to
do so: Bern.
but he whose conversation is in heaven, is as the heavens are in continual
progress. For Inter profectum, and defectum and defectum, medium in hac vita
non datur. A Christian is always in a proficiency, or deficiency: If he go not
forward, he goes backward. Nemo dicat, satis est, sic manner vol^; Let no man
say, I have done enough, I have made my profession already, I have been
catechized, I have been thought fit to receive the Communion, sufficit mihi
esse sicut heri and nudiustertius; though he be in the way, in the Church, yet
he sleeps in the way, he is got no farther in the way, then his godfathers
carried him in their arms, to engraffe him in the Church by Baptism: for this
man, says he, Idem.
In via residet, in scala subsistit, quod nemo angelorum fecit, he stands still
upon the ladder, Luke 2. 52.
and so did none of the Angels. Christ himself, increased in wildome, and in
stature, and in favor with God, and Man; so must a Christian also labor to
grow and to increase, by speaking and speaking again, by asking more, and more
questions, and by farther, Act. 10. 58.
and farther informing his understanding, and enlightening his faith; per
transiit benefaciendo, and sanavit omnes, says Saint Peter of Christ; He went
about doing good, Acts 10. 38.
and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil; and it was prophesied of
him, Psalm. 19.
Exultavit ut Gigas ad currendam vim, He went forth as a Giant, to run a race;
If it be Christ's pace, it must be a Christians pace too. Currentem non
apprehendit, nisi qui and pariter currit; Bern.
There is no overtaking of him that runs, without running too. Quid prodest
Christum sequi, si non consequamur? and to what purpose do we follow Christ, if
not to overtake him, and lay hold upon him? Sic currite, ut comprehendatis,
fige Christian cursus and profectus metam ubi Christus suum; run so as ye
may obtain; and if thou be a Christian, propose the same end of thy course,
as Christ did; factus est obediens usque ad mortem; and the end of his course
was, to be obedient unto death.

Speak then, and talk continually of the name, and the goodness of God; speak
again, and again; It is no tautology, no babbling, to speak, and ^terate his
praises: Who accuses Saint Paul for repeating the sweet name of Jesus so very
many times in his Epistles? Who accuses David for repeating the same phrase,
the same sentence [for his mercy endures for ever] so many times, as he does
in his Psalms? nay, the one hundred and nineteenth Psalm is scarce any thing
else, then an often repetition of the same thing. Thou spokest as soon as thou
wast awake, as soon as thou wast born, thou spokest in Baptism. So proceed to
the farther knowledge of Religion, and the mysteries of Gods service in his
house; and conceive a fearful reverence of them in their institution, and
speak again, enquire what they mean, what they signify, what they exhibit to
thee. Conceive a reverence of them, first, out of the authority that has
instituted them, and then speak, and inform thy self of them. God spent a whole
week in speaking for thy good; Dixit Deus, God spoke that there might be light,
Dixit Deus, God sp^ke that there might be a firmament; for immediately upon
Gods speaking, the work followed: Dixit and factum, he spoke the word, and the
world was created. As God did, a godly man shall do; If he delight to talk of
God, to mention often upon all occasions, the greatness, and goodness of God,
to prefer that discourse, before obscene, and scurrile, and licentious, and
profane, and defamatory, and ridiculous, and frivolous talk; If he delight in
professing God with his tongue, out of the abundance of his heart, his works
shall follow his words, he will do as he says. If God had given over, when he
had spoke of Light, and a Firmament, and Earth, and Sea, and had not continued
speaking till the last day, when he made thee, what had thou got by all that?
what had thou been at all for all that? If thou can speak when thou
awakest, when thou beginnest to have an apprehension of Gods presence, in a
remorse, if then, that presence, and Majesty of God, make thee afraid, with the
horror and greatness of thy sins, if thou can not speak again then, not
go forward with thy repentance; thy former speech is forgotten by God, and
unprofitable to thee. Jacob at first speaking confessed God to be in that
place; but so he might be every where; but he conceived a reverentiall fear at
his presence; and then he came to speak the second time, to profess, that that
was none other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven; that there was an
entrance for him in particular, a fit place for him to testify and exercise
his Devotion; he came to see, what it was fit for him to do, toward the
advancing of Gods house.

Now whenever a man is proceeded so far with Jacob, first to sleep, Domus.
to be at peace with God, and then to wake, to do something for the good of
others, and then to speak, to make profession, to publish his sense of Gods
presence, and then to attribute all this only to the Light of God himself, by
which light he grows from faith to faith, and from grace to grace, whosoever is
in this disposition, he may say in all places, and in all his actions, This is
none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. He shall see
heaven open, and dwell with him, in all his undertakings: and particularly, and
principally in his expressing of a care, and respect, both to Christ's
Mystical, and to his material body; both to the sustentation of the poor, and
to the building up of Gods house. In both which kinds of Piety, and Devotion,
(non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed nomini tuo da gloriam; Not unto us O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy Name be given the glory;) As to the confusion of
those shameless slanderers, who place their salvation in works, and accuse us
to avert men from good works, there have been in this Kingdom, since the
blessed reformation of Religion, more public charitable works performed, more
Hospitals and Celleges erected, and endowed in threescore, then in some
hundreds of years, of superstition before, so may God be pleased to add one
example more amongst us, that here in this place, we may have some occasion to
say, of a house erected, and dedicated to his service, This is none other but
the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven: and may he vouchsafe to
accept at our hands, in our intention, and in our endeavor to consummate that
purpose of ours, that thanksgiving, that acclamation which he received from his
Royal servant Solomon, at the Consecration of his great Temple, when he said,
Is it true indeed, 1 Reg. 8. 27.
that God will dwell on the earth? Behold, the heavens, and the heaven of
heavens are not able to contain thee, how much more unable shall this house
be, that we intend to build? But have thou respect unto the prayer of thy
servant, and to his supplication, O Lord, my God, to hear the cry and the
prayer that thy servant shall make before thee that day; That thine eye may be
open toward that house night and day, that thou may hear the supplications
of thy servants, and of thy people, which shall pray in that place, and that
thou may hear them in the place of thy habitation even in heaven, and when
thou hear, may have mercy. Amen.

SERMON XII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
JOHN 5. 22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son.
When our Savior forbids us to cast pearl before swine, Mat. 7. 6.
we understand ordinarily in that place, that by pearl, are understood the
Scriptures, and when we consider the natural generation and production of
Pearl, that they grow bigger and bigger, by a continual succession, and
devolution of dew, and other glutinous moisture that falls upon them, and there
condenses and hardens, so that a pearl is but a body of many shells, many
crusts, many films, many coats enwrapped upon one another. To this Scripture
which we have in hand, does that Metaphor of pearl very properly appertain,
because our Savior Christ in this Chapter undertaking to prove his own
Divinity and Godhead to the Jews, who acknowledged, and confessed the Father
to be God, but denied it of him, he folds and wraps up reason upon reason,
argument upon argument, that all things are common between the Father and him,
That whatsoever the Father does, he does, whatsoever the Father is, he is; for
first, he says, he is a partner, a cooperator with the Father, in the present
administration and government of the world, Verse 17.
My Father works hitherto, and I work; well, if the Father do ease himself
upon instruments now, yet was it so from the beginning? had he a part in the
Creation? Yes; What things soever the Father does, those also does the Son
likewise. But do those extend to the work properly, Verse 19.
and naturally belonging to God, to the remission, to the effusion of grace, to
the spiritual resurrection of them that are dead in their iniquities? Yes,
even to that too, For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them,
Verse 21.
even to the Son quickneth whom he will. But has not this power of his a
determination, or expiration? shall it not end, at least when the world ends?
no, not then, for God has given him authority to execute judgment, because he
is the Son of man. Verse 27.
Is there then no Supersedeas upon this commission? Is the Son equal with
the Father in our eternal election, in our creation, in the means of our
salvation, in the last judgment, in all? In all, Omne judicium, God has
committed all judgment to the Son; And here is a pearl made up, the dew of
Gods grace sprinkled upon your souls, the beams of Gods Spirit shed upon your
souls, that effectual and working knowledge; That he who dyed for your
salvation is perfect God, as well as perfect man, fit, as willing to accomplish
that salvation.

In handling then this Judgment, which is a word that embraces and comprehends
all, All from our Election, where no merit or future actions of ours were
considered by God to our fruition and possession of that election, where all
our actions shall be considered and recompensed by him, we shall see first that
Judgment belongs properly to God; And secondly, that God the Father whom we
consider to be the root and foundation of the Deity, can no more divest his
Judgment then he can his Godhead, and therefore in the third place we consider,
what that committing of Judgment, which is mentioned here imports, and then to
whom it is committed, To the Son: and lastly the largnesse of that which is
committed, Omne, all Judgment, so that we cannot carry our thoughts so high, or
so far backwards, as to think of any Judgment given upon us in Gods purpose
or decree without relation to Christ; Nor so far forward, as to think that
there shall be a Judgment given upon us, according to our good, moral
dispositions or actions, but according to our apprehension and imitation of
Christ. Judgment is a proper and inseparable Character of God; that is first,
the Father cannot divest himself of that; that is next. The third is that he
has committed it to another; And then the person that is his delegate, is his
only Son, and lastly his power is everlasting; And that Judgment day that
belongs to him, has, and shall last from our first Election, through the
participation of the means prepared by him in his Church, to our association
and union with him in glory, and so the whole circle of time, and before time
was, and when time shall be no more, makes up but one Judgment day to him, to
whom the Father who judges no man has committed all Judgment.

First then Judgment appertains to God, It is his in Criminal causes, 1. Part.
^ Vindicta mihi, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord; It is so in
civil things too; for God himself is proprietary of all, Domini est terra et
plenitudo ejus, Iuticiu^ Dei^ a Romans 12. 19.
The earth is the Lords, and all that is in, and on the earth; Your silver is
mine, and your gold is mine, says the Prophet, and the beasts on a Thousand
hills are mine, says David, you are usu^^ructuaries of them, but I am
proprietary; No attribute of God is so often iterated in the Scriptures, no
state of God so often incultated, as this Judge, and Judgment: no word
concerning God so often repeated, but it is brought to the height, where in
that place of the Psalm, where we read, God judges among the Gods, the Latin
Church ever read it, Psalm. 82. 1.
Deus dijudicat De^s, God judges the Gods themselves, for though God say of
Judges and Magistrates, Ego dixi dii estis; I have said ye are Gods, (and if God
say it, who shall gainsay it?) yet he says too, Moriemini, sicut homines, The
greatest Gods upon earth shall die like men; And if that be not humiliation
enough, there is more threatened in that which follows, ye shall fall like one
of the Princes, for the fall of a Prince involves the ruin of many others too,
and it fills the world with horror for the present, and ominous discourse for
the future; but the farthest of all is Deus dijudicat Deos, even these Judges
must come to Judgment, and therefore that Psalm which begins so, is concluded
thus, Surge Domine, arise o God, and judge the earth: If he have power to judge
the earth, he is God, and even in God himself it is expressed as a kind of
rising, as some exaltation of his power, that he is to Judge; And that place in
the beginning of that Psalm many of the ancients read in the future
Dijudicabit, God, shall judge the Gods, because the frame of the Psalm seems
to refer it to the last Judgment; Turtullian reads it Dijudicavit, as a thing
past, God has judged in all times; and the letter of the text requires it to
be in the present, Dijudicat. Collect all, and Judgment is so essential to
God, as that it is coeternall with him, he has, he does, and he will judge the
world, and the Judges of the world, other Judges die likemen, weakly, and they
fall, that is worse ignominiously, and they fall like Princes, that is worst,
fearfully, and yet scornfully, and when they are dead and fallen, they rise no
more to execute Judgment, but have Judgment executed upon them the Lord dies
not, nor he falls not, and if he seem to slumber, the Martyrs under the Altar
awake him with their Vsque quo Domine, how long O Lord before thou execute
Judgment? And he will arise and Judge the world, for Judgment is his; God
puts down one, and sets up another, says David; Psalm 75. 7.
where has he that power? Why, God is the Judge, not a Judge, but the Judge,
and in that right he puts down one, and sets up another.

Now for this Judgment, which we place in God, Iudicinm detestationis.
we must consider in God three notions, three apprehensions, three kinds of
Judgment. First, God has Iudicium detestationis, God does naturally know, and
therefore naturally detest evil; for no man in the extremest corruption of
nature is yet fallen so far, as to love or approve evil at the same time that
he knows, and acknowledges it to be evil. But we are so blind in the knowledge
of evil, that we needed that great supplement, and assistance of the law it
self to make us know what was evil; Moses magnifies (and justly) the law, Non
appropinqu^vit, says Moses, God came not so near to any nation as to the Jews;
Non taliter fecit, God dealt not so well with any nation, as with the Jews, and
wherein? because he had given them a law, and yet we see the greatest dignity
of this law, to be, That by the law is the knowledge of sin; for though by
the law of nature written in our hearts, there be some condemnation of some
sins, yet to know that every sin was Treason against God, to know that
every sin has the reward of death, and eternal death annexed to it; this
knowledge we have only by the law. Now if man will pretend to be a Judge, what
an exact knowledge of the law is required at his hand? for some things are
sin to one nation, which are not to another, as where the just authority of
the lawful Magistrate, changes the nature of the thing, and makes a thing
naturally indifferent, necessary to them, who are under his obedience; some
things are sins at one time, which are not at another, as all the ceremonial
law, created new sins which were not sins before the law was given, nor
since it expired; some things are sins in a man now, which will not be sins
in the same man to morrow, as when a man has contracted a just scruple,
against any particular action, it is a sin to do it during the scruple, and
it may be sin in him to omit it, when he has divested the scruple; only God
has Iudicium detestationis, he knows, and therefore detests evil, and
therefore flatter not thy self with a Tush, God sees it not, or, Tush, God
cares not, Does it disquiet him or trouble his rest in heaven that I break his
Sabbath here? Does it wound his body, or draw his blood there, that I swear by
his body and blood here? Does it corrupt any of his virgins there, that I
solicit the chastity of a woman here? Are his Martyrs withdrawn from their
Allegiance, or retarded in their service to him there, because I dare not
defend his cause, nor speak for him, nor fight for him here? Beloved, it is a
degree of superstition, and an effect of an undiscreet zeal, perchance, to be
too forward in making indifferent things necessary, and so to imprint the
nature, and sting of sin where naturally it is not so: certainly it a more
slippery and irreligious thing to be too apt to call things merely
indifferent, and to forget that even in eating and drinking, waking and
sleeping, the glory of God is intermingled, as if we knew exactly the
prescience and foreknowledge of God, there could be nothing contingent or
casual, (for though there be a contingency in the nature of the thing, yet it
is certain to God) so if we considered duly, wherein the glory of God might be
promov'd in every action of ours, there could scarce by any action so
indifferent, but that the glory of God would turn the scale and make it
necessary to me, at that time; but then private interests, and private respects
create a new indifferency to my apprehension, and calls me to consider that
thing as it is in nature, and not as it is considered with that circumstance of
the glory of God, and so I lose that Iudicium detestationis, which only God
has absolutely and perfectly to know, and therefore to detest evil, and so he
is a Judge.

And as he is a Judge, so Iudicat rem, he judges the nature of the thing, he is
so too, as he has Iudicium discretionis, and so Iudicat personam, he knows
what is evil, Iudicium discretionis.
and he discernes when thou committest that evil. Here you are fain to supply
defects of laws, that things done in one County may be tried in another; And
that in offenses of high nature, transmarine offenses may be inquired and tried
here; But as the Prophet says; Esaias 40. 12.
Who measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, or meted (...) the heavens
with a span, who comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, or weighed
the mountains in a scale? So I say, who has divided heaven into shires or
parishes, or limited the territories and Jurisdictions there, that God should
not have Iudicium discretionis, the power of discerning all actions, in all
places? When there was no more to be seen, or considered upon the whole earth
but the garden of Paradise, for from the beginning Deliciae ejus esse cum
filiis hominum, Gods delight was to be with the sons of men, and man was only
there, shall we not deminish God nor speak too vulgarly of him to say, that he
hovered like a Falcon over Paradise, and that from that height of heaven, the
piercing eye of God, saw so little a thing, as the forbidden fruit, and what
became of that, and the reaching ^are of God heard the hissing of the Serpent,
and the whispering of the woman, and what was concluded upon that? Shall we
think it little to have seen to have things done in Paradise when there was
nothing else to divert his eye, nothing else to distract his counsels, nothing
else done upon the face of the earth? Take the earth now as it is replenished,
and take it either as it is torn and crumbled into rags, and shivers, not a
kingdom, not a family, not a man agreeing with himself; Or take it in that
concord which is in it, as All the Kings of the earth set themselves, Psalm 2.
2.
and all the Rulers of the earth take counsel together against the Lord; take
it in this union, or this division, in this concord, or this discord, still the
Lord that sits in the heavens discernes all, looks at all, laughs at all,
and has them all in derision. Earthly Judges have their distinctions, and so
their restrictions, some things they cannot know, what mortal man can know
all? Some things they cannot take knowledge of, for they are bound to evidence:
But God has Iudicium discretionis, no mist, no cloud, no darkness, no
disguise keeps him from discerning, and judging all our actions, and so he is a
Judge too.

And he is so lastly, as he has Iudicium retributionis, God knows what is
evil, he knows when that evil is done, and he knows, how to punish and
recompense that evil: for the office of a Judge who judges according to a law,
being not to contract, or extend that law, but to declare what was the true
meaning of that Lawmakers when he made that law, God has this judgment in
perfection, because he himself made that law by which he judges, and therefore
when he has said, Morte morieris; If thou do this, thou shall die a double
death, where he has said, Stipendium peccati mors est, every sin shall be
rewarded with death; If I sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for me? Who
shall give any other interpretation, 1 Samuel 2. 15.
any modification, any Non obstante upon his law in my behalf, when he comes to
judge me according to that law which himself has made? Who shall think to
delude the Judge, and say, Surely this was not the meaning of the Lawgiver,
when he who is the Judge was the Lawmakers too?

And then as God is Judge in all these respects, Sine Appellatione.
so is he a Judge in them all, Sine Appellatione, and Sine judiciis, man cannot
appeal from God, God needs no evidence from man; for, for the Appeal first, to
whom should we appeal from the Sovereign (...) Wrangle as long as ye will who
is Chief Justice, and which Court has Juris^ over another; I know the Chief
Justice, and I know the Sovereign (...) the King of heaven and earth shall send
his ministering Spirits, his Angels to the (...), and bowels of the Earth, and
to the bosom, and bottom of the Sea, and Earth must deliver, Corpus cum
causa, all the bodies of the dead, and all their actions, to receive a
judgment in this Court: when it will be but an erroneous, and frivolous
Appeal, to call to the Hills to fall down upon us, and the Mountains to cover,
and hide us from the wrathful judgment of God. He is a Judge then Sine
appellatione, without any Appeal, from him, he is so too Sine judiciis, without
needing any evidence from us. Now if I be wary in my actions here, incarnate
Devils, detractors, and informers cannot accuse me; If my sin come not to
action, but lie only in my heart, the Devil himself who is the accuser of the
brethren, has no evidence against me, but God knows my heart; does not he that
pondereth the heart, understand it? Prove. 24. 12.
where it is not in that faint word, which the vulgar Edition has expressed it
in, inspector cordium, That God sees the heart; but the word is Tochen, which
signifies every where to weigh, to number, to search, to examine, as the word
is used by Solomon again, The Lord weighs the spirits, and it must be a ready
hand, Prove. 16. 2.
and exact scales that shall weigh spirits. So that though neither man, nor
Devil, nay nor my self give evidence against me, yea, though I know nothing by
my self, I am not thereby justified, why? where is the farther danger? 1 Cor.
4. 4.
In this which follows there in Saint Paul, He that judges me is the Lord, and
the Lord has means to know my heart better then my self: And therefore, as
Saint Augustine makes use of those words, Abyssus Abyssum invocat, one depth
calls upon another, The infinite depth of my sins must call upon the more
infinite depth of Gods mercy, for if God, who is Judge in all these respects,
judicio detestationis, he knows, and abhors evil, and judicio discretionis, he
discerns every evil person, and every evil action, judicio retributionis, he
can, and will recompense evil with evil; And all these Sine Appellatione, we
cannot appeal from him, and Sine judiciis, he needs no evidence from us; If
this judgment enter into judgment with me, not only not I, but not the most
righteous man, no, nor the Church whom he has washed in his blood, that she
might be without spot or wrinckle, shall appear righteous in his sight.

This being then thus, that Judgment is an unseparable character of God the
Father, 2. Part.
being Fons Deitatis, the root and spring of the whole Deity, how is it said,
that the Father judges no man? Not that we should conceive a weariness, or
retiring in the Father, or a discharging of himself upon the shoulders, and
labors of another, in the administration, and judging of this world; for as it
is truly said, that God rested the seventh day, that is, he rested from working
in that kind, from creating, so it is true that Christ says here; My Father
works yet, and I work, and so as it is truly said here, The Father judges no
man, it is truly said by Christ too, of the Father, I seek not mine own glory,
there is one that seeks, and judges; still it is true, that God has
Iudicium detestationis, Thy eyes are pure eyes O Lord, and cannot behold
iniquity, says the Prophet, still it is true, that he has Iudicium
discretionis (because they committed villainy in Israel, and I know it, Ier. 29.
23.
says the Lord;) still it is true, that he has Iudicium retributionis, The
Lord kills and makes alive, 1 Samuel 2. 6.
he brings down to the grave, and brings up; still it is true, that he has
all these sine appellatione; for go to the Sea, or Earth, or Hell, as David
makes the distribution, and God is there; and he has them sine judiciis, for
our witness is in heaven, and our record is on high: Job 16. 19.
All this is undeniably true, and besides this, that great name of God, by
which he is first called in the Scriptures Elohim, is not inconveniently
derived from Elah, which is Iurare to swear, God is able as a Judge to minister
an oath unto us, and to draw evidence from our own consciences against our
selves, so that then, the Father he judges still, but he judges as God, and not
as the Father. In the three great judgments of God, the whole Trinity judges,
In the first judgment, before all times, which was Gods Judiciary separating
of vessels of honor, from vessels of dishonor, in our Election, and
Reprobation; In his second judgment, which is in execution now, which is Gods
judiciary separating of servants from enemies, in the seals, and in the
administration of the Christian Church; and in the last judgment, which shall
be Gods Judiciary separating of sheep from goats, to everlasting glory, or
condemnation; in all these three judgments, all the three Persons of the
Trinity are Judges. Consider God altogether, and so in all outward works, all
the Trinity concurres, because all are but one God; but consider God in
relation, in distinct Persons, and so the several Persons do something in
which the other Persons are not interessed; The Son has not a generation
from himself, so, as he had from the Father, and from the holy Ghost, as a
distinct person, he had none at all; the holy Ghost had a proceeding from the
Father and Son, but from the Son as a person, who had his generation from
another, but not so from the Father. Not to stray into clouds, or perplexities
in this contemplation, God, that is, the whole Trinity, judges still, but so as
the Son judges, the Father judges not, for that Judgment he has committed.

That we may husband our hour well, Commisit.
and reserve as much as we can for our two last considerations, the Cui, and
Quid, to whom, and that is to the Son, and what he has committed, and that is
all Judgment, we will not stand much upon this, more needs not then this; That
God in his wisdom foreseeing, that man for his weakness would not be able to
settle himself upon God and his judgments, as they are merely heavenly, and
spiritual, out of his abundant goodness has established a judgment, and
ordained a Judge upon earth like himself, and like our selves too, That as no
man has seen God, so no man should go about to see his unsearchable decrees,
and judgments, but rest in those sensible, and visible means which he has
afforded, that is, Christ Jesus speaking in his Church, and applying his blood
unto us in the Sacraments to the worlds end: God might have suffered Abraham to
rest in the first general promise, Semen mulieris, the Seed of the woman shall
bruise the Serpents head, but he would bring it nearer to a visible, to a
personal Covenant, In semine tuo, In thy Seed shall all nations be blessed; he
might well have let him rest in that appropriation of the promise to his race,
but he would proceed farther, and seal it with a sensible seal in his flesh
with Circumcision; he might have let him rest in that ratification, that a
Messiah should come by that way, but he would continue it by a continual
succession of Prophets, till that Messiah should come; and now that he is come
and gone, still God pursues the same way; How should they believe, except they
hear? and therefore God evermore supplies his Church with visible and sensible
means, and knowing the natural inclination of man, when he cannot have, or
cannot comprehend the original, and prototype, to satisfy, and refresh
himself with a picture, or representation; So, though God has forbidden us
that slippery, and frivolous, and dangerous use of graven Images, yet he has
afforded us his Son, who is the image of the invisible God, and so more
proportional unto us, more apprehensible by us; Col. 1. 15.
And so this committing is no more but that God in another form, then that of
God, has manifested his power of judging, and this committing, this
manifestation is in Filio, in his Son.

But in the entrance into the handling of this, Filio.
we ask only this question, Cui filio, to which Son of God is this
commission given? Not that God has more Sons then one; but because that Son
is his Son by a twofold filiation; by an eternal, and inexpressible
generation, and by a temporary, but miraculous incarnation, in which of these
rights is this commission derived upon him? does he judge as he is the Son of
God? or as he is the Son of man? I am not ordinarily bold in determining points
(especially if they were fundamental) wherein I find the Fathers among
themselves, and the School in it self, and the reverend Divines of the
Reformation amongst themselves to differ; But yet neither am I willing to raise
doubts, and leave the auditory unsatisfyed, and unsettled; we are not upon a
Lecture, but upon a Sermon, and therefore we will not multiply variety of
opinions; sum up the Fathers upon one side in Saint Ambrose mouth, and they
will say with him, Huic dedit ubique generundo, non largiendo, God gave his
Son this commission then (and when was that then?) then when he begot him,
and then he must have it by his eternal generation, as the Son of God: sum up
the Fathers on the other side, in Saint Augustines mouth, and there they will
say with him, that it is so clear, and so certain, that whatsoever is said in
the Scripture to be committed, and given to Christ, belongs to Christ as the
Son of man, and not as the Son of God, as that the other opinion cannot be
maintained; and at this distance we shall never bring them to meet, but take in
this rule, Iudicium convenit ei ut homo, causa ut Deus, God has given Christ
this commission as man, but Christ had not been capable of this commission if
he had not been God too, and so it is easily reconciled: If we shall hold
simply to the letter of the text, Pater dedit, then it will seem to have been
committed to him in his eternal generation, because that was a work of the
Fathers only, and in that generation the holy Ghost had no part; But since in
this judgment, which is now committed to him, the holy Ghost has a part, (for
as we said before, the Judgment is an act of the whole Trinity) we must look
for a commission from the whole Trinity, and that is as he is man, for, tota
Trinitas univit humanitatem, August,
The hypostaticall union of God and man in the person of Christ, was a work of
the whole Trinity.

Taking it then so settled, that the capacity of this Judgment, and (if we may
say so) the future title to it, was given to him, as God by his essence, in his
eternal generation, by which non vitae particeps, sed vitae naturaliter est,
we cannot say that Christ has life, Cy^ill.
but that he is life, for whatsoever the Father is, he is, excepting only the
name and relation of Father, the capacity, the ability is in him, eternally
before any imaginable, any possible consideration of time; But the power of the
actual execution of this Judgment, which is given, and is committed, is in
him as man: because as the same Father says, Ad heminem dicitur, Quid habes
quod non accepisti? When Saint Past says, What have thou that thou have not
received? he asks that question of a man, that which is received, is received
as man, For as Bellarmine in a place where he disposes himself to quarrel, De
Christo. l. 2. c. 19.
at some few words of Calvin's, though he confess the matter to be true, and
(as he calls it there) Catholic, says, Essentiam genitam negamus, we confess
that Christ has not his essence from his Father by generation, the relation,
the filiation, he has from his Father, he has the name of Son, but he has
not this execution of this judgment by that relation, by that filiation, still
as the Son of God, he has the capacity, as the Son of man, he has the
execution; And therefore Prosper that follows S. Augustine limits perchance too
narrowly to the very flesh, to the humanity, Ipsa (not Ipsae) ^rit Iudex, quae
sub Iudice stetit, and ipsa judicabit, quae judicatae est, where he places not
this Judgment upon the mixed person (which is the safest way) of God and man,
but upon man alone, God has appointed a day, in which he will judge the world
in righteousness; But by whom? By that man whom he has ordained God will
judge still; but still in Christ; and therefore says S. Augustine upon those
words: Arise O Lord, and judge the earth, Cui Deo dicitur surge, nisi ei qui
dormivit? What God does David call upon to arise, but that God who lay down to
sleep in the grave? as though he should say (says August.) Dormivisti judicatus
a terra, surge and jud^ca terram. So that to collect all, though judgment be
such a character of God as he cannot divest, yet the Father has committed such
a Judgment to the Son, as none but he can execute.

And what is that? Omne judicium, all judgment, that is, omne imperium, Omne
judicium.
omnem potestatem; It is presented in the name of Judgment, but it involves
all, It is literally, and particularly Judgment in S. John, 5. 27.
The Father has given him authority to execute judgment, It is extended unto
power in Saint Matthew, 28. 18.
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth; And it is enlarged as far
farther, as can be expressed or conceived in another place of Saint Matthew,
All things are delivered to me of my Father. 11. 27.
Now all things our Savior Christ Jesus exercises, either per carnem, or at
least in carne, whatsoever the Father does, the Son does too, In carne,
because now there is an unseparable union betwixt God and the humane nature:
The Father creates new souls every day in the inanimation of Children, and the
Son creates them with him; The Father concurs with all second causes as the
first moving cause of all natural things, and all this the Son does too; but
all this in carne; Though he be in our humane flesh, he is not the less able
to do the acts belonging to the Godhead, but per carnem, by the flesh
instrumentally, visibly, he executes judgment, because he is the Son of man,
God has been so indulgent to man, as that there should be no judgment given
upon man, but man should give it; Christ then having all Judgment, we refresh
to your memory those three Judgments which we touched upon before; first, the
Judgment of our Election, severing of vessels of honor and dishonor; next,
the Judgment of our Justification here severing of friends from enemies; and
then the Judgment of our Glorification, severing sheep from goats; Iudicium
Electionis.
and for the first, of our Election, As if I were under the condemnation of the
Law, for some capital offense, and going to execution, and the Kings mercy
expressed in a sealed pardon were presented me, I should not stand to enquire
what moved the King to do it, what he said to any body else, what any body
else said to him, what he saw in me, or what he looked for at my hands, but
embrace that mercy cheerfully, and thankfully, and attribute it only to his
abundant goodness: So, when I consider my self to have been let fall into
this world, in massa Damnata, under the general condemnation of mankind, and
yet by the working of Gods Spirit, I find at first a desire, and after a modest
assurance, that I am delivered from that condemnation, I enquire not what God
did in his bedchamber, in his cabinet counsel, in his eternal decree, I know
that he has made Iudicium electionis in Christ Jesus: And therefore that I
may know, whether I do not deceive my self, in presuming my self to be of
that number, I come down, and examine my self whether I can truly tell my
conscience, that Christ Jesus dyed for me, which I cannot do, if I have not a
desire and an endeavor to conform my self to him; And if I do that, there I
find my Predestination, I am a Christian, and I will not offer to go before
my Master Christ Jesus, I cannot be saved before there was a Savior, In Christ
Jesus is Omne judicium, all judgment, and therefore the judgment of Election,
the first separation of vessels of honor and dishonor in Election and
Reprobation was in Christ Jesus.

Much more evidently is the second judgment of our Justification by means
ordained in the Christian Church, the Judgment of Christ, it is the Gospel of
Christ which is preached to you there, There is no name given under heaven
whereby you should be saved, there are no other means whereby salvation should
be applied in his name given, but those which he has instituted in his Church;
So that when I come to the second judgment, to try whether I stand justified
in the sight of Christ, or no, I come for that Judgment to Christ in his
Church; Do I remember what I contracted with Christ Jesus, when I took the
name of a Christian at my entrance into his Church by Baptism? Do I find I
have endeavored to perform those Conditions? Do I find a remorse when I have
not performed them? Do I feel the remission of those sins applied to me
when I hear the gracious promises of the Gospel shed upon repentant sinners by
the mouth of his Minister? Have I a true and solid consolation, (without shift,
or disguise, or flattering of my conscience) when I receive the seal of his
pardon in the Sacrament? Beloved, not in any moral integrity, not in keeping
the conscience of an honest man, in general, but in using well the means
ordained by Christ in the Christian Church, am I justified. And therefore this
Judgment of Justification is his too. And then the third and last judgment,
which is the judgment of Glorification, Iudiciu^ Glorificationis. Apot. 1. 7.
that is easily agreed by all to appertain unto Christ, Idem Jesus, The same
Jesus that ascended, shall come to judgment, Videbunt quem pupugerant, Apoc.
1. 7.
Every eye shall see him, and they also which pierced him; Then the Son of man
shall come in glory, and he, as man, shall give the judgment, for things done,
or omitted toward him as man, for not feeding, for not clothing, for not
harboring, for not visiting. The sum of all is, that this is the overflowing
goodness of God, that he deals with man by the son of man; and that he
has so given all judgment to the Son, as that if you would be tried by the
first judgment; are you elected or no? The issue is, do you believe in Christ
Jesus, or no? If you would be tried by the second judgment, are you justified
or no? The issue is, do you find comfort in the application of the Word, and
Sacraments of Christ Jesus, or no? If you would be tried by the third
Judgment, do you expect a Glorification, or no? The issue is, Are you so
reconciled to Christ Jesus now, by hearty repentance for sins past, and by
detestation of occasion of future sin, that you durst welcome that Angel which
should come at this time, and swear that time should be no more, that your
transmigration out of this world should be this minute, and that this minute
you might say unfeignedly and effectually, Veni Domine Jesus; come quickly, come
now; if this be your state, then are you partakers of all that blessedness,
which the Father intended to you, when for your sake, he committed all Judgment
to the Son.

SERMON XIII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
JOHN 8. 15. I judge no man.
THe Rivers of Paradise did not all run one way, and yet they flowed from one
head; the sentences of the Scripture flow all from one head, from the holy
Ghost, and yet they seem to present diverse senses, and to admit diverse
interpretations; In such an appearance does this Text differ from that which I
handled in the forenoon, and as heretofore I found it a useful and acceptable
labor, to employ our Evening exercises, upon the vindicating of some such
places of Scripture, as our adversaries of the Roman Church had detorted in
some point of controversy between them and us, and restoring those places to
their true sense, (which course I held constantly for one whole year) so I
think it a useful and acceptable labor, now to employ for a time those
Evening exercises to reconcile some such places of Scripture, as may at first
sight seem to differ from one another; In the morning we saw how Christ judged
all; now we are to see how he judges none; I judge no man.

To come then to these present words, here we have the same person Christ
Jesus, and has not he the same Office? Is not he Judge? certainly though he
retained all his other Offices, though he be the Redeemer, and have shed his
blood in value satisfactory for all our sins, though he be our Advocate and
plead for us in heaven, and present our evidence to that Kingdom, written in
his blood, sealed in his wounds, yet if he be not our Judge, we cannot stand
in judgment; shall he be our Judge, and is he not our Judge yet? Long
before we were he was our Judge at the separation of the Elect and Reprobate,
in Gods eternal Decree. Was he our Judge then, and is he not so still? still
he is present in his Church, and cleares us in all scruples, rectifies us in
all errors, erects us in all dejections of spirit, pronounces peace and
reconciliation in all apprehensions of his Judgments, by his Word and by his
Sacraments, was he, and is he, and shall he not be our Judge still? I am sure
my Redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on earth. Job 19. 24.
So that Christ Jesus is the same to day, and yesterday, and for ever, before
the world begun, and world without end, Sicut erat in principio, as he was in
the beginning, he is, and shall be ever our Judge. Divisio.


So that then these words are not De temp^re, but De modo, there was never any
time when Christ was not Judge, but there were some manner of Judgments which
Christ did never exercise, and Christ had no commission which he did not
execute; for he did all his Fathers will. 1. In secularibus, in civil, or
criminal businesses, which belong merely to the Judicatures, and cognizance of
this world, Iudicat neminem, Christ judges no man. 2. Secundum carnem, so as
they to whom Christ spoke this; who judged, as himself says here, according to
fleshly affections, Iudicat neminem, he judges no man: and 3. Ad internecionem,
so as that upon that Judgment, a man should despair of any reconciliation, any
redintegration with God again, and be without hope of pardon, and remission of
sins in this world, Iudicat neminem, he judges no man; 1. Christ usurps upon no
man's Jurisdiction, that were against justice. 2. Christ imputes no false things
to any man, that were against charity. 3. Christ induces no man to desperation,
that were against faith; and against Justice, against charity, against faith,
Iudicat neminem.

First then, Christ judges not in secular judgments, 1. Part.
and we note his abstinence therein; first, in civil matters, when one of the
company said to him, Non secularla.
Master, bid my brother divide the inheritance with me, Luke 12. 14.
as Saint Augustine says, the Plaintiff thought his cause to be just, and he
thought Christ to be a competent Judge in the cause, and yet Christ declines
the judgment, disavows the authority, and he answers, Homo, quis me constituit
Iudicem, Man, who made me a Judge between you? To that General, which we had
in the morning, Omne judicium, the Son has all judgment; here is an exception
of the same Judges own making, for in secular judgments, Nemo constituit, he
had no commission, and therefore Iudicat neminem, he judges no man; he forbore
in criminal matters too, for when the woman taken in adultery, was brought
before him, he condemned her not; It is true, he absolved her not, the evidence
was pregnant against her, but he condemned her not, he undertook no office of a
Judge, but of a sweet and spiritual Counselor, Go, and sin no more, for
this was his Element, his Tribunal.

When then Christ says of himself, with such a pregnant negative, Quis me
constituit Iudicem, may not we say so too, to his pretended Vicar, the Bishop
of Rome, Qui^te? Who made you Judge of Kings, that you should depose them, in
criminal causes? Or who made you proprietary of Kingdoms, that you should
dispose of them, as of civil inheritances? when to countenance such a
pretense, they detort places of Scripture, not only perversely, but senselesly,
blasphemously, ridiculously, (as ridicolously as in their pasquils, when in an
undiscreet shamlesnes, to make their power greater then it is, they make their
fault greater then it is too, and fill their histories with examples of Kings
deposed by Popes, which in truth were not deposed by them, for in that they are
more innocent then they will confess themselves to be) when some of their
Authors say, that the Primitive Church abstained from deposing Emperors, only
because she was not strong enough to do it, when some of them say, That all
Christian Kingdoms of the earth, may fall into the Church of Rome, by faults
in those Princes, when some of them say, that De facto, the Pope has already a
good title to every Christian Kingdom, when some of them say, that the world
will never he well governed, till the Pope put himself into possession of all
(all which several propositions are in several Authors of good credit amongst
them) will be not endure Christ's own question, Quis te constituit? Who made you
Judge of all this? If they say Christ did; did he it in his Doctrine? It is
hard to pretend that, for such an institution as that must have very clear,
very pregnant words the carry in; did he do it by his example and practice?
we see he abstained in criminal causes, when they come to their last shift,
that is, that Christ did exercise Judiciary Authority, when he whipped
Merchants out of the Temple, when he cursed the fig tree, and damnified the
owner thereof, and when he destroyed the Heard of Swine, (for there, say they,
the Devil was but the Executioner, Christ was the Judge) to all these, and
such as these, it is enough to say, All these were miraculous, and not
ordinary; and though it might seem half a miracle how that should exercise so
much authority as he has done over the world, yet when we look nearer, and see
his means, that he has done all this by Massacres of millions, by withdrawing
Subjects from their Allegiance, by assasinating and murdering of Princes, when
we know that miracles are without means, and we see the means of his
proceedings, the miracle ceases, howsoever that Bishop as Christ's Vicar can
claim no other power, then was ordinary in Christ, and so exercised by Christ,
and so Iudicavit neminem; In secular judgment, Christ judges no man, and
therefore that Bishop as his Vicar should not.

Secondly, Christ judges no man by calumny, by imputing, 2. Part.
or laying false aspersions upon him, nor truths extrajudicially, for that is a
degree of calumny; Detractio.
We enter into a large field, when we go about to speak against calumny, and
slander, and detracti^on, so large a field, as that we may fight out the last
drop of our blood, preach out the last gasp of our breath, before we overcome
it, those to whom Christ spoke here, were such as gave perverse judgments,
caluminiating censures upon him, and so he judges no man, we need not insist
upon that, for it is manifest verum; but that we may see our danger, and our
duty, what calumny is, and so how to avoid it actively, and how to bear it
passively, I must by your leave stop a little upon it.

When then we would present unto you that monster Slander, and Calumny, though
it be hard to bring it within any compass of a division, yet to take the
largeness of the school, and say, that every calumny is either direct, or
indirect, that will comprehend all, and then a direct calumny, will have three
branches, either to lay a false and unjust imputation, or else to aggravate a
just imputation, with unnecessary, but heavy circumstances, or thirdly to
reveal of fault which in it self was secret and I by no duty bound to
discover it, and then the indirect calumny will have three branches too, either
to deny expressly some good that is in another, or to smother it in silence,
when my testimony were due to him, and might advantage him, or lastly to
diminish his good parts, and say they are well, but not such as you would
esteem them to be; collect then again, for that is all, that we shall be able
to do, that he is a calumniator directly, that imputes a false crime, that
aggravates a true crime, that discovers any crime extrajudicially; That he is
an indirect calumniator, that denies another man's sufficiencies, that conceales
them, that diminishes them; Take in some of Saint Bernards examples of these
rules, that it is a calumny to say, Doles vehementer, Sermon. 24. in Can.
I am sorry at the heart for such a man because I love him, but I could never
draw him from such and such a vice, or to say, per me nunquam innotuisset, I
would never have spoken of it, yet since all the world talks of it, the truth
must not be disguised, and so take occasion to discover a fault which no body
knew before, and thereby (as the same Father says) cum gravitate et tarditate
aggredi maledictionem, to cut a man's throat gravely, and soberly, and so much
the more perswasively; because he seems, and pretends to do it all against his
will; This being the rule, and this the exumple, who amongst us is free from
the passive calumny? Who amongst us has not some other man calumniated? Nay
who is free from the active part? Which of us in some of these degrees has not
calumniated some other? But those to whom Christ makes his exception here, that
he judges no man as they judge, were such calumniators, as David speaks of,
Sede^ adversus fratrem tuum loque ba^is, Then sit and speak against thy
neighbor, Psalm. 50. 20.
as Saint Augastin notes upon that place, Non transitory, non surreptionis
passione, sed quasi ad hoc vacans, not by chance, and unawares, not in passion
because he had offended thee, not for company, because thou would be of
their minds, but as though thy profession would bear thee out in it, to leave
the cause and lay aspersion upon the person, so thou art a calumniator, They up
(...) my people as bread, as David says in Gods person: And upon those words of
the same Prophet, says the same Father, De caeteris, when we eat of any thing
else, Psalm. 53. 4.
we taste of this dish, and we taste of that, non semper hoc ^lus, says he we
do not always eat one sallet, one meat, one kind of fruit, sed semper
panem, whatsoever we eat else we always eat bread, howsoever they implored
their thoughts, or their wits otherways, it was always one exercise of them to
calumniate Christ Jesus, and in that kind of calumny, which is the bitterest
of all, they abounded most, which is in scorn and derision, David, and Job,
who were slander proof, in a good measure, yet every where complain
passionately that they were made a scorn, that the wits made libells, that
drunkards sung songs, that fools, and the children of fools derided them; And
when Saul was in his last, and worst agony, and had abandoned himself to a
present death, and prayed his armourbearer to kill him, it was not because the
uncircumcised should not kill him (for he desired death, and he had their
deadly arrows already in his bosom) but it was (as it is expressed there)
lest the uncircumcised should come and abuse him, he was afraid of scorn when
he had but a few minutes of life. Since then Christ judges no man (as they did)
secundum carnem ejus, according to the outward appearance, for they thought no
better of Christ then he seemed to be, (as Fathers take that phrase, nor
secundum carnem suam, according to his own fleshly passions, (as some others
take it) judge not you so neither, first judge not that ye be not judged, Mat.
7. 1.
that is, as Saint Ambrose interprets it well enough, Nolite ^udicare de
judiciis Dei, when you see Gods judgments fall upon a man, when you see the
tower of Silo fall upon a man, do not you judge that that man had sinned more
then you, when you see another borne blind, do not you think that he or his
Father had sinned, and that you only are derived from a pure generation,
especially n^n maledic as surdo, speak not evil of the deaf that hears not;
That is, (as Gregory interprets it if not literally, yet appliably, and
usefully) calumniate not him who is absent, Lev. 19. 14.
and cannot defend himself, it is the devils office to be Accusator fratrum,
and though God do not say in the law, Non erit, yet he says, Non erit
criminator, it is not plainly, Lev. 19. 16.
there shall be no Informer: (for as we dispute, and for the most part affirm
in the School, that though we could, we might destroy no entire species of
those creatures, which God made at first, though it be a Tiger, or a viper,
because this were to take away one link of Gods chain out of the world, so
such vermin as Informers may not, for some good use that there is of them, be
taken away) though it be not non erit, there shall be none, yet it is at least
by way of good counsel to thee, non eris, thou shall not be the man, thou
shall not be the Informer, and for resisting those that are, we are bound, not
only not to harm our neighbors house, but to help him, if casually his house
fall on fire, Prove. 25. 23.
we are bound where where we have authority to stop the mouths of other
calumniators where we have no authority, yet since as the North wind drives
away rain, an angry countenance drives away a backbiting tongue, at least
deal so with a libeller, with a calumniator, for he that looks pleasantly,
and hearkens willingly to one libell, makes another, occasions a second; always
remember David's case, when he thought that he had been giving judgment against
another he was more severe, more heavy, then the law admitted; The law was,
that he that had stolen the sheep should return fourefold, and David's anger was
kindled says the text, and he said, and he swore, As the Lord lives, 2 Samuel 12.
that man shall restore fourfold, Et filius mortis, and he shall surely dies O
judicis superfluentem justitiam, O superabundant and overflowing Justice, when
we judge another in passion; Chrysostom.
But this is judicium secundum carnem, according to which Christ judges no man,
for Christ is love, and that non cogitat malum, love thinks no evil any way; 1
Cor. 13. 5.
The charitable man neither meditates evil against another, nor believes not
easily any evil to be in another, though it be told him.

Lastly, Christ judges no man Ad internecionem, he judges no man so, Non ad
internecionem.
in this world, as to give a final condemnation upon him here; There is no
error in any of his Judgments, but there is an appeal from all his Judgments in
this world; There is a verdict against every man, every man may find his case
recorded, and his sin condemned in the law, and in the Prophets, there is a
verdict, but before Judgment, God would have every man saved by his book, by
the apprehension, and application of the gracious promises of the Gospel, to
his case, and his conscience, Christ judges no man so, as that he should see no
remedy, but to curse God, and die, not so, as that he should say, his sin is
greater then God could forgive, for God sent not his Son into the world to
condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved. John 3. 17.


Do not thou then give malicious evidence against thy self, do not weaken
the merit, nor lessen the value of the blood of thy Savior, as though thy
sin were greater then it; Does God desire thy blood now, when he has
abundantly satisfied his justice with the blood of his Son for thee? what
have thou done? have thou come hypocritically to this place upon collateral
reasons, and not upon the direct service of God? not for love of Information,
of Reformation of thy self? If that be thy case, yet if a man hear my words,
says Christ, and believe not, I judge him not, Job. 12. 47.
he has one that judges him, says Christ, and who is that? The word that I
have spoken, the same shall judge him; It shall, but when? It shall judge him,
says Christ, at that last day, for till the last day, the day of his death, no
man is past recovery, no man's salvation is impossible: Have thou gone farther
then this? Have thou admitted scruples of diffidence, and distrust in Gods
mercy, and so tasted of the lees of desperation? It is true, perpetrare
flagitium est mors anima, sed desper are est descensus ad inferos, In every
sin the soul dies, but in desperation it descends into hell, Isidor.
but yet portae inferi non praevalebunt, Mat. 16. 18.
even the gates of this hell shall not prevail against thee; Assist thy self,
argue thine own case, desperation it self may be without infidelity;
desperation as well as hope is rooted in the desire of happiness; desperation
proceeds out of a fear and a horror of sin, Thom. 1. 2d. 9. 40. or 4.
desperation may consist with faith thus far, that a man may have a true, and
faithful opinion in the general, that there is a remission of sin, to be
had in the Church, and yet have a corrupt imagination in the particular, that
to him in this sinful state that he is in, this remission of sins shall not
be applied, so that the resolution of the School is good, Desperatio potest
esse (...) solo excessu boni; desperation may proceed from an excess of that
which is good in it self, from an excessive over fearing of Gods justice, from
an excessive over hating thine own sins, Et virtute quis male utitur? Can any
man make so ill use of so great virtues, as the fear of God and the hare of
sin? yes they may, so froward a weed is sin, as that it can spring out of
any root, and therefore if it have done so in thee, and thou thereby have made
thy case the harder, yet know still, that Objectum spe^ est ardu^, et possibile,
the true object of hope is hard to come by, but yet possible to come by, and
therefore as David said, 2. Sam. 22. 30.
By my God have I leaped over a wall, so by thy God may thou break through a
wall, through this wall of obduration, which thou thy self have begun to
build about thy self. Feather thy wings again, which even the flames of hell
have touched in these beginnings of desperation, feather them again with this
text Neminem judicat, Christ judges no man, so as a desperate man judges
himself, do not make thy self believe, that thou have sinned against the
holy Ghost; for this is the nearest step thou have made to it, to think that
thou have done it; walk in that large field of the Scriptures of God, and from
the first flower at thy entrance, the flower of Paradise, Semen mulieris, the
general promise of the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, to
the last word of that Messiah upon the Cross, Consummatum est, that all that
was promised for us is now performed, and from the first to the last thou shall
find the savor of life unto life in all those flowers; walk over the same
alley again and consider the first man Adam in the beginning who involved thee
in original sin; and the thief upon the Cross who had continued in actual
sins all his life, and sealed all with the sin of reviling Christ himself
a little before his expiration, and yet he recovered Paradise, and Paradise
that day, and see if thou can make any shift to exclude thy self, receive
the fragrancy of all these Cordialls, Vivit Domin^^, as the Lord lives I would
not the death of a sinner, Quandocunque, At what time soever a sinner
repents, and of this text Neminem judieat, Christ judges no man to
destruction here, and if thou find after all these Antidotes a suspicious air,
a suspicious working in that Impossibi^e est, that it is impossible for them,
who were once enlightened if they fall away, to renew them again by
repentance, sprinkle upon that worm wood of Impossible est, that Manna of
Quorum remiseritis, whose sins ye remit, are remitted, and then it will have
another taste to thee, and thon wilt see that that impossibility lies upon them
only, who are utterly fallen away into an absolute Apostasy, and infidelity,
that make a mock of Christ, and crucify him again, as it is expressed there,
who undervalue, and despise the Church of God, and those means which Christ
Jesus has instituted in his Church for renewing such as are fallen. To such it
is impossible, because there are no other ordinary means possible, but that is
not thy case, thy case is only a doubt, that those means that are sha^^ not
be applied to thee, and even that is a slippery state to doubt of the mercy of
God to thee in particular, this goes so near making thy sin greater then
Gods mercy, as that it makes thy sin greater then daily adulteries, daily
murders, daily blasphemies, daily prophanings of the Sabbath could have done,
and though thou can never make that true in this life that thy sins are
greater then God can forgive, yet this is a way to make them greater, then God
will forgive.

Now to collect both our Exercises, and to connexe both Texts, Christ judges
all men and Christ judges no man, he claims all judgment, and he disavows all
judgment, and they consist well together, he was at our creation, but that was
not his first sense; the Arians who say, Erat quando non erat, there was a time
when Christ was not, intimating that he had a beginning, and therefore was a
creature, yet they will allow that he was created before the general creation,
and so assisted at ours, but he was infinite generations before that, in the
bosom of his Father, at our election, and there in him was executed the first
judgment of separating those who were his, the elect from the reprobate, and
then he knows who are his by that first Judgment: And so comes to his second
Judgment, to seal all those in the visible Church with the outward mark of his
baptism, and the inward mark of his Spirit, and those whom he calls so, he
justifies, and sanctifies, and brings them to his third Judgment, to an
established and perpetual glory. And so all Judgment is his. But then to judge
out of humane affections, and passions, by detraction, and calumny, as they did
to whom he spoke at this time, so he judges no man, so he denies judgment: To
usurp upon the jurisdiction of others, or to exercise any other judgment, then
was his commission, as his pretended Vicar does so he judges no man, so he
disavows all judgment: To judge so as that our condemnation should be
irremediable in this life, so he judges no man, so he forswears all judgment,
As I live, says the Lord of hosts, and as I have died, says the Lord Jesus,
so I judge none. Acknowledge his first Judgment, thy election in him, Christ
his second Judgment, thy justification by him, breath and pant after his third
Judgment, thy Crown of glory for him; intrude not upon the right of other men,
which is the first, defame not, calumniate not other men, which is the second,
lay not the name of reprobate in this life upon any man, which is the third
Judgment, that Christ disavows here, and then thou shall have well understood,
and well practiced both these texts, The Father has committed all Judgment to
the Son, and yet The Son judges no man.

SERMON XIIII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
JOB 19. 26. And though, after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God.
AMongst those Articles, in which our Church has explained, and declared her
faith, this is the eight Article, that the three Creeds, (that of the council
of Nice, that of Athanasius, and that which is commonly known by the name of
the Apostles Creed) ought thoroughly to be received, and embraced. The meaning
of the Church is not, that only that should be believed in which those three
Creeds agree; (for, the Nicen Creed mentions no Article after that of the holy
Ghost, not the Catholic Church, not the Communion of Saints, not the
Resurrection of the flesh; Athanasius his Creed does mention the Resurrection,
but not the Catholic Church, nor the communion of Saints,) but that all
should be believed, which is in any of them, all which is summed up in the
Apostles Creed. Now, the reason expressed in that Article of our Church, why
all this is to be believed, is; Because all this may be proved by most certain
warrants of holy Scriptures. The Article does not insist upon particular places
of Scripture; not so much as point to them. But, they who have enlarged the
Articles, by way of explanation, have done that. And when they come to cite
those places of Scripture, which prove the Article of the Resurrection, I
observe that amongst those places they forbear this text; so that it may seem,
that in their opinion, this Scripture does not concern the Resurrection. It
will not therefore be impertinent, to make it a first part of this exercise,
whether this Scripture be to be understood of the Resurrection, or no; And
then, to make the particular handling of the words, a second part. In the
first, we shall see, that the Jews always had, and have still, a persuasion of
the Resurrection. We shall look after, by what light they saw that; whether by
the light of natural reason; And, if not by that, by what light given in other
places of Scripture; and then, we shall shut up this inquisition with a unanime
consent, (so unanime, as I can remember but one that denies it, and he but
faintly) that in this text, the doctrine of the resurrection is established. In
the second part, the doctrine it self comprised in the words of the text, (And
though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see
God) we shall see first, that the Saints of God themselves, are not privileged
from the common corruption and dissolution of the body; After that curse upon
the Serpent, super pectus gradieris, Genesis 3. 14.
upon thy belly shall thou go, we shall as soon see a Serpent go upright, and
not craule, as, after that Judgment, In pulverem reverteris, to dust thou shall
return, see a man, that shall not see death, and corruption in death.
Corruption upon our skin, says the text, (our outward beauty;) corruption upon
our body, (our whole strength, and constitution.) And, this corruption, not a
green palenesse, not a yellow jaundise, not a blue lividnesse, not a black
morpheu upon our skin, not a bony leanness, not a sweaty faintness, not an
ungratious decrepitnesse upon our body, but a destruction, a destruction to
both, After my skin my body shall be destroyed. Though not destroyed by being
resolved to ashes in the fire, (perchance I shall not be burnt) not destroyed
by being washed to slime, in the sea, (perchance I shall not be drowned) but
destroyed contemptibly, by those whom I breed, and feed, by worms; (After my
skin worms shall destroy my body.) And thus far our case is equal; one
event to the good and bad; worms shall destroy all in them all. And farther
then this, their case is equal too, for, they shall both rise again from this
destruction. But in this lies the future glory, in this lies the present
comfort of the Saints of God, that, after all this, (so that this is not my
last act, to dye, nor my last scene, to lie in the grave, nor my last exit, to
go out of the grave) after, says Job; And indefinitely, After, I know not how
soon, nor how late, I press not into Gods secrets for that; but, after all
this, Ego, I, I that speak now, and shall not speak then, silenced in the
grave, I that see now, and shall not see then, ego videbo, I shall see, (I
shall have a new faculty) videbo Deam, I shall see God (I shall have a new
object) and, In carne, I shall see him in the flesh, (I shall have a new organ,
and a new medium) and, In carne mea, that flesh shall be my flesh, (I shall
have a new propriety in that flesh) this flesh which I have now, is not mine,
but the worms; but that flesh shall be so mine, as I shall never divest it
more, but in my flesh I shall see God for ever.

In the first part then, which is an inquiry, 1. Part.
whether this text concern the Resurrection, or no, we take knowledge of a
Crediderunt, and of a Credunt in the Jews, Iudhi credunt.
that the Jews did believe a Resurrection, and that they do believe it still.
That they do so now, appears out of the doctrine of their Talmud, where we
find, that only the Jews shall rise again, but all the Gentiles shall perish,
body and soul together, as Korah, Numb. 16. 31. 26. 19.
Dathan, and Abiram were swallowed all at once, body, and soul into hell. And
to this purpose, (for the first part thereof, that the Jews shall rise) they
abuse that place of Esaias; Thy dead men shall live; awake and sing, ye that
dwell in the dust. And, 14.
for the second part, that the Gentiles shall not rise, they apply the words of
the same Prophet before, They are dead, they shall not live, they are deceased,
they shall not rise. The Jews only, say they shall rise; but, not all they;
but only the righteous amongst them. And, to that purpose, they abuse that
place of the Prophet Zachary, two parts shall be cut off, and dye, but the
third shall be left therein, and I will bring that third part, 13. 8.
through the fire, and will refine them, as silver is refined, and try them, as
gold is tried. The Jews only of all men, the good Jews only of all Jews, and
of these good Jews, only they who were buried in the land of promise shall
have this present, and immediate resurrection; And to that purpose they force
that place in Genesis where Jacob, upon his deathbed, advised his son
Joseph, to bury him in Canaan, and not in Egypt, 47. 29.
and to that purpose, they detort also, that place of Jeremy, where the Prophet
lays that curse upon Pashur, That he should dye in Babylon, and be buried
there. For, 20. 6.
though the Jews do not absolutely say, that all that are buried out of
Canaan, shall be without a resurrection, yet, they say, that even those good
and righteous Jews, which are not buried in that great Churchyard, the land of
promise, must, at the day of judgment, be brought through the hollow parts of
the earth into the land of promise at that time, and only in that place,
receive their resurrection, wheresoever they were buried. But yet, though none
but Jews, none but righteous Jews, none but righteous Jews in that place, must
be partakers of the Resurrection, yet still a Resurrection there is in their
doctrine.

It is so now; it was so always. We see, in that time, when Christ walked upon
the earth, Crediderunt. John 11. 23.
when he came to the raising of Lazarus, and said to his sister Martha, Thy
brother shall rise again, she replies to Christ, Alas, I know he shall rise
again, at the Resurrection of the last day, I make no doubt of that, we all
know that. So also, when Christ put forth that parable, that in placing of
benefits, Luke 14. 12.
we should rather choose such persons, as were able to make no recompense, he
gives that reason, Thou shall be recompensed at the resurrection of the just.
The Resurrection was a vulgar doctrine, well known to the Jews then, and
always. For, even Herod, when Christ preached and did miracles, was apt to say,
Mat. 6. 14.
John Baptist is risen from the dead; And when it is said of those two great
Apostles, John 20. 9.
(the loving, and the beloved Apostle, Peter, and John) that as yet they knew
not the Scripture, that Christ must rise from the dead, this argues no more,
but that as Peter's compassion before Christ's death, made him dissuade Christ
from going up to Jerusalem, to suffer, Mat. 16. 12.
so their extreme passion after Christ's death, made them the less attentively
to consider those particular Scriptures, which spoke of the Resurrection. For,
the Jews in general, (much more, they) had always an apprehension, and an
acknowledgment of the Resurrection of the dead. By what light they saw this,
and how they came to this knowledge, is our next consideration.

Had they this by the common notions of other men, An exratione.
out of natural Reason? Melanothon, (who is no bold, nor rash, nor dangerous
expressor of himself) says well, Articulus resurrectionis propria
Ecclesiaevox; It is the Christian Church, that has delivered to us the article
of the resurrection. Nature says it not, Philosophy says it not; it is the
language and the Idiotisme of the Church of God, that the resurrection is to be
believed as an article of faith. For, though articles of faith be not facta
Ecclesiae, they are dicta Ecclesiae, though the Church do not make articles,
yet she declares them. In the Creation, the way was, Dixit and facta sunt, God
spoke, and so things were made; In the Gospel, the way is, Fecit, and dicta
sunt, God makes articles of faith, and the Church utters them, presents them.
That Is manifest verum, evidently, undeniably true, that Nature, and Philosophy
say nothing of articles of faith. But, even in Nature, and in Philosophy, there
is some preparation A priore, and much illustration A posteriore, of the
Resurrection. For, first, we know by natural reason, that it is no such thing,
as God cannot do; It implies no contradiction in it self, as that new article
of Transubstantiation does; It implies no defectivenesse in God, as that new
article, The necessity of a perpetual Vicar upon earth, does. For, things
contradictory in themselves, (which necessarily imply a falsehood) things
arguing a defectivenesse in God, (which implies necessarily a derogation, to
his nature, to his natural goodness, to that which we may justly call even
the God of God, that which makes him God to us, his mercy) such things God
himself cannot do, not things which make him an unmercifull, a cruel, a
precondemning God. But, excepting only such things, God, who is that, Grog.
Narianz.
Quod cum dicitur, non potest dici, whom if you name you cannot give him half
his name; for, if you call him God, he has not his Christen name, for he is
Christ as well as God, a Savior, as well as a Creator; Quod cum astimatur, non
potest aestimari, If you value God, weigh God, you cannot give him half his
weight; for, you can put nothing into the balance, to weight him withal, but
all this world; and, there is no single sand in the sea, no single dust upon
the earth, no single atome in the air, that is not likelyer to weigh down all
the world, then all the world is to co^^^pose pose God; Mat. 8. 36.
What is the whole world to a soul? says Christ; but what are all the souls
of the world, to God? What is man, that God should be mindful of him, that
God should ever think of him, Psalm. 8. 5.
and not forget that there is such a thing, such a nothing? Quod cum definitur,
ipsa definitione crescit, says the same Father; If you limit God with any
definition, he grows larger by that definition; for even by that definition
you discern presently that he is something else then that definition
comprehends. That God, Quem omnia nesciunt, and metuendo sciunt, whom no man
knows perfectly, Idem.
yet every man knows so well, as to stand in fear of him, this
incomprehensible God, I say, that works, and who shall let it? can raise our
bodies again from the dead, because, to do so, implies no derogation to
himself, Esaias 43. 13.
no contradiction to his word.

Our reason tells us, he can do it; does our reason tell us as much of his
will, that he will do it? Our reason tells us, that he will do, Anvelit.
whatsoever is most convenient for the Creature, whom, because he has made
him, he loves, and for his own glory. Now this dignity afforded to the dead
body of man, cannot be conceived, but, as a great addition to him. Nor can it
be such a diminution to God, to take man into heaven, as it was for God to
descend, and to take man's nature upon him, upon Earth. A King does not diminish
himself so much, by taking an inferior person into his bosom at Court, as he
should do by going to live with that person, in the Country, or City; and
this God did, in the incarnation of his Son. It cannot be thought
inconvenient, it cannot be thought hard. Our reason tells us, that in all Gods
works, in all his material works, still his latter works are easier then his
former. The Creation, which was the first, and was a mere production out of
nothing, was the hardest of all. The specific ation of Creatures, and the
disposing of them, into their several kinds, the making of that which was made
something of nothing before, a particular thing, a beast, afowle, a fish, a
plant, a man, a Sun or Moon, was not so hard, as the first production out of
nothing. And then, the conservation of all these, in that order in which they
are first created, and then distinguished, the Administration of these
creatures by a constant working of second causes, which naturally produce their
effects, is not so hard as that. And so, accordingly, and in that proportion,
the last work is easiest of all; Distinction and specification easier then
creation, conservatio^, and administration easier then that distinction, and
restitution by resurrection, easiest of all. Tertullian has expressed it well,
Plus est fecisse quam refecisse, and dedisse quam reddidisse; It is a harder
work to make, Tertull.
then to mend, and, to give thee that which was mine, then to restore thee that
which was thine. Et institutio carnis quam destitutio; It is a less matter to
recover a sick man, then to make a whole man. Does this trouble thee, says
Justin Martyr, (and Athenagor as proceeds in the same way of argumentation too,
in his Apology) does this trouble thee, Just. Mart. Athenago.
Quod homo a piscibus, and piscis ab homine comeditar, that one man is devoured
by a fish, and then another man that eats the flesh of that fish, eats, and
becomes the other man? Id nec hominem resolvit in piscem, nec piscem in
hominem, that first man did not become that fish that eat him, nor that fish
become that second man, that eat it; sed utriusque resolutio fit in elementa,
both that man, and that fish are resolved into their own elements, of which
they were made at first. Howsoever it be, if thine imagination could carry thee
so low, as to think, not only that thou were become some other thing, a fish,
or a dog that had fed upon thee, and so, thou could not have thine own
body, but therewithal must have his body too, but that thou were infinitely
farther gone, that thou were an^^ilated, become nothing, can thou choose but
think God as perfect now, at least as he was at first, and can he not as
easily make thee up again of nothing, Tertull.
as he made thee of nothing at first? Recogita quid fueris, antequam esses;
Think over thy self; what wast thou before thou wast any thing? Meminisses
utique, si fuisses; If thou had been any thing then, surely thou would
remember it now. Qui non eras, factus es; Cum iterum non eris, fies; Thou that
wast once nothing, wast made this that thou art now, and when thou shall be
nothing again, thou shall be made better then thou art yet. And, Redderationem
qua factus es, and ego reddam rationem qua fies; Do thou tell me, how thou
wast made then, and I will tell thee how thou shall be made hereafter. And yet
as Solomon sends us to creatures, and to creatures of a low rank and station,
to Ants and Spiders, for instruction, so Saint Gregory sends us to creatures,
to learn the Resurrection. Lux quotidie moritur, and quotidie resurgit; Greg.
That glorious creature, that first creature, the light, dies every day, and
every day has a resurrection. In arbustis folia resurrectione erumpunt; from
the Cedar of Libanus, to the Hyssop upon the wall, every leaf dies every
year, and every year has a Resurrection. Vbi in brevitate seminis, tam
immensa arbor latuit? (as he pursues that meditation.) If thou had seen the
bodies of men rise our of the grave, at Christ's Resurrection, could that be a
stranger thing to thee, then, (if thou had never seen, nor hard, not imagined
it before) to see an Oak that spreads so far, rise out of an Akorne? Or if
Churchyards did vent themselves every spring, and that there were such a
Resurrection of bodies every year, when thou had seen as many Resurrections
as years, the Resurrection would be no stranger to thee, then the spring is.
And thus, this, and many other good and reverend men, and so the holy Ghost
himself sends us to Reason, and to the Creature, for the doctrine of the
Resurrection; Saint Paul allows him not the reason of a man, that proceeds not
so; Thou fool, says he, that which thou sowest, is not quickened except it dye;
1 Cor. 15. 36.
but then it is. It is truly harder to conceive a translation of the body into
heaven, then a Resurrection of the body from the earth. Ambr.
Number in hominibus terra degenerat, quae omnia regenerare consuevit? Do all
kinds of earth regenerate, and shall only the Churchyard degenerate? Is there
a yearly Resurrection of every other thing, and never of men? Tertull.
Omnia pereunde servantur, All other things are preserved, and continued by
dying; Tu homo solus ad hoc morieris, ut pereas? And can thou, O man, suspect
of thy self, that the end of thy dying is an end of thee? Fall as low as thou
can, corrupt and putresie as desperately as thou can, Idem.
sis nihil, think thy self nothing; Ejus est nihilum ipsum cujus est totum,
even that nothing is as much in his power, as the world which he made of
nothing; And, as he called thee when thou wast not, as if thou had been, so
will he call thee again, when thou art ignorant of that being which thou have
in the grave, and give thee again thy former, and glorify it with a better
being.

The Jews then, if they had no other helps, Anex Scripturis.
might have, (as natural men may) preparations a Priore, and illustrations a
Posteriore, for the doctrine of the Resurrection. The Jews had seen
resuscitations, from the dead in particular persons, and they had seen
miraculous cures done by their Prophets. And Gregory Nyssen says well, Greg.
Nyss.
that those miraculous cures which Christ wrought, with a Toll grabatum, and
an Este sanus, and no more, they were praeludia resurrectionis,
halfe-resurrections, prologues, and inducements to the doctrine of the
resurrection, which shall be transacted with a Surgite mortui, and no more. So
these natural helps in the consideration of the creature, are praeludia
resurrectionis, they are halfe-resurrections, and these natural resurrections
carry us half way to the miraculous resurrection. But certainly, the Jews,
who had that, which the Gentiles wanted, The Scriptures, had from them, a
general, though not an explicit knowledge of the resurrection. That they had
it, we see by that practice of Judas the Maccabee, 2. Macab. 12. 43.
in gathering a contribution to send to Jerusalem, which is therefore
commended, because he was therein mindful of the Resurrection. Neither does
Christ find any that opposed the doctrine of the Resurrection, but those, who
though they were tolerated in the State, because they were otherwise great
persons, Act. 15. 5.
were absolute Heretics, even amongst the Jews, The Sadduces. And Saint Paul,
when, finding himself to be oppressed in Judgment, he used his Christian
wisdom, and to draw a strong party to himself, protested himself to be of
the sect of the Pharisees; and that, as they, and all the rest, in general,
did, he maintained the Resurrection, he knew it would seem a strange injury,
and an oppression, to be called in question for that, that they all believed;
Though therefore our Savior Christ, who disputed then, only against the
Sadduces, argued for the doctrine of the Resurrection, only from that place of
the Scripture, which those Sadduces acknowledged to be Scripture, (for they
denied all but the books of Moses) Luke 20. 37.
and so insisted upon those words, Exodus 3. 6.
I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yet
certainly the Jews had established that doctrine, upon other places too,
though to the Sadduces who accepted Moses only, Moses were the best evidence.
It is evident enough in that particular place of Daniel, Many of them that
sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, 12. 2.
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And in
Daniel, that word many, must not be restrained to less then all; Daniel
intends by that many, that how many soever they are, they shall all arise; Romans
5. 19. 12.
as Saint Paul does, when he says, By one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners; that is, All, for, death passed over all men, for all have sinned. And
Christ does but paraphrase that place of Daniel, who says, Multi, many, when he
says, Omnes, all; All that are in the grave shall hear his voice and shall
come forth; They that have done good, Mat. 5. 28.
unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil to the
resurrection of damnation. This then being thus far settled, that the Jews
understood the resurrection, and more then that, they believed it, and
therefore, as they had light in nature, they had assurance in Scripture, come
we now, to that which was our last purpose in this first part, whether in this
text, in these words of Job, (though after my skin, worms destroy my body)
there be any such light of the Resurrection given.

It is true, that in the new Testament, where the doctrine of the resurrection
is more evidently, An ex hac Scriptura.
more liquidly delivered, then in the old, (though it be delivered in the old
too) there is no place cited out of the book of Job, for the resurrection; and
so, this is not. But it is no marvel; both upon that reason which we noted
before, that they who were to be convinced, were such as received only the
books of Moses, and therefore all citations from this book of Job, or any
other had been impertinently and frivolously employed, and, because in the new
Testament, there is but one place of this book of Job cited at all. 1. 3. 19.
5. 13.
To the Corinthians the Apostle makes use of those words in Job, God takes the
wise in their own craft; And more then this one place, is not, (I think)
cited out of this book of Job in the new Testament. But, the authority of Job
is established in another place; you have heard of the patience of Job, and you
have seen the end of the Lord, 5. 11.
says Saint James. As you have seen this, so you have heard that; seen and
heard one way, out of the Scripture; you have hard that out of the book of
Job, you have seen this out of the Gospel. And further then this, there is no
naming of Jobs person, or his book in the new Testament. Saint Hierome
confesses, Praefat. in Job.
that both the Greek, and Latin Copies of this book, were so defective in
his time, that seven or eight hundred verses of the original were wanting in
the book. And, for the original it self, he says, Obliquus totus liber
fertur, and lubricus, it is an uncertain and slippery book. But this is only
for the sense of some places of the book; And that made the authority of this
book, to be longer suspended in the Church, and oftener called into question by
particular men, then any other book of the Bible. But, in those who have, for
many ages, received this book for Canonical, there is an unanime
acknowledgement, (at least, tacitly) that this piece of it, this text, (When,
after my skin, worms shall destroy my body, yet in my flesh I shall see God)
does establish the Resurrection.

Divide the expositors into three branches; (for, so, the world will needs
divide them) The first, Parts.
the Roman Church will call theirs; though they have no other title to them,
but that they received the same translation that they do. And all they use
this text for the resurrection. Greg.
Verba viri in gentilitate positi erubescamus; It is a shame for us, who have
the word of God it self, (which Job had not) and have had such a commentary,
such an exposition upon all the former word of God, as the real, and actual,
and visible resurrection of Christ himself, Erubescamus verba viri in
gentilitate positi, let us be ashamed and confounded, if Job, a person that
lived not within the light of the covenant, saw the resurrection more clearly,
and professed it more constantly then we do. Greg. Nyss. 42. 10.
And, as this Gregory of Rome, so Gregory Nyssen understood Job too. For, he
considers Jobs case thus; God promised Job twofold of all that he had lost; And
in his sheep and camels, and oxen, and asses, which were utterly destroyed, and
brought to nothing, God performs it punctually, he had all in a double
proportion. 12.
But Job had seven sons; and three daughters before, and God gives him but
seven sons; and three daughters again; And yet Job had twofold of these too;
for Postnati cum prioribus numerantur, quia omnes deo vivunt; Those which were
gone, and those which were new given, lived all one life, because they lived
all in God; Necquicquam aliud est mors nisi viti, ositatis expiatio; Death is
nothing else, but a devesting of those defects, which made us less fit for
God. And therefore, agreeably to this purpose, says Saint Cyprian, Scimus non
amitti, sed praemitti; Cyprian.
thy dead are not lost, but lent. Non recedere, sed praecedere; They are not
gone into any other womb, then we shall follow them into; nec acquirendae,
atrae vestes, pro iis qui albis induuntur, neither should we put on blacks, for
them that are clothed in white, nor mourn for them, that are entered into their
Masters joy. We can enlarge our selfs no farther in this consideration of the
first branch of expositors, but that all the ancients took occasion from this
text to argue for the resurrection.

Take into your Consideration the other two branches of modern expositors,
Lutheran. Calvinist.
(whom others sometimes contumeliously, and themselves sometimes perversely have
called Lutherans and Calvinists, and you may know, that in the first rank,
Osiander, and with him, all his interpret these words so; And in the other
rank, Tremellius, and Pellicanus, heretofore, Polanus lately, and Piscator,
for the present; All these, and all the Translators into the vulgar tongues of
all our neighbors of Europe, do all establish the doctrine of the Resurrection
by these words, this place of Job. And therefore, though one, (and truly for
any thing I know, but one) though one, to whom we all owe much, for the
interpretation of the Scriptures, Calvin.
do think that Job intends no other resurrection in this place, but that, when
he shall be reduced to the miserablest estate that can be in this life, still
he will look upon God, and trust in him for his restitution, and reparation in
this life; let us with the whole Christian Church, embrace and magnify this
Holy and Heroical Spirit of Job; Scio, says he; I know it, (which is more in
him, then the Credo is in us, more to know it then, in that state, then to
believe it now, after it has been so evidently declared, not only to be a
certain truth, but to be an article of faith) Scio Redemptorem, says he; I know
not only a Creator, but a Redeemer; And, Redemptorem meum, My Redeemer, which
implies a confidence, and a personal application of that Redemption to
himself. Scio vivere, says he; I know that he lives; I know that he begun
not in his Incarnation, I know he ended not in his death, but it always was,
and is now, and shall for ever be true, Vivit, that he lives still. And then,
Scio venturum, says he too; I know he shall stand at the last day to Judge me
and all the world; And after that, and after my skin and body is destroyed by
worms, yet in my flesh I shall see God. And so have you as much as we proposed
for our first part; That the Jews do now, that they always did believe a
Resurrection; That as natural men, and by natural reason they might know it,
both in the possibility of the thing, and in the purpose of God, that they had
better helps then natural reason, for they had diverse places of their
Scripture, and that this place of Scripture, which is our text, has evermore
been received for a proof of the Resurrection. Proceed we now, to those
particulars which constitute our second part, such instructions concerning the
Resurrection, as arise out of these words, Though after my skin, worms
destroy my body, yet in my flesh I shall see God.

In this second part, the first thing that was proposed, was, That the Saints
of God, 2. Part. Sancti non eximuntur.
are not priviledg'd from this, which fell upon Job, This Death, this
dissolution after death. Upon the Morte morieris, that double death,
interminated by God upon Adam, there is a Non obstante; Revertere, turn to God,
and thou shall not die the death, not the second death. But upon that part of
the sentence, In pulverem reverteris, To dust thou shall return, there is no
Non obstante; though thou turn to God, thou must turn into the grave; for, he
that redeemed thee from the other death, redeemed not himself from this. Carry
this consideration to the last minute of the world, 1 These. 4. 17.
when we that remain shall be caught up in the clouds, yet even that last fire
may be our fever, those clouds our winding sheets, that rapture our
dissolution; and so, with Saint Augustine, most of the ancients, most of the
latter men think, that there shall be a sudden dissolution of body and soul,
which is death, and a sudden re-uniting of both, which is resurrection, in that
instant; Quis Homeo, is David's question; What man is he that lives and shall
not see death? Let us add, Quis Deoram? What god is he amongst the Gentiles,
Psalm. 89. 48.
that has not seen death? Which of their three hundred Jupiters, which of
their thousands of other gods, have not seen death? Mortibus morjuntur; we may
add to that double death in Gods mouth, another death; The gods of the
Gentiles have dyed thrice; In body, in soul, and in fame; for, though they have
been glorified with a Deification, nor one of all those old gods, is, at this
day, worshipped, in any part of the world, but all those temporary, and
transitory Gods, are worn out, and dead in all senses. Those gods, who were but
men, fall under David's question, Quis Home? And that man who was truly God,
falls under it too, Christ Jesus; He saw death, though he saw not the death of
this text, Corruption. And, if we consider the effusion of his precious blood,
the contusion of his sacred flesh, the extention of those sinews, and ligaments
which tied heaven, and earth together, in a reconciliation, the departing of
that Intelligence from that sphere, of that high Priest from that Temple, of
that Dove from that Arc, of that soul from that body, that dissolution (which,
as an ordinary man he should have had in the grave, but that the decree of God,
declared in the infallibility of the manifold prophesies, preserved him from
it) had been but a slumber, in respect of these tortures, which he did suffer;
The Godhead staid with him in the grave, and so he did not corrupt, but, though
our souls be gone up to God, our bodies shall.

Corruption in the skin, says Job; In the outward beauty, In pelle.
These be the Records of velim, these be the parchmins, the endictments, and
the evidences that shall condemn many of us, at the last day, our own skins; we
have the book of God, the Law, written in our own hearts; we have the image of
God imprinted in our own souls; we have the character, and seal of God stamped
in us, in our baptism; and, all this is bound up in this velim, in this
parchmin, in this skin of ours, and we neglect book, and image, and character,
and feal, and all for the covering. It is not a clear case, if we consider the
original words properly, That Iesabel did paint; and yet all translators, 2
Reg. 5. 30.
and expositors have taken a just occasion, out of the ambiguity of those
words, to cry down that abomination of painting. It is not a clear case, if we
consider the propriety of the words, That Absolon was hanged by the hair of the
head; 2 Samuel 18. 9.
and yet the Fathers and others have made use of that indifferency, and
verisimilitude, to explode that abomination, of cherishing and curling hair,
to the enveagling, and ensnaring, and entangling of others; Iudicium patietur
aeternum, says Saint Hierome, Thou art guilty of a murder, though no body die;
Quia vinum attulisti, si faisset qui bibisset; Hieron:
Thou have poisoned a cup, if any would drink, thou have prepared a tentation,
if any would swallow it. Tertullian Tertul.
thought he had done enough, when he had writ his book De Habitu muli^bri,
against the excess of women in clothes, but he was fain to add another with
more vehemence, De cultu foeminarum, that went beyond their clothes to their
skin. And he concludes, Illud ambitionis crimen, there is vainglory in their
excess of clothes, but, Hoc prostitutionis, there is prostitution in drawing
the eye to the skin. Pliny says, that when their thin silk stuffes were first
invented at Rome, Excogitatum ad faeminas denudandas, It was but an invention
that women might go naked in clothes, for their skins might be seen through
those clothes, those thin stuffes: Our women are not so careful, but they
expose their nakedness professedly, and paint it, to cast bird-lime for the
passengers eye. Beloved, good diet makes the best Complexion, and a good
Conscience is a continual feast; A cheerful heart makes the best blood, and
peace with God is the true cheerfulness of heart, Thy Savior neglected his
skin so much, as that at last, he scarce had any; all was torn with the whips,
and scourges; and thy skin shall come to that absolute corruption, as that,
though a hundred years after thou art buried, one may find thy bones, and say,
this was a tall man, this was a strong man, yet we shall soon be past saying,
upon any relic of thy skin, This was a fair man; Corruption seises the
skin, all outward beauty quickly, and so it does the body, the whole frame
and constitution, which is another consideration; After my skin, my Body.

If the whole body were an eye, or an ear, where were the body, says Saint
Paul; but, In corpore. 1 Cor. 12. 17.
when of the whole body there is neither eye nor ear, nor any member left,
where is the body? And what should an eye do there, where there is nothing to
be seen but loathsomeness; or a nose there, where there is nothing to be smelt,
but putrefaction; or an ear, where in the grave they do not praise God? Does
not that body that boasted but yesterday of that privilege above all
creatures, that it only could go upright, lie to day as flat upon the earth
as the body of a horse, or of a dog? And does it not to morrow lose his other
privilege, of looking up to heaven? Is it not farther removed from the eye of
heaven, the Sun, then any dog, or horse, by being covered with the earth,
which they are not? Painters have presented to us with some horror, the
s^cleton, the frame of the bones of a man's body; but the state of a body, in
the dissolution of the grave, no pencil can present to us. Between that
excrementall jelly that thy body is made of at first, and that jelly which thy
body dissolves to at last; there is not so noisome, so putrid a thing in
nature. This skin, (this outward beauty) this body, (this whole constitution)
must be destroyed, says Iob^ in the next place.

The word is well chosen, by which all this is expressed, in this text, Nakaph,
Destroyed.
which is a word of as heavy a signification, to express an utter abolition,
and annihilation, as perchance can be found in all the Scriptures. Tremellius
has mollifyed it in his translation; there it is but Confodere, to pierce. And
yet it is such a piercing, such a sapping, such an undermining, such a
demolishing of a fort of Castle, as may justly remove us from any high
valuation, or any great confidence, in that skin, and in that body, upon
which this Confoderint must fall. But, in the great Bible it is Contriverint,
Thy skin, and thy body shall be ground away, trod away upon the ground. Ask
where that iron is that is ground off of a knife, or axe; Ask that marble that
is worn off of the threshold in the Church Porch by continual treading, and
with that iron; and with that marble, thou may find thy Fathers skin, and
body; Contrita sunt, The knife, the marble, the skin, the body are ground
away, trod away, they are destroyed, who knows the revolutions of dust? Dust
upon the Kings highway, and dust upon the Kings grave, are both, or neither,
Dust Royal, and may change places; who knows the revolutions of dust? Even in
the dead body of Christ Jesus himself, one dram of the decree of his Father,
one sheet, one sentence of the prediction of the Prophets preserved his body
from corruption, and incineration, more then all Joseph's new tombs, and fine
linen, and great proportion of spices could have done. O, who can express
this inexpreffible mystery? The foul of Christ Jesus, which took no harm by
him, contracted no Original sin, in coming to him, was guilty of no more sin,
when it went out, then when it came from the breath and bosom of God, yet this
soul left this body in death. And the Divinity, the Godhead, incomparably
better then that soul, which soul was incomparably better then all the Saints,
and Angels in heaven, that Divinity, that Godhead did not forsake the body,
though it were dead If we might compare things infinite in themselves, it was
nothing so much, that God did assume man's nature, as that God did still cleave
to that man, then when he was no man, in the separation of body and soul, in
the grave. But full we from incomprehensible mysteries; for, there is
mortification enough, (and mortification is vivification, and aedification) in
this obvious consideration; skin and body, beauty and substance must be
destroyed; And, Destroyed by worms, which is another descent in this
humiliation, and ex^anition of man, in death; After my skin, worms shall
destroy this body.

I will not insist long upon this, because it is not in the Original, In the
Original there is no mention of worms. Vermes. 21. 26. 24. 20.
But because in other places of Job there is, (They shall lie down alike in the
dust, and the worms shall cover them) (The womb shall forget them, and the worm
shall feed sweetly on them; and because the word Destroying is presented in that
form and number, Contriverint, when they shall destroy, they and no other
persons, no other creatures named) both our later translations, (for indeed,
our first translation has no mention of worms) and so very many others, even
Tremell^s that adheres most to the letter of the Hebrew, have filled up this
place, with that addition, Destroyed by worms. It makes the destruction the
more contemptible; Thou that would not admit the beams of the Sun upon
thy skin, and yet have admitted the pollutions of sin; Thou that would
not admit the breath of the air upon thy skin, and yet have admitted the
spirit of lust, and unchaste solicitations to breath upon thee, in execrable
oaths, and blasphemies, to vicious purposes; Thou, whose body has (as far
as it can) putrefyed and corrupted even the body of thy Savior, in an unworthy
receiving thereof, in this skin, in this body, must be the food of worms, the
prey of destroying worms. After a low birth thou may pass an honorable
life, after a sentence of an ignominious death, Acts 12: 23.
thou may have an honorable end; But, in the grave can thou make these
worms silk worms? They were bold and early worms that eat up Herod before he
dyed; They are bold and everlasting worms, which after thy skin and body is
destroyed, shall remain as long as God remains, in an eternal gnawing of thy
conscience; long, long after the destroying of skin and body, by bodily worms.

Thus far then to the destroying of skin and body by worms, all men are
equal; Thus far all is Common law, Post.
and no Prerogative, so is it also in the next step too; The Resurrection is
common to all. The prerogative lies not in the Rising, but in the rising to the
fruition of the sight of God; in which consideration, the first beam of comfort
is the Postquam, After all this, destruction before by worms; ruinous misery
before; but there is something else to be done upon me after. God leaves no
state without comfort. God leaves some inhabitants of the earth, under longer
nights then others, but none under an everlasting night; and, those, whom he
leaves under those long nights, he recompenses with as long days, after. I were
miserable, if there were not an Antequam in my behalf; if before I had done
well or ill actually in this world, God had not wrapped me up, in his good
purpose upon me. And I were miserable again, if there were not a Postquam in
my behalf; If, after my sin had cast me into the grave, there were not a
loud trumpet to call me up, and a gracious countenance to look upon me, when I
were risen. Nay, let my life have been as religious, as the infirmities of this
life can admit, 1 Cor. 15. 19.
yet, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are, of all men, most
miserable. For, for the worldly things of this life, first, the children of God
have them in the least proportions of any; and besides that, those children of
God, which have them in larger proportion, do yet make the least use of them,
of any others, because the children of the world, are not so tender
conscienced, nor so much afraid, lest those worldly things should become
snares, and occasions of tentation to them, if they open themselves to a full
enjoying thereof, as the children of God are. And therefore, after my wanting
of many worldly things, (after a penurious life) and, after my not daring to
use those things that I have, so freely as others do, after that holy and
conscientious forbearing of those things that other men afford themselves,
after my leaving all these absolutely behind me here, and my skin and body in
destruction in the grace, After all, there remains something else for me.
After; but how long after? That Is next.

When Christ was in the body of that flesh, which we are in, Quando? Mar. 13.
32.
now, (sin only excepted) he said, in that state that he was in then, Of
that day and hour, no man knows, not the Angels, not the Son. Then, in
that state, he excludes himself. And when Christ was risen again, in an
uncorruptible body, he said, even to his nearest followers, Non est vestru^^,
Act^. 17. Basil.
it is not for you, to know times, and seasons. Before in his state of
mortality, (...) ignor antibus, he pretended to know no more of this, then they
that knew nothing. After, when he had invested immortality, per sui
exceptionem, (says that Father) he excepts none but himself; all the rest,
even the Apostles, were left ignorant thereof. For this non est vestrum, (it is
not for you) is part of the last sentence that ever Christ spoke to them. If it
be a convenient answer to say, Christ knew it not, as man, how bold is that man
that will pretend to know it? And, if it be a convenient interpretation of
Christ's words, that he knew it not, that is, knew it not so, as that he might
tell it them, how indiscreet are they, who, though they may seem to know it,
will publish it? For, thereby they fill other men with scruples, and vexations,
and they open themselves to scorn and reproach, when their predictions prove
false, as Saint Augustine observed in his time, and every age has given
examples since, of confident men that have failed in these conjectures. It is a
poor pretense to say, this intimation, this impression of a certain time,
prepares men with better dispositions. For, they have so often been found
false, that it rather weakens the credit of the thing it self. In the old
world they knew exactly the time of the destruction of the world; that there
should be an hundred and twenty years, Genesis 6. 3.
before the flood came; And yet, upon how few, did that prediction, though from
the mouth of God himself, work to repentance? Na^^ found grace in Gods eyes;
but it was not because he mended his life upon that prediction, but he was
grations in Gods sight before. At the day of our death, we write
Pridi^r^surr^ctioni^, the day before the resurrection; It is Vigilia
resurectionis; Our Easter Eve. Adveniat regnum tuum, possess my soul of thy
kingdom then: And, Fi^^ voluntas tua, my body shall arise after, but how soon
after, or how late after, thy will be done then; by thy self, and thy will
be known, till then, to thy self.

We pass on. Ego.
As in Massa damnata, the whole lump of mankind is under the condemnation of
Adams sin, and yet the good purpose of God severs some men from that
condemnation, so, at the resurrection, all shall rise; but not all to glory.
But amongst them, that do, Ego, says Job, I shall. I, as I am the same man,
made up of the samebody, and the same soul. Shall I imagine a difficulty in my
body, because I have lost an Arm in the East, and a leg in the West? because I
have left some blood in the North, and some bones in the South? Do but
remember, with what ease you have sat in the chair, casting an account, and
made a shilling on one hand, a pound on the other, or five shillings below, ten
above, because all these lay easily within your reach. Consider how much less,
all this earth is to him, that sits in heaven, and spans all this world, and
reunites in an instant arms, and legs, blood, and bones, in what corners so
ever they be scattered. The greater work may seem to be in reducing the soul;
That that soul which sped so ill in that body, last time it came to it, as
that it contracted Original sin then, and was put to the slavery to serve
that body, and to serve it in the ways of sin, not for an Apprentiship of
seven, but seventy years after, that that soul after it has once got loose by
death, and lived God knows how many thousands of years, free from that body;
that abused it so before, and in the sight and fruition of that God, where it
was in no danger, should willingly, nay desirously. ambitiously seek this
scuttered body; this Eastern, and Western, and Northern, and Southern body,
this is the most inconsiderable consideration, and yet, Ego, I, I the same
body, and the same soul, shall be recompact again, and be identically,
numerically, individually the same man. The same integrity of body, and soul,
and the same integrity in the Organs of my body, and in the faculties of my
soul too; I shall be all there, my body, and my soul, and all my body, and all
my soul I am not all here, I am here now preaching upon this text, and I am at
home in my Library considering whether S. Gregory, or S. Hierome, have said
best of this text, before. I am here speaking to you, and yet I consider by the
way, in the same instant, what it is likely you will say to one another, when I
have done, you are not all here neither; you are here now, hearing me, and yet
you are thinking that you have heard a better Sermon somewhere else, of this
text before, you are here, and yet you think you could have heard some other
doctrine of downright Predestinations and Reprobation roundly delivered
somewhere else with more edification to you^ you are here, and you remember
your selves that now ye think of it. This had been the fittest time, now, when
every body else is at Church, to have made such and such a private visit; and
because you would be there, you are there. I cannot say, you cannot say so
perfectly, so entirely now, as at the Resurrection, Ego, I am here; I, body and
soul; I, soul and faculties: as Christ said to Peter, Noli timere, Ego sum,
Fear nothing, it is I; so I say to my self, Noli timere; My soul, why art thou
so sad, my body, why do thou languish: Ego, I, body and soul, soul and
faculties, shall say to Christ Jesus, Ego sum, Lord, it is I, and he shall not
say, Nescio te, I know thee not, but avow me, and place me at his right hand.
Ego sum, Lam. 3. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 4.
I am the man that has seen affliction, by the rod of his wrath; Ego sum, and
I the same man, shall receive the crown of glory which shall not fade.

Ego, Videbo.
I, the same person; Ego videbo, I shall see; I have had no looking-glass in
my grave, to see how my body looks in the dissolution; I know not how. I have
had no houre-glasse in my grave to see how my time passes; I know not when:
for, when my eylids are closed in my deathbed, Apoc. 10. 7. Dan. 7. 9.
the Angel has said to me, that time shall be no more; Till I see eternity,
the ancient of days, I shall see no more; but then I shall: Now, why is Job
gladder of the use of this sense of seeing, then of any of the other? He is
not; He is glad of seeing, but not of the sense, but of the Object. It is true
that is said in the School, ^ quin. sup. q. 82. ^. 4.
Vicinius se habent potentiae sensitivae ad animam quam corpus; Our sensitive
faculties have more relation to the soul, then to the body; but yet to some
purpose, and in some measure, all the senses shall be in our glorified bodies,
In actu, or in potentia, say they; so as that we shall use them, or so as that
we might. But this sight that Job speaks of, is only the fruition of the
presence of God, in which consists eternal blessedness. 1 Cor. 13. 12.
Here, in this world, we see God per speculum, says the Apostle, by reflection,
upon a glass; we see a creature; and from that there arises an assurance that
there is a Creator; we see him in aenigmate, says he; which is not ill rendered
in the margin, in a Riddle, we see him in the Church; but men have made it a
riddle; which is the Church, we see him in the Sacrament, but men have made it
a riddle; by what light, and at what window: Do I see him at the window of
bread and wine; Is he in that; or do I see him by the window of faith; and is
he only in that? still it is in a riddle. Do I see him a Priore, (I see that
I am elected, and therefore I cannot sin to death.) Or do I see him a
Posteriore, (because I see my self careful not to sin to death, therefore I
am elected) I shall see all problematicall things come to be dogmaticall, I
shall see all these rocks in Divinity, come to be smooth alleys; I shall see
Prophe^ies untyed, Riddles dissolved, controversies reconciled; but I shall
never see that, till I come to this sight which follows in out text, Videbo
Deum, I shall see God.

No man ever saw God and lived; Deum.
and yet, I shall not live till I see God; and when I have seen him I shall
never dye. What have I ever seen in this world, that has been truly the same
thing that it seemed to me? I have seen marble buildings, and a chip, a crust,
a plaster, a face of marble has pilld off, and I see brick-bowels within. I
have seen beauty, and a strong breath from another, tells me, that that
complexion is from without, not from a sound constitution within. I have seen
the state of Princes, and all that is but ceremony; and, I would be loath to
put a Master of ceremonies to define ceremony, and tell me what it is, and to
include so various a thing as ceremony, in so constant a thing, as a
Definition. I see a great Officer, and I see a man of mine own profession, of
great revenues, and I see not the interest of the money, that was paid for it,
I see not the pensions, nor the Annuities, that are charged upon that Office,
or that Church. As he that fears God, fears nothing else, so, he that sees God,
sees every thing else: 1 John 3. 2.
when we shall see God, Sicuti est, as he is, we shall see all things Sicuti
sunt, as they are; for that is their Essence, as they conduce to his glory. We
shall be no more deluded with outward appearances: for, when this sight, which
we intend here comes, there will be no delusory thing to be seen. All that we
have made as though we saw, in this world, will be vanished, and I shall see
nothing but God, and what is in him; and him I shall see in carne, in the
flesh, which is another degree of Exaltation in mine Exinanition.

I shall see him, In carne.
In car^e sua, in his flesh: And this was one branch in Saint Augustines great
wish, That he might have seen Rome in her state, That he might have heard S.
Paul preach, That he might have seen Christ in the flesh: Saint Augustine has
seen Christ in the flesh one thousand two hundred years; in Christ's glorified
flesh; but, it is with the eyes of his understanding, and in his soul. Our
flesh, even in the Resurrection, cannot be a spectacle, a perspective glass to
our soul. We shall see the Humanity of Christ with our bodily eyes, then
glorified; but, that flesh, though glorified, cannot make us see God better,
nor clearer, then the soul alone has done, all the time, from our death, to
our resurrection. But as an indulgent Father, or as a tender mother, when they
go to see the King in any Solemnity, or any other thing of observation, and
curiosity, delights to carry their child, which is flesh of their flesh, and
bone of their bone, with them, and though the child cannot comprehend it as
well as they, they are as glad that the child sees it, as that they see it
themselves, such a gladness shall my soul have, that this flesh, (which she
will no longer call her prison, nor her tempter, but her friend, her companion,
her wife) that this flesh, that is, I, in in the reunion, and redintegration
of both parts, shall see God; for then, one principal clause in her rejoicing,
and acclamation, shall be, that this flesh is her flesh; In carne mea, in my
flesh I shall see God.

It was the flesh of every wanton object here, Mea.
that would allure it in the petulancy of mine eye. It was the flesh of every
Satyricall Libeller, and defamer, and calumniator of other men, that would call
upon it, and tickle mine ear with aspersions and slanders of persons in
authority. And in the grave, it is the flesh of the worm; the possession is
transferred to him. But, in heaven, it is Caro mea, My flesh, my souls flesh, my
Saviors flesh. As my meat is assimilated to my flesh, and made one flesh with
it; as my soul is assimilated to my God, 2. Pet. 1. 4. 1. Cor. 6. 17.
and made partaker of the divine nature, and Idem Spiritus, the same Spirit
with it; so, there my flesh shall be assimilated to the flesh of my Savior,
and made the same flesh with him too. Verbum caro factum, ut caro resurgeret;
Therefore the Word was made flesh, Athanas.
therefore God was made man, that that union might exalt the flesh of man to
the right hand of God. That Is spoken of the flesh of Christ; and then to
facilitate the passage for us, Reformat ad immortalitatem suam participes sui;
Cyril.
those who are worthy receivers of his flesh here, are the same flesh with him;
Romans 8. 11.
And, God shall quicken your mortal bodies, by his Spirit is that dwells in
you. But this is not in consummation, in full accomplishment, till this
resurrection, when it shall be Caro mea, my flesh, so, as that nothing can draw
it from the allegiance of my God; and Caro mea, My flesh, so, as that nothing
can divest me of it. Here a bullet will ask a man, where is your arm; and a
Wolf will ask a woman, where is your breast. A sentence in the Star Chamber will
ask him, where is your ear, and a mouths close prison will ask him, where is
your flesh? A fever will ask him, where is your Red, and a morphew will ask
him, where is your white? But when after all this, when after my skin worms
shall destroy my body, I shall see God, I shall see him in my flesh, which
shall be mine as inseparably, (in the effect, though not in the manner) as the
Hypostaticall union of God, and man, in Christ, makes our nature and the
Godhead one person in him. My flesh shall no more be none of mine, then Christ
shall not be man, as well as God.

SERMON XV.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
1 COR. 15. 50. Now this I say Brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God.
SAint Gregory has delivered this story; Moral. 14. 29.
That Eutychius, who was Bishop of Constantinople, having written a book of the
Resurrection, and therein maintained that error, That the body of Christ had
not, that our bodies, in the Resurrection should not have any of the qualities
of a natural body, but that those bodies were, in subtilitatem redacta, so
rarifyed, so refined, so atten^ated, and reduced to a thinness, and
subtlenesse, that they were aerie bodies, and not bodies of flesh and blood.
This error made a great noise, and raised a great dust, till the Emperor, to
avoid scandal, (which for the most part arises out of public conferences) was
pleased to hear Eutychius, and Gregory dispute this point privately before
himself, and a small company; And, that upon conference, the Emperor was so
well satisfied, that he commanded Eutychius his books to be burnt. That after
this, both Gregory and Eutychius fell sick; but Eutychius dyed; and dyed with
this protestation, In hac carne, in this flesh, (taking up the flesh of his
hand in the presence of them that were there) in this flesh, I acknowledge,
that I, and all men shall arise at the day of Judgment. Now, the principal
place of Scripture, which in his book, and in that conference Eutychius stood
upon, was this Text, these words of Saint Paul; (This I say brethren, that
flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.) And the directest answer
that Gregory gave to it was, Caro secundum culpam non regnabit, sed Caro
secundum naturam; sinful flesh shall not, but natural flesh, that is, flesh
endued with all qualities of flesh, all such qualities as imply no defect, no
corruption, (for there was flesh before there was sin) such flesh, and such
blood shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

As there have been more Heresies about the Humanity of Christ, then about his
Divinity, so there have been more heresies about the Resurrection of his body,
and consequently of ours, then about any other particular article, that
concerns his Humiliation, or Exaltation. Simon Magus struck deepest at first,
to the root; That there was no Resurrection at all; The Gnostics, (who took
their name from knowledge, as though they knew all, and no body else any thing,
which is a pride transferred through all Heretics: for, as that sect in the
Roman Church, which call themselves Ignorantes, and seem to pretend to no
knowledge, do yet believe that they know a better way to heaven, then all
other men do, so that sect amongst them, which called themselves Nullanos,
Nothings, thought themselves greater in the Kingdom of God, then either of the
other two sects of diminution, the Minorits, or the Minims did) These Gnostics
acknowledged a Resurrection, but they said it was of the soul only, and not of
the body, for they thought that the soul lay dead (at least, in a dead sleep)
till the Resurrection. Those Heretics that are called the Arabians, did (as
the Gnostics did) affirm a temporary death of the soul, as well as of the
body, but then they allowed a Resurrection to both soul, and body, after that
death, which the Gnostickes did not, but to the soul only. Hymeneus and
Philetus, (of whom Saint Paul speaks) they restrained the Resurrection to the
soul, 2. Tim. 2. 18.
but then they restrained this Resurrection of the soul to this life, and that
in those who were baptized, the Resurrection was accomplished already.
Eutychius, (whom we mentioned before) enlarged the Resurrection to the body,
as well as to the soul, but enlarged the qualities of the body so far, as that
it was scarce a body. The Armenian heretics said; that it was not only Corpus
hum^num, but Corpus masculinum, That all should rise in the perfecter sex, and
none, as women. Origin allowed a Resurrection, and allowed the Body to be a
natural body; but the contracted the time; he said, that when we rose we
should enjoy the benefits of the resurrection, even in bodily pleasures, for a
thousand years, and then be annihilated, or absorpted and swallowed up into the
nature, and essence of God himself; (for, it will be hard to state Origens
opinion in this point; Origin was not, herein, well understood in his own
time; not do we understand him now, (for the most part) but by his accusers,
and those that have written against him.) Diverse of these Heretics, for the
maintenance of their several heresies, perverted this Scripture, (Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God) and that occasioned those Fathers who
opposed those heresies, so diverse from one another, to interpret these words
diversely, according to the heresy they opposed. All agree, that they are an
argument for the resurrection, though they seem at first, to oppose it. For,
this Chapter has three general parts; first, Resurrectionem esse, that there
shall be a Resurrection, which the Apostle proves by many and various arguments
to the thirty fifth verse. And then Quati corpore, the body shall rise, but
some will say, How are the dead raised, and with what body, do they come? in
that thirty fifth verse: And lastly, Quid de superstitibus, what shall become
of them, who shall be found alive, at the day? We shall all be changed, verse
fifty one. Now, this text is the knot, and corollary or all the second part,
concerning the qualities of the bodies in the resurrection; Now, says the
Apostle, now that I have said enough to prove that a resurrection there is,
now, now that I have said enough what kind of bodies shall arise, now, I show
you as much in the Negative as I have done in the Affirmative, now I teach you
what to avoid, as well as I have done what to affect, now this I say brethren,
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God.

Now, though those words be primarily, principally intended of the last
Resurrection, yet in a secondary respect, they are appliable in themselves, and
very often applied by the ancients, Tertull.
to the first Resurrection, our resurrection in this life. Tertullian has
intimated, and presented both together, elegantly, when he says of God, Nobis
arrhabonem spiritus reliquit, and arrhabonem a nobis accepit, God has given us
his earnest, and a pawn from him upon earth, in giving us the holy Ghost, and
he has received our earnest, and a pawn from us into heaven, by receiving our
nature, in the body of Christ Jesus there. Flesh and blood, when it is
conformed to the flesh and blood of Christ now glorified, and made like his, by
our resurrectien, may inherit the kingdom of God, in heaven. Yea flesh and
blood being conformed to Christ by the sanctification of the holy Ghost, here,
in this world, may inherit the kingdom of God, here upon earth; for, God has
a kingdom here; and there is a Communion in Arms, as well as a communion in
Triumph. Leaving then that acceptance of flesh and blood, which many think to
be intended in this text, that is, Animalis caro, flesh and blood that must be
maintained by eating, and drinking, and preserved by propagation and
generation, that flesh, and that blood cannot inherit heaven, where there is no
marying, nor giving in marriage, but Erimus sicut Angeli, we shall be as the
Angels, (though such a heaven, in part, Mahomet has proposed to his followers,
a heaven that should abound with worldly delights, and such a heaven the
Disciples of Origin, and the Millenarians, that look for one thousand years of
all temporal felicity, proposed to themselves; And, though amongst our latter
men, Cajetan do think, that the Apostle in this text, bent himself upon that
doctrine, non caro, non Animalis caro, flesh and blood, that is, no carnal, no
worldly delights are to be looked for, in heaven,) leaving that sense, as too
narrow, and too shallow for the holy Ghost, in this place, in which he has a
higher reach, we shall determine our selves at this time, in these too
acceptations of this phrase of speech; Divisio.
first, non caro, that is, non caro corrupta, flesh and blood cannot, sinful
flesh, corrupt flesh, flesh not discharged of sinful corruption here, by
repentance, and Sanctification, and the operation of Gods spirit, such flesh
cannot inherit the kingdom of God here. Secondly, noncar^, is non car^
corruptibilis, flesh and blood cannot, that is, flesh that is yet subject to
corruption, and dissolution, and natural passions and impressions, tending to
defectivenesse, flesh that is still subject to any punishment that God lays
upon flesh, for sin, such flesh cannot inherit the kingdom of God hereafter;
for our present possession of the kingdom of God here, our corrupt flesh must
be purged by Sanctification here, for the future kingdom, our natural
Corruptiblenesse must be purged by glorification there. We will make the last
part first, as this flesh, and this blood, by devesting the corruptiblenesse it
suffers here, by that glorification, shall inherit that kingdom; and, not stay
long upon it neither. For, of that we have spoken conveniently before, of the
resurrection it self. Now we shall look a little into the qualities of bodies
in the resurrection; and that, not in the intricacies, and subtilties of the
School, but only in that one pattern, which has been given us of that
glory, upon earth, which is the Transfiguration of Christ; for, that
Transfiguration of his, was a representation of a glorified body in a glorified
state. And then in the second place, we shall come to our first part, what that
flesh and blood is that is denied to be capable of the inheritance of that
kingdom here, that is, that earnest of heaven, and that inchoation of heaven
which may be had in this world; and, in that part we shall see, what this
inheritance, what this title to heaven here, and what this kingdom of God,
that heaven which is proposed to us here, is.

First then, 1. Part. Melancthon.
for the first acceptance, (which is of the later resurrection) no man denies
that which Melancthon has collected and established to be the sum of this
text, Statuit resurrectionem in corpore, sed non quale jam corpus est; The
Apostle establishes a resurrection of the body, but yet not such a body as this
is. It is the same body, and yet not such a body; which is a mysterious
consideration, that it is the same body, and yet not such as it self, nor like
any other body of the same substance. But, what kind of body then? We content
ourselves with that, Transfiguratio specimen appositissimum Resurrectionis,
Musculus.
the Transfiguration of Christ, is the best glass to see this resurrection,
and state of glory in. But how was that transfiguration wrought? We content our
selves with Saint Hieromes expressing of it, Hierom.
non pristinam amisit veritatem, vel formam corporis; Christ had still the same
ture, and real body, and he had the same form, and proportion, and
lineaments, and dimensions of his body, in it self. Transfiguratio non faciem
subtraxit, sed splendorem ad didit, says he; It gave him not another face, but
it super-immitted such a light, such an illustration upon him, as, by that
irradiation, that coruscation, the beams of their eyes were scattered, and
disgregated, dissipated so, as that they could not collect them, as at other
times, nor constantly, and confidently discern him. Moses had a measure, a
proportion of this; but yet when Moses came down with his shining face, Exodus
23. 29. Mat. 17.
though they were not able to look long upon him, they knew him to be Moses.
When Christ was transfigured in the presence of Peter, James and John, yet they
knew him to be Christ. Transfiguration did not so change him, nor shall
glorification so change us, as that we shall not be known. There is nothing to
convince a man of error, nothing in nature, nothing in Scriptures, if he
believe that he shall know those persons in heaven, whom he knew upon earth;
and, if he conceive soberly, that it were a less degree of blessedness, not
to know them, then to know them, he is bound to believe that he shall know
them, Aquin.
for he is bound to believe, that all that conduces to blessedness shall be
given him. The School resolves, that at the Judgment, all the sins of all,
shall be manifested to all; even those secret sinful thoughts that never came
out of the heart. And, when any in the School differs or departs from this
common opinion, they say only, Lombar.
that those sins which have been, in particular, repented, shall not be
manifested: all others shall. And therefore it is a deep uncharitablenes, to
reproach any man, of sins formerly repented; and a deep uncharitableness not
to believe, that he whom thou see at the Communion, has repented his former
sins; Reproach no man, after thou have seen him receive, with last years sins;
except thou have good evidence of his Hypocrisy then, or of his Relapsing
after; For, in those two cases, a man remains, or becomes again guilty of his
former sins. Now, if in heaven they shall know the hearts of one another,
whose faces they never knew before, there is less difficulty in knowing them,
whom we did know before. From this transfiguration of Christ, in which, the
mortal eye of the Apostles, did see that representation of the glory of
Christ, the Schools make a good argument, that in heaven we shall do it much
more. And though in this case of the Transfiguration, in which the eyes of
mortal men could have no proportion with that glory of heaven, this may be
well said to have been done, either Moderando lumen, (that God abated that
light of glory) or Confortando visum, (that God exalted their sense of seeing
supernaturally) no such distinctions, or modifications will be needful in
heaven, because how highly soever the body of my Father, or of my friend shall
be glorified there, mine eyes shall be glorified as much, and we are both kept
in the same proportion there, as we had toward one another here; here my
natural eye could see his natural face, and there mine eye is as much mended,
as his body is, and my sense as much exalted as mine object; And as well, as I
may know, that I am I; I may know, that He is He; for, I shall not know my
self, nor that state of glory which I am then in, by any light of Nature which
I brought thither, but by that light of Glory which I shall receive there. When
therefore a man finds, that this consideration does him good in his
conversation, and retards him toward some sins; how shall I stand then, when
all the world shall see, that my solicitation has brought such a woman to the
stews, to the Hospital, to hell, who had escaped all this, if I had not
corrupted her at first, (which no man in the world knew before, and all shall
know then.) Or that my whispering, and my calumny has overthrown such a man in
his place, in his reputation, in his fortune (which he himself knew not before,
and all shall know then.) Or, that my counsel, or my example has been a
furtherance to any man's spiritual edification here. He that in rectified
reason, and a rectified conscience finds this, in Gods name let him believe;
yea, for Gods sake let him take heed of not believing that we shall know one
another, Actions and Persons, in the Resurrection, as the Apostles did know
Christ at the Transfiguration, which was a Type of it.

This Transfiguration then upon earth; was the same glory, which Christ had
after, in heaven. Transfiguratio. Hierom.
Qualis venturus, talis apparuit; such as all eyes shall see him to be, when he
comes in glory at last, those Apostles saw him then, but of the particular
circumstances, even of this transfiguration upon earth, there is but little
said to us. Let us modestly take that which is expressed in it, and not search
over-curiously farther into that which is signified, and represented by it;
which is, the state of glory in the Resurrection. First, his face shined as the
Sun, says that Gospel, he could not take a higher comparison, Sol. Mat. 17.
2.
for our Information, and for our admiration in this world, then the Sun. And
then, the Saints of God in their glorified state are admitted to the same
comparison. The righteous shall shine out as the Sun in the Kingdom of the
Father; the Sun of the firmament which should be their comparison, 13. 43.
will be gone; But the Sun of grace and of glory, the Son of God shall remain;
and they shall shine as he; that is, in his righteousness.

In this transfiguration, Nix.
his clothes were white, says the text; but how white, the holy Ghost does not
tell us at once, as white as snow, says Saint Mark, as white as light, says
Saint Matthew. Let the garments of the glorified Saints of God be their bodies,
and then, 9. 3.
their bodies are as white as snow, as snow that falls from heaven, and has
tou^ht no pollution of the earth. For, though our bodies have been upon earth,
and have touched pitch, and have been defiled, yet that will not lie in proof,
not be given in evidence; Though he that drew me, and I that was drawn too,
know, in what unclean places, and what unclean actions, this body of mine has
been, yet it lies not in proof, it shall not be given in evidence, for,
Accusator fratrum, The accuser of the brethren is cast down, Apoc. 12. 10.
the Devil shall find nothing against me; And if I had spontaneum Daemonem, as
Saint Chrysostom speaks, a bosom Devil, and could tempt my self, though
there had been no other tempter in this world, so I have spontan^um Demonem, a
bosom accuser, a conscience that would accuse me there, if I accuse my self
there, I reproach the mercy of God, who has sealed my pardon, and made even my
body, what sins soever had discolored it, as white as snow.

As white as snow, Lux:
and as white as light, says that Gospel. Light implies an active power, Light
is operative, and works upon others. The bodies of the Saints of God; shall
receive all impressions of glory in themselves, and they shall do all that is
to be done, for the glory of God there. There, they shall stand in his
service, and they shall kneel in his worship, and they shall fall in his
reverence, and they shall sing in his glory, they shall glorify him in all
positions of the body; They shall be glorified in themselves passively, and
they shall glorify God actively, sicut Nix, sicut Lux, their being, their
doing shall be all for him; Thus they shall shine as the Sun; Thus their
garments shall be white, white as snow, in being glorified in their own bodies,
white as light, in glorifying God in all the actions of those bodies.

Now, Societas.
there is thus much more considerable, and applyable to our present purpose, in
this tranfiguration of Christ, that there was company with them. Be not apt to
think heaven in an Ermitage, or a Monastery, or the way to heaven a sullen
melancholy; Heaven, and the way to it, is a Communion of Saints, in a holy
cheerfulness. Get thou thither; make sure thine own salvation; but be not too
hasty to think, that no body gets thither, except he go thy way in all
opinions, and all actions.

There was company in the transfiguration; Quaesocietas.
but no other company then Moses, and Elias, and Christ, and the Apostles; none
but they, to whom God had manifested himself otherwise then to a mere natural
man, otherwise then as a general God. For, in the Law, and in the Padagogie,
and Schoolmastership, and instruction thereof, God had manifested himself
particularly by Moses, In Elias and the Prophets, whom God sent in a continual
succession, to refresh that manifestation which he had given of himself in the
Law, before, in the example of these rules, in him, who was the consummation of
the Law, and the Prophets, Christ Jesus; And then, in the Application of all
this, by the Apostles, and by the Church established by them, God had more
particularly manifested himself, then to natural men. Moses, Elias, Christ,
and the Apostles, make up the household of the faithful; and none have interest
in the Resurrection, but in, and by these; These, to whom, and by whom, God
has exhibited himself, to his Church, by other notions, then as one universal
God; For, nothing will save a man, but to believe in God; so as God has
proposed himself, in his Son, in his Scriptures, in his Christ.

These were with him in the transfiguration, Communicatio.
and they talked with him, says that text. As there is a Communion of Saints,
so there is a Communication of Saints. Think not heaven a Charter House, where
men, who only of all creatures, are enabled by God to speak, must not speak to
one another. The Lord of heaven is Verbum, The word, and his servants there
talk of us here, and pray to him for us.

They talked with him; but of what? They talked of hi^ Decease, Quae
communicatio. Luke 9. 31.
(says the text there) which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, all that they
talked of, was of his Passion. All that we shall say, and sing in heaven, will
be of his Passion, accomplished at Jerusalem, in that Hymn, Apoc. 5. 9. 12.
This Lamb has redeemed as to God, by his blood; Worthy is the Lamb that was
slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor,
and glory, and blessing, Amen. Even our glory in heaven, at last, is not
principally for our selves, but to contribute to the glory of Christ Jesus. If
we inquire further then this, into the state of our glorified bodies, remember
that in this real Parable, in this Type of the Resurrection, Mar. ^. 6.
the transfiguration of Christ, it is said, that even Beter himself wist not
what to say; and remember too, That even Christ himself forbad them to say any
thing at all of it, Mat. 17. 9.
till his Resurrection. Till our Resurrection, we cannot know clearly, we
should not speak boldly, of the glory of the Saints of God, nor of our blessed
endowments in that state.

The sum of all is, Tertull.
Fiducis Christianorum est resurrectio mortuorum; My faith directs it self
first upon that which Christ has done, he is dead, he is risen; and my hope
directs it self upon that which shall be done, Luther.
I shall rise again. And yet says Luther, Papa, Cardinales and primarii viri, I
know the Pope, the Cardinals, the Bishops are I^genio, doctrina, ratione,
prudentia excellentes, they abound in natural parts, in reading, in
experience, in civil wisdom: yet says he, si tres sunt, qui hunc ^^ticulum
indubitanter ^redunt, If there be three amongst them. that do faithfully and
undoubtedly believe this article of the Resurrection of the body, three are
more then I look for amongst them. Beloved, as no things are liker one another,
then Court and Court, the same ambitions, the same underminings in one Court as
in another, so Church and Church is alike too; All persecured Churches are
religious, all peaceable Churches are dissolute, when Luther said that of the
Church of Rome, (That few of them believed the Resurrection) the Roman Church
wall owed in all abundances, and dissolutenesse^ and scarce a man, (in respect)
opened his mouth against her, otherwise then that the holy Ghost, to make his
continual (...), and to interrupt their prescription, in every age raised up
some to declare their impieties and usurpations. But then, when they bent all
their thoughts entirely, and prosperously upon possessing this world, they
thought they might spare the Resurrection well enough; As he that has a
plentiful fortune in Europe, cares not much though there be no land of
perfumes in the East, nor of gold, in the West Indies; God in our days, has
given us, and our Church, the fat of the glory of this world too, and we also
neglect the other: But when men of a different religion from them, (for they
will needs call a differing from their errors, a different Religion, as though
all their religion were errors, for (excepting errors) we differ in no point)
when, I say, such men came to enquire into them, to discover them, and to
induce or to attempt in diverse parts of their government a reformation, then
they shut themselves up closer, then they grew more careful of their manners,
and did reform themselves somewhat, though not thoroughly, and are the better
for that reformat on which was offered to them, and wrought more effectually
upon others? As we say in the School, that even the Devil is somewhat the
better for the death of Christ, so the Roman Church is somewhat the better for
the Reformation. Our assiduity of preaching has brought them to another manner
of frequency in preaching, then before the Reformation they were accustomed to,
and our answers to their books have brought them to a more reserved manner of
writing, then they used before. Let us therefore by their example, make as good
use of our enemies, as our enemies have done of us. For, though we have no
military enmity, no hostility with any nation, though we must all, and do, out
of a true sense of our duty to God, pray ever for the continuance of peace
amongst Christian Princes, and to withhold the effusion of Christian blood, yet
to that intendment, and in that capacity as they were our enemies in 88. when
they provoked by their Excommunications, dangerous invasions, and in that
capacity as they were our enemies in 603. when they bent their malice even
against that place, where the Laws for the maintenance of our religion were
enacted, so they are our enemies still, if we be still of the same religion. He
that by Gods mercy to us, leads us, is as sure that the Pope is Antichrist,
now, as he was then; and we that are blessedly led by him, are as sure, that
their doctrine is the doctrine of Devils, now, as we were then. Let us
therefore make use of those enemies, and of their aerie insolences, and their
frothy confidences, as thereby to be the firmer in our selves, and the
carefuller of our children, and servants, that we send not for such a Physician
as brings a Roman Priest for his Apothecary, nor entertain such a
Schoolmaster, as brings a Roman Priest for his Usher, nor such a Mercer, as
brings a Priest for his Tailor;) for, in these shapes they have, and will
appear.) But in true faith to God, true Allegiance to our Prince, true
obedience to the Church, true dealing with all men, make our selves sure of the
Resurrection in the next life; In carne incorruptibili, in flesh that shall be
capable of no corruption, by having that resurrection in this life, in carne
incorrupta, in devesting or correcting the corruptions which cleave to our
flesh here, that we be not corrupted spiritually, (not disputed out of our
Religion, nor jeasted out, nor threatened out, nor bought out, nor beat out of
the truth of God) nor corrupted carnally by the pleasures or profits of this
world, but that we may conform our selves to the purity of Christ Jesus, in
that measure, which we are able to attain to, which is our spiritual
Resurrection, and constitutes our second part, That Kingdom of God, which
flesh and blood may inherit in this life.

From the beginning we settled that, 2. Part.
That the primary purpose of the Apostle in these words, was to establish the
doctrine of the last Resurrection. But in Tertullians exposition, Arrabonem
dedit, and arrabonem accepit; That God has left us the earnest of his Spirit
upon earth, and has taken the earnest of our flesh into heaven, it grew
indifferent, of which Resurrection, spiritual, or bodily, first, or last, it
be accepted. but take Tertullian in another place, upon the verse immediately
preceding our Text (Sicut portavimus, portemus, (for so Tertullian reads that
place, and so does the Vulgate) As we have born the image of the earthly, so
let us bear the Image of the heavenly) there from Tertullian it must
necessarily be referred to the first Resurrection, the Resurrection by grace in
this life, for, says he there, Non refertur ad substantiam resurrectionis, sed
ad pr^^sentis temporis disciplinam; the Apostle does not speak of our glorious
resurrection at last, but of our religious resurrection now. Portemus, non
portabimus, Let us bear his image, says the Apostle; Let us now, not that we
shall bear it at the last day. Praeceptive dictum, non promissive; The Apostle
delivers it as a duty, that we must, not as a reward, that we shall bear that
image. And therefore in Tertulli^^ construction, it is not only indifferent,
and probable, but necessary to refer this Text to the first Resurrection in
this life; where it will be fittest, to pursue that order, which we proposed at
first, first to consider Quid regnum, what Kingdom it is, that is pretended
to; And then, Quid haeredetas, what estate and term is to be had in it: It is
an Inheritance. And lastly, Quid care, and sanguis, what flesh and blood it is,
that is excluded out of this Kingdom. Flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God.

First, for this kingdom of God in this world, let us be glad that it is a
kingdom, that it is so much, Regnum Dei.
that the government is taken out of the hands of Saints, and Angels and
reunited, re-annexed to the Crown, restoted to God, to whom we may come
immediately, and be accepted. Let us be glad that it is a kingdom, so much,
and let us be glad that it is but a kingdom, and no more, not a Tyranny; That
we come not to a God that will dam^e us, because he will dam^e us, but a God
that proposes Conditions, and enables us to perform those conditions, in such
a measure as he will vouchsafe to accept from us; A God that governs us by his
word, for in his word is truth, and by his law, for in his law is clearness.
Will you ask what this kingdom of God is? What did you take it to be, or what
did you mean by it, when, even now, you said with me, in the Lords prayer, Thy
kingdom come? Did you deliberately, and determinately pray for the day of
Judgment, and for his coming in the kingdom of glory, then? Hierom.
Were you all ready for that, when you said so? Purae conscientiae, and grandis
audaciae est, It is a very great confidence, and (if it be not grounded upon a
very pure conscience) it must have a worse name, Regnum Dei postul are, and
judicium non time^^; To call upon God for the day of Judgment, upon confidence
of our own righteousness, is a shrewd distemper; To say, V^ni Domine Jesus,
come Lord Jesus come and take us, as thou findst us, is a dangerous issue. But
Adveniat regnum, and then veniat Rex, let his kingdom of grace come upon us,
in this life, and then let himself come too, in his good time, and when his
good pleasure shall be, in the kingdom of Glory: Sive velimus sive nolimus,
Augustine.
regnum Dei utique veniet, what need we hasten him, provoke him? says Saint
Augustine; whether we will or no, his kingdom, his Judgment will come. Nay,
before we called for it, even his kingdom of grace was come. Christ said to
the Scribe, Mar. 12. 34. Luke 17. 21.
Non long, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God; And to the Pharisees
themselves he said; Intra vos, the kingdom of God is among you, within you.
But, where there is a whole Hospital of three hundred blind men together, (as
there is at Paris) there is as much light, amongst them there, as amongst us
here, and yet all they have no light, so this kingdom of God is amongst us
all, and yet God knows whether we see it, Augustine.
or no. And therefore Adveniat ut manifestet^r Deus, says S. Augustine, his
kingdom come, that we may discern it is come, that we may see that God offers
it to us; and, Adveniat regnum, ut manefestemur Deo, his kingdom come so, that
he may discernus in our reception of that Kingdom, and our obedience to it. He
comes when we see him, and he comes again, Idem.
when we receive him: Quid est, Regnum ejus veniat, quam ut nos bonos inveniat?
Then his Kingdom comes, when he finds us willing to be Subjects to that
Kingdom. God is a King in his own right. By Creation, by Redemption, by many
titles, and many undoubted claims. Chrysostom.
But, Aliud est Regem esse, aliud regnare, It is one thing to be a King,
another to have Subjects in obedience; A King is not the less a King, for a
Rebellion; But, Vere justum regnum est, (says that Father) quando and Rex vult
homines habere sub se, and cupiunt homines esse sub ^o, when the King would
wish no other Subjects, nor the Subjects other King, then is that Kingdom come,
come to a durable, and happy state. When God has showed himself in calling us,
and we have showed our willingness to come, when God shows his desire to
preserve us, Psalm. 97. 1.
and we adhere only to him, when there is a Dominus regnat, Latetur terra,
When our whole Land is in possession of peace, and plenty, and the whole Church
in possession of the Word and Sacraments, when the Land rejoices because the
Lord reigns; and when there is a Dominus regnat, Laetentur Insulae, Because the
Lord reigns, every Island does rejoice; that is, every man; that every man
that is encompassed within a Sea of calamities in his estate, with a Sea of
diseases in his body, with a Sea of scruples in his understanding, with a Sea
of transgressions in his conscience, with a Sea of sinking and swallowing in
the sadness of spirit, may yet open his eyes above water, and find a place in
the Arc above all these, a recourse to God, and joy in him, in the Ordinances
of a well established, and well governed Church, this is truly Regnum Dei, the
Kingdom of God here; God is willing to be present with us, (that he declares
in the preservation of his Church) And we are sensible of his presence, and
residence with us, and that we declare in our frequent recourses to him
hither, and in our practice of those things which we have learnt here, when we
are gone hence.

This then is the blessed state that we pretend to, Haereditas.
in the Kingdom of God in this life; Peace in the State, peace in the Church,
peace in our Conscience: In this, that we answer the motions of his blessed
Spirit here in his Ordinance, and endeavor a conformity to him, in our life,
and conversation; In this, he is our King, and we are his Subjects, and this
is this Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Grace. Now the title, by which we make
claim to this Kingdom, is in our text Inheritance: Who can, and who cannot
inherit this Kingdom of God. I cannot have it by purchase, by mine own merits
and good works; It is neither my former good disposition, nor Gods foresight
of my future cooperation with him, that is the cause of his giving me his
grace. I cannot have this by Covenant, or by the gift, or bequeathing of
another, by works of Supererogation, (that a Martyr of the primitive Church
should send me a violl of his blood, a splinter of his bone, a Collop of his
flesh, wrapped up in a half sheet of paper, in an imaginary six-penny
Indulgence from Rome, and bid me receive grace; and peace of Conscience in
that.) I cannot have it by purchase, I cannot have it by gift, I cannot have it
by Courtesy, in the right of my wife, That if I will let her live in the
obedience of the Roman Church, and let her bring up my children so, for my
self, I may have leave to try a Court, or a worldly fortune, and be secure in
that, that I have a Catholic wife, or a Catholic child to pray, and merit
for me; I have no title to this Kingdom of God. but Inheritance, whence
grows mine Inheritance? Ex semine Dei; because I am propagated of the seed of
God, I inherit this peace. Whosoever is born of God does not commit finne; 1
Ioh. 3. 9.
for, his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of
God: That is, he cannot desire to sin; He cannot antidate a sin, by
delighting in the hope of a future sin, and sin in a praefruition of his sin,
before the act; He cannot post-date a sin, delight in the memory of a
pastsinne, and sin it over again, in a post-fruition of that sin; He cannot
boast himself of sin, much less belly himself in glorying in sins, never
done; He cannot take sins diet, therefore, that he may be able to sin
again next Spring; He cannot hunger and thirst, and then digest and sleep
quietly after a sin; and to this purpose, and in this sense Saint Bernard
says, Praedestinati non possunt peccare, That the Elect cannot sin; And in
this also, That when the sins of the Elect, are brought to trial, and to
judgment, there their sins are no sins; not because they are none in
themselves, but because the blood of Jesus covering them, they are none in the
eyes of God. I am Heir then as I am the Son of God, born of the seed of God.
But, what is that seed? Verbum Dei, James 1. 18.
the seed is the word of God, Of his own will beg at he us, (says that Apostle)
with the word of truth; And our Savior himself speaks very clearly in
expounding the Parable; Luke 8. 11.
The seed is the word of God. We have this Kingdom of God, as we have an
inheritance, as we are Heirs; we are Heirs as we are Sons; we are Sons as we
have the seed, and the seed is the Word. So that all ends in this; We inherit
not this Kingdom if we possess not the preaching of the Word; if we profess
not the true ^ligion still: for, the word of this text which we translate to
inherit, for the most part, in the translation of the Septuagint, answers the
Hebrew word, Nachal; and Nachal is Haereditas cum possessione; Exodus 34. 9.
Hier.
not an inheritance in reversion, but in possession. Take us O Lord for thine
inheritance, says Moses; Et possideas nos, as Saint H^erome translates that
very place; Inherit us, and Possess us; Et erimus tibi, whatsoever we are, we
will be thine, says the Septuagint: You see then how much goes to the making
up of this Inheritance of the Kingdom of God in this world, First, Vt habeamus
verbum, That we have this seed of God, his word; (In the Roman Church they have
it not; not that that Church has it not, not that it is not there; but they,
the people that have it not) and then, Vt possideamus, That we possess it, or
rather that it possess us; that we make the Word the only rule of our faith,
and of our actions; (In the Roman Church they do not so, they have not pure
wheat, but mestlin, other things joined with this good seed, the word of God)
and lastly, Vt simus Deo, That we be his, that we be so still, that we do not
begin with God, and give over, but that this seed of God, of which we are born,
11. 23.
may (as Saint Peter says) be incorruptible, and abide for ever; that we may
be his so entirely, and so constantly, as that we had rather have no being,
then for any time of suspension, or for any part of his fundamental truth, be
without it, and this the Roman Church cannot be said to do, that expunges and
interlines articles of faith, Mal. 2: 15.
upon Reason of State, and emergent occasions. God has made you one, says the
Prophet, Ribera.
who be the parties whom God has married together, and made One, in that
place? you and your religion; (as our expositors interpret that place.) And why
One, says the Prophet there; That God might have a godly seed, says he, that
is, a continuation, a propagation, a race, a posterity of the same religion;
Therefore says he, Let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.
Let none divorce himself from that religion, and that worship of God, which God
put into his arms, and which he embraced in his Baptism. Except there be
error in fundamental points, such as make that Church no Church, let no man
depart from that Church, and that religion, in which he delivered himself to
the service of God at first. Woe be unto us, if we deliver not over our religion
to our posterity, in the same sincerity, and the same totality in which our
Fathers have delivered it us; for that, that continuation, is that, that makes
it an inheritance: for, (to conclude this) every man has an inheritance in the
Law, and yet if he be hanged, he is hanged by the Law, in which he had his
inheritance: so we have our inheritance in the Word of God, and yet, if we
be damned, we are damned by that Word; Deuteronomy. 30. 18.
If thy heart turn away, so as that thou worship other Gods, I denounce unto
you this day, that you shall surely perish. So then, we have an inheritance in
this Kingdom, if we preserve it, and we incur a forfeiture of it, if we
have not this seed, (The Word, the truth of Religion) so as that we possess
it; that is, conform our selves to him, whose Word it is, by it, and possess
it so, as that we persevere in the true profession of it, to our end; for,
Perseverance, as well as Possession, enters into our title, and inheritance to
this Kingdom.

You see then, Caro and sanguis.
what this Kingdom of God is; It is, when he comes, and his welcome, when he
comes in his Sacraments, and speaks in his Word; when he speaks and is
answered; knocks and is received, (he knocks in his Ordinances, and is received
in our Obedience to them, he knocks in his example, and most holy conversation,
and is received in our conformity, and imitation.) So have you seen what the
Inheritance of this Kingdom is, it is a Having, and Holding of the Gospel, a
present, and a permanent possession, Apoc. 3. 11.
a holding fast, lest another (another Nation, another Church) take our Crown.
There remains only that you see, upon whom the exclusion falls; and for the
clearing of that, This I say brethren, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the
Kingdom of God.

It is fully expressed by Saint Paul, Romans 8. 7.
The carnal mind is enmity against God. It is not a coldness, a slacknesse,
an omission, a preterition of some duties toward God, but it is Enmity, and
that is an exclusion out of the Kingdom; for, (says the Apostle there) it is
not subject to the Law of God; and no subjection, no Kingdom; it is not, says
he, neither can it be; It is not, that excludes the present; It cannot be,
that excludes the future; so that it is only this incorrigible, this desperate
state that constitutes this flesh, and blood, that cannot inherit the Kingdom
of God; for this implies impenitablenesse, which is the sin against the holy
Ghost. Take the word flesh, so literally, as that it be either the adorning of
my flesh in pride, or the polluting of my flesh in wantonness, whether it be a
pampering of my flesh with voluptuous provocations, or a withering, a
shriveling of my flesh with superstitious and meritorious fastings, or other
macerations, and lacerations by inhumane violence upon my body; Take the word
Blood so literally, as that it be either an admiring and adoring of honorable
blood, in a servile flattering of great persons, or an insinuating of false and
adulterous blood, in a bastardizing a race, by supposititious children, whether
it be the inflaming the blood of young persons by lascivious discourse, or
shedding the blood of another in a murderous quarrel, whether it be in
blaspheming the blood of my Savior, in execrable oaths, or the profaning of
his blood in an unworthy receiving thereof, all these ways, and all such, does
this flesh and blood exclude from the Kingdom of God; It is summarily, all
those works which proceed merely out of the nature of man, without the
regeneration of the Spirit of God; all that is flesh and blood, and enmity
against God, says the Apostle in that place.

But in another place, Gal. 5. 19.
that Apostle leads us into other considerations; to the Galatians he says, The
works of the flesh are manifest: And amongst those manifest works of the flesh,
he reckons not only sins of wantonness, and sins of anger, not only sins in
concupiscibili, and in irascibili, but in intelligibili, sins and errors in
the understanding, particularly Heresy, and Idolatry are works of the flesh,
in Saint Paul's inventory, in that place, Heresy and Idolatry, are that flesh
and blood which shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Bring we this
consideration home to our selves. The Church of Rome does not charge us with
affirming any Heresy, nor does she charge us with any Idolatry in our
practice. So far we are discharged from the works of the flesh. If they charge
us with Doctrine of flesh and blood because we prefer Marriage before Chastity,
it is a charge ill laid, for Marriage and Chastity consist well together; The
bed undefiled is chastity. If they charge us that we prefer Marriage before
Continency, they charge us unjustly, for we do not so: Let them contain that
can, and bless God for that heavenly gift of Continency, and let them that
cannot, mary, and serve God, and bless him for affording them that Physic for
that infirmity. As Marriage was ordained at first, for those two uses,
Procreation of children, and mutual assistance of man, and wife, so Continency
was not preferred before Marriage. As there was a third use of Marriage added
after the fall, by way of Remedy, so Marriage may well be said to be inferior
to continency, as physic is in respect of health. If they charge us with it,
because our Priests mary, they do it frivolously, and impertinently, because
they deny that we are Priests. We charge them with Heresy in the whole new
Creed of the Council of Trent, (for, if all the particular doctrines be not
Heretical, yet, the doctrine of inducing new Articles of faith is Heretical,
and that doctrine runs through all the Articles, for else they could not be
Articles.) And we charge them with Idolatry, in the peoples practice, (and that
practice is never controld by them) in the greatest mystery of all their
Religion, in the Adoration of the Sacrament; And Heresy and Idolatry are
manifest works of the flesh. Our Kingdom is the Gospel; our Inheritance is our
holding that; our exclusion is flesh and blood, Heresy and Idolatry. And
therefore let us be able to say with the Apostle, when God had called us, and
separated us, immediately we conferred not with flesh and blood. Gal. 1. 16.
Since God has brought us into a fair prospect, let us have no retrospect
back; In Canaan, let us not look toward Egypt, nor toward Sodom being got to
the Mountain; since God has settled us in a true Church, let us have no kind of
byas, and declination toward a false; for that is one of Saint Paul's manifest
works of the flesh, and I shall lose all the benefit of the flesh and blood of
Christ Jesus, if I do so, for flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of
God.

We have done; Add we but this, by way of recollecting this which has been
said now, upon these words, and that which has been formerly said upon those
words of Job, 19. 26.
which may seem to differ from these, (In my flesh I shall see God) Omne verum
omni vero consentiens, whatsoever is true in it self agrees with every other
truth. Because that which Job says, and that which Saint Paul says, agree with
the truth, they agree with one another. For, as Saint Paul says, Non omni^ caro
eadem caro, there is one flesh of man, another of beasts, so there is one flesh
of Job, another of Saint Paul; 1 Cor. 15. 39.
And Jobs flesh can see God, and Paul's cannot; because the flesh that Job
speaks of has overcome the destruction of skin and body by worms in the
grave, and so is mellowed and prepared for the sight of God in heaven; And
Paul's flesh is overcome by the world. Jobs flesh triumphs over Satan, and has
made a victorious use of Gods corrections, Paul's flesh is still subject to
tentations, and carnalities. Jobs argument is but this, some flesh shall see
God, (Mortified men here, Glorified men there shall) Paul's argument is this,
All flesh shall not see God, (Carnal men here, Impenitent men there, shall
not.) And therefore, that as our texts answer one another, so your
resurrections may answer one another too, as at the last resurrection, all that
hear the sound of the Trumpet, shall rise in one instant, though they have
passed thousands of years between their burialls, so do all ye, who are now
called, by a lower and infirmer voice, rise together in this resurrection of
grace. Let him that has been buried sixty years, forty years, twenty years, in
covetousness, in uncleanness, in indevotion, rise now, now this minute, and
then, as Adam that dyed five thousand before, shall be no sooner in heaven, in
his body, then you, so Abel that dyed for God, so long before you, shall be no
better, that is, no fuller of the glory of heaven, then you that dye in God,
when it shall be his pleasure to take you to him.

SERMON XVI.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
COLOS. 1. 24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which
is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake which
is the Church.
WE are now to enter into the handling of the doctrine of Evangelicall
counsels; And these words have been ordinarily used by the writers of the
Roman Church, for the defense of a point in controversy between them and us;
which is a preparatory to that which hereafter is to be more fully handled upon
another Text. Out of these words, they labor to establish works of
supererogation, in which (they say) men do or suffer more then was necessary
for their own salvation; and then the superfluity of those accrues to the
Treasury of the Church, and by the Stewardship, and dispensation of the Church
may be applied to other men living here, or suffering in Purgatory by way of
satisfaction to Gods justice; But this is a doctrine which I have had occasion
heretofore in this place to handle; And a doctrine which indeed deserves not
the dignity to be too diligently disputed against; And as we will not stop upon
the disproving of the doctrine, so we need not stay long, nor insist upon the
vindicating of these words, from that wresting and detortion of theirs, in
using them for the proof of that doctrine. Because though at first, Greg. de
Valent.
they presented them with great eagerness and vehemence, and assurance,
Quicquid haeretici obstrepunt, illustris hic locus, say the Heretics what
they can, this is a clear and evident place for that doctrine, yet another
after him is a little more cautelous and reserved, Bellar.
Negari non potest quin ita expeni possint, it cannot be denied, but that these
words may admit such an exposition; And then another more modified then both
says, Cornel a Lapide.
Primo and proprie non id intendit Apostolus; the Apostle had no such purpose
in his first and proper intention to prove that doctrine in these words. Sed
innuitur ille sensus; qui et si non genuinus, tamen a pari deduci potest: some
such sense (says that author) may be implied and intimated, because, though it
be not the true and natural sense, yet by way of comparison, and convenience,
such a meaning may be deduced. Generally their difference in having any
patronage for that corrupt doctrine out of these words, appears best in this,
that if we consider their authors who have written in controversies, we shall
see that most of them have laid hold upon these words for this doctrine;
because they are destitute of all Scriptures, and glad of any, that appear to
any, any whit that way inclinable; But if we consider those authors, who by way
of commentary and exposition (either before, or since the controversies have
been stirred) have handled these words, we shall find none of their own
authors of that kind, which by way of exposition of these words does deliver
this to be the meaning of them, that satisfaction may be made to the justice of
God by the works of supererogation one man for another.

To come then to the words themselves in their true sense, and interpretation,
Divisio.
we shall find in them two general considerations. First, that to him that is
become a new creature, a true Christian, all old things are done away, and all
things are made new: As he has a new birth, as he has put on a new man, as he
is going toward a new Jerusalem, so has he a new Philosophy, a new
production, and generation of effects out of other causes, then before, he
finds light out of darkness, fire out of water, life out of death, joy out of
afflictions, Nunc ga^de^, now I rejoice in my sufferings etc. And then in a
second consideration he finds that this is not by miracle, that he should hope
for it but once, but he finds an express, and certain, and constant reason
why it must necessarily be so, because I still up that which is behind of the
afflictions of Christ etc. It is strange that I should conceive joy out of
affliction, but when I come to see the reason that by that affliction, I fill
up the sufferings of Christ etc. it is not strange, it cannot choose but be so.
The parts then will be but two, a proposition, and a reason; But in the first
part it will be sit to consider first, the person, not merely who it is, but
in what capacity, the Apostle conceives this joy; And secondly, the season,
Now, for joy is not always seasonable, there is a time of mourning, but now
rejoicing; And then in a third place we shall come to the affection it self,
Joy, which when it is true, and truly placed, is the nearest representation of
heaven it self to this world. From thence we shall descend to the production
of this joy, from whence it is derived, and that is out of sufferings, for this
phrase in passionibus, in my sufferings, is not in the midst o^ my
sufferings, it is not that I have joy and comfort, though I suffer, but in
passionibus is so in suffering as that the very suffering is the subject of my
joy, I had no joy, no occasion of joy, if I did not suffer. But then these
sufferings which must occasion this joy, are thus conditioned, thus qualified
in our text; That, first, it be passio mea, my suffering, and not a suffering
cast by my occasion upon the whole Church, or upon other men, mea, it is
determined and limited in my self, and mea, but not prome, not for my self,
not for mine own transgressions, and violating of the law, but it is for
others, pro vobis, says the Apostle, for out of that root springs the whole
second part why there appertains a joy to such sufferings, which is that the
suffering of Christ being yet, not unperfect, but unperfected, Christ having
not yet suffered all, which he is to suffer to this purpose, for the gathering
of his Church, I fill up that which remains undone; And that in Carne, not
only in spirit and disposition, but really in my flesh, And all this not only
for making sure of mine own salvation, but for the establishing and edifying a
Church, but yet, his Church, for men seduced, and seducers of men have their
Churches too, and suffer for those Churches; but this is for his Church, and
that Church of his which is properly his body, and that is the visible Church:
and these will be the particular branches of our two general parts, the
proposition, Gaudeo in afflictionibus etc. And the reason, Quiae adimpleo etc.

To begin then with the first branch of the first part, 1. Part. Ego.
The person; we are sure it was Saint Paul, who we are sure was an Apostle, for
so he tells the Colo^sians in the beginning of the Epistle; Paul an Apostle of
Jesus Christ, by the will of God, but yet he was not properly, peculiarly their
Apostle, he was theirs as he was the Apostle of the Gentiles; but he was not
theirs, Romans 11. 12. 1 Cor. 9. 1.
as he was the Apostle of the Corinthians; If I be not an Apostle to others
(says he) yet doubtless I am to you; for amongst the Corinthians he had laid
the foundations of a Church, Are ye not my work in the Lord? (says he there)
but for the Colossians, he had never preached to them, never seen them;
Epaphras had laid the foundation amongst them; And Archippus was working, now
at the writing of this Epistle, upon the upper buildings, as we may see in the
Epistle it self; Epaphras had planted, Col. 1. 7. 4. 17.
and Archippus watered; How entered Paul? First as an Apostle, he had a general
jurisdiction, and superintendency over them, and over all the Gentiles, and
over all the Church; And then, as a man whose miraculous conversion, and
religious conversation, whose incessant preaching, and whose constant
suffering, had made famous, and reverend over the whole Church of God, all that
proceeded from him had much authority, and power, in all places to which it was
directed; As himself says of Andronicas and Iunia his kinsmen; Romans 16. 7.
that they were Nobiles in Apostolis, Nobly spoken of amongst the Apostles, so
Saint Paul himself was Nobilis Apostolus in Discipulis, reverendly esteemed
amongst all the Disciples, August.
for a laborious Apostle; Saint Augustine joined his desire to have heard Saint
Paul preach, with his other two wishes, to have seen Christ in the flesh, and
to have seen Rome in her glory; Chrysostom.
And Saint Chrysostom admires Rome, so much admired for other things, for this
principally, that she had heard Saint Paul preach; And that, Si^ut^orpus magnum
and validum, ita duos haberet illustres oculos, as she was a great and glorious
body, so she had two great and glorious eyes; The presence and the memories of
Saint Peter, and Saint Paul; he writes not to them then merely as an Apostle
not in that capacity, for he joines Timothy with himself at the beginning of
the Epistle, who was no Apostle, properly; though upon that occasion, of Paul's
writing in his own, and in Timothies name, Saint Chrysostame say, Chrysoft.
in a larger sense, Ergo Timothe^s Apostolus, if Timothy be in commission with
Paul, Timothy is an Apostle too: But Saint Paul by his ^ame and estimation,
having justly got a power and interest in them, he cherishes that by this
salutation, and he binds them the more to accept his instructions, by giving
them a part in all his persecutions, and by letting them see, how much they
were in his care, even in that distance; A servile application of himself to
the humors of others, becomes not the ministers of God; It becomes him not to
depart from his ingenuity, and freedom, to a servile humoring, but to be
negligent of their opinion of him, with whom he is to converse, and upon whose
conscience he is to work, becomes him not neither. It is his doctrine that
must bear him out; But if his discretion do not make him acceptable too, his
doctrine will have the weaker root when; Saint Paul and the Colossians thought
well of one another, the work of God was likely to go forward amongst them;
And where it is not so, the work prospers not.

This was then the person; Nunc.
Paul, as he had a calling, and an authority by the Apostleship, and Paul as he
had made his calling, and authority, and Apostleship acceptable to them, by his
wisdom and descreet behavior toward them, and the whole Church. The season
follows next, when he presents this doctrine to them Nunc Gaudeo, now I
rejoice, and there is a Nunc illi, and a Nunc illis to be considered, one time
it has relation to Saint Paul himself, and another that has relation to the
Colossians.

His time, Illi.
the Nunc illis, was nunc in vinculis, now when he was in prison at Rome, for
from thence he writ this Epistle; Ordinarily a prisoner is the less to be
believed for his being in prison and in fetters, if he speak such things as
conduce to his discharge of those fetters, or his deliverance from that
imprisonment, it is likely enough that a prisoner will lie for such an
advantage; But when Saint Paul being now a prisoner for the preaching of the
Gospel, speaks still for the advancement of the Gospel, that he suffers for,
and finds out another way of preaching it by letters and by epistles, when he
opens himself to more danger, to open to them more doctrine, then that was
very credible which he spoke, though in prison; There is in all his epistles
impetus Spiritus Christi, as Irenaeus says, a vehemence of the holy Ghost, but
yet amplius habent quae e vinculis, says Chrysostom, Irenae. Chrysostom.
Those epistles which Saint Paul writ in prison, have more of this vehemence in
them: a sentence written with a cole upon a wall by a close prisoner, affects
us when we come to read it; Stolen letters, by which a prisoner adventers the
loss of that liberty which he had, come therefore the more welcome, if they
come; It is not always a bold and veliement reprehension of great persons, that
is argument enough of a good and a rectified zeal, for an intemperate use of
the liberty of the Gospel, and sometimes the impotency of a satyricall humor,
makes men preach freely, and over-freely, offensively, scandalously; and so
exasperate the magistrate; God forbid that a man should build a reputation of
zeal, for having been called in question for preaching of a Sermon; And then
to think it wisdom, redimere se quo queat minimo, to sink again and get off
as good cheap as he can; But when the malignity of others has slandred his
doctrine, or their galled consciences make them kick at his doctrine, then to
proceed with a Christian magnanimity, and a spiritual Nobility in the
maintenance of that doctrine, to prefer then before the greatness of the
their persons and the greatness of his own danger, the greatness of the
glory of God, and the greatness of the loss which Gods Church should suffer
by his lenity and prevarication: To edify others by his constancy, then when
this building in appearance and likelihood must be raised upon his own ruin,
then was Saint Paul's Nunc, concerning himself, then was his season to plant
and convey this doctrine to these Colossians, when it was most dangerous for
him to do so.

Now to consider this season and fitness as it concerned them; The Nunc illis,
Illis.
It was then, when Epaphras had declrared unto him their love, and when upon so
good testimony of their disposition, he had a desire that they might be
fulfilled with knowledge of Gods will in all wisdom and spiritual
understanding, as he says verse 9. when he knew how far they had proceeded in
mysteries of the Christian Religion, and that they had a spiritual hunger of
more, then it was seasonable to present to them this great point, that Christ
had suffered thoroughly, sufficiently, abundantly, for the reconciliation of
the whole world, and yet that there remained some sufferings, (and those of
Christ too) to be fulfilled, by us; That all was done; and yet there remained
more to be done, that after Christ's consummatum est, which was all the text,
there should be an Adimplendum est, interlined, that after Christ had fulfilled
the Law, and the Prophets by his sufferings, Saint Paul must fulfill the
residue of Christ's sufferings, was a doctrine unseasonably taught, till they had
learnt much, and showed a desire to learn more; In the Primitive Church men of
ripe understandings were content to think two or three years well spent in
learning of Catechisms and rudiments of Christian Religion; and the greatest
Bishops were content to think that they discharged their duties well, if they
ca^echized ignorant men in such rudiments, for we know from Genna^dius an
Ecclesiastical author, that the Bishops of Greece, and of the Eastern Church,
did use to con S. Cyrils sermons (made at Easter and some other Festivals)
without book, and preached over those Sermons of his making, to Congregations
of strong understanding, and so had more time for their Ca^echizing of others;
Optatus thinks, that when Saint Paul says, Ego plantavi, Apollos rigavit, I
planted the faith, and Apollos watered, he intended in those words, Optatus.
Ego de pagano feci catechumenum, ille de catechumeno Christianum, That Saint
Paul took ignorant persons into his charge, to catechize them at first, and
when they were instructed by him, Apollos watered them with the water of
Baptism, Tertullian thought he did young beginners in Christianity no wrong,
Tertull.
when he called them catulos infantiae re^entis, nec perfectis luminibus
reptantes, Young whelps which are not yet come to a perfect use of their eyes,
in the mysteries of Religion. Now God has delivered us in a great measure from
this weakness in seeing, because we are catechized from our cra^^^s, and from
this penury in preaching, we need not preach others Sermons, nor feed upon cold
meat, in Homilies, but we are fallen upon such times too, as that men do not
think themselves Christians, except they can tell what God meant to do with
them before he meant they should be Christians; for we can be intended to be
Christians, but from Christ; and we must needs seek a Predestination, without
any relation to Christ; a decree in God for salvation, and damnation, before
any decree for the reparation of mankind, by Christ, every Common-placer will
adventure to ^each, and every artificer will pretend to understand the purpose,
yea, and the order too, and method of Gods eternal and unrevealed decree,
Saint Paul required a great deal more knowledge then these men use to bring,
before he presented to them, a great deal, a less point of Doctrine then these
men use to ask.

This was then the Nunc illis their season, when they had humbly received so
much of the knowledge of the fundamental points of Religion. Gaudium.
Saint Paul was willing to communicate more and more, stronger and stronger
meat unto them; That which he presents here is, that which may seem least to
appertain to a Christian, (that is loy) because a Christian is a person that
has surrendered himself over to a sad and serious, and a severe examination of
all his actions, that all be done to the glory of God; but for all this, this
joy, true joy is truly, properly, only belonging to a Christian; because this
joy is the Testimony of a good conscience, that we have received God, so as
God has manifested himself in Christ, and worshipped God, so God has ordained:
In a true Church there are many tesserae externae, outward badges and marks, by
which others may judge, and pronounce me to be a true Christian; But the
tessera interna^, the inward badge and mark, by which I know this in my self,
is joy; The blessedness of heaven it self, Salvation, and the fruits of
Paradise, (that Paradise which cannot be expressed, cannot be comprehended)
have yet got no other name in the subtilty of the Schools, nor in the fullness
of the Scriptures, but to be called the joys of heaven; Matthew. 25. 21. Luke 15.
7. and 10. 2. 10.
Essential blessedness is called so, Enter into thy Masters joy, that is,
into the Kingdom of heaven; and accidental happiness added to that
essential happiness is called so too: There is joy in heaven at the
conversion of a sinner; and so in the Revela^ion, Rejoice ye heavens, and ye
that dwell in them, for the a^c^ser of our brethren is cast down^ There is now
joy even in heaven, which was not there before; Certainly as that man shall
never see the Father of Lights after this, to whom the day never breaks in this
life: As that man must never look to walk with the Lamb wheresoever he goes in
heaven, that ran away from the Lamb whenever he came toward him, in this
life; so he shall never possess the joys of heaven hereafter, that feels no
joy here; There must be joy here, which Tanquam Cellulae mellis (as Saint
Bernard says in his mellifluous language) as the honeycomb walls in, Bernard.
and prepares, and preserves the honey, and is as a shell to that kernel; so
there must be a joy here, which must prepare and preserve the joys of heaven
it self, and be as a shell of those joys. For heaven and salvation is not a
Creation, but a Multiplication; it begins not when we dye, but it increases
and dilates it self infinitely then; Christ himself, when he was pleased to
feed all that people in the wilderness, he asks first, Quot panes habetis, how
many loafes have you? and then multiplied them abundantly, as conduced most to
his glory; but some there was before. When thou go to eat that bread, of
which whosoever eats shall never dye, the bread of life in the Land of life,
Christ shall consider what joy thou broughtest with thee out of this world, and
he shall extend and multiply that joy unexpressibly; but if thou carry none
from hence, thou shall find none there. He that were to travel into a far
country, would study before, somewhat the map, and the manners, and the
language of the Country; He that looks for the fullness of the joys of heaven
hereafter, will have a taste, an insight in them before he go: And as it is
not enough for him that would travail, to study any language indifferently
(were it not an impertinent thing for him that went to lie in France, to study
Dutch?) So if we pretend to make the joys of heaven our residence, it is a
madness to study the joys of the world; The Kingdom of heaven is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 7.
says Saint Paul; And this Kingdom of heaven is Intra nos, says Christ, it is
in us, and it is joy that is in us; but every joy is not this Kingdom, and
therefore says the same Apostle, Phil. 4.4.
Rejoice in the Lord; There is no other true joy, none but that; But yet says
he there, Rejoice, and again, I say rejoi^e; that is, both again we say it,
again, and again we call upon you to have this spiritual joy, for without this
joy ye have not the earnest of the Spirit; And it is again rejoice, bring all
the joys ye have, to a second examination, and see if you can rejoice in them
again; Have you rejoiced all day in Feasts, in Musickes, in Conversations?
well, at night you must be alone, hand to hand with God. Again, I say rejoice,
sleep not, till you have tried whether your joy will hold out there too. Have
you rejoiced in the contemplation of those temporal blessings^ which God has
given you? it is well, for you may do so: But yet again I say Rejoice; call that
joy to an account, and see whether you ca^^ rejoice again, in such a use of
those blessings as he that gave them to you, requires of you. Have you rejoiced
in your zeal of Gods service? that is a true rejoicing in the Lord; But yet
still rejoice again, see that this joy be accompanied with another joy; that
you have zeal with knowledge: Rejoice, but rejoice again, refine your joy,
purge away all dross, and lees from your joy, there is no false joy enters
into heaven, but yet no sadness neither.

There is a necessary sadness in this life, Tristitiae.
but even in this life necessary only so, as Physic is necessary, Chrisost.
Tristitia data, ut peccata deleamus, It is Data, a gift of God, a sadness and
sorrow infused by him, and not assumed by our selves upon the crosses of this
world; And so it is physic, and it is Morbi illius peccati, it is proper and
peculiar physic for that disease for sin; But, (as that Father pathetically
enlarges that consideration) Remedium lippitudinis non t^llit alios morbos,
water for fore eyes, will not cure the toothache, sorrow and sadness which is
prescribed for sin, will not cure, should not be applied to the other
infirmities and diseases of our humane condition; Pecunia mulctatus est, (says
that Father still) Doluit, non emendavit, A man has a decree passed against
him in a Court of Justice, or lost a Ship by tempest, and he has grieved for
this, has this reversed the decree, or repaired the shipwreck? Filium amisit,
doluit, non resuscitavit. His Son, his eldest Son, his only Son, his towardly
Son is dead, and he has grieved for this; has he raised his Son to life
again? Infirmatur ipse, doluit, abstulit morbum? Himself is fallen into a
consumption, and languishes, and grieves, but does it restore him? Why no, for
sadness, and sorrow is not the physic against decrees, and shipwracks, and
consumptions, and death: But then Peccavit quis (says he still) and deluit?
peccata delevit; Has any man sinned against his God, and come to a true sorrow
for that sin? peccata delevit he has washed away that sin, from his soul;
for sorrow is good for nothing else, intended for nothing else, but only for
our sins, out of which sadness first arose: And then, considered so, this
sadness is not truly, nor properly sadness, because it is not so entirely;
There is health in the bitterness of physique; There is joy in the depth of
this sadness; Saint Basil inforces those words of the Apostle, Concor. ^. in
Psalm. 48.
2 Cor. 6. 10. Quasi tristes, semper autem gandentes, usefully to this point;
Tristitia nostra habet quasi, gaudium non habet, Our sorrow, says he, has a
limitation, a modification, it is but as it were sorrow, and we cannot tell
whether we may call it sorrow or no, but our joy is perfect joy, because it is
rooted in an assurance: Est in spe certa, our hope of deliverance is in him
that never deceived any; for says he then, our sadness passes away as a
dream, Et qui insomnium judicat, addit quasi, quasi dicebam, quasi equitabam,
quasi cogitabam, he that tells his dream, tells it still in that phrase, me
thought I spoke, me thought I went, and me thought I thought, so all the sorrow
of Gods children is but a quasi tristes, because it determines in joy, and
determines soon. To end this, because there is a difference inter delectationem
and gaudium, between delight and joy (for delight is in sensual things, and in
beasts, as well as in men, but joy is grounded in reason, and in reason
rectified, which is, conscience (therefore we are called to rejoice again; to
try whether our joy be true joy, and not only a delight, and when it is found
to be a true joy, we say still rejoice, that is, continue your spiritual joy
till it meet the eternal joy in the kingdom of heaven, and grow up into one
joy, but because sadness and sorrow have but one use, and a determined and
limited employment, only for sin, we do not say, be sorry, and again be
sorry, but when you have been truly sorry for your sins, when you have taken
that spiritual physique, believe your self to be well, accept the seal of
the holy Ghost, for the remission of your sins, in Christ Jesus, and come to
that health which that physique promises, peace of conscience.

This joy then which Saint Paul found to be so essential, In passionibus.
so necessary for man, he found that God placed within man's reach; so near him
as that God afforded man this joy where he least looked for it, even in
affliction; And of this joy in affliction, we may observe three steps, three
degrees; one is indeed but half a joy; and that the Philosophers had; A second
is a true joy, and that all Christians have; but the third is an overflowing,
and abundant joy, to which the Apostle was come, and to which by his example,
he would rouse others, that joy, of which himself speaks again; 1. Cor. 17.
4.
I am filled with comfort and am exceeding joyful, in all our tribulations;
The first of these, which we call a half joy, is but an indolency, and a
forced unsensiblenesse of those miseries which were upon them; a searing up, a
stupefaction, is not of the senses, yet of the affections; That resolution
which some moral men had against misery, Non facies ut te dicam malam, no
misery should draw them to do misery that honor, as to call it misery; And,
in respect of that extreme anguish which out of an over tenderness, ordinary
men did suffer under the calamities of this life, even this poor indolency and
privation of grief, was a joy, but yet but a half joy; the second joy, which
is a true joy, but common to all Christians, is that assurance, which they have
in their tribulations, that God will give them the issue with the temptation;
not that they pretend not to feel that calamity, so the Philosophers did, but
that it shall not swallow them, this is natural to a Christian, he is not a
Christian without this; Think it not strange, says the Apostle, as though some
strange thing were come unto you, (for we must accustom our selves to the
expectation of tribulation) but rejoice, says he, and when his glory shall
appear, ye shall be made glad and rejoice; He bids us rejoice, and yet all
that he promises, is but rejoicing at last, he bids us rejoice, all the way;
though the consummate, and determinable joy come not till the end, yet God has
set bounds to our tribulations, as to the sea, and they shall not overflow us;
But this perfect joy (to speak of such degrees of perfection, as may be had in
this life) this third joy, the joy of this text, is not a collateral joy, that
stands by us in the tribulation, and sustaines us, but it is a fundamental
joy, a radical joy, a viscerall, a gremiall joy, that arises out of the bosom
and womb and bowels of the tribulation it self. It is not that I rejoice,
though I be afflicted, but I rejoice because I am afflicted; It is not because
I shall not sink in my calamity, and be buried in that valley, but because my
calamity raises me, and makes my valley a hill, and gives me an eminency, and
brings God and me nearer to one another, then without that calamity I should
have been, Acts 5. 41.
when I can depart rejoicing, and that therefore, because I am worthy to suffer
rebuke for the name of Christ, as the Apostles did, when I can feel that
pattern proposed to my joy, Matthew. 5. 12.
and to my tribulation, which Christ gives, Rejoice and be glad, for so
persecuted they the Prophets, when I can find that seal printed upon me, 1
Pet. 4. 14.
by my tribulation, If ye be railed on for the name of Christ, blessed are ye,
for the spirit of God and of glory rests on you, that is, that affliction
fixes the holy Ghost upon me, which in prosperity, falls upon me but as
Sunbeams; Briefly if my soul have had that conference, that discourse with
God, that he has declared to me his purpose in all my calamities, (as he told
Ananias that he had done to Paul, he is a chosen vessel unto me, Acts 9. 16.
for I will show him how many things he must suffer for my sake) If the light
of Gods Spirit show us the number, the force, the intent of our tribulations,
then is our soul come to that highest joy, which she is capable of in this
life, when as cold and dead water, when it comes to the fire, has a motion and
dilatation and a bubling and a kind of dancing in the vessel, so my soul,
that lay asleep in prosperity, has by this fire of Tribulation, a motion, a
joy, an exaltation.

This is the highest degree of suffering; In passionibus meis.
but this suffering has this condition here, that it be passio mea; And this
too, that it be mea, and not pro me, but pro aliis: that it be mine, and no
bodies else, by my occasion; That it be mine without any fault of mine, that I
be no cause that it fell upon me, and that I be no occasion, that it fall upon
others. And first, it is not mine, if I borrow it; I can have no joy in the
sufferings of Martyrs and other Saints of God, by way of applying their
sufferings to me, by way of imitation and example I may, by way of application
and satisfaction I cannot, borrowed sufferings are not my sufferings: They are
not mine neither, if I steal them, if I force them; If my intemperate, and
scandalous zeal, or pretense of zeal, extort a chastisement from the State, if
I exasperate the Magistrate and draw an affliction upon my self, this stolen
suffering, this forced suffering is not passio mea, it is not mine, if it
should not be mine; August.
Natura cujusque rei est, quam Deus indidit, That only is the nature of every
thing which God has imprinted in it: That affliction only is mine, which God
has appointed for me, and what he has appointed we may see by his exclusions:
Let none of you suffer as a murderer, 1 Pet. 4. 15.
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busie-body in other men's matters,
(and that reaches far:) I am not possess^r bonae fidei, I come not to this
suffering by a good title, I cannot call it mine; I may find joy in it, that
is, in the midst of it, I may find comfort in the mercy of Christ, though I
suffer as a malefactor; But there is no joy in the suffering it self, for it is
not mine, it is not I, but my sin, my breach of the law, my disobedience that
suffers. It is not mine again, if it be not mine in particular, mine, and
limited in me. To those sufferings that fall upon me for my conscience, or for
the discharge of my duty, there belongs a joy, but when the whole Church is in
persecution, and by my occasion especially, or at all, woe unto them, by whom
the first offense comes; this is no joyful matter, and therefore vae illis per
quos scandalum, they who by their ambition of preferment, or indulgence to
their present case, or indifferency how things fall out, or presumptuous
confidence in Gods care, for looking well enough to his own, how little soever
they do, give way to the beginnings of superstition, in the times of
persecution; when persecutions come, either they shall have no sufferings, that
is, God shall suffer them to fall away, and refuse their testimony in his
cause, or they shall have no joy in their sufferings, because they shall see
this persecution is not theirs, it is not limited in them, but induced by their
prevarication upon the whole Church; And lastly, this suffering is not mine, if
I stretch it too far; if I overvalue it, it is not mine; A man forfeits his
privilege, by exceeding it; There is no joy belongs to my suffering, if I
place a merit in it; Meum non est cujus nomine nulla mihi superest acti^, says
the Law; That Is none of mine for which I can bring no action; and what actio^
can I bring against God, for a reward of my merit? Have I given him any thing
of mine? Quid habeo quod non accepi? what have I that I received not from him?
Have I given him all his own? how came I to abound then, and see him starve in
the streets in his distressed members? Has he changed his blessings unto me in
single money? Has he made me rich by half pence and farthings; and yet have I
done so much as that for him? Have I suffered for his glory? Am not I vas
figuli, a potters vessel, and that Potters vessel; and whose hand soever he
imploys, the hand of sickness, the hand of poverty, the hand of justice, the
hand of malice, still it is his hand that breaks the vessel, and this vessel
which is his own; for, can any such vessel have a propriety in it self, or
be any other bodies primarily then his, from whom it has the being? To
recollect these, if I will have joy in suffering it must be mine, mine, and not
borrowed out of an imaginary treasure of the Church; from the works of others
Supererogation: mine, and not stolen or enforced by exasperating the
Magistrate to a persecution: mine by good title and not by suffering for breach
of the Law, mine in particular, and not a general persecution upon the Church
by my occasion; And mine by a stranger title then all this, mine by
resignation, mine by disavowing it, mine by confessing that it is none of mine;
Till I acknowledge, that all my sufferings are even for Gods glory, are his
works, and none of mine, they are none of mine, and by that humility they
become mine, and then I may rejoice in my sufferings.

Through all our sufferings then, there must pass an acknowledgement that we
are unprofitable servants; Pro vobis.
toward God utterly unprofitable; So unprofitable to our selves, as that we
can merit nothing by our sufferings; but still we may and must have a purpose
to profit others by our constancy; it is Pro vobis, that Saint Paul says he
suffers for them, 1 Cor. 12. 15.
for their souls; I will most gladly bestow, and be bestowed for your souls,
(says he. 1 Cor. 1. 13.
) But Numquid Paulus crucifixus pro vobis, was Paul crucified for you? is his
own question, as he suffered for them here, so we may be bold to say he was
crucified for them; that is, that by his crucifying and suffering, the benefit
of Christ's sufferings, and crucifying might be the more cheerfully embraced by
them, and the more effectually applied to them; Pro vobis, is Pro vestro
commodo, for your advantage, and to make you the more active in making sure
your own salvation; 1 Cor. 1. 16.
We are afflicted (says he) for your consolation; that is first, that you might
take comfort, and spiritual courage by our example, that God will no more
forsake you, then he has done us, and then, he adds salvation too; for your
consolation and salvation; for our sufferings beget this consolation; and then,
this consolation facilitates your salvation; and then, when Saint Paul had that
testimony in his own conscience, that his purpose in his sufferings, was Pro
illis, to advantage Gods children, and then saw in his experience so good
effect of it, as that it wrought, and begot faith in them, then the more his
sufferings encreast, the more his joys encreast; Though (says he) I be offered
up, upon the service, and sacrifice of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with
you all; And therefore he calls the Philippians, who were converted by him,
Gaudium, and Coronam, his Joy and his Crown; not only a Crown, in that sense,
as an auditory, a congregation that compasses the Preacher, was ordinarily
called a Crown, Cor^na. (In which sense that Martyr Cornelius answered the
Judge, when he was charged to have held intelligence, and to have received
Letters from Saint Cyprian against the State, Ego de Corona Domini, (says he,
from Gods Church, it is true, I have, but Contra Rempublicam, against the State,
I have received no Letters.) But not only in this sense, Saint Paul calls
those whom he had converted, his Crown, his Crown, that is, his Church; but he
calls them his Crown in heaven, What is our hope, our joy, our Crown of
rejoicing, are not even you it? and where? even in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming, says the Apostle; And therefore not to stand upon
that contemplation of Saint Gregory's, that at the Resurrection Peter shall
lead up his converted Jews, and Paul his converted Nations, and every Apostle
his own Church; Since you, to whom God sends us, do as well make up our Crown,
as we do yours, since your being wrought upon, and our working upon you
conduce to both our Crowns, call you the labor, and diligence of your Pastors,
(for that is all the suffering they are called to, till our sins together call
in a persecution) call you their painfulnesse your Crown, and we shall call
your applyablenesse to the Gospel, which we preach, our Crown, for both conduce
to both; but especially childrens children, are the Crown of the Elders, says
Solomon: If when we have begot you in Christ, by our preaching, you also beget
others by your holy life and conversation, you have added another generation
unto us, and you have preached over our Sermons again, as fruitfully as we our
selves; you shall be our Crown, and they shall be your Crowns, and Christ Jesus
a Crown of everlasting glory to us all. Amen.

SERMON XVII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
MATTHEW. 18. 7. We unto the world, because of offenses.
THe Man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of
the Earth. Numb. 12. 3.
The man Moses was so; but the Child Jesus was meeker then he. Compare Moses
with men, and Moses will scarce be paralleled; Compare him with him, who being
so much more then man, as that he was God too, was made so much less then man,
as that he was a worm and no man, and Moses will not be admitted. If you
consider Moses his highest expression, what he would have parted with for his
brethren, in his Dele me, Pardon them, or blot my name out of thy book, yet
Saint Paul's zeal will enter into the balance, and come into comparison with
Moses in his Anathema pro fratribus, in that he wished himself to be separated
from Christ, rather then his brethren should be. But what comparison has a
sudden, a passionate, and indigested vehemence of love, expressed in a phrase
that tastes of zeal, but is not done, (Moses was not blotted out of the book of
life, nor Saint Paul was not separated from Christ for his brethren) what
comparison has such a love, that was but said, and perchance should not have
been said (for, we can scarce excuse Moses, or Saint Paul, of all excess and
inordinatenesse, in that that they said) with a deliberate and an eternal
purpose in Christ Jesus conceived as soon as we can conceive God to have known
that Adam would fall, to come into this world, and dye for man, and then
actually and really, in the fullness of time, to do so; he did come, and he did
dye. The man Moses was very meek, the child Jesus meeker then he. Moses his
meekness had a determination, (at least an interruption, a discontinuance)
when he revenged the wrong of another upon that Egyptian whom he slew. Exodus
2. 11. Esaias 42. 3.
But a bruised reed might have stood unbroken, and smoking flax might have lien
unquenched for ever, Mat. 23. 1.
for all Christ. And therefore though Christ send his Disciples to School, to
the Scribes and Pharisees, because they sat in Moses seat, for other lessons,
yet for this, 11. 29.
he was their Schoolmaster himself, Discite a me, learn of me, for I am
meek. In this Chapter he gives them three lessons in this doctrine of
meekness; He gives them foundations, and upperbuildings, The Text, and a
Comment, all the Elements of true instruction, Rule and Example. First, he
finds them contending for place, ver. 1.
Quis maximus, who should be greatest in the kingdom of heaven. The disease
which they were sick of, was truly an ignorance what this kingdom was; For,
though they were never ignorant that there should be an eternal kingdom in
heaven, yet they thought not that the kingdom of Christ here should only be a
spiritual kingdom, but they looked for a temporal inchoation of that
kingdom here. That was their disease, and a dangerous one. But as Physicians
are forced to do sometimes, to turn upon the present cure of some vehement
symptom, and accdient, and leave the consideration of the maine disease for a
time, so Christ leaves the doctrine of the kingdom for the present, and does
not rectify them in that yet, but for this pestilent symptom, this malignant
accident of precedence, and ambition of place, he corrects that first, and to
that purpose gives them the example of a little child, and tells them, that
except they become as humble, as gentle, as supple, as simple, as seely, as
tractable, as ductile, as careless of place, as negligent of precedence, as
that little child, they could not only not be great, but they could not at all
enter into the kingdom of heaven. He gives them a second lesson in this
doctrine of meekness against scandals, and offenses, against an easiness in
giving or an easiness in taking offenses. For, how well soever we may seem to
be in our selves, we are not well, if we forbear not that company, and abstain
not from that conversation, which by ill example may make us worse, or if we
forbear not such things, as, though they be indifferent in themselves, and can
do us no harm, yet our example may make weaker persons then we are, worse,
because they may come to do as we do, and not proceed upon so good ground as
we do; They may sin in doing those things by our example, in which we did not
sin, because we knew them to be indifferent things, and therefore did them,
and they did them though they thought them to be sins. And for this
Doctrine, verse. 8.
Christ takes an example very near to them, If thy hand, or foot, or eye offend
thee, cut it off, pull it out. His third lesson in this doctrine of meeknes is
against hardness of heart, against a loathnesse, a weariness in forgiving the
offenses of other men, verse. 21.
against us, occasioned by Peter's question, Quoties remittam, How often shall my
brother sin against me, and I forgive him? and the example in this rule
Christ has wrapped up in a parable, verse. 28.
The Master forgave his servant ten thousand Talents, (more money then
perchance any private man is worth) and that servant took his fellow by the
throat, and cast him into prison, because he did not presently pay an hundred
pence, perchance fifty shillings, not three pound of our money: in such a
proportion was Christ pleased to express the Masters inexhaustible largeness
and bounty, (which is himself,) and the servants inexcusable cruelty, and
penuriousnesse, (which is every one of us.) The root of all Christian duties is
Humility, meekness, that is violated in an ambitious precedence, for that
implies an over-estimation of our selves, and an undervalue of others; And it
is violated in scandals, and offenses, for that implies an unsetlednesse and
irresolution in our selves, that we can be so easily shaked, or a neglecting
of weaker persons, of whom Christ neglected none; and it is violated in an
unmercifulness, and inex^rablenesse, for that implies an indocilenesse, that
we will not learn by Christ's doctrine; and an ungratefulness, that we will not
apply his example, and do to his servants, as he, our Master, has done to us:
And so have you some Paraphrase of the whole Chapter, as it consists of Rules
and Examples in this Doctrine of meeknes, endangered by pride, by scandal, by
uncharitablenes. But of those two, pride and uncharitabenes (though they
deserve to be often spoken of,) I shall have no occasion from these words of my
text, to speak, for into the second of these three parts, The Doctrine of
scandals, our text falls, and it is a Doctrine very necessary, and seldom
touched upon.

As the words of our Text are, Divisio.
our parts must be three. First, that heavy word Vae, woe; Secondly, that
general word, Mundo, Woe be unto the world; And lastly, that mischievous word,
A scandalis, Woe be unto the, world because of scandals, of offenses. each of
these three words will receive a twofold consideration; for the first, Vae, is
first Vox dolentis, a voice of condoling and lamenting, Christ laments the
miseries imminent upon the world, because of scandals, and then it is Vox
minantis, a voice of threatening, and intermination, Christ threatens, he
interminates heavy judgments upon them, who occasion and induce these miseries
by these scandals; This one Vae denotes both these; sorrow, and yet
infallibility; They always go together in God; God is loath to do it, and yet
God will certainly inflict these judgments. The second word, Mundo, Woe be
unto the world, looks two ways too; Vae malis, woe unto evil men that raise
scandals, vae bonis, woe unto them who are otherwise good in themselves, if
they be so various, as to be easily shaked and seduced by scandals. And then
upon the last word A scandalis, Woe be unto the world, because of scandals, of
offenses, we must look two ways also; first, as it denotes Scandalum activum,
a scandal given by another, and then, as it denotes Scandalum passivum, a
scandal taken by another.

First then, 1. Part.
our first word, in the firrst acceptance thereof, is Vae dolentis, the voice
of condoling and lamentation; God laments the necessity that he is reduced to,
and those judgments which the sins of men have made inevitable. In the
person of the Prophets which denounced the judgments of God, it is expressed
so, Onus Babyl^nis, Onus Egypti, Onus Damasci? O the burden of Damascus, the
burden of Egypt, the burden of Babylon; And not only so, but Onus visionis,
Not only that that judgment would be a heavy burden, when it fell upon that
Nation, but that the very pre-contemplation, and pre-denunciation of that
judgment upon that people, was a burden and a distasteful bitterness, to the
Prophet himself, that was sent upon that message. In reading of an Act of
Parliament, or of any Law that inflicts the heaviest punishment that can be
imagined upon a delinquent, and transgressour of that Law, a man is not often
much affected, because he needs not, when he does but read that law, consider
that any particular man is fallen under the penalty, and bitterness thereof.
But if upon evidence and verdict he be put to give judgment upon a particular
man that stands before him, at the bar, according to that Law, That that man
that stands there that day, must that day be no man; that that breath breathed
in by God, to glorify him, must be suffocated and strangled with a halter, or
evaporated with an Axe, he must be hanged or beheaded, that those limbs which
make up a Cabinet for that precious Jewel, the image of God, to be kept in,
must be cut into quarters, or torn with horses; that that body which is a
consecrated Temple of the Holy Ghost, must be chained to a stake, and burnt to
ashes, he that is not affected in giving such a judgment, upon such a man,
has no part in the bowels of Christ Jesus, that melt in compassion, when our
sins draw and extort his Judgments upon us in the mouth of those Prophets,
those men whom God sends, it is so, and it is so in the mouth of God himself
that sends them. Esa. 1. 24.
Heu vindicabor, (says God) Alas, I will revenge me of mine enemies; Alas, I
will, is Alas, I must, his glory compels him to do it, the good of his Church,
and the sustentation of his Saints compel him to it, and yet he comes to it
with a condolency, with a compassion, Heu vindicabor, Alas, I will revenge me
of mine enemies: Ezech. 6. 11.
so also in another Prophet, Heu abominationes, Alas for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel; for (as it is added there) they shall
fall, (that is, they will fall) by the sword, by famine, by pestilence, and (as
it follows) I will accomplish my fury upon them; Though it were come to that
height, fury, and accomplishment, consummation of fury, yet it comes with a
condolency, and compassion, Heu abominationes, Alas for all the evil
abominations of the house of Israel, I would they were not so ill, that I might
be better to them. Men sent by God do so, so does God that sends those men, and
he that is both God and man, Christ Jesus does so too: We have but two clear
records in the Scriptures of Christ's weeping, and both in compassion for
others, when Mary wept for her dead brother Lazarus, Ioh. 11. 33.
and the Jews that were with her wept too, Jesus also wept, and he groaned in
the spirit, and was troubled. This was but for the discomfort of one family,
(it was not a mortality over the whole Country) It was but for one person in
that family, (it was not a contagion that had swept, or did threaten the whole
house) it was but for such a person in that family, as he meant forthwith to
restore to life again, and yet Jesus wept, and groaned in the Spirits, and was
trobled; he would not lose that opportunity of showing his tenderness, and
compassion in the behalf of others. How vehement, how passionate then, must we
believe his other weeping to have been, Luke. 19. 41.
when he had his glorious and beloved City Jerusalem in his sight, and wept
over that City, and with that stream of tears powered out that Sea, that
tempestuous Sea, those heavy judgments, which, (though he wept in doing it) he
denounced upon that City, that glorious, that beloved City, which City (though
Christ charge, to have stoned them that were sent to her, Mat. 23. 34.
and to be guilty of all the righteous blood shed upon the earth) the holy
Ghost calls the holy City for all that, 4. 5.
not only at the beginning of Christ's appearance, (The Devil took him up into
the holy City) (for at that time she was not the unholyer for any thing that
she had done upon the person of Christ,) but when they had exercised all their
cruelty, even to death, the death of the Cross upon Christ himself, Mat. 27.
33.
the Holy Ghost calls still the holy City; Many bodies of Saints, which slept,
arose, and went into the holy City. When the Fathers take into their
contemplation and discourse, that passionate exclamation of our Savior upon
the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? those blessed Fathers,
that never thought of any such sense of that place, that Christ was, at that
time, actually in the real torments of hell, assign no fitter sense of those
words, then that the foresight of those insupportable, and inevitable, and
imminent judgments upon his City, and his people, occasioned that passionate
exclamation, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Acts 9. 4.
That as, after he was ascended into heaven, he said to Saul, Cur me
persequeris? He called Saul's persecuting of his Church, a persecuting of him,
so when he considered that God had forsaken his people, his City, his
Jerusalem, he cried out, that God had forsaken him. God that sent the Prophets;
the Prophets that were sent; Christ who was both, the person sent, and the
sender, came to the inflicting and denouncing of judgments, with this Vae
dolentis, a heart, and voice of condoling and lamentation.

Grieve not then the holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4. 30.
says the Apostle; extort not from him those Judgments, which he cannot in
justice forbear, and yet is grieved to inflict. How often do we use that
motive, to divert young men from some ill actions, and ill courses, How will
this trouble your friends, how will this grieve your Mother, this will kill
your Father? The Angels of heaven who are of a friendship and family with us,
as they rejoice at our conversion, so are they sorry and troubled at our
aversion from God. Our sins have grieved our Mother; that is, made the Church
ashamed, and blush that he has washed us, and clothed us, in the whiteness
and innocence of Christ Jesus in our baptism, and given us his blood to drink
in the other Sacrament. Our sins have made our mother the Church ashamed in her
self, (we have scandalized and offended the Congregation) and our sins have
defamed and dishonored our mother abroad, that is, imprinted an opinion in
others, that that cannot be a good Church, in which we live so dissolutely, so
falsely to our first faith, and contract, and stipulation with God in Baptism.
We have grieved our brethren, the Angels, Mal. 2. 10.
our mother, the Church, and we have killed our Father: God is the father of us
all; Act. 20. 28.
and we have killed him; for God has purchased a Church with his blood, says
Saint Paul. And, oh, how much more is God grieved now, that we will make no
benefit of that blood which is shed for us, then he was for the very shedding
of that blood! We take it not so ill, (pardon solow a comparison in so high a
mystery; for, since our blessed Savior was pleased to assume that metaphor,
Mat. 20. 22.
and to call his passion a Cup, and his death a drinking, we may be admitted to
that Comparison of drinking too) we take it not so ill, that a man go down into
our Cellar, and draw, and drink his fill, as that he go in, and pierce the
vessels, and let them run out, in a wastfull wantonneste. To satisfy the
thirst of our souls, there was a necessity that the blood of Christ Jesus,
should be shed; To satisfy Christ's own sitto, that thirst which was upon him,
when he was upon the Cross, there was a necessity too, that Christ should
bleed to death. On our part there was an absolute and a primary necessity; God
in his justice requiring a satisfaction, nothing could redeem us, by way of
satisfaction, but the blood of his Son. And though there were never act more
voluntary, more spontaneous, then Christ's dying for man, nor freer from all
coaction, and necessity of that kind, yet after Christ had submitted himself
to that Decree and contract that passed between him, Luke 24. 26.
and his Father, that he, by shedding his blood, should redeem Mankind, there
lay a necessity upon Christ himself to shed his blood, as himself says first
to his Disciples that went with him to Emans, Nonne op^rtuit, ought not Christ
to suffer all these things? do ye not find by the prophets that he was bound to
do it? and then to his Apostles at Jerusalem, verse 36.
Sic opertuit, Thus it behoved Christ to suffer. There was then an absolute
necessity upon us, an obedientiall necessity upon Christ, that his blood must
be shed; But to let him dye in a wantonness, to let out all that precious
liquor, and taste no drop of it, to draw out all that immaculate and unvaluable
blood, and make no balsamum, no antidote, no plaster, no fomentation in the
application of that blood, to labor still under a burning fever of lust, and
ambition, and presumption, and find no cooling julips there, in the
application of that blood, to labor under a cold damp of indevotion, and under
heartlesse desperation, and find no warming Cordialls there, to be still as
far under judgments and executions for finne, as if there had been no
Messiah sent, no ransom given, no satisfiaction made, not to apply this blood
thus shed for us, by those means which God in his Church presents to us, this
puts Christ to his woeful Interjection, to cast out this woe upon us, (which he
had rather have left out) woe be unto the world, which, though it begin in a vae
dolentis, a voice of condoling and lamenting, yet it is also vae minantis, a
voice of threatening, and intermination, denoting the infallibility of
Judgments, Vae minantis.
and that is our next consideration.

I think we find no words in Christ's mouth so often, as vae, and Amen. Each of
them has two significations; as almost all Christ's words, and actions have;
consolation, and commination. For, as this vae signifies (as before) a sorrow,
(woe, that is, woe is me, for this will fall upon you) and signifies also a
Judgment inevitable and infallible, (woe, that is, woe be unto you, for this
Judgment shall fall upon you) so Amen is sometimes vox Asserentis, and
signifies vere, verily, Verily I say unto you, when Christ would confirm, and
establish a belief in some doctrine, John 14. 12.
or promise of his, (as when he says Amen, Amen, verily verily I say unto you,
he that believes on me, the works that I do, shall he do also, and greater
works then these shall he do) so it is vox Asserentis, a word of assertion,
Mat. 5. 26.
and it is also vox Deserentis, a word of desertion, when God denounces an
infallibility, Mat. 5. 26.
an unavoydablenesse, an inevitableness in his judgments, Amen dico, verily I
say unto thee, thou shall by no means come out thence till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing; so this Amen signifies Fiat, this shall certainly be thus
done. And this seal, this Amen, as Amen is Fiat, is always set to his vae, as
his vae is vox minantis; whenever God threatens any Judgment, he means to
execute that Judgment as far as he threatens it; God threatens nothing in
terrorem only, only to frighten us; every vae has his Amen, every Judgment
denounced, a purpose of execution. This then is our woeful case; every man may
find upon record, in the Scriptures, a vae denounced upon that sin, which he
knows to be his sin; and if there be a vae, there is an Amen too, if God have
said it shall, it shall be executed, so that this is not an execution of a few
condemned persons, but a Massacre of all: It is not a Decimation, as in a
rebellion, to spare nine, and hang the tenth, but it is a washing, a sweeping
away of all: every man may find a Judgment upon record against him. It does
not acquit him that he has not committed an adultery; and yet, is he sure of
that? He may have done that in a look, in a letter, in a word, in a wish: It
does not acquit him, that he has not done a murder; and yet, is he sure of
that? He may have killed a man, in not defending him from the oppression of
another, if he have power in his hand, and he may have killed in not relieving,
if he have a plentiful fortune. He may have killed in not reprehending him who
was under his charge, when he saw him kill himself in the sinful ways of death.
Ardoinus.
As they that write of Poisons, and of those creatures that naturally malign
and would destroy man, do name the Flea, as well as the Viper, because the Flea
sucks as much blood as he can, so that man is a murderer that stabs as deep as
he can, though it be but with his tongue, with his pen, with his frown; for a
man may kill with a frown, in withdrawing his countenance from that man, that
lives upon so low a pasture as his countenance, nay he may kill with a smile,
with a good look, if he afford that good look with a purpose to delude him.
And, beloved, how many dye of this disease; how many dye laughing, dye of a
tickling; how many are overjoyed with the good looks, and with the familiarity
of greater persons then themselves, and led on by hopes of getting more, wast
that they have? An adultery, a murder may be done in a dream, if that dream
were an effect of a murderous, or an adulterous thought conceived before. 1
Cor. 4. 4.
The Apostle says, I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified,
we sin some sins, that all the world sees, and yet we see not, but then,
how many more, which none in the world sees but our selves? Scarce any man
scapes all degrees of any sin; scarce any man some great degree of some great
sin; no man escapes so, but that he may find upon record, in the Scriptures,
a vae, and an Amen, a Judgment denounced, and an execution sealed against him.
And, if that be our case, where is there any room for this milder
signification of these two words, vae, and Amen, which we spoke of before, as
they are words of Consolation? If because God has said Stipendium peccati mors
est, the wages of sin is death, because I have sinned, I must dye, what can I
do in a Prayer? can I flatter God? what can I do in an Alms? Can I bribe
God, or frustrate his purpose? Can I put an Euge upon his vae, a vacat upon his
Fiat, a Nonobstante upon his Amen. God is not man, not a false man that he can
lie, nor a weak man that he can repent. Where then is the restorative, the
consolatory nature of these words? In this, beloved, consists our comfort, that
all Gods vae's and Amens, all judgments, and all his executions are
Conditional; There is a Creed and vives, Believe and thou shall live; there is
a Fac hoc and vives, do this and thou shall live; If thou have done otherwise,
there is a Converte and vives, turn unto the Lord and thou shall live; If thou
have done so, and fallen off, there is a Revertere and vives, return again
unto the Lord, and thou shall live. How heavy so ever any of Gods judgments
be, 2 Samuel 12. 22.
yet there is always room for David's question, Quis scit, who can tell whether
God will be gracious unto me? What better assurance could one have, then David
had? The Prophet Nathan had told David immediately from the mouth of God, this
child shall surely dye, and ratified it by that reason, because thou have given
occasion to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, this child shall surely dye,
yet David fasted, and wept, and said, who can tell whether the Lord will be
gracious unto me, that the child may live? There is always room for David's
question, Quis scit, who can tell? Nay there is no room for it, as it is a
question of diffidence and distrust; every man may and must know, that
whatsoever any Prophet have denounced against any sin of his, yet there are
conditions, upon which the Lord will be gracious and thy soul shall live. But
if the first condition, that is Innocence, and the second, that is Repentance,
be rebelliously broken, then every man has his vae, and every vae has his
Amen, the judgments are denounced against him; and upon him they shall be
executed; for God threatens not to fright children, but the Mountains melt, and
Powers, and Thrones, and Principalities tremble at his threatening. And so have
you the doubled signification of the first word vae, as it is vox Dolentis, and
as it is Vox minantis, God is loath, but God will infallibly execute his
judgment, and we proceed to the extension of this vae, over all, vae mundo,
woe unto the world, and the double signification of that word.

I have wondered sometimes that that great Author, 2. Part. Mund^.
and Bishop in the Roman Church, Abulensis, is so free, as to confess that
some Expositors amongst them, have taken this word in our Text, Mundo,
adjective, not to signify the world, but a clean person, a free man, that it
should be vae immuni, woe unto him that is free from offenses, that has had no
offenses; perchance they mean from crosses. And so, though it be a most absurd,
and illiterate, and ungrammaticall construction of the place that they make,
yet there is a doctrine to be raised from thence, of good use. As God brought
light out of darkness, and raises glory out of sin, so we may raise good
Divinity out of their ill Grammar; for vae mundo, indeed, vae immuni, woe be
unto him that has had no crosses. There cannot be so great a cross as to have
none. I lack one loaf of that daily bread that I pray for, if I have no cross;
for afflictions are our spiritual nourishment; I lack one limb of that body I
must grow into, which is the body of Christ Jesus, if I have no crosses; for,
my conformity to Christ, (and that is my being made up into his body) must be
accomplished in my fulfilling his sufferings in his flesh. So that, though our
adversaries out of their ignorance mislead us in a wrong sense of the place;
the Holy Ghost leads us into a true, and right use thereof. But there is
another good use of their error too, another good doctrine out of their ill
Grammar; Take the word mundo, adjective, for an adjective, and vae mundo, vae
immuni, woe unto him that is so free from all offenses, as to take offense at
nothing; to be indifferent to any thing, to any Religion, to any Discipline, to
any form of Gods service; That from a glorious Mass to a sordid Conventi^le,
all is one to him, all one to him whether that religion, in which they meet, and
light candles at Noon; or that, in which they meet, and put out candles at
midnight; what innovations, what alterations, what tolerations of false, what
extirpations of true Religion soever come, it shall never trouble, never offend
him; It Is true, Vae mundo indeed, woe unto him that is so free, so unsensible,
so unaffected with any thing in this kind; for, as to be too inquisitive into
the proceedings of the State, and the Church, out of a jealousy and suspicion
that any such alterations, or tolerations in Religion are intended or prepared,
is a seditious disaffection to the government, and a disloyal aspersion upon
the persons of our Superiors, to suspect without cause, so, not to be sensible
that the Catterpillars of the Roman Church, do eat up our tender fruit, that
the Jesuits, and other enginiers of that Church, do seduce our forwardest and
best spirits, not to be watchful in our own families, that our wives and
children and servants be not corrupted by them, for the Pastor to s^acken in
his duty, (not to be earnest in the Pulpit) for the Magistrate to slacken in
his, (not to be vigilant in the execution of those Laws as are left in his
power) vae mundo, vae immuni, woe unto him that is unsensible of offenses.
Jealously, suspiciously to mis-interpret the actions of our Superiors, is
inexcusable, but so is it also not to feel how the adversary gains upon us, and
not to wish that it were, and not to pray that it may be otherwise; vae mundo,
vae immuni, woe to him that is un-offended unsensible, thus. But as I have
wondered that that Bishop would so easily confess, that some of their
Expositors were so very unlearned, so barbarously ignorant, so enormously
stupid, as to take this vae mundo adjective, so do I wonder more, that after
such confessions, and acknowledgements of such ignorances and stupidities
amongst them, they will not remedy it in the cause, but still continue so
rigid, so severe in the maintenance of their own Translation, their Vulgate
Edition, as in places, and cases of doubt, not to admit recourse to the
Original, as to the Supreme Judge, nor to other Translations: for, by either
of those ways, it would have appeared, that this vae mundo could not be taken
adjective, but is a cloud cast upon the whole world, a woe upon all, no place,
no person, Genesis 25.
no calling free from these scandals, and offenses, from tentations, and
tribulations; when there was a vae Sodom, that God reigned fire and brimstone
upon Sodom, yet there was a Zoar, where Let might be safe. When there was a vae
Egypto, woe and woe upon woe upon Egypt, there was a Go^hen a Sanctuary for the
children of God in Egypt. When there is a vae inhabitantibus, a persecution in
any place, there is a Fuge in aliam, leave to fly into another City. But in
such an extension, such an expansion, such an exaltation, such an inundation of
woe, as this in our text, Vae mundo, woe to the world, to all the world, a
tide, a flood without any ebb, a Sea without any shore, a dark sky without
any Horizon; That though I do withdraw my self from the woeful uncertainties,
and irresolutions and indeterminations of the Court, and from the snares and
circumventions of the City; Though I would divest, and shake off the woes and
offenses of Europe in Afrique, or of Asia in America, I cannot, since
wheresoever, or howsoever I live, these woes, and scandals, and offenses,
tentations, and tribulations will pursue me, who can express the wretched
condition, the miserable station, and prostration of man in this world? vae
mundo.

Take the word, Ioh. 17. 9.
World, in as ill a sense as you will, as ill as when Christ says, I pray not
for the world, (and they are very ill, for whom Christ Jesus who prayed for
them that crucified him, would not pray:) Take the word world, in as good a
sense as you will, 6. 51.
as good as when Christ says, I give my flesh for the life of the world, (and
they are very good that are elemented, made up with his flesh, and alimented
and nursed with his blood:) Take it for the Elect, take it for the Reprobate,
the Reprobate and the Elect too are under this vae, woe to the world, from
tentations, and tribulations, scandals, and offenses.

So it is if the world be persons, and it is so also, if it be times; Take the
world for the times we live in now, 1 Ioh. 2. 18.
and it is Novissima hora, this is the last time, and the Apostle has told us,
that the last times are the worst. Take the world for the Old world, Originalis
mundus, 2. 2. 5.
as Saint Peter call's it; the Original world, of which, this world; since the
flood, is but a copy, and God spared not the Old world, says that Apostle. Take
it for an elder world then that, the world in Paradise, when one Adam, the Son
of God, and one Eve produced by God, from him, made up the world: or take it
for an elder world then that, the world in heaven, when only the Angels, and
no other creatures made up the world; Take it any of these ways, we in this
latter world do, Noah in the old world did, so did Adam in the world in
Paradise, and so did the Angels in the oldest world of all, find these woes
from offenses, and scandals, tentations, and tribulations.

So it is in all persons, in all men, so it is in all times, in all ages, and
so it is in all places too; for he that retires into a Monastery upon pretense
of avoiding tentations, and offenses in this world, he brings them thither, and
he meets them there; He sees them intramittendo, and extramittendo, he is
scandalized by others, and others are scandalized by him. That part of the
world that sweats in continual labor in several vocations, is scandalized
with their laziness, and their riches, to see them anoint themselves with other
men's sweat, and lard themselves with other men's fat; and then these retired and
cloistrall men are scandalized with all the world, that is out of their walls.
There is no sort of men more exercised with contentious and scandalous
wranglings, then they are: for, first, with all eager animosity they prefer
their Monastical life before all other secular callings, yea, before those
Priests, whom they call Secular Priests, such as have care of souls, in
particular parishes, (as though it were a Diminution, and an inferior state to
have care of souls, and study and labor the salvation of others.) And then as
they undervalue all secular callings, (Mechaniques, and Merchants, and
Magistrates too) in respect of any Regular order, (as they call them) so with
the same animosity do they prefer their own Order, before any other Order. A
Carthusian is but a man of fish, for one Element, to dwell still in a Pond, in
his Cell alone, but a Jesuit is a useful ubiquitary, and his Scene is the
Court, as well as the Cloister. And howsoever they pretend to be gone out of
the world, they are never the farther from the Exchange for all their Cloister;
they buy, and sell, and purchase in their Cloister. They are never the farther
from Westminster in their Cloister, they occasion and they maintain suits from
their Cloister; and there are the Courts of Justice noted to abound most with
suits, where Monasteries abound most. Nay, they are never the farther from the
field for all their Cloister; for they give occasions of armies, they raise
armies, they direct armies, they pay armies from their Cloister. Men should not
retire from the mutual duties of this world, to avoid offenses, tentations,
tribulations, neither do they at all avoid them, that retire thus, upon that
pretense.

Shall we say then, Mat. 19. 9.
as the Disciples said to Christ; If the case of the man be so with his wife,
it is not good to mary? If the world be nothing but a bed of Adders, a quiver
of poisoned arrows, from every person, every time, every place, woes by
occasion of offenses, and scandals, it had been better God had made no world,
better that I had never been born into the world, better, if by any means I
could get out of the world quickly, ^ 2. 22.
shall we say so? God forbid. As long as Job charged not God foolishly, it is
said, in all this Job sinned not; but when he came to curse his birth, and to
loath his life, 1 Reg. 19. 4.
then Job charged God foolishly. When one Prophet (Eliah) comes to proportion
God the measure of his corrections, Ion. 4.
Satisest, Lord, this is enough; Thou have done enough, I have suffered enough,
now take away my life. When another Prophet comes to wish his own death in
anger, and to justify his anger, and dispute it out with God himself, for not
proceeding with the Ninivites, as he would have had him do; nay for the
withering of his gourd that shadowed him, in all these, they did, in all such,
we do charge God foolishly; And shall we that are but worms, but
silke-wormes, but glow-wormes at best, chide God that he has made
slow-wormes, and other venomous creeping things? shall we that are nothing but
boxes of poison in our selves, reprove God for making Toads and Spiders in the
world? shall we that are all discord, quarrel the harmony of his Creation, or
his providence? Can an Apothecary make a Sovereign triacle of Vipers, and other
poisons, and cannot God admit offenses, and scandals into his physic?
scandals, and offenses, tentations, and tribulations, are our leaven that
ferment us, and our lees that preserve us. Use them to Gods glory, and to thine
own establishing, and then thou shall be a particular exception to that
general Rule, the Vae mundo a scandalis, shall be an Euge tibi a scandalis,
thou shall see that it was well for thee, that there were scandals and offenses
in the world, for they shall have exercised thy patience, they shall have
occasioned thy victory, they shall have assured thy triumph.

SERMON XVIII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
The second Sermon on MATTHEW. 18. 7. Woe unto the world, because of offenses.
We have seen in the first word the vae, as it is vox Dolentis, the voice of
condoling and lamenting, that it is accompanied with a Heu; Gods judgments
come against his will, he had rather they might be forborne, he had rather those
easy conditions had been performed; And as it is vox minantis, a voice of
threatening and intermination, it is accompanied with an Amen; if conditions be
rebelliously broken, Gods judgments do come infallibly, inevitably; And we
have seen in the second word, vae mundo, and the twofold signification of that,
that these offenses, and scandals fall upon all the world; the wicked embrace
tentations, and are glad of them, and sorry when they are but weak; the godly
meet tentations, and wrestle with them, and sometimes do overcome them, and
are sometimes overcome by them; but all have them, and yet we must not break
out of the world by a retired life, nor break out of the world by a violent
death, but take Gods ways, and stay Gods leisure. In this our third part, we
are to consider the root from which this over-spreading vae, this woe proceeds,
A scandalis, from scandals, from offenses, and the double signification of that
word, first, Scandalum activum, the active scandal, which is a malice, or at
least an indiscretion in giving offense, and Scandalum passivum, the passive
scandal, which is a forwardness, at least an easiness in taking offense; To
know the nature of the thing, look we to the derivation, the extraction, the
Origination of the word. The word from which scandal is derived (scazein)
signifies claudicare, to halt; and thence, a scandal is any trap, or Engine,
any occasion of stumbling, and laming, hid in the way that I must go, by
another person; and as it is transferred to a spiritual use, appropriated to
an Ecclesiastical sense, it is an occasion of sinning. It has many branches;
too many to be so much as named; but some fruits from some of them we shall
gather, Activum.
and present you. First, in our first, the Active Scandal, to do any thing
that is naturally ill, formally sin, whereby another may be occasioned or
encouraged by my example to do the like, this is the active scandal most
evidently, and most directly, and this is morbus complicatus, a disease that
carries another disease in it, a fever exalted to a frenzy; It is Peccatum
pragnans, peccatum gravidum, a spauning sin, a sin of multiplication, to sin
purposely, to lead another into tentation. But there is a less degree then
this, and it is an active scandal too; To do any thing that in it self is
indifferent, (and so no sin in me, that do it) in the sight of another that
thinks it not indifferent, but unlawful, and yet because he has a real, or a
reverentiall dependence upon me, (my Son, my Servant, my Tenant) and thinks I
would be displeased if he did it not, does it against his conscience by my
example, though the sin be formally his, radically it is mine, because I gave
the occasion, And there is a lower degree then this; and yet is an active
scandal. If I do an indifferent thing in the sight and knowledge of another,
that thinks it unlawful, though he do not come to do it, out of my example,
by any dependence upon me, yet if he come to think uncharitably of me, or to
condemn me for doing it, though this uncharitableness in him be his sin,
yet the root grew in me, and I gave the scandal. And there is a lower degree
then this, and yet is an Active scandal too. Origin has expressed it thus,
Scandalum est quo scandentium pedes offenduntur; To hinder the feet of another,
that would go farther, or climb higher in the ways of godliness; but for me,
to say to any man, What need you be so pure, so devout, so godly, so zealous,
will this make you rich, will this bring you to preferment? this is an active
scandal in me, though he that I speak to, be not damnified by me. Of which
kind of scandal, Mat. 16. 23.
there is an evident, and an illustrious example, between Saint Peter, and
Christ; Christ calls Peter a scandal unto him, when Peter rebuked Christ for
offering to go up to Jerusalem in a time of danger. Christ was to accomplish
the work of our salvation at Jerusalem, by dying, and Peter disswades,
discounsels that journey; and for this, Christ lays that heavy name upon his
indiscreet zeal, and that heavy name upon his person, Vade retro, Get thee
behind me Satan, thou art a scandal unto me. This is Scandalum oppositionis,
the scandal of opposing, dissuading, discounselling, discountenancing, and
consequently the frustrating of Gods purpose in man; This is but by word, and
yet there is a less then this, which is Scandalum timoris, when he that has
power in his hand, in a family, in a parish, in a City, in a Court, intimidates
them who depend upon him, (though nothing be expressly done or said that way)
and so slackens them in their religious duties to God; and in their constancy
in Religion it self; And vae illis, woe unto them that do so, and vae mundo
ab illis; woe unto the world, because there are so many that do so. And yet
there is another scandal which seems less then this, Scandalum amoris, the
scandal of love; as Saul gave David his daughter Mich^l, ut esset ei in
scandalum, that she might be a snare unto him; 1 Samuel 18. 21.
that is, that David being over-uxorious, and over-indulgent to his wife, might
thereby lie the more open to Saul's mischievous purposes upon him, and vae
illis, woe unto them that do so; and vae munde ab illis, woe unto the world,
because there are so many that do so, that study the affections, and
dispositions, and inclinations of men, and then, minister those things to them,
that affect them most, which is the way of the instruments of the Roman Church,
to promise preferments to discontented persons, and is indeed, his way, whose
instrument the Roman Church is, The Devil; for this is all that the Devil is
able to do, in the ways of tentation, Applicare passivis activa, To find out
what will work upon a man, and to work by that. The Devil did not create me,
nor bring materials to my creation; The Devil did not infuse into me, that
choler, that makes me ignorantly and indiscreetly zealous, nor that phlegm that
choakes me with a stupid indevotion; He did not infuse into me that blood,
that inflames me in licentiousness, nor that melancholy that dampes me in a
jealousy and suspicion, a diffidence and distrust in God. The Devil had no
hand in composing me in my constitution. But the Devil knows, which of these
govern, and prevail in me, and ministers such tentations, as are most
acceptable to me, and this is Scandalum amoris, the scandal of Love.

So have ye then the Name, and Nature, and extent of the Active Scandal;
against which, the inhibition given in this Text is general, we are forbidden
to scandalize any person by any of these ways, The scandal of Example, or the
scandal of Persuasion, The scandal of Fear, or the scandal of Love. For,
there is scarce any so free to himself, so entirely his own, so independent
upon others, but that Example, or Persuasion, or Fear, or Love may scandalize
him, that is, Lead him into tentation, and make him do some things against his
own mind. Our Savior Christ had spoken, De pusillis, of little children, of
weak persons, easy to be scandalized, before this Text, and he returns, ad
pusillos, to the consideration of little children, persons easy to be
scandalized again; ver. 10.
this Text is not of them, or not of them only, but of all; say not thou of
any man, aetatem habet, he is old enough, let him look to himself, he has
reason as other men have, he has had a learned and a religious education, ill
example can do him no harm; but give no ill example to any, study the settling,
and the establishing of all; for, scarce is there any so strong, but may be
shaked by some of these scandals, Example, Persuasion, Fear, or Love. And he
that employs his gift of wit, and Counsel to seduce and mislead men, or his
gift of Power, and Authority to intimidate, and affright men, or his gift of
other graces, loveliness of person, agreeableness of Conversation,
powerfulness of speech, to ensnare and entangle men by any of these scandals,
may draw others into perdition, but he falls also with them, and shall not be
left out by God in the punishments inflicted upon them that fall by his
occasion.

The Commandment is general, scandalize none, scarce any but may be
overthrown, by some of these ways; And then the Apostles practice was general
too, we give no occasion of offense in any thing. 2 Cor. 6. 3.
As he requires that we should eat and drink to the glory of God, so he
would have us study to avoid scandalizing of others, 1 Cor. 10. 31. 8. 13.
even in our eating and drinking; If meat make my brother to offend, (offend
either in eating against his own conscience, or offend in an uncharitable
mis-interpretation of my eating) In aeternum, Romans 14. 15.
says the Apostle there, I will eat no flesh while the world stands; Nor,
destroy my brother with my meat, for whom Christ dyed. That Is the Apostles
tenderness in things; (He would give no occasion of offense in any thing) And
it is as general in contemplation of persons, he would have no offense given,
neither to the Jew, 1 Cor. 10. 32.
nor to the Grecian, nor to the Church of God: He was as careful not to
scandalize, not to give just occasion of offense to Jew, not Gentile, as not to
the Church of God; so must we be toward them of a superstitions religion
amongst us, as careful as toward one another, not to give any scandal, any
just cause of offense. But what is to be called a just cause of offense toward
those men? Good ends, and good ways, plain, and direct, and manifest
proceedings, these can be called no scandal, no just cause of offense, to Jew,
nor Gentile, to Turk, nor Papist; nor does Saint Paul intend that we should
forbear essential and necessary things, for fear of displeasing perverse and
peevish men. To maintain the doctrinall truths of our religion, by conferences,
by disputations, by writing, by preaching, to avow, and to prove our religion
to be the same, that Christ Jesus and his Apostles proposed at beginning, the
same that the general Councels established after, the same that the blessed
Fathers of those times, unanimely, and dogmatically delivered, the same that
those glorious Martyrs quickened by their death, and carried over all the world
in the rivers, in the seas of their blood, to avow our religion by writing, and
preaching, to be the same religion, an then to preserve and protect that
religion which God has put into our hearts, by all such means as he has put
into our hands, in the due execution of just Laws, this is no scandal, no just
cause of offense to Jew not Gentile, Turk nor Papists. But when leaving
fundamental things, and necessary truths, we wrangle uncharitably about
Collateral impertinencies, when we will refuse to do such things as conduce
to the exaltation of Devotion, or to the order, and peace of the Church, not
for any harm in the things, but only therefore because the Papists do them,
when, because they kneel in the worship of the bread in the Sacrament, we will
not kneel in Thanksgiving to God for the Sacrament; when because they pray to
Saints, we will reproach the Saints, or not name the Saints, when because they
abuse the Cross, we will abhor the Cross; This is that that Saint Paul
protests against, and in that protestation Catechizes us, that as he would give
no just occasion of offense to the true Church of God, so neither would he do
it to a false or infirm Church. He would not scandalize the true Church of
God, by any modifications, any inclinations toward the false; nor he would
not scandalize the false and infirm Church, by refusing to communicate with
them, in the practice of such things, as might exalt our Devotion, and did not
endanger nor shake any foundation of religion: which was the wisdom of our
Church, in the beginning of the Reformation, when the Injuctions of our Princes
forbad us to call one another by the odious names of Papist, or Papisticall
Heretic, or Schismatique, or Sacramentary, or such convitions (as the word of
the Injunction is) and repr^achfull names; but cleaving always entirely, and
inseparably to the fundamental truths of our own religion, as far as it is
possible we should live peaceably with all men. Saint Paul would give no
offense to the true Church of God, he would not prevaricate, nor to the Jew nor
Gentile neither, he would not exasperate. And this may be enough to have been
said of the active scandall^, and pass we now, in our order, to the Passive.

It is no wonder to see them who put all the world, Passivum.
into differences, (the Jesuits) to differ sometimes amongst themselves. And
therefore though the Jesuit Maldonat say of this Text, That Christ did not here
intend to warn, or to arm his Disciples against scandals, as scandals
occasions of sin, but only from offering injury to one another, That scandal
in this text is nothing but wrong, yet another Jesuit, (Vincemius Rhegius) is
not only of another opinion himself, but thinks that opinion (as he calls it)
absurd; It is absurd, says he, to interpret it so; for, can a man's own hand or
foot, or eye, be said to injure him? And yet, in this place, they are often
said to scandalize him, to offend him. The interpretation that Maldonat departs
from, himself acknowledges to be the interpretation of Saint Chrysostom, of
Euthymius, of Theophylact, of others of the Fathers; and, by the council of
Trent, he is bound to interpret Scriptures according to the Fathers, and he is
angry with us, if at any time we do not so; and here he departs from them,
where, not only his reverence to them, but the frame, and the evidence of the
place should have kept them to him; for here Christ utters his vae, as it is
vae Dolentis, as he laments their miseries, and as it is vae Minantis, as he
threatens his judgments, not only upon them that offend and scandalize
others, but upon them also that are easily scandalized by others, and put from
their religion, and Christian constancy with every rumor. Hierom.
Par^m distat scandalizare, and scandalizari; It is almost as great a sin to be
shaked by a scandal given, as to give it. Christ intends both in this Text;
the Active, and the Passive scandal; but the latter, melius quadrat, says a
later Divine, Calvin.
worthy to be compared to the Ancients, for the exposition of Scriptures, it
fits the scope and purpose of Christ best, to accept and interpret this vae,
(Woe be unto the world) of the Pas^ive scandal, the scandal taken.

In that, we consider the working of this Vae, three ways; first, vae quia
illusiones fortes, woe unto the world because these scandals and offenses,
tentations, and tribulations are so strong in their nature; and then vae quia
infirmi vas, woe because you are so weak in your nature; and again, vae quia
Pravaricatores, woe because we prevaricate in our own case, and make our
selves weaker then we are, and are scandalized with things which are not in
their nature scandalous, nor were scandalously intended. The two first, are woe
because we shall be scandalized, for scandals are truly strong, and you are
truly weak; The other is woe because ye will be scandalized, when, and where
you might easily unentangle the snare, and divest the ^scruple. First, for the
vehemence, the violence, the unavoydablenesse and impetuousnesse of these
scandals, tentations, and tribulations under which we all suffer in this
world, it may be enough to consider that one saying of our Saviors, They
shall seduce, Si possibile, Mat. 24. 23.
even the elect, where (by the way, it is not merely, not altogether, as we
have translated it, If it were possible, for that sounds, as if Christ had
positively, and dogmatically determined, that it is not possible for the elect
to be seduced; but Christ says only, Si possibile, if it be possible, as being
willing to leave it in doubt, and in suspense how far, in so great scandals,
so very great tentations, even the elect might be seduced. Gregor.
Ista Dominici sermonis dubitatto, trepidationem mentis in electis relinquit;
this doubtfulnesse in Christ's speech, makes the very elect stand in fear of
falling, in the midst of such tentations, for, howsoever the elect shall rise
again, the elect may fall by these scandals, and though they may be reduced,
they may be seduced. We are to consider men, as they are delivered in the
approbation, and testimony of the Church, that judges s^cundum allegata and
probata, according to the evidence that she sees and hears, and not as they
are wrapped up in the infallible knowledge of God; and so, our election admits
an outward trial, 1 Pet. 1. 1.
that is, Sanctification: so S. Peter writes, to the strangers elect through
sanctification. They were strangers, strangers to the Covenant, and yet Elect;
for, as all of the household, all within the Covenant, all children of the
faithful, are not elect, (for to be born of Christian parents within the
Covenant, gives us a title to the Sacrament of Baptism, so as that we may claim
it, and the Church cannot deny it us; but this birth does not give us that
title to heaven, which Baptisin it self does) so all strangers, all that are
without the Covenant, are not excluded in the election. S. Peter admits
stragers to election, but yet no otherwise then through sanctification; when we
are come to that hill, 2 These. 2. 13.
to sanctification, we have a fair prospect to see our election; in: so, God
has elected you to salvation, says S. Paul, to the These. but how? To salvation
through sanctification; that is your hill, there opens your prospect. Agreeably
to these two great Astles, says the beloved Apostle, 2 Ioh. 1. 1.
the Elder unto the elect Lady, and her children; but still, how elect? verse 6.
as he tells you, elect if she walk in the Commandments of God, elect if she
lose not her former good works, verse. 8.
that she may receive a full reward; elect, if she abide in the doctrine of
Christ. Always from that mount of sanctification arises our prospect to
election; and sanctification were glorification, if it were impossible to fall
from it. If a tentation of money made Judas an Apostle fall from his Master, how
easily will such a tentation make men fall with their Master, that is, run into
dangerous and ruinous actions with them? How easily will our children, our
servants, our tenants fall form the truth of God, if they have both the example
of their superiors to countenance them, and their purse to reward them for it?
That scandal, that tentation is a Giant, and an armed Giant, a Goliath, and a
Goliath with a spear like a weavers beam, that marches upon those two legs,
Example to do it, and Preferment for doing it.

This is the vae, in the consideration of the passive scandal, as it arises out
of the vehemence of the scandal, Quia infirmi
and tentation, Quia illusiones fortes, because they are so strong in
themselves. It arises also out of our weakness, Quia infirmi nos, because we
are so weak, even the strongest of us. And for this, it may also be enough to
consider those words of our Savior; Mat. 13. 21.
That a man may receive the word, and receive it with joy, and yet, Temporalis
est, says Christ, it may be but for a while, he may be but a time-server,
for, as soon as persecution comes, Illico continuo scandalizatur, by and by,
instantly, forthwith he is scandalized and shaked. He stays not to give God
his leisure, whether God will succor his cause to morrow, though not to day.
He stays not to give men their Law, to give Princes, and States time to
consider, whether it may not be fit for them to come to leagues, and alliances,
and declarations for the assistance of the Cause of Religion next year, though
not this. But continuo scandalizatur, as soon as a Catholic army has given a
blow, and got a victory of any of our forces, or friends, or as soon as a
crafty Jesuit has forged a Relation, that that Army has given such a blow, or
that such an Army there is, (for many times they intimidate weak men, when
they shoot nothing but Paper, when they are only Paper-Armies, and
Pamphlet-Victories, and no such in truth) Illico scandalizatur, yet with these
forged rumors, presently he is scandalized, and he comes apace to those
dangerous conclusions, Non potens Deus, (for any thing I see, God is not so
powerful a God, as they make him, for his enemies Armies prevail against his)
Non sapiens Deus, (for any thing I see, God does not take so wise courses for
his glory, of which he talks so much, and pretends to be so jealous, for his
enemies Counsels prevail against his;) And he comes at last to the Non est
Deus, to labor to overruled his own Conscience, and make himself bebeleeve,
or (at least) to wish, though he cannot believe it, that there were no God.

Now to correct, or to repair this weakness, you see our Saviors physique
here; If thy foot, thy hand, thine eye, scandalize thee, offend thee, abscinde
and proj^ce, erue and projice, Cut it off, pull it out, and then cast it away.
You see Christ's method in his physique, It determines not in a preparative,
that does but stir the humors, (for every remorse, and every compunction,
and every sense that a man has, that such, and such company leads him into
tentation, does that, it works in the nature of such a preparative, as stirs
the humors, affects the soul,) Christ's physique determines not in a
blood-letting, no not in cutting off the gangrened part, for it is not only
Cut off, and pull out, but, Cast away, it is an absolute evacuation and purging
out of the peccant humor. It is not a halting with the foot, nor a shifting
with the hand, it is not a winking with the eye, but abscinde, and erue, Cut
off, pull out; and, after that, Though he be the foot upon which thou
stand, thy Master, thy Patron, thy Benefactor; Though he be thy hand by
which thou gettest thy living, thy means, the instrument of thy maintenance,
or preferment; Though he be thine eye, the man from whom thou receivest all
thy Light, and upon whose learning thou engagest thy Religion, abscindatur, and
projice, if he scandalize thee, shake thee in thy Religion at the heart, or in
the ways of godliness in thine actions, Cut him off; that is, cut off thy
self from that conversation, and cast him away, return no more within
distance of that tentation: for, as sin has that quality of a worm, that it
gnawes, (it gnawes the conscience) so has it also that quality of a worm, that
if you cut it into pieces, yet if those pieces come together again, they will
reunite again; sin, though discontinued, will find his old pieces, if they
keep not far asunder. And since it is said of God himself by David, Psalm 18.
Cum perverso perverteris, That God will grow froward with the froward, and
since God says of himself, That with them that go crookedly, he will go
crookedly too, that the behavior of other men are said to make impressions
upon God himself, consider the slipperinesse of our corrupt nature, how easily
the vices of other men insinuate and infuse themselves into us, and how much
need we have of all Christ's physique, abscinde, erue, projice, Cut off, pull
out, and cast away.

But to come to our last note, Besides the woe arising from the strength of the
scandal, and the woe from the corruptnesse of our weak nature, there is a woe
upon our wilfulness, upon our easiness in being scandalized by an
over-jealousie, and suspicious mis-interpretations of the actions of other men.
And for this, in the highest consideration, as it has relation to our Savior
himself, and his Gospel, it may be enough to consider that which himself
says, Mat. 11. 6.
Blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. But, Quis homo, What
man is he that is not offended in him, and his Gospel? Qui non crubescit, aut
timet, what man is he that is not ashamed of the Gospel, or afraid of it; that
does not desire that the religion that he professes, were a religion of more
liberty and of less threatenings? We see, that though the Cross of Christ, that
is, Christ crucified, were daily represented to the Jews in their sacrifices,
and preached to the in the succession of their Prophets, 1 Cor. 1. 23.
yet this Cross of Christ was Scandalum Iudais, a scandal to the Jews; It was,
(as the Apostle says there) Stultitia Gracis, to the Gentiles, that had no such
preparation to the Gospel, as the Jews had in their Law, and Sacrifices, the
Gospel was mere foolishnes, a religion unconformable to nature, and to reason,
but even to the Jews themselves, it was a scandal, a stumbling block; they
grudged that that religion left them so narrow a way open to pleasure, and to
profit, and that it referred all to a spiritual Kingdom, whereas the Jews
looked for a temporal Kingdom in their Messiah. And so truly Christ and his
Gospel will be a scandal to all them that will needs set Christ a price, at
which he shall sell his Gospel. If Tithes, or some some small matter in lieu
of Tithes, will serve his turn, and now and then a groat to a Brief, and
sometimes an extraordinary contribution, when extraordinary knowledge may be
taken of it, if this will serve his turn he shall have it. But if it must come
to a Non pacem, that Christ profess he comes not to settle peace, but to
kindle a war, if we must maintain armies for his Gospel, if it come to an
Odisse vitam, to hate Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and our own
life's for his Gospel, this is too high a price, Nolumus hunc regnare, now the
Gospel grows a Tyran, and we will not be under a tyrannous government; If
he will govern by his Law, that he be content with our coming to Church every
Sunday, and our receiving every Easter, we will live under his Law; but if he
come to exercise his Prerogative, and press us to extraordinary duties, in
watching all our particular actions, and calling our selves to an account, for
words and thoughts, then Christ and his Gospel become a scandal, a stumbling
block unto us, and lie in our way, and retard our ends, our pleasures, and our
profits. But if we can overcome this one scandal of the Gospel, that we be
not ashamed nor afraid of that, (that is, well satisfied in the sufficiency of
that Gospel for our salvation, and then content to suffer for that Gospel) if
we can divest this scandal, no other shall trouble us. Psalm. 119. 165.
Great peace have they which love thy Law, says David; To love it, is to prefer
it before all things; and great peace have they that do so, says he; Wherein
consists this peace? In this, Et non est illis scandalum, Great peace have they
that love thy Law, Prove. 12. 21.
for they have no scandals; nothing shall offend them. There shall no evil
happen to the just, says his son Solomon; not that the just shall feel no
worldly misery, but that that misery shall not make them miserable; how evil
so ever it be in it self, it shall not be evil to them, Romans 8. 28. 1. 3. 13.
but Omnia in bonum, All things work together for good, to them that love God.
Who is he that will harm you, if you be followers of God? says Saint Peter,
The wicked will not follow you in that strange Country; their conversation is
not in heaven; if yours be, they will not follow you thither. They will do, as
he, whose instruments they are, Jacob. 4. 7.
do, the Devil; and Resist the Devil, and he will flee from you. A religious
constancy blunts the edge of any sword, dampes the spirits of any counsel,
benums the strength of any arm, opens the corners of any Labyrinth, and brings
the subtilest plots against God and his servants, not only to an invalidnesse,
an ineffectualnesse, but to a derision; Jude 5. 20. Psalm. 2. 4.
not only to a Dimicatum de coelis, that the world shall see, that the Lord
fights for his servants from heaven, but to an Irridebit in coelis, that he
that sits in heaven, shall laugh them to scorn; he shall ruin them, and ruin
them in contempt. That prayer that David makes, Libera me Domine ab homine
malo, deliver me O Lord, from the evil man, is a large, an extensive, an
indefinite prayer; for, there is an evil man (occasion of tentation) in every
man, in every woman, in every action; there is Coluber in via, a snake in every
path, danger in every calling. But Saint Augustine contracts that prayer, and
fixes it, Liberet te Deus a temes, noli tibi esse malius; God bless me from my
self, that I be not that evil man to my self, that I lead not my self into
tentation, and nothing shall scandalize me. To which purpose it concerns us to
divest that natural, but corrupt easiness of uncharitable mis-construing that
which other men do, especially those whom God has placed in his own place,
for government over us; that we do not come to think that there is nothing
done, if all be not done; that no abuses are corrected, if all be not removed;
that there is an end of all Protestants, if any Papists be left in the world.
Upon those words of our Savior, speaking of the last day of Judgment, Mat.
13. 41.
The son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
Kingdom, Omnia scandala, All things that might offend: Calvin says learnedly
and wisely, Qui ad extirpandum quicquid displicet praepostere festinant, They
that make too much haste to mend all at once, antevertunt Christi judicium, and
ereptum Angelis officium sibi temereusurpant, They prevent Christ's judgment,
and rashly, and sacrilegiously they usurp the Angels office. Christ has
reserved the cleansing and removing of all scandals, all offenses to the last
day; the Angels of the Church, the Minister, the Angels of the State, the
Magistrate, cannot do it; not the Angels of heaven themselves, till the day of
judgment. All scandals cannot be removed in this life; but a great many more
might be then are, if men were not so apt to suspect, and mis-constru, and
imprint the name of scandal upon every action, of which they see not the end,
nor the way; for from this jealousy and suspicion; and misconstruction of the
Angels of Church and State (our Superiors in those spears) we shall become
jealous, and suspicious of God himself, that he has neglected us, abandoned
us, if he do not deliver us, and establish us, at those times, and by those
means, which we prescribe him; we shall come to argue thus against God
himself, Surely, if God meant any good to us, he would not put us into their
hands, who do us no good. Reduce all to the precious mediocrity; To be
unsensible of any declination, of any diminution of the glory of God, or his
true worship and religion, is an irreligious stupidity; But to be so
ombragious, so startling, so apprehensive, so suspicious, as to think every
thing that is done, is done to that end; this is a seditious jealousy, a Satyr
in the heart, and an unwritten Libell; and God has a Star Chamber, to punish
unwritten Libels before they are published; Libels against that Law, Curse not,
or speak not ill of the King, Eccles. 1^. 20.
no not in thy thought. Not to mourn under the sense of evils, that may fall
upon us, is a stony disposition; Nay, the hardest stone, marble, will weep
toward foul weather. But, to make all Possible things Necessary, (this may
fall upon us, therefore it must fall upon us,) and to make contingent, and
accidental things, to be the effects of counsels, (this is fallen upon us,
therefore it is fallen by their practice that have the government in their
hands) this is a vexation of spirit in our selves, and a defacing, a casting of
dirt in the face of Gods image, of that representation, and resemblance of God,
which he has imprinted in them, of whom he has said, They are Gods. In
divine matters there is principally exercise of our faith, That which we
understand not, we believe. In civil affairs, that are above us, matters of
State, there is exercise of our Hope; Those ways which we see not, we hope are
directed to good ends. In Civil actions amongst our selves, there is exercise
of our Charity, Those hearts which we see not, let us charitably believe to be
disposed to Gods service. That when as Christ has shut up his w^e only in
those two, Va quia f^rtes illusiones, W^e because scandals and offenses are so
strong in their nature; and Va quia infirmivos, w^e because you are so weak in
yours, we do not create a third Woe, Va quia praevaricatores, in an
uncharitable jealousy, and mis-interpretation of him, (that we are not in his
care) nor of his Ministers (that they do not execute his purposes,) nor of one
another; that when as God has placed us in a Land, where there are no w^lfes,
we do not think Hominem homini Lupum, imagine every man to be a wolf to us, or
to intend our destruction. But as in the Arc there were Lions, but the Lion
shut his mouth, and clincht his paw, (the Lion hurt nothing in the Arc) and in
the Arc there were Vipers and Scorpions, but the Viper showed no teeth, nor
the Scorpion no tail, (the Viper bit none, the Scorpion stung none in the
Arc) (for, if they had occasioned any disorder there, their escape could have
been but into the Sea, into irreparable ruin) so, in every State, (though that
State be an Arc of peace, and preservation) there will be some kind of
oppression in some Lions, some that will abuse their power; but Vae si
scandalizemur, woe unto us if we be scandalized with that, and seditiously lay
aspersions upon the State and Government, because there are some such in every
Church, (though that Church be an Arc, for integrity and sincerity) there
will be some Vipers, Vipers that will gnaw at their Mothers belly, men that
will shake the articles of Religion; But Vae si scandalizemur, woe if we be so
scandalized at that, as to defame that Church, or separate our selves from that
Church which has given us our Baptism, for that. It is the chasing of the
Lion, and the stirring of the Viper, that aggravates the danger; The first blow
makes the wrong, but the second makes the fray; and they that will endure no
kind of abuse in State or Church, are many times more dangerous then that abuse
which they oppose. It was only Christ Jesus himself that could say to the
Tempest, Mar. ^4. 39.
Tace, ^b^utesce, peace, be still, not a blast, not a sob more; only he could
becalm a Tempest at once. It is well with us, if we can ride out a storm at
anchour, that is, lie still and expect, and surrender ourselves to God, and
anchor in that confidence, till the storm blow over. It is well for us if we
can beat out a storm at sea, with boarding to and again; that is, maintain and
preserve our present condition in Church, and State, though we increase not,
that though we gain no way, yet we lose no way whilst the storm lasts. It is
well for us, if, though we be put to take in our sayls, and to take down our
masts, yet we can hull it out; that is, if in storms of contradiction, or
persecution, the Church, or State, though they be put to accept worse
conditions then before, and to depart with some of their outward splendour, be
yet able to subsist and swim above water, and reserve it self for Gods
farther glory, after the storm is past; only Christ could becalm the storm;
He is a good Christian that can ride out, or board out, or hull out a storm,
that by industry, as long as he can, and by patience, when he can do no more,
over-lives a storm, and does not forsake his ship for it, that is not
scandalized with that State, nor that Church, of which he is a member, for
those abuses that are in it. The Arc is peace, peace is good dispositions to
one another, good intepretations of one another; for, if our impatience put us
from our peace, and so out of the Arc, all without the Arc is sea; The
bottomless and boundless Sea of Rome, will hope to swallow us; if we
dis-unite our selves, in uncharitable mis-interpretations of one another; The
peace of God is the peace that passes all understanding; Phil. 4. 7.
That men should subdue and captivate even their understanding to the love of
this peace, that when in their understanding they see no reason why this or
this thing should be thus or thus done, or so and so suffered, the peace of
God, that is, charity, may pass their understanding, and go above it; for,
howsoever the affections of men, or the vicissitudes and changes of affairs may
vary, or apply those two great axioms, and aphorisms of ancient Rome, Salus
populi suprema lex est^^, The good of the people is above all Law, and then,
Quod Principi places, lex esto, The pleasure of the Prince is above all Law,
howsoever I say, various occasions may vary their Laws, adhere we to that Rule
of the Law, which the Apostle prescribes, that we always make, 1 Timothy ^. 5.
Finem pra^cepti charit^tem, The end of the Commandment charity; for, no
Commandment, (no not those of the first Table) is kept, if, upon pretense of
keeping that Commandment, or of the service of God, I come to an uncharitable
opinion of other men. Ephef. 3. 17.
That so first, Fundemur and radic^mur in charitate, that we be planted, and
take root in that ground, in charity, (so we are, by being planted in that
Church, that thinks charitably even of that Church, that uncharitably condemns
us) And then, 1 P^t. 1. 2.
Vt ^ultiplice^ur, That Grace and peace may be multiplied in us, (so it is, if
to our outward peace, God add the inward peace of conscience in our own
bosoms) and lastly, 1 These. 3. 11.
Vt abundemus, that we may not only increase, (as the Apostle says there) but
(as he adds) abound in charity toward one another, and toward all men, for
this abundant and overflowing charity, (as long as we can, to believe well, for
the present, and where we cannot do so, to hope well of the future) is the best
preservative and antidote against the woe of this Text, Woe unto the world
because of scandals and offenses; which, though it be spoken of the Active, is
more especially intended of the Passive scandal; and though it be pressed upon
us, first, Quia Illusiones fortes, because those scandals are so strong, and
then, Quia infer^^ nos, because we are so weak, do yet endanger us most, in
that respect, Quia pr^varicatores, because we open ourselves, nay offer our
selves to the vexation of scandals, by an easy, a jealous, a suspicious, an
uncharitable interpreting of others.

SERMON XIX.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
PSALM. 38. 2. For thine arr^wes stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me
sore.
ALmost every man has his Appetite, and his taste disposed to some kind of
meats rather then others; He knows what dish he would choose, for his first,
and for his second course. We have often the same disposition in our spiritual
Diet; a man may have a particular love toward such or such a book of
Scripture, and in such an affection, I acknowledge, that my spiritual appetite
carries me still, upon the Psalms of David, for a first course, for the
Scriptures of the Old Testament: and upon the Epistles of Saint Paul, for a
second course, for the New, and my meditations even for these public exercises
to Gods Church, return oftnest to these two. For, as a hearty entertainer
offers to others, the meat which he loves best himself, so do I oftnest
present to Gods people, in these Congregations, the meditations which I feed
upon at home, in those two Scriptures. If a man be asked a reason why he loves
one meat better then another, where all are equally good, (as the books of
Scripture are) he will at least, find a reason in some good example, that he
sees some man of good taste, and temperate withal, so do: And for my Diet, I
have Saint Augustines protestation, that he loved the Book of Psalms, and Saint
Chrysostomes, that he loved Saint Paul's Epistles; with a particular devotion, I
may have another more particular reason, because they are Scriptures, written
in such forms, as I have been most accustomed to; Saint Paul's being Letters,
and David's being Poems: for, God gives us, not only that which is merely
necessary, but that which is convenient too; He does not only feed us, but
feed us with marrow, and with fatness; he gives us our instruction in
cheerful forms, not in a sour, and sullen, and angry, and unacceptable way,
but cheerfully, in Psalms, which is also a limited, and a restrained form; Not
in an Oration, not in Prose, but in Psalms; which is such a from as is both
curious, and requires diligence in the making, and then when it is made, can
have nothing, no syllable taken from it, nor added to it: Therefore is Gods
will delivered to us in Psalms, that we might have it the more cheerfully, and
that we might have it the more certainly, because where all the words are
numbered, and measured, and weighed, the whole work is the less subject to
falsification, either by substraction or addition. God speaks to us in or
atione stricta, in a limited, in a diligent form; Let us speak to him in or
atione soluta; not pray, not preach, not hear, flackly, suddenly, unadvisedly,
extemporally, occasionally, indiligently; but let all our speech to him, be
weighed, and measured in the weights of the Sanctuary, let us be content to
preach, and to hear within the compass of our Articles, and content to pray in
those forms which the Church has meditated for us, and recommended to us.

This whole Psalm is a Prayer, Divisio.
and recommended by David to the Church; And a Prayer grounded upon Reasons.
The Reasons are multiplied, and dilated from the second to the 20. verse. But
as the Prayer is made to him that is Alpha, and Omega, first, and last; so the
Prayer is the Alpha and Omega of the Psalm; the Prayer possesses the first and
the last verse thereof; and though the Reasons be not left out, (Christ himself
settles that Prayer, which he recommended to our daily use, upon a Reason, Quia
tuum est Regnum, for thine is the Kingdom,) yet David makes up his Circle, he
begins, and ends in prayer. But our text falls within his Reasons; He prays in
the first verse that God would forbear him, upon the Reasons that follow; of
which some are extrinsecall, some arising out of the power, some out of the
malice, some out of the scorn of other men; And some are intrinsecall, arising
out of himself, and of his sense of Gods Judgments upon him; and our Text
begins the Reasons of that last kind, which because David enters, with that
particle, not only of Connection, but of Argumentation too, For, (Rebuke me not
O Lord, for it stands thus and thus with me) we shall make it a first short
part, to consider, how it may become a godly man, to limit God so far, as to
present and oppose Reasons against his declared purpose, and proceedings. And
then in those calamities which he presents for his Reasons in this Text, For
thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore, we shall pass by
these steps, first, we shall see in what respect, in what allusion, in what
notification he calls them arrows: And therein first, that they are alienae,
they are shot from others, they are not in his own power; a man shoots not an
arrow at himself; And then, that they are Veloces, swift in coming, he cannot
give them their time; And again, they are Vix visibiles, though they be not
altogether invisible in their coming, yet there is required a quick eye, and an
express diligence, and watchfulness to discern and avoid them; so they are
arrows in the hand of another; not his own; and swift as they come, and
invisible before they come. And secondly, they are many arrows; The victory
lies not in scaping one or two; And thirdly, they stick in him; they find not
David so good proof, as to rebound back again, and imprint no sense; And they
stick fast; Though the blow be felt, and the wound discerned, yet there is not
a present cure, he cannot shake them off; Infixae sunt; And then, with all
this, they stick fast in him; that is, in all him; in his body, and soul; in
him, in his thoughts, and actions; in him, in his sins and in his good works
too; Infixae mihi, there is no part of him, no faculty in him, in which they
stick not: for, (which may well be another consideration) That hand, which
shot them, presses him: follows the blow, and presses him sore, that is,
vehemently. But yet, (which will be our conclusion) Sagittaetuae, and manus
tua, These arrows that are shot, and this hand that presses them so sore, are
the arrows, and is the hand of God; and therefore, first, they must have their
Effect, they cannot be dis-appointed; But yet they bring their comfort with
them, because they are his, because no arrows from him, no pressing with his
hand, comes without that Balsamum of mercy, to heal as fast as he wounds. and
of so many pieces will this exercise consist, this exercise of your Devotion,
and perchance Patience.

First then, 1 Part.
this particle of connection and argumentation, For, which begins our text,
occasions us, in a first part, to consider, that such an impatience in
affliction, as brings us toward a murmuring at Gods proceedings, and almost to
a calling of God to an account, in inordinate expostulations, is a leaven so
kneaded into the nature of man, so innate a tartar, so inherent a sting, so
inseparable a venim in man, as that the holiest of men have scarce avoided it
in all degrees thereof. Job had Gods testimony of being an upright man; and yet
Job bent that way, O that I might have my request, says Job, and that God would
grant me the thing that I long for. 6. ^.
Well, if God would, what would, Job ask? That God would destroy me, and cut
me off. Had it not been as easy, and as ready, and as useful a prayer, That
God would deliver him? Is my strength the strength of stones, or is my flesh of
brass? says he, in his impatience. What though it be not? Not stones, not
brass; is there no remedy, but to wish it dust? Moses had Gods testimonies of
a remarkable and exemplar man, for meekness. But did God always find it so?
was it a meek behavior toward God, to say, Wherefore have thou afflicted thy
servant? Have I conceived all this people, Numb. 11. 11.
have I begotten them, that thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy
bosom? Elias had had testimonies of Gods care and providence in his behalf;
and God was not weary of preserving him, and he was weary of being preserved;
He desired that he might dye, 1 Reg. 19. 4.
and said, Sufficit Domine, It is enough O Lord, now take my soul. Io^as, even
then, when God was expressing an act of mercy, takes occasion to be angry, and
to be angry at God, and to be angry at the mercy of God. we may see his
fluctuation and distemper, and irresolution in that case, and his
transportation; He was a^gry, says the text; very angry; And yet, the text
says, He prayed, but he prayed angerly; O Lord take, I beseech thee, my life
from me; for it is better for me to dye, 4. 1. 3.
then to live. Better for him, that was all he considered; not what was best
for the service and glory of God, but best for him. God asks him, If he do
well to be angry? And he will not tell him there; 4.
God gives him time to vent his passion, and he asks him again ^after: Do
thou well to be angry? And he answers more angerly, I do well to be angry, 9.
even unto death. Jeremy was under this tentation too. Jonas was angry because
his Prophecy was not performed; because God would not second his Prophecy in
the destruction of Nineveh. Jeremy was angry because his Prophecy was like to
be performed; he preached heavy Doctrine, and therefore his Auditory hated him;
Woe is me, my Mother, says he, that thou have born me a man of strife, and a
man of contention to the whole earth! 15. 11.
I preach but the messages of God; and (vae mihi si non, woe be unto me if I
preach not them) I preach but the sense of Gods indignation upon mine own soul,
in a conscience of mine own sins, I impute nothing to another, that I confess
not of my self, I call none of you to confession to me, I do but confess my
self to God, and you, I rack no man's memory, what he did last year, last week,
last night, I only gather into my memory, and power out in the presence of my
God, and his Church, the sinful history of mine own youth, and yet I am a
contentious man, says Jeremy, a worm, and a burden to every tender conscience,
says he, and I strive with the whole earth, I am a bitter, and satyricall
preacher; This is that that wearies me, says he, I have neither lent on
usury, nor men have lent me on usury, yet, as though I were an oppressing
lender, or a fraudulent borrower, every one of them does curse me.

This is a natural infirmity, which the strongest men, being but men, cannot
divest, that if their purposes prosper not, they are weary of their industry,
weary of their life's; But this is Summa ingratitude in Deum, m^lle non esse,
quam miserum esse: There cannot be a greater unthankfulness to God then to
desire to be Nothing at all, rather then to be that, that God would have thee
to be; To desire to be out of the world, rather then to glorify him, by thy
patience in it. But when this infirmity overtakes Gods children, Chrysostom.
Patiuntur ut homtines, sustinent ut Dei amici; They are under calamities, as
they are r^en, but yet they come to recollect themselves and to beat those
calamities, as the valiant Soldiers, as the faithful servants, as the bosom
friends of almighty God: Si vis discere, qualis esse debi^s, disce post
gratiam, says the same Father; Learn patience, not from the stupidity of
Philosophers, who are but their own statues, men of stone, without sense,
without affections, and who placed all their glory, in a Non facies ut te dicam
analum, that no pain should make them say they were in pain; nor from the
per^i^acy of Heretics, how to bear a calamity, who gave their bodies to the
fire, for the establishing of their Disciples, but take out a new lesson in the
times of Grace; Consider the Apostles there, Act. 5. 42.
Gaudentes and Gloriantes, They departed from the Council, rejoicing that they
were counted worthy, 1. 2.
to suffer rebuke for his name. It was Joy, and all Joy, says S. James; It was
Glory, and all Glory, says S. Paul, Absit mihi, God forbid that I should glory,
Gal. 6. 14.
save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ; And if I can glory in that, (to
glory in that, is to have a conscience testifying to me, that God receives
glory by my use of his correction) I may come to God, reason with God, plead
with God, wrestle with God, and be received and sustained by him. This was
David's case in our Text: therefore he does not stray into the infirmities of
these great, and good Men, Moses, Job, Elias, Jeremy, and Jonah; whose errors,
it is labor better bestowed carefully to avoid, then absolutely to excuse, for
that cannot be done. But David presents only to God the sense of his
corrections, and implies in that, that since the cure is wrought, since Gods
purpose, which is, by corrections, to bring a sinner to himself, and so to God,
is effected in him, God would now be pleased to remember all his other gracious
promises too; and to admit such a zealous prayer as as he does from Esaias after,
64. 9.
Be not angry, O Lord, above measure; (that is, above the measure of thy
promises to repentant souls, or the measure of the strength of our bodies)
Neither remember iniquities for ever; But, lo, we beseech thee, Behold, we
are thy people. To end this first part, (because the other extends it self in
many branches.) Then when we are come to a sense of Gods purpose, by his
corrections, it is a seasonable time to fly to his mercy, and to pray, that he
would remove them from us; and to present our Reasons, to spare us, for thy
corrections have wrought upon us; Give us this day, our daily bread, for thou
have given us stones, and scorpions, tribulations and afflictions, and we have
fed upon them, found nourishment even in those tribulations and afflictions,
and said thee grace for them, blessed and glorified thy name, for those
tribulations, and afflictions; Give us our Cordials now, and our Restoratives,
for thy physic has evacuated all the peccant humor, and all our natural
strength; shine out in the light of thy countenance now, for this long cold
night has benumbed us; since the dr^sse is now evaporated, now withdraw thy
fire; since thy hand has anew cast us, now imprint in us anew thine Image;
since we have not disputed against thy corrections, all this while, O Lord open
thou our lips now, and accept our remembering of thee, that we have not done so;
Accept our Petition, and the Reason of our Petition, for thine Arrows stick
fast in us, and thy hand presses us sore.

David in a rectified conscience finds that he may be admitted to present
reasons against farther corrections, 2. Part.
And that this may be received as a reason, That Gods Arrows are upon him; for
this is phrase or a Metaphore, in which Gods indignation is often expressed in
the Scripture. Ps. 18. 14.
He sent out his Arrows, and scattered them; says David; magnifying Gods
goodness in his behalf, against his enemies. And so again, God will ordain his
Arrrowes for them that persecute me. Ps. 7. 13.
Complebo sagittas, says God, I will heap mischiefs upon them, Deuteronomy. 32. 23. v.
42.
and I will spend mine arrows upon them: yea, Inebriabo sanguine, I will make
mine Arrows drunk in their blood. It is Idiotismus Spiritus sancti, a peculiar
character of the holy Ghosts expressing Gods anger, in that Metaphore of
shooting Arrows. In this place, some understand by these Arrows, foul and
infectious diseases, in his body, derived by his incontinence. Others, the
sting of Conscience, and that fearful choice, which the Prophet offered him,
war, famine, and pestilence. Others, his passionate sorrow in the death of
Bethsheba's first child; or in the Incest of Amnon upon his sister, or in the
murder upon Amnon by Absolon; or in the death of Absolen by Ioab; or in many
other occasions of sorrow, that surrounded David and his family, more,
perchance, then any such family in the body of story. But these Psalms were
made, not only to vent David's present holy passion, but to serve the Church of
God, to the worlds end. And therefore, change the person, and we shall find a
whole quiver of arrows. Extend this Man, to all Mankind; carry David's History
up to Adams History, and consider us in that state, which we inherit from him,
and we shall see arrows fly about our ears, A Deo prosequente, the anger of God
hanging over our heads, in a cloud of arrows; and a conscientia remordente, our
own consciences shooting poisoned arrows of desperation into our souls; and ab
Homine Contemnente, Men multiplying arrows of Detraction, and Calumny, and
Contumely upon our good name, and estimation. Briefly, in that wound, as we
were all shot in Adam, we bled out Impassibilitatem, and we sucked in
Impossibilitatem; There we lost our Immortality, our Impassibility, our
assurance of Paradise, and then we lost Possibilitatem boni, says S. August:
all possibility of recovering any of this by our selves. So that these arrows
which are lamented here, are all those miseries, which sin has cast upon us;
Labor, and the child of that, Sickness, and the offspring of that, Death;
And the security of conscience, and the terror of conscience; the searing of
the conscience, and the over-tendernesse of the conscience; Gods quiver, and
the Devils quiver, and our own quiver, and our neighbors quiver, afford, and
furnish arrows to gall, and wound us. These arrows then in our Text, proceeding
from sin, and sin proceeding from tentations, and inducing tribulations, it
shall advance your spiritual edification most, Ephesians. 6. 16.
to fix your consideration upon those fiery darts, as they are tentations, and
as they are tribulations. Origin says, he would wish no more, for the recovery
of any soul, but that she were able to see Cicatrices suas, those scars which
these fiery darts have left in her, the deformity which every sin imprints
upon the soul, and Contritiones suas, the attenuating and wearing out, and
consumption of the soul, by a continual succession of more, and men wound, ^
upon the same place. An ugly thing in a Consumption, were a fearful spectacle,
And such Origin imagins a soul to be, if she could see Cicatrices, and
Contritiones, her ill-favourednesse, and her leanness in the deformity, and
consumption of sin. How provident, how diligent a patience did our blessed
Savior bring to his Passion, who foreseeing that that would be our case, our
sickness, to be first wounded with single tentations, and then to have even
the wounds of our soul wounded again, by a daily reiterating of tentations in
the same kind, would provide us physic agreeable to our Disease, Chyrurgery
conformable to our wound, first to be scourged so, as that his holy body was
torn with wounds, and then to have those wounded again, and often, with more
violatings. So then these arrows, are those tentations and those tribulations,
which are accompanied with these qualities of arrows shot at us, that they are
alienae, shot from others, not in our power; And veloces, swift and sudden,
soon upon us; And vix visibiles, not discernible in their coming, but by an
exact diligence.

First then, Alienae.
these tentations are dangerous arrows, as they are alienae, shot from others,
and not in our own power. It was the Emblem, and Inscription, which Darius
took for his coin, Insculpere sagittarium, to show his greatness, that he
could wound afar off, as an Archer does. And it was the way, by which God
declared the deliverance of Israel from Syria; 2 Reg. 13. 17.
Elisha bids the King open the window Eastward, and shoot an arrow out. The
King does shoot: And the Prophet says, Sagitta salutis Domini, The arrow of the
Lords deliverance: He would deliver Israel, by shooting vengeance into Syria.
One danger in our arrows, as they are tentations, is, that they come
unsuspectedly; they come, we know not, from whence; from others; that is a
danger; But in our tentations, there is a greater danger then that, for a man
cannot shoot an arrow at himself; but we can direct tentations upon our selves;
If we were in a wilderness, we could sin; and where we are, we tempt
temptations, and wake the Devil, 1 Reg. 22. 34.
when for any thing that appears, he would sleep. A certain man drew a bow at a
venture, says that story; He had no determinate mark, no express aim, upon
any one man; He drew his bow at a venture, and he hit, and he flew the King
Ahab. A woman of tentation, Tendit areum in incertum, as that story speaks;
she paints, she curls, she sings, she gazes, and is gazed upon; There Is an
arrow shot at randon; she aimed at no particular mark; And thou put thy
self within shot, and meetest the arrow; Thou soughtest the tentation, the
tentation sought not thee. A man is able to oppress others; Ps. ^2. 1.
Et gl^riatur in mal^ quia potens, He boasts himself because he is able to do
mischief; and tendit arcum in incertum, he shoots his arrow at randon, he lets
it be known, that he can prefer them, that second his purposes, and thou
putt'st thy self within shot, and meet'st the arrow, and make thy self his
instrument; Thou sought'st the tentation, the tentation sought not thee; when
we expose our selves to tentations, tentations hit us, that were not expressly
directed, nor meant to us. And even then, when we begin to fly from
tentations, the arrow overtakes us. 2 Reg. 9. 23.
Iehoram fled from Iehu, and Iehu shot after him, and shot him through the
heart. But this was after Iehoram had talked with him. After we have par^ed
with a tentation, debated whether we should embrace it or no, and entertained
some discourse with it, though some tenderness, some remorse, make us turn our
back upon it, and depart a little from it, yet the arrow overtakes us; some
reclinations, some retrospects we have, a little of Lots wife is in us, a
little sociablenesse, and conversation, a little point of honor, not to be
false to former promises, a little false gratitude, and thankfulness, in
respect of former obligations, a little of the compassion and charity of Hell,
that another should not be miserable, for want of us, a little of this, which
is but the good nature of the Devil, arrests us, stops us, fixes us, till the
arrow, the tentation shoot us in the back, even when we had a purpose of
departing from that sin, and kills us over again. Thus it is, when we meet a
tentation, and put our selves in the arrows way; And thus it is when we fly not
fast enough, nor far enough from a tentation. But when we do all that, and
provide as safely as we can to get, and do get quickly out of distance, yet,
The wicked bend their bows, Ps. 11. 2.
that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart; In occulto; It is a work
of Darkness, Detraction; and they can shoot in the dark; they can wound, and
not be known. They can whisper Thunder, and pass an arrow through another man's
ear, into mine heart; Let a man be zealous, and fervent in reprehension of
sin, and there flies out an arrow, that gives him the wound of a Puritan. Let a
man be zealous of the house of God, and say any thing by way of moderation, for
the repairing of the ruins of that house, and making up the differences of the
Church of God, and there flies out an arrow, that gives him the wound of a
Papist. One shoots East, and another West, but both these arrows meet in him,
that means well, to defame him. And this is the first misery in these arrows,
these tentations, Quia alienae, they are shot from others, they are not in our
own quiver, not in our own government.

Another quality that tentations receive from the holy Ghosts Metaphore of
arrows is, Veloces.
Quia veloces, because this captivity to sin, comes so swiftly, so impetuously
upon us. Consider it first in our making; In the generation of our parents, we
were conceived in sin; that is, they sinned in that action; so we were
conceived in sin; in their sin. And in our selves, we were submitted to sin,
in that very act of generation, because then we became in part the subject of
Original sin. Yet, there was no arrow shot into us then; there was no sin in
that substance of which we were made; for if there had been sin in that
substance, that substance might be damned, though God should never infuse a
soul into it; and that cannot be said well then; God, whose goodness, and
wisdom will have that substance to become a Man, he creates a soul for it, or
creates a soul in it, (I dispute not that) he sends a light, or he kindles a
light, in that lanthorn; and here is no arrow shot neither; here is no sin in
that soul, that God creates; for there God should create something that were
evil; and that cannot be said; Here Is no arrow shot from the body, no sin in
the body alone; None from the soul, no sin in the soul alone; And yet, the
union of this soul and body is so accompanied with Gods malediction for our
first transgression, that in the instant of that union of life, as certainly as
that body must die, so certainly the whole Man must be guilty of Original sin.
No man can tell me out of what Quiver, yet here is an arrow comes so swiftly,
as that in the very first minute of our life, in our quickening in our mothers
womb, we become guilty of Adams sin done 6000 years before, and subject to all
those arrows, Hunger, Labor, Grief, Sickness, and Death, which have been shot
after it. This is the fearful swiftness of this arrow, that God himself
cannot get before it. In the first minute that my soul is infused, the Image of
God is imprinted in my soul; so forward is God in my behalf, and so early does
he visit me. But yet Original sin is there, as soon as that Image of God is
there. My soul is capable of God, as soon as it is capable of sin; and though
sin do not get the start of God, God does not get the start of sin neither.
Powers, that dwell so far asunder, as Heaven, and Hell, God and the Devil,
meet in an instant in my soul, in the minute of my quickening, and the Image of
God, and the Image of Adam, Original sin, enter into me at once, in one, and
the same act. So swift is this arrow, Original sin, from which, all arrows of
subsequent tentations, are shot, as that God, who comes to my first minute of
life, cannot come before death.

And then, a third, and last danger, which we noted in our tentations,
Invisibiles.
as they are represented by the holy Ghost, in this Metaphore of arrows, is,
that they are vix visibiles, hardly discernible. It Is true, that tentations do
not light upon us, as bullets, that we cannot see them, till we feel them. An
arrow comes not altogether so: but an arrow comes so, as that it is not
discerned, except we consider which way it comes, and watch it all the way. An
arrow, that finds a man asleep, does not wake him first, and wound him after;
A tentation that finds a man negligent, possesses him, before be sees it. In
gravtssimis criminibus, confinia virtutum ladunt; This is it that undoes us,
Ambros.
that virtues and vices are contiguous, and borderers upon one another; and
very often, we can hardly tell, to which action the name of vice, and to which
the name of virtue appertains. Many times, that which comes within an inch of a
noble action, falls under the infamy of an odious treason; At many executions,
half the company will call a man an Heretic, and half, a Martyr. How often,
an excess, makes a natural affection, an unnatural disorder? Vtinam aut
sororem non amasset, Hamon, aut non vindicasset Absolon; Hamon loved his sister
Tamar; but a little too well; Idem.
Absolon hated his brothers incest, but a little too ill. Though love be good,
and hate be good, respectively, yet, says S. Ambrose, I would neither that
love, nor that hate had gone so far. The contract between Jonathan and David,
was, If I say, The arrow on this side of thee, all is well; 1 Samuel 20.
If I say, The arrow is beyond thee, thou art in an ill case. If the arrow, the
tentation, be yet on this side of thee, if it have not lighted upon thee, thou
art well; God has directed thy face to it, and thou may, if thou will,
continue thy diligence, watch it, and avoid it. But if the arrow be beyond
thee, and thou have cast it at thy back, in a forgetfulness, in a security of
thy sin, thy case is dangerous. In all these respects, are these arrows, these
infirmities, derived from the sin of Adam, dangerous, as they are alienae, in
the hand of others, as they are veloces, swift in seizing us, and as they are
vix visibiles, hardly discerned to be such; And these considerations fell
within this first branch of this second part, Thine arrows, tentations, as they
are arrows, stick fast in me.

These dangers are in them, as they are sagittae, arrows; and would be so,
Plures.
if they were but single arrows; any one tentation would endanger us, any one
tribulation would encumber us; but they are plural, arrows, and many arrows. A
man is not safe, because one arrow has mist him; nor though he be free from
one sin. Ios. 7. 25.
In the execution of Achan, all Israel threw stones at him, and stoned him. If
Achan had had some brother, or cousin amongst them, that would have flung over,
or short, or weakly, what good had that done him, when he must stand the mark
for all the rest? All Israel must stone him. A little disposition toward some
one virtue, may keep thee from some one tentation; Thou may think it pity to
corrupt a chaste soul, and forbear soliciting her; pity to oppress a submitting
wretch, and forbear to vex him; and yet practice, and that with hunger and
thirst, other sins, or those sins upon other persons. But all Israel stones
thee; arrows fly from every corner; and thy measure is not, to thank God, that
thou art not as the Publican, as some other man, but thy measure is, to be pure
and holy, as thy father in heaven is pure, and holy, and to conform thy self in
some measure, to thy pattern, Christ Jesus. Against him it is noted, that the
Jews took up stones twice to stone him. Once, when they did it, He went away
and hid himself. Our way to escape these arrows, Job. 8. 59.
these tentations, is to go out of the way, to abandon all occasions, and
conversation, that may lead into tentation. In the other place, Christ stands
to it, 10. 31.
and disputes it out with them, and puts them from it by the scriptum est; and
that is our safe shield, since we must necessarily live in the way of
tentations, (for coluber in via, there is a snake in every path, tentation in
every calling) still to receive all these arrows, upon the shield of faith,
still to oppose the scriptum est, the faithful promises of God, that he will
give us the issue with the tentation, when we cannot avoid the tentation it
self. Otherwise, these arrows are so many, as would tire, and wear out, all the
diligence, and all the constancy of the best moral man. We find many
mentions in the Scriptures of filling of quivers, and emptying of quivers, and
arrows, and arrows, still in the plural, many arrows. But in all the Bible, I
think, we find not this word, (as it signifies tentation, or tribulation) in
the singular, one arrow, any where, but once, where David calls it, The arrow
that flies by day; And is seen, that is, known by every man; for, for that, the
Fathers, and Ancients run upon that Exposition, Psalm. 91. 5.
that that one arrow common to all, that day-arrow visible to all, is the
natural death; (so the Chalde paraphrase calls it there expressly, Sagitta
m^rtis, The arrow of death) which every man knows to belong to every man; (for,
as clearly as he sees the Sun set, he sees his death before his eyes.)
Therefore it is such an arrow, as the Prophet does not say, Thou shall not
feel, but, Thou shall not fear the arrow that flies by day. The arrow, the
singular arrow that flies by day, is that arrow that falls upon every man,
death. But every where in the Scriptures, but this one place, they are plural,
many, so many, as that we know not whence, nor what they are. Nor ever does any
man receive one arrow alone, any one tentation, but that he receives another
tentation, to hide that, though with another, and another sin. And the use of
arrows in the war, was not so much to kill, as to rout, and disorder a battle;
and upon that routing, followed execution. Every tentation, every tribulation
is not deadly. But their multiplicity disorders us, discomposes us, unse^^les
us, and so hazards us. Not only every periodicall variation of our years,
youth and age, but every day has a diverse arrow, every hour of the day, a
diverse tentation. An old man wonders then, how an arrow from an eye could wound
him, when he was young, and how love could make him do those things which he
did then; And an arrow from the tongue of inferior people, that which we make
shift to call honor, wounds him deeper now; and ambition makes him do as
strange things now, as love did then; A fair day shoots arrows of visits, and
comedies, and conversation, and so we go abroad: and a foul day shoots arrows
of gaming, or chambering, and wantonness, and so we stay at home. Nay, the
same sin shoots arrows of presumption in God, before it be committed, and of
distrust and diffidence in God after; we do not fear before, and we cannot
hope after: And this is that misery from this plurality, and multiplacity of
these arrows, these manifold tentations, which David intends here, and as often
as he speaks in the same phrase of plurality, vituli multi, many bulls, canes
multi, Ps. 22. 13. 17.
many dogs, and bellantes multi, many warlike enemies, and aquae^ multae, many
deep waters compass me. For as it is said of the spirit of wisdom, that it is
unicus multiplex, Wisd. 7. 22.
manifoldly one, plurally singular: so the spirit of tentation in every soul is
unicus multiplex, singularly plural, rooted in some one beloved sin, but
derived into infinite branches of tentation.

And then, these arrows stick in us; the rain falls, Fixae.
but that cold sweat hangs not upon us; Hail beats us, but it leaves no
pock-holes in our skin. These arrows do not so fall about us, as that they
miss us; nor so hit us, as they rebound back without hurting us: But we
complain with Jeremy, The sons of his quiver are entered into our reins. Lam. 3.
13.
The Roman Translation reads that filias, The daughters of his quiver; If it
were but so, daughters, we might limit these arrows in the signification of
tentations, by the many occasions of tentation; arising from that sex. But the
Original has it filios, the sons of his quiver, and therefore we consider
these arrows in a stronger signification, tribulations, as well as tentations;
They stick in us; Consider it but in one kind, diseases, sicknesses. They
stick to us so, as that we are not sure, that any old diseases mentioned in
Physicians books are worn out, but that every year produces new, of which they
have no mention, we are sure. We can scarce express the number, scarce sound
the names of the diseases of man's body; 6000 year has scarce taught us what
they are, how they affect us, how they shall be cured in us, nothing, on this
side the Resurrection, can teach us. They stick to us so, as that they pass by
inheritance, and last more generations in families, then the inheritance it
self does; and when no land, no Manor, when no title, no honor descends upon
the heir, the stone, or the gout descends upon him. And as though our bodies
had not naturally diseases, and infirmities enough, we contract more, inflict
more, (and that, out of necessity too) in mortifications, and macerations, and
Disciplines of this rebellious flesh. I must have this body with me to heaven,
or else salvation it self is not perfect; And yet I cannot have this body
thither, except as S. Paul did his, I beat down this body, 1 Cor. 9. ult.
attenuate this body by mortification; Wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of death? I have not body enough for my body, and I
have too much body for my soul; not body enough, not blood enough, not strength
enough, to sustain my self in health, and yet body enough to destroy my soul,
and frustrate the grace of God in that miserable, perplexed, riddling condition
of man; sin makes the body of man miserable, and the remedy of sin,
mortification, makes it miserable too; If we enjoy the good things of this
world, Duriorem carcerem praeparamus, Basil.
we do but carry an other wall about our prison, an other story of unwieldy
flesh about our souls; and if we give our selves as much mortification as our
body needs, we live a life of fridays, and see no Sabbath, we make up our years
of Lents, and see no other Easters, and whereas God meant us Paradise, we make
all the world a wilderness. Sin has cast a curse upon all the creatures of
the world, they are all worse then they were at first, and yet we dare not
receive so much blessing, as is left in the creature, we dare not eat or drink,
and enjoy them. The daughters of Gods quiver, and the sons of his quiver, the
arrows of tentation, and the arrows of tribulation, do so stick in us, that as
he lives miserably, that lives in sickness, and he as miserably, that lives in
physic: so plenty is a misery, and morti^ication is a misery too; plenty, if
we consider it in the effects, is a disease, a continual sickness, for it
breeds diseases; And mortification, if we should consider it without the
effects, is a disease too, a continual hunger, and fasting; and if we consider
it at best, and in the effects, mortification is but a continual physic,
which is misery enough.

They stick, and they stick fast; alte infixae; every syllable aggravates our
misery. Alre Infixae.
Now for the most part, experimentally, we know not whether they stick fast or
no, for we never go about to pull them out: these arrows, these tentations,
come, and welcome: we are so far from offering to pull them out, that we fix
them faster and faster in us; we assist our tentations: yea, we take
preparatives and fomentations, we supple our selves by provocations, lest our
flesh should be of proof against these arrows, that death may enter the surer,
and the deeper into us by them. And he that does in some measure, soberly and
religiously, go about to draw out these arrows, yet never consummates, never
perfects his own work; He pulls back the arrow a little way, and he sees blood,
and he feels spirit to go out with it, and he lets it alone: He forbears his
sinful companions, a little while, and he feels a melancholy take hold of him,
the spirit and life of his life decays, and he falls to those companions again.
Perchance he rushes out the arrow with a sudden, and a resolved vehemence, and
he leaves the head in his body: He forces a divorce from that sin, he removes
himself out of distance of that tentation; and yet he surfets upon cold meat,
upon the sinful remembrance of former sins, which is a dangerous rumination,
and an unwholesome chawing of the cud; It is not an ill derivation of
repentance, that poenitere is poenam tenere; that is true repentance, when we
continue in those means, which may advance our repentance. When Ioash the King
of Israel came to visit Elisha upon his sick bed, 2 Reg. 13. 17.
and to consult with him about his war, Elisha bids the King smite the ground,
and he smites it thrice, and ceases: Then the man of God was angry, and said,
Thou should have smitten five or six times, and so thou should have
smitten thine enemies, till thou had consumed them. Now, how much have thou
to do, that have not pulled at this arrow at all yet? Thou must pull thrice
and more, before thou get it out; Thou must do, and leave undone many things,
before thou deliver thy self of that arrow, that sin that transports thee.
One of these arrows was shot into Saint Paul himself, and it stuck, 1 Cor. 12.
7.
and stuck fast; whether an arrow of tentation, or an arrow of tribulation, the
Fathers cannot tell; And therefore, we do now, (not inconveniently) all our
way, in this exercise, mingle these two considerations, of tentation, and
tribulation. Howsoever Saint Paul pulled thrice at this arrow, and could not
get it out; I besought the Lord thrice, says he, that it might depart from me.
But yet, Ioash his thrice striking of the ground, brought him some victory;
Saint Paul's thrice praying, brought him in that provision of Grace, which God
calls sufficient for him. Once pulling at these arrows, a slight consideration
of thy sins will do no good. Do it thrice; testify some true desire by such a
diligence; Do it now as thou sitt'st, do it again at the Table, do it again
in thy bed; Do it thrice, do it in thy purpose, do it in thine actions, do
it in thy constancy; Do it thrice, within the walls of thy flesh, in thy self,
within the walls of thy house in thy family, and in a holy and exemplar
conversation abroad, and God will accomplish thy work, which is his work in
thee; And though the arrow be not utterly pulled out, yet it shall not fester,
it shall not gangrene; Thou shall not be cut off from the body of Christ, in
his Church here, nor in the Triumphant Church hereafter, how fast soever these
arrows did stick upon thee before. God did not refuse Israel for her wounds,
and bruises, and putrefying sores, though from the sole of the foot, Esa. 1. 6.
to the crown of the head, but because those wounds were not closed, nor bound
up, nor suppled with ointments, therefore he refused her. God shall not refuse
any soul, because it has been shot with these arrows; Alas, God himself has
set us up for a mark, says Job, and so says Jeremy, against these arrows. Lam.
3. 12.
But that soul that can pour out floods of tears, for the loss, or for the
absence, or for the unkindnes, or imagination of an unkindness of a friend,
mis-beloved, beloved a wrong way, and not afford one drop, one tear, to wash
the wounds of these arrows, that soul that can squeaze the wound of Christ
Jesus, and spit out his blood in these blasphemous execrations, and shed no
drop of this blood upon the wounds of these arrows, that soul, and only that
soul, that refuses a cure, does God refuse; not because they fell upon it, and
stook, and stook fast, and stook long, but because they never, never went about
to pull them out; never resisted a tentation, never lamented a transgression,
never repented a recidivation.

Now this is more put home to us in the next addition, Infixae mihi, Mihi.
they stick, and stick fast, in me, that is, in all me. That that sin must be
saved or damned; That Is not the soul alone, nor body alone, but all, the whole
man. God is the God of Abraham, as he is the God of the living; Therefore
Abraham is alive; And Abraham is not alive, if his body be not alive; Alive
actually in the person of Christ; alive in an infallible assurance of a
particular resurrection. Whatsoever belongs to thee, belongs to thy body and
soul; and these arrows stick fast in thee; In both. Consider it in both; in
things belonging to the body and to the soul; We need clothing; Baptism is
Gods Wardrobe; there Induimur Christo; In Baptism we put on Christ; there we
are invested, apparelled in Christ; And there comes an arrow, that cuts off
half our garment, 2 Samuel 10. 4.
(as Hammon did David's servants) A tentation that makes us think, it is enough
to be baptized, to profess the name of Christ; for Papist, or Protestant, it
is but the train of the garment, matter of civility, and policy, and
government, and may be cut off, and the garment remain still. So we need meat,
sustenance, and then an arrow comes, a tentation meets us, Edite, and bibite,
Eat and drink, tomorrow you shall die; That there is no life, but this life, no
blessedness but in worldly abundances. If we need physic, and God offer us
his physic, medicinal corrections, there flies an arrow, a tentation, Medice
cura teipsum, that he whom we make our Physician, died himself, of an
infamous disease, that Christ Jesus from whom we attend our salvation, could
not save himself. In our clothing, in our diet, in our physic, things which
carry our consideration upon the body, these arrows stick fast in us, in that
part of us. So in the more spiritual actions of our souls too. In our alms
there are trumpets blown, there is an arrow of vainglory; In our fastings,
there are disfigurings, there is an arrow of Hypocrisy; In our purity, there is
contempt of others; there is an arrow of pride; In our coming to Church, there
is custom and formality; In hearing Sermons, there is affection to the parts
of the Preacher. In our sinful actions these arrows abound; In our best
actions they lie hid; And as thy soul is in every part of thy body, so these
arrows are in every part of thee, body, and soul; they stick, and stick fast,
in thee, in all thee.

And yet there is another weight upon us, in the Text, Manus.
there is still a Hand that follows the blow, and press it, Thy hand presses
me sore; so the Vulgat read it, Confirmasti super me manum tuam, Thy hand is
settled upon me; and the Chalde paraphrase carries it farther then to man, Sit
super me vulnus manus tua; Thy hand has wounded me, and that hand keeps the
wound open. And in this sense the Apostle says, It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10. 31.
But as God leaves not his children without correction, so he leaves them not
without comfort, and therefore it behooves us to consider his hand upon these
arrows, more then one way.

First, because his hand is upon the arrow, it shall certainly hit the mark;
Tua ut afflictio.
Gods purpose cannot be disappointed. If men, and such men, left handed men,
and so many 700 left handed men, and so many of one Tribe, 700 Benjamites, Iud.
20. 16.
could sling stones at a hairs breadth, and not fail, God is a better Mark-man
then the left handed Benjamites; his arrows always hit as he intends them.
Take them then for tribulation, his hand is upon them; Though they come from
the malice of men, his hand is upon them. S. Ambrose observes, that in
afflictions, Gods hand, and the Devils are but one hand. Stretch out thy hand,
says Satan to God, concerning Job; And, all that he has is in thy hand, says
God to Satan. Stretch out thy hand, and touch his bones, says Satan again to
God; And again, God to Satan, He is in thy hand, but touch not his life. A
difference may be, that when Gods purpose is but to punish, as he did Pharaoh,
in those several verall premonitory plagues, there it is Digitus Dei; It was
but a finger, Exodus 8. 19.
and Gods finger. When Balshazzar was absolutely to be destroyed, there were
Digiti, Dan. 5. 5.
and Manus hominis, men's fingers, and upon a man's hand. The arrows of men are
ordinary, more venomous, and more piercing, then the arrows of God. 2 Reg. 13.
17.
But as it is in that story of Elisha, and Ioash, The Prophet bade the King
shoot, but Elisha laid his hand upon the Kings hand; So from what instrument of
Satan soever, thy affliction come, Gods hand is upon their hand that shoot it,
and though it may hit the mark according to their purpose, yet it has the
effect, and it works according to his.

Yea, let this arrow be considered as a tentation, yet his hand is upon it; Tua
ut Peccatum.
at least God sees the shooting of it, and yet lets it fly. Either he tries
us by these arrows, what proof we are; Or he punishes us by those arrows of new
sins, for our former sins; and so, when he has lost one arrow, he shoots
another. He shoots a sermon, and that arrow is lost; He shoots a sickness, and
that arrow is lost; He shoots a sin; not that he is author of any sin, as sin;
but as sin is a punishment of sin, he concurs with it. And so he shoots arrow
after arrow, permits sin after sin, that at last some sin, that draws
affliction with it, might bring us to understanding; for that word, in which
the Prophet here expresses this sticking, and this fast sticking of these
arrows, which is Nachath, is here, (as the Grammarians in that language call
it) in Niphal, figere factae, they were made to stick; Gods hand is upon them,
the work is his, the arrows are his, and the sticking of them is his,
whatsoever, and whosesoever they be.

His hand shoots the arrow, as it is a tribulation, he limits it, whosoever
inflict it. Tua ut Medicamenta.
His hand shoots it, as it is a tentation; He permits it, and he orders it,
whosoever offer it. But it is especially from his hand, as it has a medicinal
nature in it; for in every tentation, and every tribulation, there is a
Catechism, and Instruction; nay, there is a Canticle, a love-song, an
Epithalamion, a marriage song of God, to our souls, wrapped up, if we would
open it, and read it, and learn that new tune, that music of God; So when
thou hear^st Nathans words to David, The child that is born unto thee, shall
surely die, 2 Samuel 12. 14.
(let that signify, the children of thy labor, and industry, thy fortune, thy
state shall perish) so when thou hear'st Gods word to David, Choose famine, or
war, or pestilence, 2 Samuel 24.
for the people, (let that signify, those that depend upon thee, shall perish)
so when thou hear'st Esays words to Hezekiah, Put thy house in order, for thou
shall die; (let that signify, Esa. 38.
thou thy self in person shall perish) so when thou hear'st all the judgments
of God, as they lie in the body of the Scriptures, so the applications of those
judgments, by Gods Ministers, in these services, upon emergent occasions, all
these are arrows shot by the hand of God, and that child of God, that is
accustomed to the voice, and to the ear of God, to speak with him in prayer,
when God speaks to him, in any such voice here, as that to David, or Hezekiah,
though this be a shooting of arrows, Job 41. 19.
Non sugabit eum vir sagittarius, The arrow, (as we read it) The Archer, (as
the Roman Edition reads it) cannot make that child of God afraid, afraid with
a distrustful fear, or make him loath to come hither again to hear more, how
close soever Gods arrow, and Gods archer, that is, his word in his servants
mouth, come to that Conscience now, nor make him mis-interpret that which he
does hear, or call that passion in the Preacher, in which the Preacher is but
sagittarius Dei, the deliverer of Gods arrows; for Gods arrows, are sagitta
Compunctionis, arrows that draw blood from the eyes; Tears of repentance from
Mary Magdalen, and from Peter; And when from thee? There is a probatum est in
S. Aug. Sagittaveras cor meum, Thou have shot at my heart; Confess. l. 9. c. 2.
and how wrought that? To the withdrawing of his tongue, a nundinis
loquacitatis, from that market in which I sold my self, (for S. Aug. at that
time taught Rhetorique) to turn the stream of his eloquence, and all his other
good parts, upon the service of God in his Church. You may have read, or heard
that answer of a General, who was threatened with that danger; that his enemies
arrows were so many, as that they would cover the Sun from him; In umbra
pugnabimus; All the better, says he, for then we shall fight in the shadow.
Consider all the arrows of tribulation, even of tentation, to be directed by
the hand of God, and never doubt to fight it out with God, to lay violent hands
upon heaven, to wrestle with God for a blessing, to charge and press God upon
his contracts and promises, for in umbra pugnabis, though the clouds of these
arrows may hide all suns of worldly comforts from thee, yet thou art still
under the shadow of his wings. Nay, thou art still, for all this shadow, in the
light of his countenance. To which purpose there is an excellent use of this
Metaphor of arrows, H^bak. 3. 11. where it is said, that Gods servants shall
have the light of his arrows, and the ^^ining of his glittering spear: that is,
the light of his presence, in all the instruments, and actions of his
corrections.

To end all, and to dismiss you with such a re-collection, as you may carry
away with you; literally, primarily, this text concerns David: He by tentations
to sin, Christus.
by tribulations for sin, by comminations, and increpations upon sin, was
bodily, and ghostly become a quiver of arrows of all sorts; they stook, and
stook fast, and stook full in him, in all him. The Psalm has a retrospect too,
it looks back to Adam, and to every particular man in his loins, and so,
David's case is our case, and all these arrows stick in all us. But the Psalm
and the text has also a prospect, and has a prophetical relation from David
to our Savior Christ Jesus. And of him, and of the multiplicity of these
arrows upon him in the exinanition, and evacuation of himself, in this world
for us, have many of the Ancients interpreted these words literally, and as in
their first and primary signification; Turn we therefore to him, before we
go, and he shall return home with us. How our first part of this text is
applyable to him, that our prayers to God, for ease in afflictions, may be
grounded upon reasons, out of the sense of those afflictions, Saint Basil tells
us, that Christ therefore prays to his Father now in heaven, to spare mankind,
because man had suffered so much, and drunk so deep of the bitter cup of his
anger, in his person and passion before: It is an avoidable plea, from Christ
in heaven, for us, Spare them O Lord in themselves, since thou did not spare
them in me. And how far he was from sparing thee, we see in all those several
weights which have aggravated his hand, and these arrows upon us: If they be
heavy upon us, much more was their weight upon thee, every dram upon us was a
Talent upon thee, Non del^r sicut dolor tuus, take Rachel weeping for her
children, Mary weeping for her brother Lazarus, Hezekiah for his health, Peter
for his sins, Non est delor sicut dolor ^uus. The arrows that were shot at
thee, were Alienae, Afflictions that belonged to others; and did not only come
from others, as ours do; but they were alienae so, Alienae.
as that they should have fallen upon others; And all that should have fallen
upon all others, were shot at thee, and lighted upon thee. Lord, though we be
not capable of sustaining that part, this passion for others, give us that,
which we may receive, Compassion with others. They were veloces, these arrows
met swiftly upon thee; from the sin of Adam that induced death, to the sin of
the last man, that shall not sleep, but be changed, Veloces.
when thy hour came they came all upon thee, in that hour. Lord put this
swiftness into our fins, that in this one minute, in which our eyes are open
toward thee, and thine ears toward us, our sins, all our sins, even from the
impertinent frowardness of our childhood, to the unsufferable frowardness of
our age, may meet in our present confessions, and repentances, and never appear
more. They were (as ours are too) Invisibiles; Invisibiles.
Those arrows which fell upon thee, were so invisible, so undiscernible, as
that to this day, thy Church, thy School cannot see, what kind of arrow thou
tookest into thy soul, what kind of affliction it was, that made thy soul
heavy unto death, or dissolved thee into a gelly of blood in thine agony. Be
thou O Lord, a Father of Lights unto us, in all our ways and works of darkness;
manifest unto us, whatsoever is necessary for us to know, and be a light of
understanding and grace before, and a light of comfort and mercy after any ^in
has benighted us. These arrows were, as ours are also, plures, Plures.
plural, many, infinite; they were the sins of some that shall never thank
thee, never know that thou borest their sins, never know that they had any such
sins to be horn. Lord teach us to number thy corrections upon us, so, as still
to see thy torments suffered for us, and our own sins, to be infinitely more
that occasioned those torments, then those corrections that thou layst upon us.
Thine arrows stook and stook fast in thee; the weight of thy torments, thou
would not cast off, nor lessen, when at thy execution they offered thee,
Fixae.
that stupesying drink, (which was the civil charity of those times to
condemned persons, Mar. 15. 23.
to give them an easier passage, in the agonies of death) thou would not
taste of that cup of ease. Deliver us, O Lord, in all our tribulations, from
turning to the miserable comforters of this world, or from wishing or accepting
any other deliverance, then may improve and make better our Resurrection. These
arrows were in thee, in all thee: from thy Head torn with thorns, to thy feet
pierced with nayls; and in thy soul so as we know not how, so as to extorta Si
possibile, If it be possible let this cup pass, and an Vt quid dereliquisti,
My God, my God, why half thou forsaken me? Lord, whilst we remain entire here,
in body and soul, make us, and receive us an entire sacrifice to thee, in
directing body and soul to thy glory, and when thou shall be pleased to take us
in pieces by death, receive our souls to thee, and lay up our bodies for thee,
in consecrated ground, and in a Christian buryall. And lastly, thine arrows
were followed, and pressed with the hand of God; The hand of God pressed upon
thee, in that eternal decree, in that irrevocable contract, between thy Father
and thee, in that Oportuit pati, That all that thou must suffer, and so enter
into our glory. Establish us, O Lord, in all occasions of diffidences here; and
when thy hand presses our arrows upon us, enable us to see, that that very
hand, has from all eternity written, and written in thine own blood, a decree
of the issue, as well, and as soon, as of the tentation. In which confidence of
which decree, as men, in the virtue thereof already in possession of heaven, we
join with that Quire in that service, in that Anthem, Blessing, and glory, and
wisdom, and thanksgiving, Apoc. 7. 11, 12.
and honor, and power, and might, be unto our God for ever, and ever, Amen.

SERMON XX.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
PSALM. 38. 3. There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger,
neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin.
IN that which is often reported to you, out of Saint Hierome, Titulus clavis,
that the title of the Psalm, is the key of the Psalm, there is this good use,
That the book of Psalms is a mysterious book; and, if we had not a lock, every
man would thrust in, and if we had not a key, we could not get in our selves.
Our lock is the analogy of the Christian faith; That we admit no other sense,
of any place in any Psalm, then may consist with the articles of the Christian
faith; for so, no Heretic, no Schismatique, shall get in by any countenance
of any place in the Psalms; and then our key is, that intimation which we
receive in the title of the Psalm, what duty that Psalm is principally directed
upon; and so we get into the understanding of the Psalm, and profiting by the
Psalm. Our key in this Psalm, given us in the title thereof, is, that it is
Psalmus ad Recordationem, a Psalm of Remembrance; The faculty that is awakened
here, is our Memory. That plural word nos, which was used by God, in the
making of Man, when God said Faciamus, Let us, us make man, according to our
image, as it intimates a plurality, a concurrence of all the Trinity in our
making, so does it also a plurality in that image of God, which was then
imprinted in us; As God, one God created us, so we have a soul, one soul, that
represents, and is some image of that one God; As the three Persons of the
Trinity created us, so we have, in our one soul, a threefold impression of that
image, and, as Saint Bernard calls it, A trinity from the Trinity, in those
three faculties of the soul, the Understanding, the Will, and the Memory. God
calls often upon the first faculty, O that this people would but understand;
But understand? Inscrutabili^ judicia tua; Thy judgments are unsearchable, and
thy ways past finding out; And, oh that this people would not go about to
understand those unreve^led decrees, and secrets of God. God calls often upon
the other faculty, the Will too, and complains of the stiff perverseness, and
opposition of that. Through all the Prophets runs that charge, Noluerunt, and
Noluerunt, they would not, they refused me, Noluerun^ audire, says God in Esaias;
They are rebellious children, that will not hear. Domus Israel noluit, says God
to Ezekiel, The house of Israel will not hear thee; not Thee, 30. 9. 3. 7.
not the minister; That Is no marvail; it is added by God there, Noluit me, they
will not hear me. Noluerunt erubescere, says God to Jeremy, They will not be
ashamed of their former ways, And therefore Noluerunt reverti, They will not
return to better ways: 3. 3. 5. 3.
He that is past shame of sin, is past recovery from sin. So Christ continues
that practice, and that complaint in the Gospel too; He sends forth his
servants, (us) to call them, Mat. 22. 3.
that were bidden, Et noluerunt venire, and they would not come upon their
call; He comes himself, and would gather them, as hen her chickens, and they
would not; 23. 37.
Their fault is not laid in this, that they had no such faculty, as a will,
(for then their not coming were not their fault) but that they perverted that
will. Of our perverseness in both faculties, understanding, and will, God may
complain, but as much of our memory; for, for the rectifying of the will, the
understanding must be rectified; and that implies great difficulty: But the
memory is so familiar, and so present, and so ready a faculty, as will always
answer, if we will but speak to it, and ask it, what God has done for us, or
for others. The art of salvation, is but the art of memory. When God gave his
people the Law, he proposes nothing to them, but by that way, to their memory;
I am the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt; Exodus 20.
Remember but that. And when we express Gods mercy to us, we attribute but
that faculty to God, that he remembers us; Lord, what is man, that thou art
mindful of him? Ps. 8. 6.
And when God works so upon us, as that He makes his wonderful works to be had
in remembrance, 111. 4.
it is as great a mercy, as the very doing of those wonderful works was
before. It was a seal upon a seal, a seal of confirmation, it was a sacrament
upon a sacrament, when in instituting the sacrament of his body and his blood,
Christ presented it so, Luc 22. 19.
Do this in remembrance of me. Memorare novissima, remember the last things,
and fear will keep thee from sinning; Memorare praeterita, remember the first
things, what God has done for thee, and love, (love, which, mis-placed, has
transported thee upon many sins) love will keep thee from sinning. Plato placed
all learning in the memory; we may place all Religion in the memory too: All
knowledge, that seems new to day, says Plato, is but a remembering of that,
which your soul knew before. All instruction, which we can give you to day, is
but the remembering you of the mercies of God, which have been new every
morning. Nay, he that hears no Sermons, he that reads no Scriptures, has the
Bible without book; He has a Genesis in his memory; he cannot forget his
Creation; he has an Exodus in his memory; he cannot forget that God has
delivered him, from some kind of Egypt, from some oppression; He has a
Leviticus in his memory; he cannot forget, that God has proposed to him some
Law, some rules to be observed. He has all in his memory, even to the
Revelation; God has revealed to him, even at midnight alone, what shall be his
portion, in the next world; And if he dare but remember that nights
communication between God and him, he is well-near learned enough. There may be
enough in remembering our selves; but sometimes, that is the hardest of all; many
times we are farthest off from our selves; most forgetful of our selves. It
was a narrow enlargement, it was an addition that diminished the sense, when
our former Translators added that word, themselves; Ps. 22. 27.
All the world shall remember themselves; there is no such particularity, as
themselves, in that text; But it is only, as our later Translators have left
it, All the world shall remember, and no more; Let them remember what they
will, what they can, let them but remember thoroughly, and then as it follows
there, They shall turn unto the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations shall
worship him. Therefore David makes that the key into this Psalm; Psalmus ad
Recordationem, A Psalm for Remembrance. Being locked up in a close prison, of
multiplied calamities, this turns the key, this opens the door, this restores
him to liberty, if he can remember. Non est sanitas, there is no soundness, no
health in my flesh; Do thou wondet at that? Remember thy self, and thou will see, that thy case is worse then so; That there is no rest in thy bones.
That Is true too; But do thou wonder at that? Remember thy self, and thou will see the cause of all that, The Lord is angry with thee; Find'st thou that
true, and wondrest why the Lord should be angry with thee? Remember thy self
well, and thou will see, it is because of thy sins, There is no soundness in
my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my bones,
because of my sin. So have I let you in, into the whole Psalm, by this key,
by awaking your memory, that it is a Psalm for Remembrance: And that that you
are to remember, is, that all calamities, that fall upon you, fall not from the
malice or power of man, but from the anger of God; And then, that Gods anger
falls not upon you, from his Hate, or his Decree, but from your sins, There is
no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in
my bones, because of my sin.

Which words we shall first consider, as they are our present object, Divisio.
as they are historically, and literally to be understood of David; And
secondly, in their retrospect, as they look back upon the first Adam, and so
concern Mankind collectively, and so you, and I, and all have our portion in
these calamities; And thirdly, we shall consider them in their prospect, in
their future relation to the second Adam, in Christ Jesus, in whom also all
mankind was collected, and the calamities of all men had their Ocean and their
confluence, and the cause of them, the anger of God was more declared, and the
cause of that anger, that is sin, did more abound; for the sins of all the
world were his, by imputation, for this Psalm, some of our Expositors take to
be a historical, and personal Psalm, determined in David; some, a Catholic,
and universal Psalm, extended to the whole condition of man, and some a
Prophetical, and Evangelicall Psalm, directed upon Christ. None of them
inconveniently; for we receive help and health, from every one of these
acceptations; first, Adam was the Patient, and so, his promise, the promise
that he received of a Messiah, is our physic; And then David was the Patient,
and there, his Example is our physic; And lastly, Christ Jesus was the
Patient, and so, his blood is our physic. In Adam we shall find the Scriptum
est, the medicine is in our books, an assurance of a Messiah there is; In David
we shall find the Probatum est, that this medicine wrought upon David; and in
Christ we find the deceit it self; Thus you may take this physic, thus you
may apply it to your selves. In every acceptance, as we consider it in David,
in our selves, in Christ, we shall consider first, That specification of humane
misery and calamity, expressed here, sickness, and an universal sickness; No
soundness in the flesh: And more then that, trouble, and an universal
trouble; No peace, no rest, not in the bones. And then in a second branch, we
shall see, that those calamities proceed from the anger of God; we cannot
discharge them, upon Nature, or Fortune, or Power, or Malice of Men or Times;
They are from the anger of God, and they are, as the Original Text has it, a
facie irae Dei, from the face of the anger of God, from that anger of God that
has a face, that looks upon something in us, and grows not out of a hate in
God, or decree of God against us. And then lastly, this that Gods anger looks
upon is sin; God is not angry till he see sin; nor with me, till it come to be
my sin; and though Original sin be my sin, and sickness, and death
would follow, though there were no more but Original sin, yet God comes not
to this, Non sanitas, N^ soundness in my flesh, nor to this, N^n pax, No rest
in my bones, till I have made sin, my sin, by act, and habit too, by doing
it, and using to do it. But then, though it be but Peccatum in the singular,
(so the Text has it) One sin, yet for that one beloved sin, especially
when that my sin comes to have a face, (for so, the Original phrase is in
this place too, a facie peccati, from the face of my sin) when my sin looks
big, and justifies it self, then come these calamities, No soundness in the
flesh, ^o rest in the bones, to their height, because the anger of God which
exals them, is in the exaltation: There is no soundness in my flesh, because
of thine anger, neither any rest in my bones, because of my sin.

All these particulars will best arise to us in our second consideration, 1.
Part.
when we consider, Hamanitatem, not Hominem, our humane condition, as we are
all kneaded up in Adam, and not this one person David. But because we are in
the consideration of health, and consequently of physic, (for the true and
proper use of physic, is to preserve health, and, but by accident to restore
it) we embra^e that Rule, Paracels.
Medio^rum theoria experientia est, Practice is a Physicians study; and he
concludes out of events: for, says he, He that professes himself a Physician,
without experience, Chronica de future scribit, He undertakes to write a
Chronicle of things before they are done, which is an irregular, and a perverse
way. Therefore, in this spiritual physic of the soul, we will deal upon
Experience too, and see first, how this wrought upon this particular person,
upon David.

David durst not presume, that God could not, or would not be angry. Anger is
not always a Defect, nor an inordinatenesse in man; Be angry, and sin not:
Ephesians. 4. 26.
anger is not utterly to be rooted out of our ground, and cast away, but
transplanted; A Gardener does well to grub up thorns in his garden; there they
would hinder good herbs from growing; but he does well to plant those thorns
in his hedges, there they keep bad neighbors from entering. In many cases,
where there is no anger, there is not much zeal. David himself came to a high
exaltation in this passion of anger. He was ordinarily so meek, as that that
which we translate afflictions, the Vulgat Edition translates mecknesse, and
patience in his afflictions. Remember David and all his afflictions, Psalm. 132.
1.
says our translation; and Memento David and omnis mansuetudinis ejus, say
they, Remember David, and all his mildness. How mildly he endured Ioabs
insultation; Thou love, says Ioab, thine enemies, and thou hate thy
friends. Bitterly spoken; Come out, 2 Samuel 19. 6.
and speak comfortably, says Ioab, or, I swear by the Lord, there will not
tarry a man with thee this night; Seditiously spoken; And David obeyed him. How
mildly he endured Shimei's cursing? 2 Samuel 16. 5.
He cast stones at him and at all his servants; He charges him with murder;
and, that which is heaviest of all, he calls Absolons rebellion, a judgment of
God; and David accepts it so, and says, The Lord has bidden him to curse
David. And yet this exemplar mild man, David himself, upon a scorn offered to
him by Hanun in the abuse of his Ambassadors, goes himself in person, into a
dangerous war, against the Ammonites, assisted with 32000 chariots of their
neighbors the Aramites, 2 Samuel 10.
and there he destroys those great numbers, which are mentioned in that story:
and after this defeat, 1 Chronicles. 19.
in cold blood, he goes out against them, that had assisted them; He takes the
City Rabbah, and the people he cuts with Saws, and with Harrows of iron, and
with Axes; David saw that a mild man can grow angry, and that a fire that is
long kindling, burns most vehemently. That which is an Adage, and Proverb now,
was ever true in substance, Ab inimico flegmatico libera me Domine; from him
that is long before he be angry, for he is long before he be reconciled
again. Gods goodness has that disposition, to be long suffering; man's
illness and abuse of that, is able to inflame God. So David's sin had inflamed
him; and the fire of Gods anger produced the calamities of this text upon him:
which our Expositors ordinarily take to have been historically this, that when
David had provoked God, with that sinful confidence in numbering his people, 2 Samuel 24. 17.
when Gods anger was executed in that devouring plague, and David saw the
persecuting Angel, then a facie irae Domini, from that face, that manifestation
of Gods anger, he fell into that dampe, and dead cold, that howsoever they
covered him, 1 Reg. ^.
they could never get heat in him: And this was the sin, say our Expositors,
and this was the anger, and this was the manifestation, and this was the
disease that David complains of here. And be this enough of the personal
acceptance of these words; There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine
anger, neither is there rest in my bones, because of my sin; for in their
second acceptance as they are referred to the miserable condition of all
mankind by sin, the particulars which we laid down before, will fall into
more particular consideration.

In this second part, first we contemplate man, as the Receptacle, 2. Part.
Miseria.
the Ocean of all misery. Fire and Air, Water and Earth, are not the Elements
of man; Inward decay, and outward violence, bodily pain, and sorrow of heart
may be rather styled his Elements; And though he be destroyed by these, yet he
consists of nothing but these. As the good qualities of all creatures are not
for their own use, (for the Sun sees not his own glory, nor the Rose smells not
her own breath: but all their good is for man) so the ill conditions of the
creature, are not directed upon themselves, (the Toad poisons not it self, nor
does the Viper bite it self) but all their ill powrs down upon man. As though
man could be a Microcosm, a world in himself, no other way, except all the
misery of the world fell upon him. Adam was able to decypher the nature of
every Creature in the name thereof, and the Holy Ghost has decyphered his in
his name too; In all those names that the Holy Ghost has given man, he has
declared him miserable, for, Adam, (by which name God calls him, Gem. 5. 2.
and Eve too) signifies but Redness, but a Blushing: and whether we consider
their low materials, as it was but earth, or the redness of that earth, as they
stained it with their own blood, and the blood of all their posterity, and as
they drew another more precious blood, the blood of the Messiah upon it, every
way both may be Adam, both may blush. So God called that pair, our first
Parents, man in that root, Adam: But the first name, by which God called man in
general, mankind, is Ish, Therefore shall a man leave his Father, etc. And
Ish, Genesis 2. 24.
is but a sonitu, a rugitu: Man has his name from crying, and the occasion of
crying, misery, testified in his entrance into the world, for he is born
crying; and our very Laws presume, that if he be alive, he will cry, and if he
be not heard cry, conclude him to be born dead. And where man is called Gheber,
(as he is often) which is derived from Greatness, man is but great so, as that
word signifies; It signifies a Giant, an oppressor, Great in power, and in a
delight to do great mischiefs upon others, or Great, as he is a Great mark,
and easily hit by others. But man has a fourth name too in Scripture, Enosh,
and that signifies nothing but misery. When David says, Put them in fear O
Lord, that the Nations may know they are but men; there is that name Enosh,
Psalm. 9. 20.
that they are but miserable things. Adam is Blushing, Ish is lamenting, Geber
is oppressing, Enosh is all that; but especially that^ which is especially
notified for the misery in our Text, Enosh is Homo aeger, a man miserable, in
particular, by the misery of sickness, which is our next step, Non sanitas,
There is no soundness, no health in me.

God created man in health, but health continued but a few hours, Morbus.
and sickness has had the Dominion 6000 years. But was man impassible before
the fall? Had there been no sickness, if there had been no sin? Secundum
passiones perfectivas, Aquin.
we acknowledge in the School, man was passible before: Every alteration is in
a degree a passion, a suffering; and so, in those things which conduced to his
well-being, eating, and sleeping, and other such, man was passible: that is,
subject to alteration, But, Secundum passiones destructiv^^, to such
sufferings, as might frustrate the end for which he was made, which was
Immortality, he was not subject, and so, not to sickness. Now he is; and put
all the miseries, that man is subject to, together, sickness is more then all.
It is the immediate sword of God. Phalaris could invent a Bull, and others have
invented Wheels and Racks; but no persecutor could ever invent a sickness or a
way to inflict a sickness upon a condemned man: To a galley he can send him,
and to the gallows, and command execution that hour; but to a quartane fever,
or to a g^ut, he cannot condemn him. In poverty I lack but other things; In
banishment I lack but other men; But in sickness, I lack my self. And, as the
greatest misery of war, is, when our own Country is made the seat of the war;
so is it of affliction, when mine own Body is made the subject thereof. How
shall I put a just value upon Gods great blessings of Wine, and Oil, and
Milk, and Honey, when my cast is gone, or of Liberty, when the gout fetters my
feet? The King may release me, and say, Let him go whither he will, but God
says, He shall not go till I will. God has wrapped up all misery, in that
condemnation, Morte morietur, That the sinner shall die twice: But if the
second death did not follow, the first death were an ease, and a blessing in
many sicknesses. And no sickness can be worse, then that which is intended
here, for it is all over, Non sanitas, no soundness, no health in any part.

This consideration arises not only from the Physicians Rule, Non sanitas.
that the best state of Man's body is but a Neutrality, neither well nor ill,
but Nulla sanitas, a state of true and exquisit health, say they, no man has.
But not only out of this strictness of Art, but out of an acknowledgment of
Nature, we must say, sanitas hujus vitae, b^ne intelligentibus, sanitas non
est; It is but our mistaking, when we call any thing Health. Augustine.
But why so? fames naturalis morbus est; Hunger is a sickness; And that is
naturally in us all. Medicamentum famis cibus, and potus sitis, and
fatigationis somnus; when I eat, I do but take Physique for Hunger, and for
thirst, when I drink, and so is sleep my physique for weariness. Detrahe
medicamentum, and interficient; for bear but these Physiques, and these
diseases, Hunger, and thirst, and weariness, will kill thee. And as this
sickness is upon us all, and so non sanitas, there is no Health, in none of us,
so it is upon us all, at all times, and so Non sanitas, there is never any
soundness in us: for, Augustine.
saemper deficimus; we are Borne in a Consumption, and as little as we are
then, we grow less from that time. Vita cursus ad mortem, Before we can craule,
we run to meet death; and urgemur ownes pari passu: Though some are cast
forward to death, by the use, which others have of their ruin, and so throw
them, through Discontents, into desperate enterprises, and some are drawn
forward to death, by false Marks, which they have set up to their own
Ambitions, and some are spurred forward to death, by sharp Diseases contracted
by their own intemperance and licentiousness; and some are whipped forward to
death, by the Miseries, and pen^ries of this life, take away all these
accidental furtherances to death, this drawing, and driving, and spurring, and
whipping, pari paessu urgemur omnes, we bring all with us into the world, that
which carries us out of the world, a natural, unnatural consuming of that
radical virtue, which sustaines our life. Non sanitas, there is no health in
any, so universal is sickness, nor at any time in any, so universal; and so
universal too, as that not in any part of any man, at any time. As the King
was but sick in his feet, and yet it killed him: It was but in his fact, 2.
Chron. 16. 12.
yet it flew up into his head, it affected his head; as our former translation
observed it in their margin; that the disease did not only grow to a great
height in the disease, but to the highest parts of the body: It was at first
but in the feet, but it was presently all over. Josiah the King was shot with
an arrow at the battle of Megiddo; One book that reports the story says he was
carried out of the field alive and dyed at Jerusalem and another, 2 Chronicles. 35.
24.
that he was carried out of the field dead. Deadly wounds and deadly sicknesses
spread themselves all over, 2 Reg. 23. 30.
so fast, as that the holy Ghost, in relating it, makes it all one, to tell the
beginning, and the end thereof. If a man do but prick a finger, and bind it
above that part, so that the Spirits, or that which they call the Balsamum of
the body, cannot descend, by reason of that ligature, to that part, it will
ga^grene; And, (which is an argument, and an evidence, that mischiefs are more
operative, more insinuating, more penetrative, more diligent, then Remedies
against misch^efes are) when the Spirits, and Balsamum of the body cannot pass
by that ligature to that wound, yet the Gangrene will pass from that wound, by
that ligature, to the body, to the Heart, and destroy. In every part of the
body death can find a door, or make a breach; Mortal diseases breed in every
part. But when every part at once is diseased, death does not bsie ge him, but
inhabit him. In the day, when the keepers of the house shall tremble, Ec^l^s.
12. 3.
and the strong men shall how themselves, and the grinders cease, because they
are few, and those that look out at the windows, he darkened, when age of Gods
making, age grown by many years, or age of the Devils making, age grown by
many sins, has spread an universal debility upon me, that all sicknesses are
in me, and have all lost their names, as all simples have in Triacle, I am sick
of sickness, and not of a Fever, or any particular distemper, then is the
misery of this Text fallen upon me, Non sanitas, no health, none at any time,
none in any part, non in Carne, not in my flesh, not in my whole substance,
which is also another circumstance of exaltation in humane misery.

Take flesh in the largest extent and signification, that may be, as Moses
calls God, Non in carne.
The God of the spirits of all flesh, that is, of the Being of all Creatures,
Numb. 27. 16.
and take all these Creatures to be ours in that Donation, Subjicite and
dominamini, subdue, and rule all Creatures, yet there is no soundness in our
flesh, for, all these Creatures are corrupted, and become worse then they were,
(to us) by the sin of Adam. Bring flesh to a nearer signification, to our
own, there was Caro juxta naturam, and there is Caro juxta culpam. That flesh
which was natural, to man, Gregor.
that which God gave man at first, that had health and soundness in it; but
yet not such a degree of soundness, as that it needed no more, then it then
had. That had been naturally enough, (if that had been preserved to carry that
flesh it self to heaven, but even that flesh if it had not sinned, though it
had an Immortality in it self, yet must have received a glorification in
heaven; as well, (though in another measure) as those bodies, which shall be
alive at the last day, and shall be but changed, and not dissolved in the dust,
must receive a glorification there, besides that preservation from dissolution.
Now this Caro juxta culpam, sinful flesh, is farther from that Glorification;
Our natural flesh, when it was at best, had some thing to put on; but our
sinful flesh has also something to put off, before it can receive glory. So
then, for flesh in general, the body of Creatures, though that flesh be our
flesh, because all Creatures are ours, in that flesh there is no soundness,
because they are become worse; for that flesh, which we call natural Adams
first flesh, besides that it was never capable of glory in it self, but must
have received that, by receiving the light of Gods presence, there is none of
that flesh remaining now; now universa caro, all flesh is corrupted; and that
curse is gone upon it, The glory of Jacob shall be impoverished, and the
fatness of his flesh shall be made lean. Esaias 4. 17.
Quia elatum sumpsimus spiritum, because we have raised our spirits in pride,
Gregory.
higher then God would, Ecce defluens quotidie portamus lutum, Behold God has
walled us with mud walls, and wet mud walls, that waste away faster, then God
meant at first, they should. And by sins, this flesh, that is but the loame
and plaster of thy Tabernacle, thy body, that, all, that, that in the entire
substance is corrupted. Those Gummes, and spices, which should embalme thy
flesh, when thou art dead, are spent upon that diseased body whilst thou art
alive: Thou seem, in the eye of the world, to walk in silks, and thou do
but walk in searcloth; Thou have a desire to please some eyes, when thou have
much to do, not to displease every Nose; and thou will solicit an adulterous
entrance into their beds, who, if they should but see thee go into thine own
bed, would need no other mortification, nor answer to thy solicitation. Thou
pursuest the works of the flesh, and have none, for thy flesh is but dust held
together by plasters; Dissolution and putrefaction is gone over thee alive;
Thou have over lived thine own death, and art become thine own ghost, and thine
own hell; No soundness in all thy flesh; and yet beyond all these, beyond the
general miserable condition of man, and the highest of humane miseries,
sickness, and sickness over all the parts, and so over them all, as that it
has putrefied them all, there is another degree, which follows in our Text,
and David calls Trouble, There is no soundness in my flesh, nor rest in my
bones.

That which such a sick man most needs, this sick soul shall not have, Rest.
Non Pax.
The Physician goes out, and says, he has left him to Rest, but he has left
no Rest to him. The anguish of the disease, nay, the officiousness of
visitors, will not let him rest. Such send to see him as would feign hear he
were dead, and such weep about his sickbed, as would not weep at his grave.
Psalm. 41. 5.
Mine enemies speak evil of me, (says David) and say, When shall he die,
and his name perish? And yet these evill-speaking enemies come there to see
him. They say, ver. 6.
an evil disease cleaves fast unto him; and that they say is true, but they
say it not out of compassion, for they add, And now that he lies, let him
rise no more. He shall not get to that good trouble, to that holy disquiet of
a conscientious consideration, how his state was got; and, it shall be a
greater trouble then he can overcome, how to dispose it: He shall not only
not make a religious restitution, but he shall not make a discreet Will. He
shall suspect his wifes fidelity, and his childrens frugality, and clogge them
with Executors, and them with Overseers, and be, or be afraid he shall be
over-seen in all. And yet a farther trouble then all this, is intended in the
other word, which is the last and highest of these vexations, Non in ossibus,
no rest in my bones.

Saint Basil will needs have us leave the obvious, In ossibus.
and the natural signification of this, Bones; for, Habet and anima ossa sua,
says he, The soul has Bones, as well as the body, and there shall be no Rest
in those Bones. Such a signification is applyable to the Flesh, as well as the
Bones; The flesh may signify the lower faculties of the soul, or the weaker
works of the higher faculties thereof; There may be a Carnality in the
understanding; a concupiscence of disputation, and controversy in unnecessary
points. Requirit quod sibi respondere nequit, Grego.
The mind of a curious man delights to examine it self upon Interrogatories,
which, upon the Rack, it cannot answer, and to vex it self with such doubts
as it cannot resolve. Sub eo ignara deficit, quod prudenter requirit; We will
needs show wit in moving subtle questions, and the more ignorance, in not
being able to give our selves satisfaction. But not only seditions, and
contentions, but Heresies too, Gal. 5. 20.
are called works of the flesh; howsoever men think themselves witty, and
subtle, and spiritual in these wranglings, yet they have carnal respects,
they are of the flesh, and there is no soundnes in them. But beyond this
carnality in matters of Opinions, in points of a higher nature, this diseased
man in our Text, comes to trouble in his Bones, S. Basils spiritual bones: He
shall suspect his Religion, suspect his Repentance, suspect the Comforts of the
Minister, suspect the efficacy of the Sacrament, suspect the mercy of God
himself. Every fit of an Ague is an Earthquake that swallows him, every
fainting of the knee, is a step to Hell; every lying down at night is a
funeral; and every quaking is a rising to judgment; every bell that
distinguishes times, is a passing bell, and every passing bell, his own; every
singing in the ear, is an Angels Trumpet; at every dimnesse of the candle, he
hears that voice, Fool, this night they will fetch away thy soul; and in every
judgment denounced against sin, he hears an lto maledicte upon himself, Go
thou accursed into hell fire. And whereas such meditations as these, might
sustain a rectified soul, as Bones in this sinner, despair shall have sucked
out all the marrow of these Bones, and so there shall be no soundness in his
flesh, no rest in his bones. And so have you this sick sinner dissected and
anatomized; He has not only his portion in misery that lies upon all
mankind, which was our first branch, but in the heavyest of all, sickness,
which was a second, and then a third sickness spread over all, no soundness,
nor rest in that sickness, which was a fourth consideration, No soundness in
his flesh, in his weaker faculties and operations, No rest in his bones, no
acquiescence in his best actions, with which we end this first part. In which,
we consider sinful man, in himself, and so all is desperate; But in the
second, where we find him upon the consideration of the cause of all these
distresses, That it is from the Contemplation of the anger of God, There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine Anger, there we shall find a way
offered to him, that may, if he pursue it aright, bring him to a Reparation,
to a Redintegration; for, if he look upon the Anger of God in a right line, it
will show him, that as that Anger is the cause of his Calamities, so his sins
are the cause of that Anger.

May we not piously apply that Proverbiall speech, Corruption optimi pessima,
(that when good things take in another nature then their own, Ira Dei.
they take it in the highest exaltation) thus, that when God, who is all mercy,
grows angry, he becomes all anger? The Holy Ghost himself seems to have
given us leave to make that application, when expressing God in the height of
his anger, he calls God then, in that anger, a Dove; we read it the
fierceness of an oppressor, but Saint Hierome reads it, The anger of a Dove.
And truly there is no other word then that, Ier. 25. ult.
in that tongue, (the word is Jonah,) that signifies a Dove, and that word does
signify a Dove, in many other places of Scripture; And that Prophet which made
his flight from God, when he sent him to Nineveh, is called by that name,
Jonah, a Dove; And the Fathers of the Latin Church, have read, and interpreted
it so, of a Dove. Some of them take Nebuchadnezzar to be this angry Dove,
because he left his own Dove-coat to feed abroad, to prey upon them; and
some, because the Dove was the Arms and Ensign of the Assyrians from the time
of Semiramis; But the rest take this Dove to be God himself, and that the
sins of men had put a Gall into a Dove, Anger into God. And then, to what
height that anger grows, is expressed in the Prophet Hosea; I will meet them,
says God, (when he is pleased, he says, he will wait for them) as a Bear, 13.
8.
(no longer a Dove) as a Bear robbed of her whelps, (sensible of his injuries)
and I will rent the caul of their hearts, (shiver them in pieces with a
dispersion, with a discerption) And I will devour them as with a Lion, (nothing
shall reunite them again But I will break them as a Potters vessel, that
cannot be made whole again.) Ier. 19. 11.
Honor not the malice of thine enemy so much, as to say, thy misery comes from
him: Dishonor not the complexion of the times so much, as to say, thy misery
comes from them; justify not the Deity of Fortune so much, as to say, thy
misery comes from her; Find God pleased with thee, and thou have a hook in the
nostrils of every Leviathan, power cannot shake thee, Thou have a wood to cast
into the waters of Marah, Ioh 40. 19.
the bitterness of the times cannot hurt thee, thou have a Rock to dwell upon,
and the dream of a Fortunes wheel, Excd. 15. 23.
can not overturn thee. But if the Lord be angry, he needs no Trumpets to call
in Armies, if he do but sibilare muscam, hiss and whisper for the fly, and
the Be, there is nothing so little in his hand, as cannot discomfort thee,
discomfit thee, dissolve and powrout, attenuate and annihilate the very marrow
of thy soul. Every thing is His, and therefore every thing is He; thy
sickness is his sword, and therefore it is He that strikes thee with it,
still turn upon that consideration, the Lord is angry; But then look that
anger in the ^face, take it in the right ^line, as the Original phrase in this
text directs, a facieirae Dei, There is no soundness in my flesh, from the
face of thine anger.

As there is a Manifestation of Gods anger in this phrase, The face of Gods
anger, so there is a Multiplication, a plurality too, for it is indeed,
Mippenei a faciebus, A facie irae.
the faces, the diverse manifestations of Gods anger; for, the face of God, (and
so of every thing proceeding from God) is that, by which God, Aug.
or that work of God is manifested to us. And therefore since God manifests his
anger so many useful, and medicinal ways unto thee, take heed of looking upon
his anger, where his anger has no face, no manifestation; take heed of
imagining an anger in God, amounting to thy Damnation, in any such Decree, as
that God should be angry with thee in that height, without looking upon thy
sins, or without any declaration why he is angry. He opens his face to thee
in his Law, he manifests himself to thee in the Conditions, by which he has
made thy salvation possible, and till he see thee, in the transgression of
them, he is not angry. And when he is angry so, be glad he shows it in his
face, in his outward declarations; that fire smothered, would consume all Gods
anger reserved till the last day, will last as long as that day, as that
undeterminable day, for ever. When should we go about to quench that fire,
that never bursts out, or to seek reconciliation, before a hostility be
declared? Therefore Saint Bernard begs this anger at Gods hands, Irascaris mihi
Domine, O Lord, be angry with me; And therefore David thanks God, in the behalf
of that people, for his anger, Psalm 99. 8.
Thou forgavest them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions. The
fires of hell, in their place, in hell, have no light; But any degrees of the
fires of Hell, that can break out in this life, have, in Gods own purpose, so
much light, as that through the darkest smother of obduration; or desperation,
God would have us see him. Therefore Saint Hierome makes this milder use of
this phrase, that God shows faciem irae, but non iram, that his face of anger
is rather a telling us, that he will be angry, then that he is angry yet;
the corrections that God inflicts to reduce us, if we profit not by them, were
anger Ab initio, we shall suffer for the sins, from which those corrections
should have reduced us, and for that particular sin, of not being reduced by
them; but if they have their effect, there was not a drop of gall, there was
not a dram of anger in the anger. Now that that God intends in them is, that
as we apprehend our calamities to proceed from Gods anger, and to discharge
Destiny, and Fortune, so we apprehend that anger to proceed from our own
sins, and so discharge God himself; There is no rest in my bones because of
my sin.

As we are the sons of Dust, (worse, the sons of Death) we must say to
Corruption, 3. Part. Peccatum. Job 17. 14.
Thou art my Father, and to the worm, Thou art my Mother, so we may say to the
anger of God, it is our grandfather, that begot these miseries, but we must
say too, to our sin, Thou art my great-grandfather, that begot Gods anger
upon us: and here is our woeful pedigree, howsoever we be otherwise descended.
It Is true, there is no soundness, there is misery enough upon thee; and true,
that God is angry, Gregor.
vehemently angry; But, Expone juststiam irae Dei, deal clearly with the world,
and clear God, and confess it is because of thy sin. When Cain says, My sin
is greater then can be forgiven, Genesis 4.
that word Gnavon is ambiguous, it may be sin, it may be punishment, and
we know not whether his impatience grew out of the horror of his sin, or
the weight of his punishment. But here we are directed by a word that has no
ambiguity; Kata signifies sin, and nothing but sin; Here the holy Ghost has
fixed thee upon a word, that will not suffer thee to consider the punishment,
nor the cause of the punishment, the anger, but the cause of that anger, and
all, the sin. We see that the bodily sickness, and the death of many is
attributed to one kind of sin, to the negligent receiving of the Sacrament, 1
Cor. 11. 30.
For this cause many are weak and sick amongst you, and many sleep. Imaginem
judicii ostenderat, Ambrose.
God had given a representation of the day of Judgment in that proceeding of
his, for then we shall see many men condemned for sins, for which we never
suspected them: so we think men dye of Fevers, whom we met lately at the
Sacrament, and God has cut them off perhaps for that sin of their unworthy
receiving the Sacrament. My miseries are the fruits of this Tree; Gods anger is
the arms that spreads it; but the root is sin. My sin, which is another
consideration.

We say of a Possession, Transit cum onere, It passes to me, Meum.
with the burden that my Father laid upon it; his debt is my debt: so does it,
with the sin too; his sin, by which he got that possession, is my sin, if I
know it: and, perchance, the punishment mine, though I know not the sin. Adams
sin, 6000 years ago, is my sin; and their sin, that shall sin by occasion of
any wanton writings of mine, will be my sin, though they come after. Woeful
riddle; sin is but a privation, and yet there is not such another positive
possession: sin is nothing, and yet there is nothing else; I sinned in the
first man that ever was; and, but for the mercy of God, in something that I
have said or done, might sin, that is, occasion sin, in the last man that ever
shall be. But that sin that is called my sin in this text, is that that is
become mine by an habitual practice, or mine by a wilful relapse into it. And
so my sin may kindle the anger of God, though it be but a single sin, One
sin, as it is delivered here in the singular, and no farther, Because of my
sin.

Every man may find in himself, Peccatum complicatum, sin wrapped up in
sin, Singular.
a body of sin. We bring Elements of our own; earth of Covetousness, water of
unsteadfastnesse, air of putrefaction, and fire of licentiousness; and of
these elements we make a body of sin; as the Apostle says of the Natural
body, 1 Cor. 12. 20.
There are many members, but one body, so we may say of our sin, it has a
wanton eye, a griping hand, an itching ear, an insatiable heart, and feet swift
to shed blood, and yet it is but one body of sin; It is all, ^and yet it is but
One. But let it be simply, and singularly but One, (which is a miracle in sin,
truly I think an impossibility in sin, to be single, to be but One) (for that
unclean Spirit, which possessed the man that dwelt amongst the tombs, Mar. 5.
carried it at first, as though he had been a single Devil, and he alone in
that man, I, I adjure thee, says he to Christ, and torment not me, not me, so
far in the singular, but when Christ puts him to it, he confesses, we are many,
and my name is legion: So though thy sin, slightly examined, may seem but
One, yet if thou dare press it, it will confess a plurality, a legion) if it
be but One, yet if that One be made thine, by an habitual love to it, as the
plague needs not the help of a Consumption to kill thee, so neither does
Adultery need the help of Murder to damn thee. For this making of any One sin,
thine, thine, by an habitual love thereof, will grow up to the last and
heaviest weight, intimated in that phrase, which is also in this clause of the
Text, In facie paccati; that this sin will have a face, that is, a confidence,
and a devesting of all (...) or disguises.

There cannot be a heavier punishment laid upon any sin, Facies peccati.
Luke 17. 2.
then Christ lays upon scandal: It were better for him a mil-stone were hanged
about his neck, and he drowned in the Sea. If something worse, then such a
death, belong to him, surely it is eternal Death. And this, this eternal
death, is interminated by Christ, in cases, where there is not always sin, in
the action which we do, but if we do any action, so, as that it may
scandalize another, or occasion sin in him, we are bound to study, and favor
the weakness of other men, and not to do such things, as they may think sins.
We must prevent the mis-interpretation, yea the malice of other men; for though
the fire be theirs, the fuel, or at least, the ^ellows, is ours; The
uncharitableness, the malice is in them, but the awaking, and the stirring
thereof, is in our carelessness, who were not watchful upon our actions. But
when an action comes to be sin indeed, and not only occasionally sin, because
it scandalizes another, but really sin in it self, then even the Poet tells
you, Maxima debetur pueris reverentia, si quid T^rpe paras, Take heed of doing
any sin, in the sight of thy Child: for, if we break through that wall, we
shall come quickly to that faci^m Sacerdotis non erubuerunt, they will not be
afraid, nor ashamed in the presence of the Priest, they will look him in the
face, Lam. 4. 16.
nay receive at his hands, and yet sin their sin, that minute, in their
hearts; and to that also, faciem seniorum non erubuerunt, they will not be
afraid, nor ashamed of the Office of the Magistrate; but sin for nothing, or
sin at a price, bear out, or buy out all their sins. They sin as Sodom, and
bide it not, is the highest charge that the Holy Ghost could lay upon the
sinner. When they come to say, Our lips are ours, who is Lord ever us? Psalm.
12. ^ 4.
They will say so of their hands, and of all their bodies, They are ours, who
shall forbid us, to do what we will with them? And what lack these open
sinners of the last judgment, and the condemnation thereof? That judgment is,
that men shall stand naked in the sight of one another, and all their sins
shall be made manifest to all, and this open sinner, does so, and chooses to do
so, even in this world. When David prays so devoutly, Psalm. 19. 12. 2 Cor. 4. ^.
to be cleansed from his secret sins; and Saint Paul glories so devoutly, in
having renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, how great a burden is there,
in these open and avowed sins; sins that have put on so brazen a face, as to
outface the Minister, and outface the Magistrate, and call the very Power,
and Justice of God in question, whether he do hate or can punish a sin? for,
they do what they can to remove that opinion out of men's hearts. Truly, as an
Hypocrite at Church, may do more good, then a devout man in his Chamber at
home, be cause the Hypocrites outward piety, though counterfeit, imprints a
good example upon them, who do not know it to be counterfeit, and we cannot
know, that he that is absent from Church now, is now at his prayers in his
Chamber: so a lesser sin done with an open avowment, and confidence, may more
prejudice the Kingdom of God, then greater in secret. And this is that which
may be principally intended, or, atleast, usefully raised our of this phrase of
the Holy Ghost in David, A facie peccati, that the habitual sinner comes to
sin, not only with a negligence, who know it, but with a glorious desire, that
all the world might know it; and with a shame, that any such Judge as feared
not God nor regarded man, should be more feareless of God, or regardless of
man, Luke 18. 2.
then he.

But now, beloved, when we have laid man thus low, Miserable, because Man, and
then Diseased, and that all over, without any soundness, even in his whole
substance, in his flesh, and in the height of this disease, Restless too, and
Restless even in his bones, diffident in his strongest assurances; And when we
have laid him lower then that, made him see the Cause of all this misery to be
the Anger of God, the inevitable anger of an incensed God, and such an anger of
God as has a face, a manifestation, a reality, and not that God was angry with
him in a Decree, before he showed man his face in the Law, and saw Man's face in
the transgression of the law; And laid him lower then that too, made him see
the cause of this anger, as it is sin, so to be his sin, sin made his by
an habitual love thereof, which, though it may be but one, yet is become an
out-facing sin, a sin in Contempt and confidence, when we have laid Man,
laid you, thus low, in your own eyes, we return to the Canon and rule of that
Physician whom they call Evangelist a^^ medicinae, the Evangelist of Physique,
Mesues.
Sit intentio prima in omni medicina comf^rtare, whether the physician purge,
or lance, or sear, his principal care, and his end, is to comfort and
strengthen: so though we have insisted upon Humane misery, and the cause of
that, the anger of God, and the cause of that anger, sin in that excess, yet
we shall dismiss you with that Consolation, which was first in our intention,
and shall be our conclusion, that as this Text has a personal aspect upon
David alone, and therefore we gave you hit case, and then a general retrospect
upon Adam, and all in him, and therefore we gave you your own case, so it has
also an Evangelicall prospect upon Christ, and therefore, for your comfort, and
as a bundle of Myrrh in your bosoms, we shall give you his case too, to whom
these words belong, as well as to Adam, or David, or you; There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, neither is there any rest in my
bones, because of my sin.

If you will see the miseries of Man, in their exaltation, and in their
accumulation too, Christus.
in their weight, and in their number, take them in the Ecce home, when Christ
was presented from Pilate, scourged and scorned, Ecce home, behold man, in that
man, in the Prophets; They have reproched the feetsteps of thine Anointed, says
David, Psalm. 89. 51.
slandred his actions, and conversation; He has no form, nor comeliness, nor
beauty, that we should desire to see him, says Esaias; Despised, rejected of men;
A man of sorrows, 53. 2.
and acquainted with griefs. And Ecce homo, behold man, in that man, in the
whole history of the Gospel. That which is said of us, of sinful men, is true
in him, the salvation of men, from the sole of the foot, even unto the Head,
there is no soundness, Esaias 1. 6.
but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores. That question will never
receive answer, which Christ asks, Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow?
Never was, Lam. 1. 12.
never will there be any sorrow like unto his sorrow, because there can never
be such a person, to suffer sorrow. Affliction was upon him, and upon all him;
for, His soul was heavy unto death; Even upon his Bones; fire was sent into
his bones, and it prevailed against him. ver. 13.
And the highest cause of this affliction was upon him, the anger of God; The
Lord had afflicted him, ver. 12.
in the day of his fierce anger. The height of Gods anger, is Dereliction; and
he was brought to his Vt quid dereliquisti, My God, my God why have thou
forsaken me? We did esteem him stricken of the Lord, says Esaias; And we were not
deceived in it; 53. 4. Mat. 26. 31. Zech. 13. 7.
Percutiam pastorem, says Christ himself of himself, out of the Prophet, I
will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered; And
then, the cause of this anger, sin, was so upon him, as that, though in one
consideration, the rain was upon all the world, and only this fleece of
Gedeon dry, all the world surrounded with sin, and only He innocent, yet in
another line we find all the world dry, and only Gedeons fleece wet, Iud. 6.
all the world innoce^, and only Christ guilty. But, as there is a Vere tulit,
and a Vere portavit, Esaias 5. 3.
surely he bore those griefs, and surely he carried those sorrows, so they
were Vere nostri, surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows, he
was wounded for our transgressio^^ and bruised for our iniquitles; The
Chastisement of our peace was upon him; (...) before it must necessarily
follow, (as it does follow there) with his stripes we (...); for, God will not
exact a debt twice; of Christ for me, and of me too. (...) therefore, Quare
moriemini Domus Israel? since I have made ye of the household ^ of Israel, why
will ye die? since ye are recovered of your former sicknesses, Ez^k. 18.
why will die of a new disease, of a suspicion, or jealousy, that this
recovery, this redemption in Christ Jesus belongs not to you? Will ye say, It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands, Heb. 10.
Dei viventis, of the living God? It Is so; a fearful thing; But if De^s
mortuus, the God of life be but dead for me, be fallen into my hands, applied
to me, made mine, it is no fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God. Hippocrates.
Non sat is est medicum fecisse suum officium, nisi agrotus, and adstantes sua;
It is not enough for Christ Jesus to have prepared you the balm of his blood,
not enough for us, to minister it to you, except every one of you help himself,
in a faithful application, and help one another, in a holy and exemplar
conversation. Quam exact, Chrysostom.
and accurate usus dictionibus? How exact and curious was the holy Ghost, in
David, in choice of words? he does not say, Non sanitas mihi, sed non in car
ne; not that there is no health for me, but none in me; non in carne mea, not
in my flesh, but in carne ejus, in the flesh and blood of my Savior, there is
health, and salvation. In ossibus ejus, in his bones, in the strength of his
merits, there is rest, and peace, a facie peccati, what face soever my sin have
had, in my former presumptions, or what face soever they put on now, in my
declination to desperation. The Lord wait^th that he may have mercy upon you;
Esa. 30. 18.
He stays your leisure; and therefore will he be exalted, (says that Prophet
there) that he may have mercy upon you; He has chosen that for his way of
honor, of exaltation, that he may have mercy upon you. And then, Quare
moriemini? If God be so respective toward you, as to wait for you, if God be
so a^bitions of you, as to affect a kingdom in you, why will ye die? since he
will not let ye die of Covetousness, of adultery, of ambition, of
profaneness in your selves, why will ye die of jealousy, of suspicion in
him? It was a merciful voice of David; 2 Samuel 9. 1.
Is there yet any man left of the house of Saul, that I may show mercy for
Jonathans sake? It is the voice of God to you all, Is there yet any man of the
house of Adam, that I may show mercy for Christ Jesus sake? that takes Christ
Jesus in his arms, and interposes him, between his sins, and mine indignation,
and non morietur, that man shall not die. We have done; Paracels.
Est ars ^anandorum morborum medicina, non rhetorica; Our physic is not
eloquence, not directed upon your affections, but upon your conscien^os; To
thus we present this for physic, The whole need not a Physician, but the sick
do. If you mistake your selves to be well, or think you have physic enough at
home, knowledge enough, divinity enough, to save you without us, you need no
Physician; that is, a Physician can do you no good; but then is this Gods
physic, and Gods Physician welcome unto you, if you be come to a remorsefull
sense, and to an humble, and penitent acknowledgement, that you are sick, and
that there is no so^ndnesse in your flesh, because of his anger, nor any rest
in your bones, because of your sins, till you turn upon him, in whom this anger
is appeased, and in whom these sins are forgiven, the Son of his love, the Son
of his right hand, at his right hand Christ Jesus. And to this glorious Son
of God, etc.

SERMON XXI.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
PSALM 38. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as a heavy burden,
they are too heavy for me.
DAvid having in the former verses of this Psalm assigned a reason, why he was
bound to pray, because he was in misery, (O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger,
for thine arrows stick fast in me) And a reason why he should be in misery,
because God was angry, (Thy hand presses (...) v. 2. And, there is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger, (...) And a reason, why God
should be angry, because he had finn'd, (There is no (...) my bones, because of
my sin, in the same verse) He proceeds to a reason, why this prayer of his must
be vehement, why these miseries of his are so violent, and why Gods anger is
permanent, and he finds all this to be, because in his sins, all these
venomous qualities, vehemence, violence, and continuance, were complicated, and
enwrapp'd; for, he had sinned vehemently, in the rage of lust, and violently,
in the effusion of blood, and permanently in a long, and senseless security.
They are all contracted in this Text, into two kinds, which will be our two
parts, in handling these words; first, the supergressa super, Mine iniquities
are gone over my head, there is the multiplicity, the number, the succession,
and so the continuation of his sin: and then, the Gravatae super, My sins are
as a heavy burden, too heavy for me, there is the greatness, the weight, the
insupportablenesse of his sin. S. Augustine calls these two distinctions, or
considerations of sin, Ignorantiam, and Difficultatem; first, that David was
ignorant, that he saw not the Tide, as it swelled up upon him, Abyssus Abyssum,
Depth called upon Depth; and, all thy wat^rs, and all thy billows are gone ever
me, (says he in another place) he perceived them not coming till they were
over him, he discerned not his particular sins, Ps. 42. 7.
then when he committed them, till they came to the supergressae super, to that
height, that he was overflowed, surrounded, his iniquities were gone over his
head, and in that S. Aug. notes Ignoranti^m, his in-observance, his
inconsideration of his own case; and then he notes Difficultatem, the hardness
of recovering, because he that is under water, has no air to see by, no air
to hear by, he has nothing to reach to, he touches not ground, to push him up,
he feels no bough to pull him up, and therein that Father notes Difficultatem,
the hardness of recovering. Now Moses expresses these two miseries together,
in the destruction of the Egyptians, in his song, after Isreal's deliverance,
and the Egyptians submersion, The Depths have covered them, (there is the
supergressa super, their iniquities, in that punishment of their iniquities,
Exodus 15. 5.
were gone over their heads) And then, They sank into the bottom as a stone
(says Moses) there is the gravata super, they depressed them, suppressed them,
oppressed them, they were under them, and there they must lie.

The Egyptians had, David had, we have too many sins, to swim above water, and
too great sins to get above water again, when we are sunk; The number of sins
then, and the greatness of sin, will be our two parts; the dangers are equal,
to multiply many lesser sins, or to commit a few, more heinous: except the
danger be greater, (as indeed it may justly seem to be) in the multiplication,
and custom, and habit of lesser sins; but how great is the danger then, how
desperate is our state, when our sins are great in themselves, and multiplied
too?

In his many sins, we shall touch thus many circumstances: First, Divisio.
they were pecca^a, sins, iniquities; and then peccata sua, his sins, his
iniquities, which intimates actual sins; for though God inflict miseries for
original sin, (death, and that, that induces it, sickn^sse, and the like) yet
those are miseries common to all, because the sin is so too; But these, are his
punishments, personal calamities, and the sins are his own sins; And then,
(which is a third circumstance) they are sins in the plural, God is not thus
angry for one sin; And again, they are such sins, as have been long in going,
and are now got over, supergressae sunt, they are gone, gone over; And then
lastly, for that first part, supergressae Caput, they are gone my head. In
which exaltation, is intimated all this; first, sicut tectum, sicut fornix,
they are over his head, as a roof, as a cieling, as an Arch, they have made a
wall of separation, betwixt God and us, so they are above our head; And then
sicut clamor, they are ascended as a noise, they are got up to heaven, and cry
to God for vengeance, so they are above our head; And again sicut aquae, they
are risen and swollen as waters, they compass us, they smother us, they blind
us, they stupefie us, so they are above our head; But lastly and principally,
sicut Dominus, they are got above us, as a Tyran, and an usurper, for so they
are above our head too: And in these we shall determine our first part. When
from thence we come to our second part, in which, (as in this we shall have
done their number) we shall consider their greatness, we find them first
heavy sin is no light matter; And then, they are too heavy, a little weight
would but ballast us, this sinkes us; Too heavy for me, even for a man equal
to David; and where is he? when is that man? for, says our text, they are as
heavy, Burden; And the nature, and incovenience of a Burden is, first to
Crooken, and bend us downward from our natural posture, which is erect, for
this incurvation implies a declination in the inordinate love of the Creature,
Incurvat. And then the nature of a burden is, to Tire us; our very sin
becomes fulsome, and wearisome to us, fatigat; and it has this inconvenience
too, ut retardet, it slackens our pace, in our right course though we be not
tried, yet we cannot go so fast, as we should in any way toward godliness;
and lastly, this is the inconvenience of a burden too, ut praecipitet, it makes
us still apt and ready to stumble, and to fall under it: It crookens us, it
deprives us of our rectitude; it tires us, extinguishes our alacrity; It
slackens us, enfeebles and intepidates our zeal; It occasions our stumbling,
opens and submits us, to every emergent tentation. And these be the dangers,
and the mischievous inconveniences, notified to us, in those two Elegancies of
the holy Ghost, the supergressae, the multiplicity of sins, They are gone
over my head, and the gravatae, They are a heavy burden, too heavy for me.

First then, all these things are literally spoken of David; By application, of
us; David.
and by figure, of Christ. Historically, David; morally, we; Typically, Christ
is the subject of this text. In David's person, we shall insist no longer upon
them, but only to look upon the two general parts, the multiplicity of his
sin, and the weight and greatness thereof: And that only in the matter of
Vriah, as the Holy Ghost, 1 Reg. 15. 5.
(without reproching the adultery or the murder, after David's repentance)
vouchsafes to mollify his manifold, and his heinous sin. First, he did wrong
to a loyal and a faithful servant; and who can hope to be well served, that
does so? He corrupted that woman, who for ought appearing to the contrary, had
otherwise preserved her honor, Psalm. 50. 18.
and her Conscience entire; It is a sin, To run with a theife when thou
see him, or to have thy p^rtion with them that are adulterers already; to
accompany them in their sin, who have an inclination to that sin before, is
a sin; but to solicit them, who have no such inclination, nor, but for thy
solicitation, would have had, is much more inexcusable. In David's sin, there
was thus much more, he defrauded some, to whom his love was due, in dividing
himself with a strange woman. To steal from another man, though it be to give
to the poor, and to such poor, as would otherwise sterve, if that had not been
stolen, is injustice, is a sin. To divide that heart, which is entirely
given to a wife, in marriage, with another woman, is a sin, though she, to
whom it is so given, pretend, or might truly suffer much torment and anguish if
it were not done. David's sin flew up to a higher sphere; He drew the enemy
to blaspheme the name of God, in the victory over Israel, where Vriah was
slain: God hates nothing more in great persons, then that prevarication, to
pretend to assist his cause, and promove his Religion, and yet underhand give
the enemies of that Religion, way to grow greater. His sins, indeed, were too
many to be numbered; too great too, to be weighed in comparison with others.
Vriah was innocent toward him, and faithful in his employment, and, at that
time, in an actual, and in a dangerous service, for his person, for the State,
for the Church. Him David betrays in his letter to Ioab; Him David makes the
instrument of his own death, by carrying those letters, the warrants of his own
execution; And he makes Ioab, a man of honor, his instrument for a murder to
cover an adultery. Thus many sins, and these heavy degrees of sin, were in
this one; and how many, and how weighty, were in that, of numbering of his
people, 1 Ch^on. 21. 1.
we know not. We know, that Satan provoked him to do it; and we know, that
Ioab, who seconded and accomplished his desire in the murder of Vriah, did yet
dissuade, and dis-counsell this numbering of the people, and not out of reason
of State, but as an express sin. Put all together, and less then all, we are
sure David belied not himself, ver. 3.
His iniquities were gone over his head, and as a heavy burden, they were too
heavy for him; Though this will be a good rule, for the most part, in all
David's confessions and lamentations, that though that be always literally true
of himself, for the sin, or for the punishment, which he says, personally
David did suffer, that which he complains of in the Psalms, in a great measure,
yet David speaks prophetically, as well as personally, and to us, who exceed
him in his sins, the exaltation of those miseries, which we find so often in
this book, are especially intended; That which David relates to have been his
own case, he foresees will be ours too, in a higher degree. And that is our
second, and our principal object of all those circumstances, in the
multiplicity, and in the heinousness of sin; And therefore, to that second
part, these considerations in our selves, we make thus much have.

First then, they were peccata, sins, iniquities. And we must not think to ease
our selves in that subtilty of the School, Peccatum nihil; That sin is nothing,
because sin (...)

We are not all David's, amabiles, lovely and beloved in that measure that David
was, Sua.
men according to Gods heart: But we are all Adams, terrestres, and lutosi,
earth, and durty earth, red, and bloody earth, and therefore in our selves, as
derived from him, let us find, and lament all these numbers, and all these
weights of sin. Here we are all born to a patrimony, to an inheritance; an
inheritance, a patrimony of sin; and we are all good husbands, and thrive too
fast upon that stock, upon the increase of sin, even to the treasuring up of
sin, and the wrath of God for sin. How naked soever we came out of our mothers
womb, otherwise, thus we came all apparelled, apparelled and invested in sin;
And we multiply this wardrobe, with new habits, habits of customary sins, every
day. Every man has an answer to that question of the Apostle, What have thou,
that thou have not received from God? Every man must say, I have pride in my
heart, wantonness in mine eyes, oppression in my hands; and that I never
received from God. Our sins are our own; and we have a covetousness of more; a
way, to make other men's sins ours too, by drawing them to a fellowship in our
sins. I must be beholden to the loyalty and honesty of my wife, whether my
children be mine own, or no; for, he whose eye waits for the evening, the
adulterer, may rob me of that propriety. I must be beholden to the protection
of the Law, whether my goods shall be mine, or no; A potent adversary, a
corrupt Judge may rob me of that propriety. I must be beholden to my Physician,
whether my health, and strength shall be mine, or no; A garment negligently left
off, a disorderly meal may rob me of that propri^ty. But without asking any man
leave, my sins will be mine own. When the presumptuous men say, Our lips are
our own, and our tongues are our own, Ps. 12.
the Lord threatens to cut off those lips, and those tongues. But except we do
come to say, Our sins are our own, God will never cut up that root in us, God
will never blot out the memory in himself, of those sins. Nothing can make them
none of ours, but the avowing of them, the confessing of them to be ours. Only
in this way, I am a holy lier, and in this the God of truth will reward my lie;
for, if I say my sins are mine own, they are none of mine, but, by that
confessing and appropriating of those sins to my self, they are made the sins
of him, who has suffered enough for all, my blessed Lord, and Savior Christ
Ies^s. Therefore that servant of God, S. August. confesses those sins, which he
never did, to be his sins, and to have been forgiven him: Peccata mihi dimissa
a fate^r and quae med sponte feci, and quae te duce non feci; Those sins which
I have done, and those, which, but for thy grace, I should have done, are all,
my sins. Alas, I may die here, and die under an everlasting condemnation of
fornication with that woman, that lives, and dies a Virgin, and be damned for a
murderer of that man, that out-lives me, and for a robbery, and oppression,
where no man is damnified, nor any penny lost. The sin that I have done, the
sin that I would have done, is my sin. We must not therefore transfer our sins
upon any other. We must not think to discharge our selves upon a Peccata
Patris; To come to say, Non patris.
My father thrived well in this course, why should not I proceed in it? My
father was of this Religion, why should not I continue in it? How often is it
said in the Scriptures, of evil Kings, he did evil in the sight of the Lord,
and walked in via Patris, in the way of his father? father in the singular; It
is never said plurally, In via Patrum; in the way of his fathers. Gods
blessings in this world, are expressed so, in the plural, thou gave this
land patribus, to their fathers, says Solomon, in the dedication of the Temple;
1 Reg. 8. 48. y. 53. y. 57. 37. 25.
And, thou brought Patres, our Fathers out of Egypt; And again, Be with us,
Lord, as thou wast with our Fathers; So; in Ezekiel, where your Fathers dwelt,
you, their children, shall dwell too, and your children, and their childrens
children for ever. His blessings upon his Saints, his holy ones in this world,
are expressed so, plurally, and so is the transmigration of his Saints out of
this world also; Thou shall sleep cum patribus, Deuteronomy. 31. 13.
with thy fathers, says God to Moses; And David slept cum patribus, with his
fathers; And Jacob had that care of himself, as of that in which consisted, 1
Reg. 2. 10.
or in which, was testified the blessing of God, I will lie cum patribus, with
my fathers, and be buried in their burying place, says Jacob to his son Joseph
Good ways, Genesis 47. 30.
and good ends are in the plural, and have many examples; else they are not
good, but sins are in the singular, He walked in the way of his father, is in
an ill way: But carry our manners, or carry our Religion high enough, and we
shall find a good rule in our fathers: Stand in the way, says God in Jeremy,
and ask for the old way, which is the good way. 6. 16.
We must put off veterem hominem, but not antiq^^m; We may put off that
Religion, which we think old, because it is a little elder then our selves, and
not rely upon that, it was the Religion of my Father. But Antiquissimum die^um,
Him, whose name is, He that is, and was, and is for ever, and so involves, and
enwraps in himself all the Fathers, him we must put on. Be that our issue with
our adversaries at Rome, By the Fathers, the Fathers in the plural, when those
fathers unanimely deliver any thing dogmatically, for matter of faith, we are
content to be tried by the Fathers, the Fathers in that plural. But by that
(...) Father, who begers his children, not upon the true mother, the Church,
but upon the Court, and so produces articles of faith, according as State
businesses, and civil occasions invite him, by that father we must refuse to
be tried: for, to limit it in particular, to my father, we must say with
Nehemiah, Ege and domus patris mei, Nchem.1.
If I make my fathers house my Church, my father my Bishop, I, and my fathers
house have sinned, says he; and with Mordecai to Esther, Thou, and thy fathers
house shall be destroyed. 4. 51.


They are not (...) a patris, I cannot excuse my sins, upon the example of my
father: nor are they (...) Temp^ris, Non temp^ris.
I cannot discharge my sins upon the Times, and upon the present ill
disposition that reigns in men now, and do ill, because every body else does
so. To say, there is a rot, and therefore the sheep must perish, Corruptions in
Religion are crept in, and work in every cornet, and therefore Gods sheep,
simple souls, must be content to admit the infection of this rot. That there is
a murrain, and therefore cattle must die, superstition practiced in many
places and therefore the strong servants of God, must come to sacrifice their
obedience to it, or their blood for it. Then no such rot, no such murrain, no
such corruption of times, as can lay a necessity, or can afford in excuse so
them who are corrupted with the times. As it is not pax temporis, such a
State-peace, us takes away honor, that secures a Nation, nor such a
Church-peace, as takes away ze^l, that secures a conscience, so neither is it
peccatum temporis, an observation what other men incline to, but what truth,
what integrity thou declin'st from, that appertains to thy consideration.

It is not peccatum ^^atis; not the sin of thy father, not the sin of the
times, Non aetatis.
not the sin of thine own years. That thou should say in thy old age, in
excuse of thy Covet^^snesse, All these things have I observed from my youth, I
have lived temperately, continently all my life, and therefore may be allowed
one sin for mine case in mine age. Or, that thou should say in thy youth, I
will re^re my self in mine age, and live contentedly with a little then, but
now, how vain were it to go about to keep out a tide, or to quench the heats,
and imperuous violence of youth? But ^uge ^venilis defideria (...) also
youthful lusts; 2 Timothy 2. 22.
And left God hear not thee at last, when thou comost with that petition,
Remember not the sins of my youth, Remember thou thy Creator, Ps. 25. 7.
Eccles. 12. 1.
now in the days of thy youth: for, if thou think it enough to say, I have but
lived as other men have lived, wantonly, thou will find some examples to die
by too, and die, as other old men, old in years, and old in sins, have died
too, negligently, or fearfully; without any sense at all, or all their sense
turned into fearful apprehensions, and desperation.

They are not peccata et atis, such sins, as men of that age must needs commit,
Non artis.
nor pec^^ ar^tis, such sins as men of thy calling, or thy profession, cannot
avoid; that thou should say, I shall not be believed to understand my
profession, as well as other men, if I live not by it, as well as other men
do. Is there no being a Carp^nter, Esa. 44. 13.
but that after he has warmed him by the chips, and baked, and roasted by it,
he must needs make an idol of his wood, and worship it? Is there no being a
Silver-smith, Acts 19. 24.
but he must needs make shrines for Dia^a of the Ephesians, as Demetrius did?
No being a Lawyer, without serving the passion of the Client? no being a
Divine, without sowing pillows under great men's elbows? It is not the sin of
thy Calling that oppresses thee; As a man may commit a massacre, in a single
murder and kill many in one man, if he kill one, upon whom many depended, so is
that man a general libeller, that defames a lawful Calling, by his abusing
thereof; that lives so scandalously in the Ministry, as to defame the
Ministry it self, or so imperiously in the Magistracy, as to defame the
Magistracy it self, as though it were but an engine, and instrument of
oppression, or so unjustly in any Calling, as his abuse dishno^rs the Calling
it self. God has institured Calling, for the conservation of order in
general, not for the justification of disorders in any particular. For he that
justifies his faults by his calling, has not yet received that calling from
above, whereby he must be justified, and sanctified in the way, and glorified
in the end. There is no lawful calling, in which, a man may not be an honest
man.

It is not peccatum Magistratus, thou can not excuse thy self upon the
unjust command of thy superior; Non Magistratus.
that is the blind and implicit obedience practiced in the Church of Rome; Nor
peccatum Pastoris, the ill example of thy Pastor, whose life counter-preaches
his doctrine, for, that shall aggravate his, but not excuse thy sin; Nor
Peccata Coeli, the influence of Stars, concluding a fatality, amongst the
Gentiles, or such a working of a necessary, and inevitable, and unconditioned
Decree of God, as may shut up the ways of a Religious walking in this life, or
a happy resting in the life to come; It is none of these, not the sin of thy
Father, not the sin of the present times, not the sin of thy years, and age,
nor of thy calling, nor of the Magistrate, nor of thy Pastor, nor of Destiny,
nor of decrees, but it is peccatum tuum, thy sin, thy own sin. And not only
thy sin so, as Adams sin is communicated to thee, by propagation of Original
sin; for, so thou might have some color to discharge thy self upon him, as
he did upon Eve, and Eve upon the Serpent; Though in truth it make no
difference, in this spiritual debt, of that sin, who is first in the bond:
Adam may stand first, but yet thou art no surety but a Principal, and for thy
self; and he, and thou are equally subject to the penalty. For though Saint
Augustine confess, that there are many things concerning Original sin, of
which he is utterly ignorant, yet of this he would have no man ignorant, that
to the guiltiness of original sin, our own wills concur as well as to any
actual sin: An involuntary act, cannot be a sinful act; and though our will
work not now, in the admitting of original sin, which enters with our soul in
our conception, or in our inanimation and quickening, yet, at first, August.
Sicut ominium natura, ita omnium voluntates erant in Adam, as every man was in
Adam, so every faculty of every man, and consequently the will of every man
concurred to that sin, which therefore lies upon every man now: So that that
debt, Original sin, is as much thine as his; And for the other debts, which
grow out of this debt, (as nothing is so generative, so multiplying, as debts
are, especially spiritual debts, sins) for actual sins, they are thine, out
of thine own choice; Thou might have left them undone, and would needs
do them; for God never induces any man into a perplexity, that is, into a
necessity of doing any particular sin. Thou could have dissuaded a Son, or a
friend, or a servant, from that sin, which thou have embraced thy self: Thou
have been so far from having been forced to those sins, which thou have done,
as that thou have been sorry, thou could not do them, in a greater measure.
They are thine, thine own, so, as that thou can not discharge thy self upon
the Devil; Chrysostom.
but art, by the habit of sin, become Spontaneus Damon, a Devil to thy self,
and would minister tentations to thy self, though there were no other
Devil. And this is our propriety in sin; They are our own.

This is the propriety of thy sin; The next is the Plurality, the multiplicity,
iniquitates; Not only the committing of one sin often; and yet, Plural.
he deceives himself in his account dangerously, that reckons but upon one
sin, because he is guilty but of one kind of sin. Would a man say he had but
one wound, if he were shot seven times in the same place? Could the Jews deny,
that they flead Christ, with their second or third or twentieth blow, because
they had torn skin, and flesh, with their former scourges, and had left
nothing but bones to wound? But it is not only that, the repeating of the same
sin often, but it is the multiplicity of diverse kinds of sins, that is here
lamented in all our behalfes. It is not when the conscience is tender, and
afraid of every sin, 2 Reg. 5.
and every appearance of sin. When Naaman desired pardon of God by the Prophet,
for sustaining the King upon his knees, in the house of Rimmon, the Idol, and
the Prophet bad him go in peace, it is not that he allows him any peace under
the conscience, and guiltiness of a sin; That was indispensable. Neither is
their any dispensation in Naamans case, but only a rectifying of a tender and
timoruos conscience, that thought that to be a sin, which was not, if it went
no further, but to the exhibiting of a Civil duty to his Master, in what place
soever, Religious, or profane, that service of kneeling were to be done.
Naamans service was truly no sin; but it had been a sin in him to have done
it, when he thought it to be a sin. And therefore the Prophets phrase, Go in
peace, may well be interpreted so, set thy mind at rest^ for all that, that
thou requirest, may be done without sin. Now that tenderness of conscience is
not in our case in the Text. He that proceeds so, to examine all his actions,
may meet scruples all the way, that may give him some anxiety and vexation, but
he shall never come to that overflowing of sin, intended in this plurality, and
multiplicity here. For, this plurality, this multiplicity of sin, has found
first a spunginesse in the soul, an aptness to receive any liquor, to embrace
any sin, that is offered to it, and after a while, a hunger and thirst in the
soul, to hunt, and pant and draw after a tentation, and not to be able to
endure any vacuum, any discontinuance, or intermission of sin: and he will
come to think it a melancholique thing, still to stand in fear of Hell; a
sordid, a yeomanly thing, still to be plowing, and weeding, and worming a
conscience; mechanical thing, still to be removing logs, or filing iron, still
to be busied in removing occasions of tentation, or filing and clearing
particular actions: and, at last he will come to that case, which S. Augustine
out of an abundant ingenuity, and tenderness, and compunction, confesses of
himself, Ne vituperarer; vitiosior fiebam, I was fain to sin, left I should
lose my credit, and be under-valued; Et ubi non suberat, quo admisso, aquarer
perditis, when I had no means to do some sins, whereby I might be equal to my
fellow, Fingebam me fecisse quod non feceram, ne viderer abjectior, quo
innocentior, I would belly my self, and say I had done that, which I never did,
lest I should be under-valued for not having done it. Audiebam eos exaltantes
flagitia, says that tender blessed Father, I saw it was thought wit, to make
Sonnets of their own sins, Et libebat facere, non libidine facti, sed
libidine laudis, I sinned, not for the pleasure I had in the sin, but for the
pride that I had to write feelingly of it. O what a Leviathan is sin, how vast,
how immense a body! And then, what a spawner, how numerous! Between these two,
the denying of sins, which we have done, and the bragging of sins, which we
have not done, what a space, what a compass is there, for millions of millions
of sins! And so have you the nature of sin, which was our first; The propriety
of sin, which was our second; and the plurality, the multiplicity of sin, which
was our third branch; And follows next, the exaltation thereof; supergressae
sunt, My sins are gone over my head.

They are, that is, they are already got above us; Supergressae sunt.
for in that case we consider this plural, this manifold sinner, that he has
slipped his time of preventing, or resisting his sins; His habits of sins are
got, already got above him. 1 Reg. 18. 41.
Elisha bids his man look toward the Sea, and he saw nothing; He bids him look
again, and again to a seventh time, and he saw nothing. After all, he sees but
a little cloud, like a man's hand; and yet, upon that little appearance, the
Prophet warns the King, to get him into his Chariot, and make good have away,
lest the rain stopped his passage, for, instantly the heaven was black, with
clouds, and rain. The sinner will see nothing, till he can see nothing; and,
when he sees any thing, (as to the blindest conscience something will appear)
he thinks it but a little cloud, but a melancholique fit, and, in an instant,
(for 7 years make but an instant to that man, that thinks of himself, but once
in 7 years) Supergresae sunt, his sins are got above him, and his way out is
stopped. The Sun is got over us now, though we saw none of his motions, and so
are our sins, though we saw not their steps. You know how confident our
adversaries are in that argument, Why do ye oppugn our doctrine of prayer for
the dead, or of Invocation of Saints, or of the fire of Purgatory, since you
cannot assign us a time, when these doctrines came into the Church, or that
they were opposed or contradicted, when they entered? When a conscience comes to
that inquisition, to an iniquitates supergressae, to consider that our sins are
gone over our head, in any of those ways, which we have spoken of if we offer to
awaken that conscience farther, it startles, and it answers us drowsily, or
frowardly, like a new waked man, Can you remember when you sinned this sin
first, or did you resist it then, or since? whence comes this troublesome
singularity now? pray let me sleep still, says this startled conscience.
Beloved, if we fear not the wetting of our foot in sin, it will be too late,
when we are over head and ears. Gods deliverance of his children, was sicco
pede, he made the sea dry land, and they wet not their foot. At first, in the
creation, Exodus 14.
subjecit omnia sub pedibus, God put all things under their feet; In man's
ways, in this world, his Angels bear us up in their hands; why? Ne impingamus
pedem, Ps. 8. 7.
that we should not hurt our foot against a stone, but have a care of every
step we make. If thou have defiled thy feet, (strayed into any unclean ways)
wash them again, and stop there, and that will bring thee to the consideration
of the Spouse, I have washed my feet, Cant. 5. 3.
how shall I then defile the^ again? I have found mercy for my former sins, how
shall I dare to provoke God with more? still God appoints us a permane^t means to
tread sin under our feet here, in this life; The woman, that is, the Church,
has the Moon, that is, all transitory things, Apoc. 12.
(and so, all tentatio^s) under her feet; As Christ himself expressed his care
of Peter, to consist in that, That if his feet were washed, all was clean; And
as in his own person he admitted nails in his feet, as well as in his hands, so
crucify thy hands, abstain from unjust actions but crucify thy feet too, make
not one step toward the way of Idolaters, or other sinners. If we watch not
the ingressus sum, we shall be insensible of the supergressae sunt; If we look
not to a sin, when it comes toward us, we shall not be able to look toward it,
when it is got over us: for, if a man come to walk in the counsel of the
ungodly, he will come to fit in the seat of the scornful; for, that is the
sinners progress, in the first warning that David gives in the beginning of his
1t Psalm. If he give himself leave to enter into sinful ways, he will sit and sin
at ease, and make a jest of sin; and he that loves danger, shall perish
therein. So have you then the nature of sin; it was sin; it was sin that
oppressed him; and the propriety of sin, it was his sin, actual sin; and the
plurality of sin, habitual, customary sin and the victory of sin, they had
been long climing, and were now got up to a height; and this height and
exaltation of theirs, is expressed thus, super caput, Mine iniquities are got
above my head.

S. Augustine, (who truly had either never true copy of the Bible, Super caput.
or else cited sometimes, as the words were in his memory, and not as they were
in the Text) he reads not these words so, supergressae super caput, but thus,
sustulerunt caput; And so he interprets the words, not that his sins had got
over his head, and depressed his head, subdued and subjugated his head, but
that they had extolled his head, made him life his head high, and say, Who is
the Lord? Sursum tellitur, says he upon this place cui erigitur caput contra
Deum, his head is exalted, who is set against God. And certainly, that is a
desperate state in sin, when a man thinks himself the wiser, or the better, or
the more powerful for his sin; That he can the better stand upon his own legs,
or the less needs the assistance of God, because he has prosper'd in the
world, by the ways of sin. S. August is an useful mistaking, but it is a
mistaking. But to pursue the right word, and the true meaning of this
metaphorical expressing, supergressae caput, My sins are got above my head,
sin may be got to our foot, and yet not to the eye. A man may stray into
company of tentations, and yet not be tempted; A man may make a covenant with
his eye, that he will not see a maid. Job.
Sin may come to the eye, and yet the hand be above water; we may look, and
lust, and yet, by Gods watchful goodness, and studious mercy, escape action.
But if it be above our head, then the brain is drowned that is, our reason, and
understanding, which should dispute against it, and make us ashamed of it, or
afraid of it; And our memory is drowned, we have forgot that there belongs a
repentance to our sins, perchance forgot that there is such a sin in us; forgot
that those actions are sins, forgot that we have done those actions; and forgot
that there is a law, even in our own hearts, by which we might try, whether our
actions were sins, or no. If they be above our heads, they are so, in many
dangerous acceptations. Of which, the first is, that they cover our heads sicut
tectum, sicut fornix, as a roof, as an arch, as a separation between God and us.

Your iniquities have separated between you and your God, says the Prophet.
Tectum. Esa. 59. 2.
A wall of separation between man and man, even in the service of God, there
was always; a wall of Gods making; that is, the Ceremonial Law, by which God
enclosed the Jews from the Gentiles. But this was but a side wall, and Christ
threw it down; He is our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14.
says the Apostle, and has made of both one, and has broken the stop of the
partition wall; This he did when he opened the Gentiles a way into his
religion. This wall was the distinction between the Jew, and Gentile, when the
Jew called the ignominiously Incircumcisos, uncircumcised, and they called the
Jews, with as much scorn, Recutitos, and Apellas; when the Jew wondered at the
Gentises eating of unclean things, and the Gentiles wondered to hear them call
things, of as good nourishment, as their clean meats, unclean; when the Jew
placed his holiness in singularity, and ceremonies of distinction, and the
Gentiles called that but a pride in them, and a scornful detestation of their
neighbors. And truly it is a lamentable thing, when ceremonial things in
matter of discipline, or problematicall things in matter of doctrine, come so
far, as to separate us from one another, in giving ill names to one another.
Zeal is directed upon God, and charity upon our brethren, but God will not be
seen, but by that spectacle; not accept any thing for an act of zeal to
himself, that violates charity toward our brethren, by the way. Neither should
we call any man Lutheran, or Calvinist, or by any other name, ignominiously,
but for such things, as had been condemned in Luther, or Calvin, and condemned
by such, as are competent Judges between them, and us; that is, by the
universal, or by our own Church. This wall then, between the Jew and Gentile,
(as it was the ceremony it self, and not the abuse of it) God built, and Christ
threw down. There are outward things, Ceremonial things, in the worship of
God, that are temporary, and they did serve God that brought them in, and they
do serve God also, that have driven them out of the Church, because their
undeniable abuse had clogged them with an impossibility of being restored to
that good use, which they were at first ordained for; of which, the brazen
serpent is evidence enough. God set up a wall, which God himself meant should
be demolished again. Such another wall, (as well as the Devil can imitate Gods
workmanship) the Devil has built now in the Christian Church; and has
morter'd it in the brains and blood of men, in the sharp and virulent
contentions arisen, and fomented in matters of Religion. But yet, says the
Spouse, Cant. 2. 9.
My well bel^ved stands behind the wall, showing himself through the grates: he
may be seen on both sides. For all this separation, Christ Jesus is amongst us
all, and in his time, will break down this wall too, these differences amongst
Christians, and make us all glad of that name, the name of Christians, without
affecting in our selves, or inflicting upon others, other names of envy, and
subdivision. But besides this wall of Gods making, the Ceremonial law, and
this wall of the Devils making, dissension in Christian Churches, there is a
wall of our own making, a roof, an arch above our heads, by which our
continual sins have separated God and us. God had covered himself with a
cloud, so that prayer could not pass thorough; That was the misery of
Jerusalem. But in the acts and habits of sin, Lam. 3. 44.
we cover our selves, with a roof, with an arch, which nothing can shake, nor
remove, but Thunder, and Earthquakes, that is, the execution of Gods fiercest
judgments; And whether in that fall of the roof, that is, in the weight of Gods
judgments upon us, the stones shall not brain us, overwhelm and smother, and
bury us, God only knows. How his Thunders, and his Earthquakes, when we put him
to that, will work upon us, he only knows, whether to our amendment, or to our
destruction. But whilst we are in the consideration of this arch, this roof of
separation, between God and us, by sin, there may be use in imparting to you,
an observation, a passage of mine own. Lying at Ai^ at Aquisgrane, a well known
Town in Germany, and fixing there some time, for the benefit of those Baths, I
found my self in a house, which was divided into many families, and indeed so
large as it might have been a little Parish, or, at least, a great lim of a
great one; But it was of no Parish: for when I asked who lay over my head, they
told me a family of Anabaptists; And who over theirs? Another family of
Anabaptists; and another family of Anabaptists over theirs; and the whole
house, was a nest of these boxes; several artificers; all Anabaptists; I asked
in what room they met, for the exercise of their Religion; I was told they
never met: for, though they were all Anabaptists, yet for some collateral
differences, they detested one another, and, though many of them, were near in
blood and alliance to one another yet the son would excommunicate the father,
in the room above him, and the Nephew the Uncle. As S. John is said to have
quitted that Bath, into which Cerinthus the Heretic came, so did I this
house; I remembered that Hezekiah in his sickness, turned himself in his bed,
to pray toward that wall; that looked to Jerusalem; And that Daniel in
Babylon, when he prayed in his chamber, opened those windows that looked
toward Jerusalem; for, in the first dedication of the Temple, at Jerusalem,
there is a promise annexed to the prayers made toward the Temple: And I began
to think, how many roofs, how many floores of separation, were made between God
and my prayers in that house. And such is this multiplicity of sins, which we
consider to be got over us, as a roof, as an arch, many arches, many roofs:
for, though these habitual sins, be so of kin, as that they grow from one
another, and yet for all this kindred excommunicate one another, (for
covetousness will not be in the same room with prodigality) yet it is but
going up another stair, and there is the the other Anabaptist; it is but living a
few years, and then the prodigal becomes covetous. All the way, they separate
us from God, as a roof, as an arch, and then, an arch will bear any weight; An
habitual sin got over our head as an arch will stand under any sickness, any
dishonor, any judgment of God, and never sink toward any humiliation.

They are above our heads, sicus tectum, as a roof, as an arch, Clamor.
and they are so toe sicut clamor, as a voice ascending, and not stopping, till
they come to God. O my God, I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes to
there, O my God; why not thine eyes? Ezra 9. 6.
there is a cloud, a clamor in the way; for as it follows, Our iniquities are
increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up to the heaven. I think
to retain a learned man of my counsel, and one that is suit to be heard in the
Court, and when I come to instruct him, I find mine adversaries name in his
book before, and he is all ready for the other party. I think to find an
Advocate in heaven, when I will, and my sin is in heaven before me. The voice
of Abels blood, and so, of Cains sin, was there: The voice of Sodomes
transgression was there. Bring down that sin again from heaven to earth: Bring
that voice that cries in heaven, to speak to Christ here in his Church, upon
earth, by way of confession; bring that clamorous sin to his blood, to be
washed in the Sacrament; for, as long as thy sin cries in heaven, thy prayers
cannot be heard there. Bring thy sin under Christ's feet there, when he walks
amongst the Candlesticks, in the light, and power of his Ordinances in the
Church, and then, thine absolution will be upon thy head, in those seals which
he has instituted, and ordained there, and thy cry will be silenced. Till
then, supergr^sse, caput, thine iniquities will be over thy head, as a roof, as
a cry, and, in the next place, sicut aqua, as the overflowing of waters.

We consider this plurality, this multiplicity of habitual sins, to be got
over our heads, as waters, especially in this, that they have stupefied us,
Aqua.
and taken from us all sense of reparation of our sinful condition. The Organ
that God has given the natural man, is the eye; he sees God in the creature.
The Organ that God has given the Christian, is the ear; he hears God in his
Word. But when we are under water, both senses, both Organs are vitiated, and
depraved, if not defea^ed. The habitual, and manifold sinner, sees nothing
aright; He sees a judgment, and calls it an accident. He hears nothing aright;
He hears the Ordinance of Preaching for salvation in the next world, and he
calls it an invention of the State, for subjection in this world. And as under
water, every thing seems distorted and crooked, to man, so does man himself to
God, who sees not his own Image in that man, in that form as he made it. When
man has drunk iniquity like water, Job 15. 16.
then, The floods of wickadnesse shall make him afraid; The water that he has
swum in, the sin that he has delighted in, Ps. 18. 4.
shall appear with horror unto him. As God threatens the pride of Tyrus, Ezck.
26. 19.
I shall bring the deep upon thee, and great waters shall cover thee, That, God
will execute upon this sinner; And then, upon every drop of that water, upon
every affliction, every tribulation, he shall come to that fearfulness, Waters
flowed over my head; then said I, Lam. 3. 54.
I am c^^ off; Either he shall see nothing, or see no remedy, no deliverance
from desperation. Keep low these waters, as waters signify sin, and God shall
keep them low, as they signify punishments; And his Dove shall return to the
Ark with an Olive leaf, Genesis 8. 8.
to show thee that the waters are abated; he shall give thee a testimony of the
return of his love, in his Oil, and Wine, and Milk, and Honey, in the
temporal abundances of this life. And, si impleat Hydrias aqua, if he do fill
all your vessels with water, Job. 2. 7.
with water of bitterness, that is, fill and exercise all your patience, and
all your faculties with his corrections, yet he shall do that, but to change
your water into wine, as he did there, he shall make his very Judgments,
Sacraments, conveyances and seals of his mercy to you, though those manifold
sins be got over your heads, as a roof, as a noise, as an overflowing of
waters: And, that, which is the heaviest of all, and our last consideration,
sicut Dominus, as a Lord, as a Tyran, as an Usurper.

Preti^ redempti es^is, nolite fieri servi, says the Apostle, you are bought
with a price, Dominus.
therefore glorify God. There he shows you, your own value, and then, 1 Cor.
6. 20.
Ne dominetur peccas^um, Let not sin have dominion over you; there he shows you
the insolency of that Tyran. You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
you free, Job. 8. 32.
says Christ to the Jews. Well; They stood not much upon the truth, but for the
freedom, We were Abraham's seed, and were never bound to any; but Christ
replies, Whosoever committesh sin, is the servant of sin; And, of whomsoever a
man is overcome, 2 Pet. 9. 29.
to the same he is in bondage. Now we are slaves to sin, not only as we have
been overcome by sin for he that is said to be overcome by sin, is presumed to
have made some resistance) but as we have sold our selves to sin, which is a
worse, and a more voluntary act. There was none like him, like Ahab; 1 Reg. 21.
20.
(says the holy Ghost) wherein was his singularity above all? He had sold
himself, to work wickedness, in the fight of the Lord. Now, how are we sold to
sin? By Adam? That Is true; Ejus praevaricatione, and ut it a dicam, Cassian.
Negotiatione, demnoso, and frandulento commercio venditi sumus: We were all
sold under hand, fraudulently sold, and sold under foot, cheaply sold by Adam.
But thus, we might seem to be sold by others; so Joseph was, and no fault in
himself; But we have sold our selves since. Did not Adam sell himself too? Did
God sell him by any secret Decree, or contract, between the Devil and him? Was
God of counsel in that bargain? God forbid. Thus faith the Lord, Where is the
bill of your mothers divorce, Esa. 50. 1.
whom I have put away? or, which of my creditours is it, to whom I have sold
you? Behold, for your iniquities you have sold your selves; and for your
transgressions, is your mother put away. In Adam we were sold in gross; in our
selves we are sold by retail, In the first, and general sale, we all passed,
even the best of us. We know the Law is spiritual, Romans 7. 14.
but I am carnal, sold under sin, says the Apostle, even of himself. But when
does the Apostle say this? in what state was he, when he accuses himself of
this mancipation, and sale under sin? Says he this only with relation to his
former times, when he was a Jew, and under the Law? Or, but then when he was
newly come to the light of the Gospel, and not to a clear sight of it? It is
true, that most of the Eastern Fathers, and it is true, that S. Augustine
himself was of that opinion, that S. Paul said of himself, that he was sold
under sin, respecting himself before his regeneration. Non qui vult esse
sapiens, statim fit sapiens, says Origin; A man is not presently learned,
because he has a good desire to be learned; nor has he that has begun a
conversion, presently accomplished his regeneration; nor is he discharged of
his bargain of being sold under sin, as soon as he sees that he has made an
ill bargain. But when he grows up in grace, (say they) as S. Paul had done,
when he said this, then he is discharged. But, as S. Augustine ingenuously
retracts that opinion, which, (as he says) he had held, Retract. 1. c. 23.
when he was a young Priest at Carthage, so is there nothing clearer, by the
whole purpose of the Apostle in that place, then that he in his best state, was
still sold under sin. As David speaks of himself being then regenerated, In thy
sight shall no man living be justified. So S. Paul speaks of himself in his
best state, still he was sold under sin, because still, that concupiscence,
under which he was sold in Adam, remains in him. And that concupiscence is sin,
Quia inest ei inobedientia contra domin^^m mentis. August.
Because it is a rebellion against that sovereignty which God has instituted
in the soul of man, and an ambition of setting up another Prince; so it is
peccatum, sin in it self; And it is poena peccati, says that Father, Quia
reddita est meritis inobedientis; Because it is laid upon us for that
disobedience, it has also the nature of a punishment of sin, as well as so sin
it self; And then it is Causa peccati too, Defectione consentientis, because
man is so enfeebled by this inherence, and invisceration of Original sin, as
that thereby he is exposed to every emergent tentation, to any actual sin. So,
Original sin, is called by many of the Ancients, the cause of sin, and the
effect of sin, but not so, exclusively, as that it is not sin, really sin in it
self too. Now, as Original sin causes Actual, in that consideration (as we
sell our selves over again in our acts of recognition, in ratifying our first
sale, by our manifold sins here) so is sin gone over our heads, by this
dominion, as a Tyran, as an usurper. Hoc lex posuit, Non concupisces; August.
This is the Law, Thou shall not covet: Non quod sic valcamus, sed ad quod
persiciendo tendamus; Not that we can perform that Law, but that that Law might
be a rule to direct our endeavors: Multum boni facit, qui facit quod scriptum
est, Post concupiscentias tuas non eas; He does well, and well in a fair
measure, that fulfils that Commandment, Thou shall not walk in the
concupiscences of thine own heart; sed non perficit, quia non implet quod
scriptum est, Non concupisces, But yet, says he, he does not all that is
commanded, because he is commanded not to covet at all: Vt sciat, quo debeat in
hac m^^talitate conari, That that commandment might teach him, what he should
labor for in this life, Et quo possit in illa immortalitate pervenire, to what
perfection we shall come in the life to come, but not till then. Though
therefore we did our best, yet we were sold under sin, that is, sold by Adam;
but because we do not, but consent to that first sale, in our sinful acts,
and habits, we have sold our selves too, and so sin is gone over our heads; in
a dominion, and in a tyrannical exercise of that dominion. If we would go
about to express, by what customs of sin this dominion is established, we
should be put to a necessity of entering into every profession, and every
conscience. And the moral man says usefully, Si tantum irasci vis sapientem,
Seneca.
quantum exigit indignitas scelerum, (we will translate it in the Church
tongue, and make his morality divinity) If we would have a zealous Preacher,
cry out as fast, or as loud, as sins are committed, non irascendum, sed in
santiendum, says he, you would not call that man an angry man, but a mad man,
you would not call that Preacher, a zealous preacher, but a Puritan. Touch we
but upon one of his reprehensions, because that may have the best use now; he
considers the iniquities, and injustices, admitted, and committed in Courts of
justice; and he says, Turpes lites, turpiores Advocati; Ill suits are set on
foot, and worse advocates defend them. Delator est criminis qui manifestior
reus, even in criminal matters, he informs against another, that should be
but defendant in that crime; And (as he carries it higher) Iudex damnaturus
quae fesit, eligitur, the Judge himself condemns a man for that, which himself
is far more guilty of, then the prisoner. Nullus nisi ex alieno damno
quaestus, and one man grows rich, by the empoverishing of many. But then it is
so in all other professions too. And this Tyranny, and dominion is justly
permitted by God upon us, ut qui noluit superiorr obedire, nec et obediat
inferior caro, we have been rebellious to our Sovereign, to God, and therefore
our subject, the flesh, is first rebellious against us, and then Tyrannical
over us. But he that leads into captivity shall go into captivity; yea,
Revel. 13. 10.
Christ has led captivity it self captive, Ephesians. 4. 8.
and given gifts to men; that is, he has established his Church, where, by a
good use of those means which God has ordained for it, the most oppressed
soul, may raise it self above those exaltations, and supergressions of sin;
And so we have done with our first part, and with all that will enter into this
time, where David in his humble spirit feels in himself, but much more in his
prophetical spirit, foresees, and foretells in others, the infectious nature
of sin; It is a mortal wound, and in a strange consideration; for, it is a
wound upon God, and mortal upon man; And then the propriety of sin, that sin
is not at all from God, nor it is not all from the Devil, but our sin is our
own; Our sins in a Pl^rality; our sins of one kind, determine not in one sin,
we sin the same sin often, and then we determine not in one kind, but slide
into many. And after this multiplication of sin, the continuation thereof, to
an irrecoverablenesse, supergressae sunt, we think not of them, till it be too
late to think of them, till they produce no thought but despair; for
supergressae Caput, they are got above our Heads, above our strongest
faculties; Above us, in the nature of an arched roof, they keep Gods grace in a
separation from us, and our prayers from him, so they have the nature of a
roof, and then, they feel no weight, they bend not under any judgment, which
he lays upon us, so they have the nature of an Arch. Above us, as a voice, as a
cry; Their voice is in possession of God, and so prevents our prayers; above us
as waters, they disable our eyes, and our ears, from right conceiving all
apprehensions; And above us, as Lords, and Tyrans, that came in by conquest,
and so put what Laws they list upon us. And these instructions have arisen from
this first, the Multiplicity, Mine iniquities are gone over my Head, and more
will from the other, the weight and burden, They are as a heavy burden, too
heavy for me.

SERMON XXII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
Second Sermon on PSALM. 38. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as a
heavy burden, they are too heavy for me.
AS the Philosopher says, if a man could see virtue, he would love it, so if a
man could see sin, he would hate it. But as the eye sees every thing but it
self, so does sin, too. It sees Beauty, and Honor, and Riches, but it sees
not it self, not the sinful coveting and compassing of all these. To make,
though not sin, yet the sinner to see himself, for the explication, and
application of these words, we brought you these two lights; first, the
Multiplicity of sin, in that elegancy of the holy Ghost, supergressae sunt,
Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and the weight, and oppression of sin,
in that, Gravatae nimis, As a heavy burden they are too heavy for me; In the
first, how numerous, how manifold they are, in the other, how grievous, how
insupportable; first, how many hands, then how fast hold sin lays upon me.
The first of these two, was our exercise the last day, when we proposed and
proceeded in these words, in which we presented to you, the dangerous
multiplicity of sin, in those pieces, which constituted that part. But
because, as men, how many soever, make but a Multitude, or a Throng, and not an
Army, if they be unarmed, so sin, how manifold, and multiform so ever, might
seem a passable thing, if it might be easily shaked off, we come now to imprint
in you a sense of the weight and oppression thereof, As a heavy burden, they
are too heavy for me; The particular degrees whereof, we laid down the last
day, in our general division of the whole Text, and shall now pursue them,
according to our order proposed then.

First then, sin is heavy. Does not the sinner find it so? No marvail,
Gravatae.
nothing is heavy in his proper place, in his own Sphere, in his own Center,
when it is where it would be, nothing is heavy. He that lies under water finds
no burden of all that water that lies upon him; but if he were out of it, how
heavy would a small quantity of that water seem to him, if he were to carry it
in a vessel? An habitual sinner is the natural place, the Center of sin,
and he feels no weight in it, but if the grace of God raise him out of it, that
he come to walk, and walk in the ways of godliness, not only his watery
Tympanies, and his dropsies, those waters which by actual and habitual sins
he has contracted, but that water, of which he is properly made, the water
that is in him naturally, infused from his parents, Original sin, will be
sensible to him, and oppress him. Scarce any man considers the weight of
Original sin; And yet, as the strongest tentations fall upon us when we are
weakest, in our deathbed, so the heavyest sin seises us, when we are
weakest; as soon as we are any thing, we are sinners, and there, where there
can be no more tentations ministered to us, then was to the Angels that fell in
heaven, that is, in our mothers womb, when no world, nor flesh, nor Devil
could present a provocation to sin to us, when no faculty of ours is able to
embrace, or second a provocation to sin, yet there, in that weakness, we are
under the weight of Original sin. And truly, if at this time, God would
vouchsafe me my choice, whether he should pardon me all those actual and
habitual sins, which I have committed in my life, or extinguish Original
sin in me, I should choose to be delivered from Original sin, because, though
I be delivered from the imputation thereof, by Baptism, so that I shall not
fall under a condemnation for Original sin only, yet it still remains in me,
and practices upon me, and occasions all the other sins, that I commit: now,
for all my actual and habitual sins, I know God has instituted means in his
Church, the Word, and the Sacraments, for my reparation; But with what a holy
alacrity, with what a heavenly joy, with what a cheerful peace, should I come
to the participation of these means and seals of my reconciliation, and pardon
of all my sins, if I knew my self to be delivered from Original sin, from
that snake in my bosom, from that poison in my blood, from that leaven and
tartar in all my actions, that casts me into Relapses of those sins which I
have repented? And what a cloud upon the best serenity of my conscience, what
an interruption, what a dis-continuance from the sincerity and integrity of
that joy, which belongs to a man truly reconciled to God, in the pardon of his
former sins, must it needs be still to know, and to know by lamentable
experiences, that though I wash my self with Soap, and Nit^e, and Snow water,
mine own clothes will defile me again, though I have washed my self in the
tears of Repentance, and in the blood of my Savior, though I have no
guiltiness of any former sin upon me at that present, yet I have a sense of a
root of sin, that is not grub'd up, of Original sin, that will cast me back
again. Scarce any man considers the weight, the oppression of Original sin.
No man can say, that an Akorn weighs as much as an Oak; yet in truth, there is
an Oak in that Akorn: no man considers that Original sin weighs as much as
Actual, or Habitual, yet in truth, all our Actual and Habitual sins are in
Original. Therefore Saint Paul's vehement, and frequent prayer to God, to that
purpose, could not deliver him from Original sin, and that stimulus carnis,
that provocation of the flesh, that Messenger of Satan, which rises out of
that, God would give him sufficient grace, it should not work to his
destruction, but yet he should have it: Nay, the infinite merit of Christ Jesus
himself, that works so upon all actual and habitual sins, as that after that
merit is applied to them, those sins are no sins, works not so upon Original
sin, but that, though I be eased in the Dominion, and Imputation thereof, yet
the same Original sin is in me still; and though God do deliver me from
eternal death, due to mine actual and habitual sins, yet from the temporal
death, due to Original sin, he delivers not his dearest Saints.

Thus sin is heavy in the seed, in the grain, in the akorn, how much more when
it is a field of Corn, a barn of grain, a forest of Oaks, in the
multiplication, and complication of sin in sin? And yet we consider the weight
of sin another way too, for as Christ feels all the afflictions of his
children, so his children will feel all the wounds that are inflicted upon him;
even the sins of other men; as Lots righteous soul was grieved with sins of
others. If others sin by my example and provocation, or by my connivence and
permission, when I have authority, their sin lies heavyer upon me, then upon
themselves; for they have but the weight of their own sin; and I have mine,
and theirs upon me; and though, I cannot have two souls to suffer, and though
there cannot be two everlastingnesses in the torments of hell, yet I shall have
two measures of those unmeasurable torments upon my soul. But if I have no
interest in the sins of other men, by any occasion ministered by me, yet I
cannot choose but feel a weight, a burden of a holy anguish, and compassion and
indignation, because every one of these sins inflict a new wound upon my
Savior, when my Savior says to him, that does but injure me, Why persecutest
thou me, and feels the blow upon himself, shall not I say to him that wounds
my Savior, Why woundest thou me, and groan under the weight of my brothers
sin, and my Fathers, my Makers, my Saviors wound? If a man of my blood, or
alliance, do a shameful act, I am affected with it; If a man of my calling,
or profession, do a scandalous act, I feel my self concerned in his fault; God
has made all mankind of one blood, and all Christians of one calling, and the
sins of every man concern every man, both in that respect, that I, that is,
This nature, is in that man that sins that sin; and I, that is, This nature, is
in that Christ, who is wounded by that sin. The weight of sin, were it but
Original sin, were it but the sins of other men, is an insupportable weight.

But if a sinner will take a true balance, and try the right weight of sin, let
him go about to leave his sin, and then he shall see how close, and how
heavily it stook to him. Then one sin will lay the weight of seelinesse, of
falsehood, of inconstancy, of dishonor, of ill nature, if you go about to
leave it: and another sin will lay the weight of poverty, of disestimation upon
you, if you go about to leave it. One sin will lay your pleasures upon you,
another your profit, another your Honor, another your Duty to wife and
children, and weigh you down with these. Go but out of the water, go but
about to leave a sin, and you will find the weight of it, and the hardness to
cast it off. Gravatae sunt, Mine iniquities are heavy, (that was our first) and
gravatae nimis, they are too heavy, which is a second circumstance.

Some weight, some balast is necessary to make a ship go steady; Nimis.
we are not without advantage, in having some sin; some concupiscence, some
tentation is not too heavy for us. The greatest sins that ever were committed,
were committed by them, who had no former sin, to push them on to that sin:
The first Angels sin, and the sin of Adam are noted to be the most desperate
and the most irrecoverable sins, and they were committed, when they had no
former sin in them. The Angels punishment is pardoned in no part; Adams
punishment is pardoned in no man, in this world. Now such sins as those, that
is, sins that are never pardoned, no man commits now; not now, when he has the
weight of former sins to push him on. Though there be a heavy guiltiness in
Original sin, yet I have an argument, a plea for mercy out of that, Lord, my
strength is not the strength of stones, nor my flesh brass; Lord, Job 6. 12.
no man can bring a clean thing out of uncleanness; Lord, no man can say
after, I have cleansed my heart, I am free from sin, I could not be borne
clean, I could not cleanse my self since. It magnifies Gods glory, it
amplifies man's happiness, that he is subject to tentation. If man had been
made impeccable, that he could not have sinned, he had not been so happy; for
then, he could only have enjoyed that state, in which he was created, and not
have risen to any better; because that better estate, is a reward of our
willing obedience to God, in such things, as we might have disobeyed him in.
Therefore when the Apostle was in danger, of growing too light, lest he should
be exalted out of measure, 2 Cor. 12. 7.
through the abundance of revelation, (says that Scripture) he had a weight
hung upon him; There was something given him, therefore it was a benefit, a
gift; And it was Angelus, an Angel, that was given him; But it was not a good
Angel, a Tutelar, a Guardian Angel, to present good motions unto him, but it was
Angelus Satane, a messenger of Satan, sent, as he says, to buffet him; and yet
this hostile Angel, this messenger of Satan was a benefit, a gift, and a
forerunner, and some kind of Inducer of that Grace, which was sufficient for
him; and it would not have appeared to us, no nor to himself, that he had had
so much of that grace, if he had not had this tentation. God is as powerful
upon us when he delivers us from tentation, that it do not overtake us; but
not so apparent, so evident, so manifest, as when he delivers us in a
tentation, that it do not overcome us: some weight does but ballast us, as
some enemies never do us more harm, but occasion us, to arm and to stand
upon our guard. Therefore, this weight that is complained of here, is not In
carne, in our natural flesh; (though in that be no goodness) it is nothing
that God from the beginning has imprinted in our nature, not that peceability,
and possibility of sinning; nor it is not in stimule carnis, in these accessory
tentations, and provocations which awaken, and provoke the malignity of this
flesh, and put a sting into it; we do not consider this heavy weight to be the
natural possibility which was in man, before Original sin entered, nor to be
that natural pronenesse to sin, which is original sin it self. But it
is, when we our selves whet that sting, when we labor to break hedges, and to
steal wood, and gather up a stick out of one sin, and stick out of another,
and to make a faggot to load us, in this life, and burn us in the next, in
multiplying sins, and aggravating circumstances, so it is Heavy, so it is too
heavy, It is too heavy for me, (for that is also another circumstance) for David
himself, for any man even in David's state.

Though this consideration might be enlarged, Mihi.
and usefully carried into this expostulation, can sin be too heavy for me, any
burden of sin sink me into a dejection of spirit, that am wrapped up in the
Covenans, borne of Christian Parents, that am bred up in an Orthodox, in a
Reformed Church, that can persuade my self sometimes, that I am of the number
of the elect; Can any sin be too heavy for me, can I doubt of the execution of
his first purpose upon me, or doubt of the efficacy of his ordinances here in
the Church, what sin soever I commit, can any sins be too heavy for me? yet it
is enough that in this Se^, God holds no man up by the chin so, but that if he
sin in confidence of that sustentation, he shall sink. But in this personal
respect in our text we consider only with what weights David weighed his sins,
when he found here that they were too heavy for him. He weighed his sin with
his punishment, and in his punishment he saw the anger, and indignation of
God, and when we see sin through that spectacle, through an angry God, it
appears great, and red, and fearful unto us; when David came to see himself
in his infirmity, in his deformity, when his body could not hear the punishment
here in this world, he considered how insupportable a weight the sin, and the
anger of God upon that sin, would be in the world to come. For me that rise to
preferment by my sin, for me that come to satisfy my carnal app^tites by my
sin, my sin is not too heavy; But for me that suffer penury in the bottom of a
plentiful state exhausted by my sin, for me that languish under diseases and
putrefaction contracted by my sin, for me upon whom the hand of God lies heavy
in any affliction for my sin, for me, my sins are too heavy. Till I come to
hear that voice, Mat. 11.
Come unto me all you that labor, and are heavy laden, and I will refresh you,
till I come to consider my sin in the mercy of God, and not only in his
justice, in his punishments, my sins will be too heavy for me; for, though that
be a good way, to consider the justice of God, yet it is not a good end; I must
stop, but not stay at it, I must consider my sin in his justice, how powerful
a God I have provoked; but I must pass through his justice to his mercy; his
justice is my way, but his mercy is my ledging; for we cannot tell by the
construction and origination of the words, whether Cain said, My sin is greater
then can b^e pardoned, or, my punishment is greater then can be borne: But it
needs not be disputed; for it is all one; He that considers only the anger
of God in the punishment, will think his sin unpardonable, his sin will be
see heavy for him. But as a fever is well spent, when the patient is fit to
take physic, so if God give me physic, if I take his corrections as
medicines, and not as punishments, then my disease is well spent, my danger is
well overcome; If I have buried my sins in the wounds of my Savior, they
cannot be too heavy for me, for they are not upon me at all; But if I take them
out again, by relapsing into them, or imagine them to rise again, by a
suspicion and jealousy in God, that he has not forgiven them, because his
hand lies still upon me, in some afflictions, so, in such a relapse, so, in
such a jealous mis-interpretation of Gods proceeding with me, my sins are too
heavy for me; for me, because I do not sustain my self by those helps that God
puts into my hands.

It is heavy, too heavy, too heavy for me, says David; Onus.
if you consider the elect themselves, their election will not bear them out
in their sins. But here we consider the insupportablenesse, in that, wherein
the holy Ghost has presented it, Quia onus, because it lies upon me, in the
nature and quality of a Burden, Mine iniquities are as a burden, too heavy for
me. When all this is packed up upon me, that I am first under a Calamity, a
sickness, a scorn, an imprisonment, a penury, and then upon that calamity,
there is laid the anger and indignation of God, and then upon that, the weight
of mine own sins; this is too much to settle me, it is enough to sink me, it
is a burden, in which the danger arises from the last addition, in that, which
is last laid on: for, as the sceptique Philosopher pleases himself in that
argumentation, that either a penny makes a man rich, or he can never be rich,
for says he, if he be not rich yet, the addition of a penny more would make him
rich: or if not that penny, yet another, or another, so that at last it is the
addition of a penny that makes him rich; so without any such fallacious or
facetious circumvention in our case, it is the last addition, that that we look
on last, that makes our burden insupportable, when upon our calamity we see the
anger of God piled up, and upon that, our sin, when I come to see my sin, in
that glass, in that glass, not in a Savior bleeding for me, but in a Judge
frowning upon me; when my sins are so far off from me, as that they are the
last thing that I see; for, if I would look upon my sins, first, with a
remorsefull, a tearfull, a repentant eye, either I should see no anger, no
calamity; or it would not seem strange to me, that God should be angry, nor
strange, that I should suffer calamities, when God is angry; Therefore is sin
heavy as a burden, because it is the last thing that I lay upon my self, and
feel not that till a heavy load of calamity and anger be upon me before. But
then, as when we come to be unloaded of a burden, that that was las^ laid on,
is first taken off, so when we come, by any means, though by the sense of a
calamity, or of the anger of God, to a sense of our sin, before the calamity it
self be taken off, the sin is forgiven. When the Prophet found David in this
state, the first act that the Prophet came to was the Transtulit peccatum, God
has taken away thy sin, but the calamity was not yet taken away. The child
begot in sin shall surely die, though the sin be pardoned. The fruit of the
tree may be preserved and kept, after the tree it self is cut down and burnt;
The fruit, and off spring of our sin, calamity, may continue upon us, after God
has removed the guiltiness of the sin from us. In the course of civility, our
parents go out before us, in the course of Mortality, our parents die before
us; In the course of Gods mercy, it is so too; The sin that begot the calamity,
is dead, and gone, the calamity, the child, and off spring of that sin, is
alive and powerful upon us. But for the most part, as if I would lift an iron
chain from the ground, if I take but the first link, and draw up that, the
whole chain follows, so if by my repentance, I remove the uppermost weight of
my load, my sin, all the rest, the declaration of the anger of God, and the
calamities that I suffer, will follow my sin, and depart from me. But still our
first care must be to take off the last weight, the last that comes to our
sense, The sin.

You have met, I am sure, in old Apophtbegms, an answer of a Philosopher
celebrated, that being asked, what was the heaviest thing in the world,
answered, Senex Tyrannus, An old Tyran; For a Tyran, at first, dares not
proceed so severely; but when he is established, and has continued long, he
prescribes in his injuries, and those injuries become Laws. As sin is a Tyran,
so he is got over our head, in Dominie, as we showed you in the
supergressaesunt, in our former part; As he is an, old Tyran, so he is the
heaviest burden that can be imagined; An inveterate sin, is an inveterate sore,
we may hold out with it, but hardly cure it; we may slumber it, but hardly kill
it. Weigh sin in heaven; heaven could not bear it, in the Angels; They fell:
In the waters; The Sea could not bear it in Jonas; He was cast in: In the
earth; That could not bear it in Dathan, and Abiram; They were swallowed: And
because all the inhabitants of the earth are sin it self, Esaias 24. 20.
The earth it self shall reel to and fro, as a Drunkard, and shall be removed
like a Cottage, and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it, and it
shall fall and notrise again; There Is the total, the final fall, proper to
the wicked; they shall fall; so shall the godly; And fall every day; and fall
seven times a day; but they shall rise again and stand in judgment; The
wicked shall not do so; They shall rise, Psalm. 1.
rise to judgment; and they shall stand, stand for judgment, stand to receive
judgment; and then not fall, but be cast out, out of the presence of God, and
cast down, down into an impossibility of rising, for ever, for ever, for ever.
There is a lively expressing of this deadly weight, this burden in the Prophet
Zechary. First, there was a certain vessel, a measure showed, (...) 5. 6.
and the Angel said, Hic est oculus, This is the sight, (says our first
translation) This is the resemblance through all the earth, (says our second.)
That is, to this measure, and to that that is figured in it, every man must
look, this every man must take into his consideration; what is it? In this
measure sat a woman whose name was Wickedness; At first, this woman, this
wickedness, sat up in this vessel, she had not filled the measure, she was
not laid securely in it, she was not prostrate, not grovelling, but her nobler
part, her head, was yet out of danger, she sat up in it. But before the Vision
departs, she is plunged wholly into that measure; (into darkness, into
blindness) and not for a time; for, then, there was a cover, (says the text)
and agreat cover, and a great cover of Lead put upon that vessel; and so, a
perpetual imprisonment, no hope to get out; and heavy fetters, no ease to be
had within; Hard ground to tread upon, and heavy burdens to carry; first a
cover, that is, an excuse; a great cover, that is, a defense, and a glory; at
last, of Lead; all determines in Desperation. This is when the multiplicity and
indifferency to lesser sins, and the habitual custom of some particular sin,
meet in the aggravating of the burden: for then, Job 6. 3.
they are heavyer then the sand of the Sea, says the holy Ghost: where he
expresses the greatest weight by the least thing; Nothing less then a grain
of sand, nothing heavyer then the sands of the Sea, nothing easier to resist
then a first tentation, or a single sin in it self, nothing heavyer, nor
harder to divest, then sins complicated in one another, or then an old Tyran,
and custom in any one sin. And therefore it was evermore a familiar phrase
with the Prophets, when they were to declare the sins, or to denounce the
punishments of those sins upon the people, to call it by this word, Onus
visionis, Onus Babylonis, Onus Ninives, O the burden of Babylon, the burden of
Niniveh. And because some of those woes, those Judgments, those burdens, did
not always fall upon that people presently, they came to mock the Prophets, and
say to them, New, what is the burden of she Lord, What Burden have you to
preach to us, Ier. 23. 23.
and to talk of now^ Say unto them, says God to the Prophet there; This is the
Burden of the Lord, I will even forsake you. And, as it is elegantly,
emphatically, vehemently added, Every man's word shall be his burden; That which
he says, shall be that that shall be laid to his charge; ver. 36.
His scorning, his idle questioning of the Prophet, What burden now, what
plague, what famine, what war now? Is not all well for all your crying The
burden of the Lord? Every man's word shall be his burden, the deriding of Gods
Ordinance, and of the denouncing of his Judgments in that Ordinance shall be
their burden, that is, aggravate those Judgments upon them, Nay, there is a
heavyer weight then that, added; Ye shall say no more (says God to the Prophet)
the burden of the Lord, ver. 38.
that is, you shall not bestow so much care upon this people, as to tell them,
that the Lord threatens them. Gods presence in anger, and in punishments, is a
heavy, but Gods absence, and dereliction, a much heavyer burden; As (if
extremes will admit comparison) the everlasting loss of the fight of God in
hell, is a greater torment, then any lakes of inextinguishable Brimstone, then
any gnawing of the incessant worm, then any gnashing of teeth can present unto
us.

Now, let no man ease himself upon that fallacy, sin cannot be, nor sin cannot
induce such burdens as you talk of, for many men are come to wealth, and by
that wealth, to honor, who, if they had admitted a tenderness in their
consciences, and forborne some sins. had lost both; for, are they without
burden, because they have wealth, and honor? In the Original language, the
same word, that is here, a burden, Ch^bad, signifies honor, and wealth, as
well as a burden. And therefore says the Prophet, Habak. 2. 9. Greg^r.
Woe unto him that loadeth himself with thick clay. Non densantur nisi per
laborem; There goes much pains to the laying of it thus thick upon us; The
multiplying of riches is a laborious thing; and then it is a new pain to bleed
out those riches for a new office, or a new title; Et tamen lutum, says that
Father, when all is done, we are but roughcast with dirt; All those Riches, all
those Honors are a Burden, upon the just man, they are bu^ a multiplying of
fears, that they shall lose them; upon the securest man, they are but a
multiplying of duties and obligations; for the more they havet, he more they
have to answer; and upon the unjust, they are a multiplying of everlasting
torments. Job 7. 3.
They possess months of vanity, and wearisom nights are appointed them. Men are
as weary of the day, upon Carpets and Cushions, as at the plough. And the
laborers weariness, is to a good end; but for these men, They weary
themselves to commit iniquity. Some do, and some do not; All do. The labor
of the foolish wearieth every one of them; Ier. 9. 5.
Why? Because he knows not how to go to the City. Eccles. 10. 15.
He that directs not his labors to the right end, the glory of God, he goes
not to Jerusalem, the City of holy peace, but his sinful labors shall be a
burden to him; and his Riches, and his Office, and his Honor he shall not be
able to put off, then when he puts off his body in his deathbed; He shall not
have that happiness, which he, till then, thought a misery, To carry nothing
out of this world, for his Riches, his Office, his Honor shall follow him into
the next world, and clog his soul there. But we proposed this consideration of
this Metaphor, That sin is a burden, (as there is an infinite sweetness, and
infinite latitude in every Metaphor, in every elegancy of the Scripture, and
therefore I may have leave to be loath to depart from it) in some particular
inconveniences, that a burden brings, and it is time to come to them.

SERMON XXIII.
Preached at Lincolns Inn.
The third Sermon on PSALM. 38. 4. For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as
a heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me.
AS a Torch that has been lighted, and used before, is easier lighted then a
new torch, so are the branches, and parts of this Text, the easier reduced to
your memory, by having heard former distributions thereof. But as a Torch that
has been lighted and used before, will not last so long as a new one, so
perchance your patience which has already been twice exercised with the
handling of these words, may be too near the bottom to afford much. And
therefore much I have determined not to need. God did his greatest work upon
the last day, and yet gave over work betimes. In that day he made man, and, (as
the context leads us, most probably, to think) he made Paradise, and placed
man in Paradise that day. For the variety of opinions amongst our Expositors,
about the time when God made Paradise, arises from one error, an error in the
Vulgat Edition, in the translation of the Roman Church, that reads it Plantaver
at, God had planted a garden, Genesis 2. 8.
as though God had done it before. Therefore some state it before the Creation,
which Saint Hierome follows, or at least relates, without disapproving it; and
others place it, upon the third day, when the whole earth received her
accomplishment; but if any had looked over this place with the same ingenuity
as their own great man Tyr: (an active man in the Council of Trent) has done
over the Book of Psalms, in which one Book he has confessed 6000 places, in
which their translation differs from the Original, they would have seen this
difference in this place, that it is not Plantaver at, but Plantavit, not that
God had before, but that he did then, then when he had made man, make a
Paradise for man. And yet God made an end of all this days work betimes; in
that day, He walked in the garden in the cool of the Evening. The noblest part
of our work, in handling this Text falls upon the conclusion, reserved for this
day; which is, the application of these words to Christ. But for that, I shall
be short, and rather leave you to walk with God in the cool of the Evening, to
meditate of the sufferings of Christ, when you are gone, then pretend to
express them here. The Passion of Christ Jesus is rather an amazement, an
astonishment, an ecstasy, a consternation, then an instruction. Therefore,
though something we shall say of that anon. First, we pursue that which lies
upon our selves, the Burden, in those four mischievous inconveniences wrapped
up in that Metaphor.

Of them, the first was, Inclinat; That a Burden sinkes a man, declines him,
Inclinat.
crookens him, makes him stoop. So does sin. It is one of Saint Augustines
definitions of sin, Conversio ad creaturam, that it is a turning, a
withdrawing of man to the creature. And every such turning to the creature, let
it be upon his side, to her whom he loves, let it be upwards, to honor that he
affects, yet it is still down-ward, in respect of him, whom he was made by, and
should direct himself to. Every inordinate love of the Creature is a descent
from the dignity of our Creation, and a disavowing', a disclaiming of that
Charter, Subjicite and dominamini, subdue, and govern the Creature. Est quoddam
bonum, quod si diligat anima rationalis, peccat. August. De. ver. releg c. 20.
There are good things in the world, which it is a sin for man to love, Quia
infra illam ordinantur, because though they be good, they are not so good as
man; And man may not decline, and every thing, except God himself, is inferior
to man, and so, it is a declination, a stooping in man, to apply himself to
any Creature, till he meet that Creature in God; for there, it is above him;
And so, as Beauty and Riches, and Honor are beams that issue from God, and
glasses that represent God to us, and idea's that return us into him, in our
glorifying of him, by these helps, so we may apply our selves to them; for, in
this consideration, as they assist us in our way to God, they are above us,
otherwise, to love them for themselves, is a declination, a stooping under a
burden; And this declination, this incurvation, this descent of man, in the
inordinate love of the Creature, may very justly seem to be forbidden in that
Commandment, that forbids Idolatry, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor
worship them; If we bow down to them, we do worship them; for it is in the
love of all Creatures, as it is in money; Covetousness, that is, the love of
money, is Idolatry, says the Apostle; and so is all other inordinate love of
any, Idolatry. And then, as we have seen some grow crooked, by a long sitting,
a lying in one posture, so, by an easy resting in these descents and
declination of the soul, it comes to be a fashion to stoop, and it seems a
comely thing to be crooked; and we become, infruniti, that is, quibus nem^ frui
velit, such as no body cares for our conversation, or company, except we be ill
company, sociable in other sins, August.
Et viliores quo castiores, if we affect Chastity, or any other virtue, we
disaffect and distaste other men; for one man's virtue chides, and reproaches a
whole vicious company. But if he will needs be in fashion, C^m pervers^
perverti, to grow crooked with the crooked, His iniquities shall take him, and
he shall be holden with the cards of his sin; Prove. 5. 22.
that is, in that posture that he puts himself, he shall be kept; kept all his
life; and then, (as it follows there) He shall die without instruction; Die in
a place, where he can have no Absolution, no Sacrament, or die, in a
disposition, that he shall receive no benefit by them, though he receive them.
He has packed a burden upon himself, in habitual sin, he has chosen to
stoop under this burden, in an Idolatrous love of those sins, and nothing
shall be able to erect him again, not Preaching, not Sacraments, no not
judgments. And this is the first inconvenience, and mischief, employed in this
Metaphor which the holy Ghost has chosen, Mine iniquities are as a burden,
Inclinant, they bend down my soul, created straight, to an incurvation, to a
crookedness.

A second inconvenience intimated in this Metaphore, a burden, is the fatigat,
Fatigat.
a burden wearies us, tires us: and so does our sin, and our best beloved
sin. It has wearied us, and yet we cannot divest it. We would leave that
sin, and yet there is one talent more to be added, one child more to be
provided for, one office, or one title more to be compassed, one tentation more
to be satisfied. Though we grumble, not out of remorse of conscience, but out
of a bodily weariness of the sin, yet we proceed in it. How often men go
to Westminster, how often to the Exchange, called by unjust suits, or called by
corrupt bargains to those places, when their case, or their health persuades
them to stay at home? How many go to forbidden beds, then when they had rather
stay at home, if they were not afraid of an unkind interpretation? We have
wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness; Plus miles in uno torneamento,
quam sanctus Monachus in december annis, says our Holkot, upon that place, a
soldier suffers more in one expedition, then a Monk does, in ten years, says
he, and perchance he says true, and yet no commendation to his Monk neither;
for that soldier may do even the cause of God, more good, in that one
expedition, then that Monk in ten years: But it is true as Holkot intended it,
(though perchance his example do not much strengthen it) vicious men are put
to more pains, and to do more things against their own minds, then the Saints
of God are in the ways of holiness. We have wearied our selves in the ways of
wickedness, says he, that is, in doing as other wicked men have done, in ways
which have been beaten out to us, by the frequent practice of other men; but he
adds more, We have gone the rough Deserts, where there lay no way; that is,
through sins, in which, we had no example, no precedent, the inventions of our
hearts. The covetous man lies still, and attends his quarter days, and studies
the endorsements of his bonds, and he wonders that the ambitious man can endure
the shuttings and thrustings of Courts, and can measure his happiness by the
smile of a greater man: And, he that does so, wonders as much, that this
covetous man can date his happiness by an Almanac, and such revolutions, and
though he have quick returns of receipt, yet scarce affords himself bread to
live till that day come, and though all his joy be in his bonds, yet demes
himself a candles end to look upon them. Hilly ways are wearisome ways, and
tire the ambitious man; Carnal pleasures are dirty ways, and tire the
licentious man; Desires of gain, are thorny ways, and tire the covetous man;
Aemulations of higher men, are dark and ^linde ways, and tire the envious man,
Every way, that is out of the way, wearies us; But, lass^it sumus; sed (...)
non datur requires, we labor, and have no rest, Lem. 5. 5.
when we have done; we are wearied with our sins, and have no satisfaction in
them; we go to bed to night, weary of our sinful labors, and we will rise
freshly to morrow, to the same sinful labors again; And when a sinner does so
little remember yesterday, how little does he consider to morrow? He that
forgets what he has done, foresees not what he shall suffer: so sin is a
burden, it crookens us, it wearies us; And those are the two first
inconveniences.

And then a third is Retardat. Though a man can stand under a burden, that he
do not sink, but be able to make some steps, yet his burden slackens his pace,
and he goes not so fast, as without that burden he could have gone. So it is an
habitual sins; though we do not sink into desperation, and stupefaction,
though we do come to the participation of outward means, and have some sense,
some feeling thereof, yet, Retardat.
as long as any one beloved and habitual sin hangs upon us, it slackens our
pace in all the ways of godliness. And we come not to such an appropriation of
the promises of the Gospel, in hearing Sermons, nor to such a re-incarnation,
and invisceration of Christ and his merits into our selves, in the Sacrament;
as if we were altogether divested of that sin, and not only at that time, we
should do. Quis ascendes, says David; Ps. 24. 3.
who shall ascend unto the hill of the Lord? It is a painful clambring; up a
hill. And Saint August. makes use of the answer, Innocens manibus, He that has
clean hands; first, he must have hands, as well as feet; He must do something
for himself; And then, Innocent hands; such as do no harm to others, such as
hold, and carry no hurtful thing to himself; Either he must have the first
Innocence, Abstinence from ill getting, or the second Innocence, Restitution of
that which was ill gotten, or he shall never get up that hill; for, it is a
steep hill, and there is no walking up, but he must crawle, hand and foot.
Therefore, says the Apostle, Deponamus pondus, Let us lay aside every weight;
He does not say, sin in general, but every weight, every circumstance that may
aggravate our sin, every conversation that may occasion our sin; And, (as he
adds, particularly and emphatically) The sin, that does so easily beset us;
Easily, because customarily, habitually; And then, says that Apostle, in that
place, Let us run; when we have laid down the sin, that does so easily beset
us, our beloved and habitual sin, and laid down every weight, every
circumstance that aggravates that sin, then we may be able to run, to proceed
with a holy cheerfulness and proficiency in the ways of sanctification; but
till that we cannot, how due observers soever we be of all outward means; for,
sin is a burden, in perverting us, in tyring us, in retarding us.

And last of all, it is a burden, quaetenus praecipitat, Praecipitat.
as it gives him ever new occasion of stumbling; He that has not been
accustomed to a sin, but exercised in resisting it, will find many tentations,
but as a wash way that he can trot thorough, and go forward religiously in his
Calling for all them;) for though there be coluber in via, A snake in every
way, tentations in every calling, yet, In Christo omnia possumus, In Christ, we
can do all things, and therefore, in him, we can bruise the Serpents head) and
spurn a tentation out of his way. But he that has been long under the custom
of a sin, evermore meets with stones to stumble at, and bogges to plunge in. It
is S. Chrys^stomes application; He that has had fever, though he have cast it
off, yet he walks weakly, and he has an inclination to the beds side, or to a
chair, at every turn that he makes about his chamber. So has he to relapses,
that has been under the custom of an habitual sin, though he have
discontinued the practice of that sin. And these be the inconveniences, the
mischiefs, represented to us in this metaphore, A burden, Mine iniquities are
as a burden too heavy for me, Because they sink me down, from the Creator to
the creature; Because they tire and weary me, and yet I must bear them; Because
when they do not absolutely tire me, yet they slacken my pace; and because,
though I could lay off that burden, leave off that sin, for the present
practice, yet the former habit has so weakened me, that I always apt to
stumble, and fall into relapses.

Thus have you the mischievous inconveniences of habitual sin laid open to
you, Conclusiv. Christus.
in these two elegancies of the holy Ghost, supergressae, Mine iniquities are
gone over my head, and the gravatae, As a burden they are too heavy for me. But
as a good Emperor received that commendation, that no man went ever out of his
presence discontented, so our gracious God never admits us to his presence in
this his Ordinance, but with a purpose to dismiss us in heart, and in comfort;
for, his Almoner, he that distributeth his mercies to Congregations, is the God
of comfort, of all comfort, the holy Ghost himself. Nay, they whom he admits to
his presence here, go not out of his presence, when they go from hence; He is
with them, whilst they stay here, and he goes home with them, when they go
home. Princes out of their Royal care call Parliaments, and graciously deliver
themselves over to that Representative Body; God out of his Fatherly love calls
Congregations, and does not only deliver himself over, in his ordinance, to
that Representative Body, the whole Church there, but when every man is become
a private man again, when the Congregation is dissolved, and every man restored
to his own house, God, in his Spirit, is within the doors, within the bosoms
of every man that received him here. Therefore we have reserved for the
conclusion of all, the application of this Text to our blessed Savior; for so
our most ancient Expositors direct our meditations, first, historically, and
literally, upon David, and that we did at first; Then morally, and by just
application to our selves, and that we have most particularly insisted upon;
And lastly, upon our Savior Christ Jesus himself; and that remains for our
conclusion and consolation; for, even from him, groaning under our burden, we
may hear these words, Mine iniquities are gone over my head, and, etc.

First then, that that lay upon Christ, was sin, properly sin. Peccatum.
Nothing could estrange God from man, but sin; and even from this Son of man,
though he were the Son of God too, was God far estranged; therefore God saw sin
in him. Non novit peccatum, He knew no sin; not by any experimental knowledge,
not by any perpetration; for, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Non fecit peccatum, He did no sin, be committed no sin. 1 Pct. 2. 23.
What though? we have sin upon us, sin to condemnation, Original sin before we
know sin, before we have committed any sin. They esteemed him stricken, and
smitten of God; Esa. 53. 4.
and they mistook not in that; He was stricken and smitten of God; It pleased
the Lord to bruile him, v. 10.
and to put him to grief; And the Lord proceeds not thus, where he sees no sin.
Therefore the Apostle carries it to a very high expression, God made him to be
sin for our sakes; 2 Cor. 5. 21.
not only sinful, but sin it self. And as one cruel Emperor wished all
mankind in one man, that he might have beheaded mankind at one blow, so God
gathered the whole nature of sin into one Christ, that by one action, one
passion, sin, all sin, the whole nature of sin might be overcome. It was sin
that was upon Christ, else God could not have been angry with him, nor pleased
with us.

It was sin, and his own sin; Mine iniquities, says Christ, in his Type, and
figure, Sua.
David; and in his body, the Church; and, (we may be bold to add) in his very
person; Mine iniquities. Many Heretics denied his body, to be his Body, they
said it was but an airy, an imaginary, an illusory Body; and denied his Soul to
be his Soul, they said he had no humane soul, but that his divine nature
supplied that, and wrought all the operations of the soul. But we that have
learnt Christ better, know, that he could not have redeemed man, by that way
that was contracted between him and his Father, that is, by way of
satisfaction, except he had taken the very body, and the very soul of man: And
as verily as his humane nature, his body and soul were his, his sins were his
too. As my mortality, and my hunger, and thirst, and weariness, and all my
natural infirmities are his, so my sins are his sins. And now when my sins are
by him thus made his sins, no Hell-Devill, not Satan, no Earth-Devill, no
Calumniator, can any more make those sins my sins, then he can make his
divinity, mine. As by the spirit of Adoption, I am made the child of God, the
seed of God, the same Spirit with God, but yet I am not made God, so by Christ's
taking my sins, I am made a servant of my God, a Beads-man of my God, a
vassal, a Tributary debtor to God, but I am no sinner in the sight of God, no
sinner so, as that man or the Devil can impute that sin unto me, then when my
Savior has made my sins his. As a Soldier would not part with his scars,
Christ would not.

They were sins, Plura.
that lay upon him, part with our sins; And his sins; and, as it follows in his
Type, David, sins in a plurality, many sins. I know nothing in the world so
manifold, so plural, so numerous, as my sins; And my Savior had all those.
But if every other man have not so many sins, as I, he owes that to Gods grace,
and not to the Devils forbearance, for the Devil saw no such parts, nor no
such power in me to advance or hinder his kingdom, no such birth, no such
education, no such place in the State or Church, as that he should be gladder
of me, then of other men. He ministers tentations to all; and all are overcome
by his tentations; And all these sins, in all men, were upon Christ at once.
All twice over; In the root, and in the fruit too; In the bullein, and in the
coin too; In gross, and in retail; In Original, and in Actual sin. And,
howsoever the sins of former ages, the sins of all men for 4000 years before,
which were all upon him, when he was upon the Cross, might possibly be
numbered, (as things that are past, may easilier fall within a possibility of
such an imagination) yet all those sins, which were to come after, he himself
could not number; for, he, as the Son of man, though he know how long the
world has lasted, knows not how long this sinful world shall last, and when
the day of Judgment shall be; And all those future sins, were his sins before
they were committed; They were his before they were theirs that do them. And
lest this world should not afford him sins enough, he took upon him the sins of
heaven it self; not their sins, who were fallen from heaven, and fallen into an
absolute incapacity of reconciliation, but their sins, which remained in
heaven; Those sins, which the Angels that stand, would fall into, if they had
not received a confirmation, given them in contemplation of the death and
merits of Christ, Christ took upon him, for all things, in Earth, and Heaven
too, were reconciled to God by him: for, if there had been as many worlds, as
there are men in this, (which is a large multiplication) or as many worlds, as
there are sins in this, (which is an infinite multiplication) his merit had
been sufficient to all.

They were sins, Supergressae.
his sins, many sins, the sins of the world; and then, as in his Type,
David, Supergressae, his sins, these sins were got above him. And not as
David's, or ours, by an insensible growth, and swelling of a Tide in Course of
time, but this inundation of all the sins of all places, and times, and
persons, was upon him in an instant, in a minute; in such a point as admits,
and requires a subtle, and a serious consideration; for it is eternity; which
though it do infinitely exceed all time, yet is in this consideration, less
then any part of time, that it is indivisible, eternity is so; and though it
last for ever, is all at once, eternity is so. And from this point, this
timelesse time, time that is all time, time that is no time, from all eternity,
all the sins of the world were gone over him.

And, Caput.
in that consideration, supergressae caput, they were gone over his head. Let
his head be his Divine nature, yet they were gone over his head: for, though
there be nothing more voluntary, then the love of God to man, (for, he loves
us, not only for his own sake, or for his own glories sake, but he loves us
for his loves sake, he loves us, and loves his love of us, and had rather want
some of his glory, then we should not have, nay, then he should not have so
much love toward us) though this love of his be an act simply voluntary, yet
in that act of expressing this love, in the sending a Savior, there was a
kind of necessity contracted on Christ's part; such a contract had passed
between him and his Father, that as himself says, there was an oportuit pati,
Luc. 24.
a necessity that he should suffer all that he suffered, and so enter into
glory, when he was come; so there was an oportuit venire a necessity, (a
necessity induced by that contract) that he should come in that humiliation,
and smother, and suppress the glory of the divine nature, under a cloud of
humane, of passible, of inglorious flesh.

So, Tectum.
be his divine nature this head, his sins, all our sins made his, were gone
above his head; And over his head, all those ways, that we considered before,
in our selves; Sicut tectum, sicut fornix, as a roof, as an arch, that had
separated between God, and him, in that he prayed, and was not heard; when in
that Transeat Calix, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me, the
Cup was not only not taken out of his hands, but filled up again as fast, as
he, in obedience to his Father, drank of it, more and worse miseries
succeeding, and exceeding those which he had born before. They were above him
in clamore, Clamor.
in that voice, in that clamor which was got up to heaven, and in possession
of his Fathers ears, before his prayer came, Father, forgive them, for they are
not forgiven that sin of crucifying the Lord of life, yet. They were above
his head, Aquae.
tanquam aquae, as an inundation of waters, then when he swet water and blood,
in the Agony, when he, who had formerly passed his Israel thorough the Red
Sea, as though that had not been love large enough, was now himself overflowed
with a Red Sea of his own blood, for his Israel again. And they were over his
head in Dominio, Dominium,
in a Lordship, in a Tyranny, then when those marks of sovereign honor, a
robe, and a scepter, and a Crown of thorns were added to his other afflictions.
And so is our first part of this Text, the supergressae sunt, the multiplicity
of sin, appliable to Christ, as well as to his Type, to David, and to us, the
members of his body.

And so is the last part, Graves.
that which we handled to day, too, the gravata sunt, the weight and
insupportablenesse of sin. They were heavy, they weighed him down from his
Fathers bosom, they made God Man. That one sin could make an Angel a Devil,
is a strange consideration; but that all the sins of the world, could make God
Man, Nimis.
is stranger. Yet sin was so heavy; Too heavy, says the Text. It did not
only make God Man; in investing our nature by his birth, but it made him no
Man, by devesting that body, by death; and, (but for the virtue, and benefit of
a former Decree) submitting that body, to the corruption, and putrefaction of
the grave; But this was the peculiar, the miraculous glory of Christ Jesus. He
had sin, all our sin, and yet never felt worm of conscience; He lay dead in
the grave, and yet never felt worm of corruption. Sin was heavy; It made God
Man; Too heavy; It made Man no Man; Mihi.
Too heavy for him, even for him, who was God and Man together; for, even that
person, so composed, had certain velleitates, (as we say in the School)
certain motions arising sometimes in him, which required a veruntamen, a
review, a re-consideration, Not my will, O Father, but thine be done; and such,
as in us, who are pushed on by Original sin, and drawn on by sinful
concupiscences in our selves, would become sins, though in Christ they were
far from it. Sin was heavy, even upon him, in all those inconveniences, which
we noted in a burden; Onus.
Incurvando, when he was bowed down, and gave his back to their scourges;
Fatigando, when his soul was heavy unto death; Retardando, when they brought
him to think it long, Viquid dereliquisti, Why have thou forsaken me? And
then, praecipitando, to make that haste to the Consummatum est, to the
finishing of all, as to die before his fellows that were crucified with him,
died; to bow down his head, and to give up his soul, before they extorted it
from him.

Thus we burdned him; Bernard.
And thus he unburdned us; Et cum exonerat nos onerat, when he unburdens us, he
burdens us even in that unburdening: Onerat beneficio, cum exonerat peccato. He
has taken off the obligation of sin, but he has laid upon us, the
obligation of thankfulness, Ps. 116. 12.
and Retribution. Quid retribuam? What shall I render to the Lord, for all his
benefits to me? is vox onerati, a voice that groans under the burden, though
not of sin, Luke 5. 8.
yet of debt, to that Savior, that has taken away that sin. Exi a me
Domine, that which Saint Peter said to Christ, Lord depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, is, says that Father, vox onerati, the voice of one oppressed with
the blessings and benefits of God, and desirous to spare, and to husband that
treasure of Gods benefits, as though he were better able to stand without the
support of some of those benefits, then stand under the debt, which so many, so
great benefits laid upon him: Truly he that considers seriously, what his sins
have put the Son of God to, cannot but say, Lord lay some of my sins upon me,
rather then thy Son should bear all this; that devotion, that says after,
Spare thy people, whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious blood, would
say before, spare that Son, that must die, spare that precious blood, that must
be shed to redeem us. And rather then Christ should truly, really bear the
torments of hell, in his soul, (which torments cannot be severed from
obduration, nor from everlastingness) I would, I should desire, that my sins
might return to me, and those punishments for those sins; I should be ashamed
to be so far exceeded in zeal, by Moses, who would have been blotted out of
the book of life, or by Paul, who would have been separated from Christ for his
brethren, as that I would not undertake as much, to redeem my redeemer, and
suffer the torments of Hell my self, rather then he should; But it is an
insupportable burden of debt, that he has laid upon me, by suffering that
which he suffered, Idem.
without the torments of Hell. Those words, Vis sanus fieri, have thou a desire
to be well, and a faith that I can make thee well? are vox ex^nerantis, the
words of him that would take off our burden; But then, the Toll grabatum and
ambula, Take up thy bed and walk, this is vox oncrantis, the voice of Christ,
as he lays a new burden upon us; ut quod prius suave, jam onerosum sit, that
bed which he had ease in before, must now be born with pain; that sin which was
forgotten with pleasure, must now be remembered with Contrition Christ speaks
not of a vacuity, nor of a levity; when he takes off one burden, he lays on
another; nay, two for one. He takes off the burden, of Irremediablenesse, of
irrecoverablenesse, and he reaches out his hand, in his Ordinances, in his Word
and Sacraments, by which we may be disburdened of all our sins; but then he
lays upon us, Onus resipiscentiae, the burden of Repentance for our selves, and
Onus gratitudinis, the burden of retribution, and thankfulness to him, in them
who are his, by our relieving of them, in whom he suffers. The end of all,
(that we may end all in endless comfort) is, That our word, in the original,
in which the holy Ghost spoake, is Iikkebedu, which is not altogether, as we
read them, graves sunt, but graves fieri; not that they are, but that they were
as a burden, too heavy for me; till I could lay hold upon a Savior to sustain
me, they were too heavy for me: And by him, Psalm. 18. 29.
I can run through a troop (through the multiplicity of my sins,) and by my
God I can leap over a wall; Though mine iniquities be got over my head, as a
wall of separation, yet in Christo omnia possum, In Christ I can do all
things; Mine iniquities are got over my head; but my head is Christ; and in
him, I can do whatsoever he has done, by applying his sufferings to my soul
for all; my sins are his, and all his merit is mine: And all my sins shall no
more hinder my ascending into heaven, nor my sitting at the right hand of God,
in mine own person, then they hindered him, who bore them all in his person,
mine only Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, blessed for ever.

SERMON XXIV.
Preached at White Hall.
EZEKIEL. 34. 19. And as for my flock, they eat that, which ye have troen with
your feet, and they drink that which ye have foulded with your feet.
THose four Prophets, whom the Church has called the great Prophets, Esaias, and
Jeremy, Ezekiel and Daniel, are not only therefore called great, because they
writ more, then the lesser Prophets did, (for Zecbary, who is amongst the
lesser, writ more then Daniel who is amongst the greater) but because their
Prophecies are of a larger comprehension, and extent, and, for the most part,
speak more of the coming of Christ, and the establishing of the Christian
Church, then the lesser Prophets do, who were more conversant about the
temporal deliverance of Israel from Babylon, though there be aspersions of
Christ, and his future government in those Prophets too, though more thinly
shed. Amongst the four great ones, our Prophet Ezekiel is the greatest. I
compare not their extraction and race; for, though Ezekiel were de genere
sacerdotali, of the Leviticall and Priestly race; (And, as Philo Iud^us notes,
all nations having some marks of Gentry, some calling that ennobled the
professors thereof, (in some Arms, and Merchandise in some, and the Arts in
others) amongst the Jews, that was Priesthood, Priesthood was Gentry) though
Ezekiel were of this race, Esaias was of a higher, for he was of the extraction
of their Kings, of the blood royal. But the extraordinary greatness of
Ezekiel, is in his extraordinary depth, and mysteriousnesse, for this is one of
those parts of Scripture, (as the beginning of Genesis, and the Canticles of
Solomon, also are) which are forbid to be read amongst the Jews, till they come
to be thirty years old, which was the Canonical age to be made Priests; In so
much, that Saint Gregory says, when he comes to expound any part of this
Prophet, Noctunum iter ago, that he traveled by night, and did but guess at
his way. But, besides that many of the obscure places of the Prophets are more
open to us, then they were to the ancients, because many of those prophecies
are now fulfilled, and so that which was Prophecy to them, is History to us, in
this place, which we have now undertaken, there never was darkness, not
difficulty, neither in the first emanation of the light thereof, nor in the
reflection; neither in the Literal, nor in the Figurative sense thereof; for
the literal sense is plainly that, that amongst the manifold oppressions,
under which the Children of Israel languished in Babylon, this was the
heaviest, that their own Priests joined with the State against them, and
infused pestilent doctrines into them, that so themselves might enjoy the
favor of the State, and the people committed to their charge, might slacken
their obedience to God, and surrender themselves to all commandments of all
men; This was their oppression, the Church joined with the Court, to oppress
them; Their own Priests gave these sheep grass which they had trodden with
their feet, (doctrines, not as God gave them to them, but as they had tampered,
and tempered them, and accommodated them to serve turns, and fit their ends;
whose servants they had made themselves, more then Gods) And they gave them
water to drink which they had troubled with their feet, that is, doctrines
mudded with other ends then the glory of God; And that therefore God would take
his sheep into his own care, and reduce them from that double oppression of
that Court, and that Church, those Tyrannous officers, and those
over-obsequious Priests. This is the literal sense of our text, and context,
evident enough in the letter thereof. And then the figurative and Mystical
sense is of the same oppressions, and the same deliverance over again in the
times of Christ, and of the Christian Church; for that is more then figurative,
fully literal, soon after the Text, I will set up one shepherd, my servant
David, And I will raise up for them a plant of renoune, which is the same that
Esaias had called A rod out of the stem of Iesse, and Jeremy had called A
righteous br^nch, ver. 23. 29. 11. 1. 23. 5.
a King thus should reign, and prosper. This prophecy then comprehending the
kingdom of Christ, it comprehends the whole kingdom of Christ, not only the
oppressions, and deliverances of our forefathers, from the Heathen, and the
Heretics in the Primitive Church, but that also which touches us more nearly,
the oppressions and deliverance of our Fathers, in the Reformation of Religion,
and the shaking off of the yoke of Rome, that Italian Babylon, as heavy as the
Chald^an. We shall therefore at this time fix our meditations upon that
accommodation of the Text, the oppression that the Israel of God was under,
then, when he delivered them by that way, the Reformation of Religion, and
consider how these metaphors of the holy Ghost, The treading with their feet
the grass that the sheep were to eae, and the troubling with their feet the
water that the sheep were to drink, do answer and set out the oppressions of
the Roman Church then, as lively as they did in the other Babylon. And so,
having said enough of the primary sense of these words, as they concern Gods
Israel, in the first Babylon, and something by way of commemoration, and
thankfulness, for Gods deliverance of his Israel, from the persecutions in the
Primitive Church, insist we now, upon the several metaphors of the Text, as
the holy Ghost continues them to the whole reign of Christ, and so to the
Reformation.

First, Pastores concurrebant.
the greatest calamity of those sheep in Babylon, was that their own shepherds
concurred to their oppression. In Babylon they were a part, but in Rome they
were all; In Babylon they joined with the State, but in Rome they were the
State. Mal. 1. 7.
Saint Hierome notes out of a Tradition of the Jews, that those loafes which
their priests were to offer to the Lord, were to be of such corn as those
Priests had sowed, and reaped and threshed, and ground, and baked all with
their own hands. But they were so far from that at Babylon, Job 4. 8.
and at Rome, Ier. 12. 20.
as that they ploughed iniquity, and sowed wickedness, and reaped the same;
and (as God himself complains) trod his portion under foot; That is, first,
neglected his people, (for Gods people are his portion) And then whatsoever
pious men had given to the Church, is his portion too, and that portion they
had trodden under foot; not neglected it, not despised it, for they collected
it, and audited it providently enough, but they trod it under foot, when that
which was given for the sustentation of the Priest, they turned upon their own
splendor, and glory, and surfeit: Christ will be fed in the poor that are
hungry, and he will be clothed in the poor that are naked, so he would be
enriched in those poor Ministers that serve at his Altar; when Christ would be
so fed, he desires not feasts and banquets; when he would be so clothed, he
desires not soft raiment fit for Kings houses, nor embroyderies, nor perfumes;
when he would be enriched in the poor Churchman, he desires not that he should
be a sponge, to drink up the sweat of others, and live idly; but yet, as he
would not be starved in the hungry, nor submitted to cold and unwholesome air
in the naked, so neither would he be made contemptible, nor beggarly in the
Minister of his Church. Nor, was there in the world, (take in Turkey, and all
the heathen) (for they also have their Clergy) a more contemtible and more
beggarly Clergy then that of Rome; I speak of the Clergy in the most proper
sense, that is, they that minister, they that officiate, they that execute,
they that personally and laboriously do the service of the Church. The
prelacies, and Dignities of the Church, were multiplied in the hands of them,
who under pretext of Government, took their ease, and they that labored, were
attenuated and macerated, with lean, and penurious pensions. In the best
governed Churches there are such Dignities, and supplies without Cure of
souls, or personal service; but they are intended for recompense of former
labors, and sustentation of their age, of whose youth, and stronger days, the
Church had received benefit. But in the Roman Church these preferments are
given almost in the womb; and children have them not only before they can
merit them, but before they can speak for them; and they have some
Church-names, Dean, or Bishop, or Abbat, as soon almost as they have any
Christian names. Yea, we know many Church dignities, entailed to noble
families, and, if it fall void, whilst the child is so incapable, it must be
held for him, by some that must resign it, when it may, by any extent of
dispensation, be asked for him. So then the Church joined with the State, to
defraud the people; The Priest was poorly maintained, and so the people poorly
instructed. And this is the first conformity between the two Babylons, the
Chaldean and the Italian.

Pursue we then the holy Ghosts purpose and manner of implying, Gramen.
and expressing it the food ordained for sheep, Grass. In which make we only
these two stops, that the sheep are to eat their grass super terram, Super
terram.
upon the ground; And they are to eat it sinerore, when the dew is off. First,
upon the ground; that is, where the hand of God has set it; which for
spiritual food is the Church. In hard winters we give sheep hay, but in open
times open grass. In persecutions of Tyrans, in Interdicts of Antichristian
Bishops, who sometimes out of passion, or some secular respect shut up Church
doors and forbid service, and Sacraments, to whole Cities, to whole nations,
sheep must live by hay, Gods Children must relieve themselves at home, by books
of pious and devout meditation; But when God affords abundant pastures, and
free entrance thereunto, Gods sheep are to take their grass upon the ground,
Gods grace at the Church. Impossible est eum corrigere, qui omnia scit,
Chrysostom: It is an impossible thing to correct him, that thinks he knows all
things already. As long as he will admit counsel from another, he
acknowledges the other, to know more then he; but if he thinks, he knows all
before, he has no room for farther instruction, nor love to the place where it
is to be had. We read in the Eastern Histories, of a navigable River, that
afforded all the inhabitants exportation, and importation, and all commerce.
But when every particular man, to serve his own curiosity, for the offices of
his house, for the pleasures of his gardens, and for the sumptuousness of
Grots and aqueducts, and such waterworks, drew several channells, infinite
channells our of this great River, this exhausted the maine channel, and
brought it to such a shallowness, as would bear no boats, and so, took from
them the great and common commodities that it had afforded them. So if every
man think to provide himself Divinity enough at home, for himself and his
family, and out of laziness and singularity, or state, or disaffection to the
preacher leave the Church unfrequented, he frustrates the Ordinance of God,
which is, that his sheep should come to his pastures, and take his grass upon
his ground, his instructions at his house at Church. And this we could not do
in the Roman Church, where all our prayers, and all Gods service of that kind,
were in a language, not only not understood by him that heard it, but for the
most part, not by him that spoke it, It is not of their manifold, and
scornful, and ridiculous and histrionicall Ceremonies in their service, nor of
the dangerous poisons, the direct Idolatries (in the practice of the people) in
their service, that we complain of now, but of this, that though it had been
never so wholesome grass, it was not so to those sheep, they could not know it
to be their proper aliment, for certainly they ask without faith, that ask
without understanding; nor can I believe or hope that God will give me that I
ask, if I know not what I asked. And what a miserable supply had they for this
in their Legends; for many of those Legends were in vulgar tongues and
understood by them. B. Virgo femoralia. B. Tho. Cantuar, veparavit. Cantiprat.
l. 2. c. 29.
In which Legends, the Virgin Mary was every good man's wife, and every good
woman's midwife, by a neighborly, and familiar, and ordinary assistant in all
household offices, as we see in those Legends, and revelations. In which
Legends, they did not only feign actions, which those persons never did, but
they fained persons which never were; and they did not only mis-canonize men,
made Devils Saints, but they mis-christened men, put names to persons, and
persons to names that never were. And these legends being transferred into the
Church, the sheep lack their grass upon the ground, that is, the knowledge of
Gods will, in his house, at Church. And this is another conformity between the
two Babylons, the Chaldean, and the Italian Babylon, that the sheep lacked due
food in the due place.

So is it also, Ros super gramen.
that the sheep eat their grass, whilst the Dew was upon it, which is found
by experience to be unwholesome. The word of God is our grass, which should be
delivered purely, simply, sincerely, and in the natural verdure thereof. The
Dews which we intend, are Revelations, Apparitions, Inspirations, Motions, and
Interpretations of the private spirit. Now, though we may see the natural dew
to descend from heaven, yet it did first ascend from the earth, and retains
still some such earthly parts, as sheep cannot digest. So howsoever these
Revelations and Inspirations seem to fall upon us from heaven, they arise from
the earth, from our selves, from our own melancholy, and pride, or our too much
homeliness and familiarity in our accesses, and conversation with God, or a
facility in believing, or an often dreaming the same thing. And with these Dews
of Apparitions and Revelations, did the Roman Church make our fathers drunk
and giddy; And against these does S. Augustine devoutly pray, and praise God,
that he had delivered him from the curiosity of sipping these dews, of
harkening after these apparitions and revelations. But so ordinary were these
apparitions then, as that any son, or nephew, or friend, could discern his
fathers, or uncles, or companions soul, ascending out of Purgatory into heaven,
and know them as distinctly, as if they kept the same hair, and beard, and
bodily lineaments, as they had upon earth. And as a ship which has struck
Sail, will yet go on with the wind it had before, for a while, so now, when
themselves are come to acknowledge, That it was the unanime opinion of the
Fathers, Maldon.
that the souls of the dead did not appear after death, but that it was still
the Devil, howsoever sometimes that that he proposed were holy and religious,
Coccius.
yet we see a great Author of theirs attribute so much to these apparitions,
and revelations, that when he pretends to prove all controversies by the
Fathers of the Church, he every where intermingles that reverend Book, of
Brigids Revelations, that they might also have some Mothers of the Church too;
which is not disproportionall in that Church; if they have had a woman Pope, to
have Mothers of the Church too. I speak not this, as though God might not, or
did not manifest his will by women; The great mystery of the Resurrection of
Christ was revealed to women before men; and to the sinfullest woman of
company, first. But I speak of that bold injury done to the mysteries of the
Christian Religion, by pouring out that dew upon the grass, the Revelations of
S. Brigid, upon the controversies of Religion. A book of so much blasphemy, and
impertinency, and incredibility, that if a Heathen were to be converted, he
would sooner be brought to believe Ovids Metamorphoses, then Brigids
Revelations, to conduce to Religion. And this is also another conformity
between the two Babylons, the Chaldean, and the Italian Babylon, that we could
not receive our grass pure, but infected, and dewed with these frivolous, nay
pernicious apparitions, and Revelations.

But press we a little closer to the very steps, Gramen conculcatum.
and metaphor of the holy Ghost, who here lays the corrupting of the sheeps
grass in this, That the shepherds had trodden it down. And this treading down
will be pertinently considered two ways. Tertullian in his Book De habitu
muliebri, notes two excesses in women's dressing; One he calls Ornatum, the other
cultum; One mundum muliebrem, the other, (according to the liberty that he
takes in making words) Immundum muliebrem; the first is a superfluous diligence
in their dressing, but the other an unnatural addition to their complexion;
the first he pronounces to be always ad ambitionem, for pride, but the other,
ad prostitutionem, for a worse, for the worst purpose. These two sorts of
Excesses do note these two kinds of treading down the grass, which we
intend; of which one is, the mingling of too much humane ornament, and secular
learning in preaching, in presenting the word of God, which word is our grass;
The other is of mingling humane Traditions, as of things of equal value, and
obligation, with the Commandments of God. For the first, humane ornament, if
in those pastures, which are ordained for sheep, you either plant rare and
curious flowers, delightful only to the eye, or fragrant and odoriferous
herbs delightful only to the smell, nay, be they medicinal herbs, useful,
and behovefull for the preservation, and restitution of the health of man, yet
if these specious and glorious flowers, and fragrant, and medicinal herbs, be
not proper nourishment for sheep, this is a treading down of the grass, a
pestering and a suppressing of that which appertained to them. So if in your
spiritual food, our preaching of the Word, you exact of us more secular
ornament, then may serve, as Saint Augustine says, Ad ancillationem, to convey,
and usher the true word of life into your understandings, and affections, (for
both those must necessarily be wrought upon) more then may serve ad vehiculum,
for a chariot for the word of God to enter, and triumph in you, this is a
treading down of the grass, a filling of that ground which was ordained for
sheep, with things improper, and impertinent to them. If you furnish a Gallery
with stuff proper for a Gallery, with Hangings and Chairs, and Couches, and
Pictures, it gives you all the conveniences of a Gallery, walks and prospect,
and ease; but if you pester it with improper and impertinent furniture, with
Beds, and Tables, you lose the use, and the name of a Gallery, and you have
made it a Wardrobe; so if your curiosity extort more then convenient ornament,
in delivery of the word of God, you may have a good Oration, a good
Panegyrique, a good Encomiastique, but not so good a Sermon. It is true that
Saint Paul applies sentences of secular Authors, even in matters of greatest
importance; but then it is to persons that were accustomed to those authors,
and affected with them, and not conversant, not acquainted at all, with the
phrase and language of Scripture amongst us now, almost every man (God be
blessed for it) is so accustomed to the text of Scripture, as that he is more
affected with the name of David, or Saint Paul, then with any Seneca or
Plutarch. I am far from forbidding secular ornament in divine exercises,
especially in some Auditories, acquainted with such learnings. I have heard men
preach against witty preaching; and do it with as much wit, as they have; and
against learned preaching, with as much learning, as they could compass. If
you should place that beast, which makes the Bezoar stone, in a pasture of
pure, but only grass, it is likely, that out of his natural faculty, he
would petrifie the juice of that grass, and make it a stone, but not such a
medicinal stone, as he makes out of those herbs which he feeds upon. Let all
things concur in the name of God, to the advancing of his purpose, in his
ordinance, which is, to make his will acceptable to you, by his word; only
avoid excess in the manner of doing it. Saint Augustines is an excellent rule,
when after in his book De Doctrina Christiana, he had taught a use of all Arts
in Divinity, he allows them only thus far, ut cum ingenia his reddantur
exercitatiora, cavendum ne reddantur maligniora, that when a man by these helps
is the more full, and the more ready and the more able for Church service, he be
not also thereby made the more bold and the more confident; Nec ament decipere
verisimili sermon, lest because he is able to make any thing seem probable and
likely to the people, by his eloquence, he come to infuse paradoxicall
opinions, or schismatic, or (which may be believed either way)
problematicall opinions, for certain and constant truths, and so be the less
conversant, and the less diligent in advancing plain, and simple, and
fundamental doctrines and catechisticall, which are truly necessary to
salvation, as though such plain, and ordinary, and catechisticall doctrines
were not worthy of his gifts and his great parts. In a word, in sheep-pastures
you may plant fruit trees in the hedge-rowes; but if you plant them all over,
it is an Orchard; we may transfer flowers of secular learning, into these
exercises; but if they consist of those, they are but Themes, and Essays. But
why insist we upon this? Was there any such conformity between the two Babylons
as that the Italian Babylon can be said to have trodden down the grass in that
kind, with overcharging their Sermons with too much learning. Truly it was
far, very very far from it; for when they had prevailed in that Axiom, and
Aphorism of theirs, that it was best to keep the people in ignorance, they
might justly keep the Priest in ignorance too; for when the people needed no
learned instruction, what needed the Church a learned instructor? And therefore
I laid hold of this consideration, the treading down of grass, by oppressing it
with secular learning, there by to bring to your remembrance, the extreme
ignorance that damped the Roman Church, at that time; where Aristotle's
Metaphysics were condemned for Heresy, Hosius.
and ignorance in general made not only pardonable, but meritorious. Of which
times, if at any time, you read the Sermons, which were then preached, and
after published, you will excuse them of this treading down the grass, by
oppressing their auditories with overmuch learning, for they are such Sermons
as will not suffer us to pity them, but we must necessarily scorn, and
contemn, and deride them; Sermons, at which the gravest, and saddest man could
not choose but laugh; not at the Sermon, God forbid; nor at the plainness, and
homeliness of it; God forbid; but at the Soloecismes, the barbarismes, the
servilities, the stupid ignorance of those things which fall within the
knowledge of boys of the first form in every School. This was their treading
down of grass, not with overmuch learning, but with a cloud, a dampe, an earth
of ignorance. After an Ox that oppresses the grass, after a Horse that
devours the grass, sheep will feed; but after a Goose that stanches the grass,
they will not; no more can Gods sheep receive nourishment from him that puts a
scorn upon his function, by his ignorance.

But in the other way of treading down grass, Conculcatum per traditiones.
(that is, the word of God) by the Additions and Traditions of men, the Italian
Babylon Rome abounded, superabounded, overflowed, surrounded all. And this is
much more dangerous then the other; for this mingling of humane additions, and
traditions, upon equal necessity, and equal obligation as the word of God it
self, is a kneading, an incorporating of grass and earth together, so, as
that it is impossible for the weak sheep, to avoid eating the meat of the
Serpent, Genesis 3.
Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. Now man upon his transgression,
was not accursed, nor woman; The sheep were not accursed; But the earth was,
and the Serpent was; and now this kneading, this incorporating of earth with
grass, traditions with the word, makes the sheep to eat the cursed meat of
the cursed Serpent, Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

Now, in this treading down this grass, this way, this suppressing it by
traditions, be pleased to consider these two applications; some traditions do
destroy the word of God, Scicut Porcus.
extirpate it, annihilate it, as when a Hog does root up the grass; In which
case, not only that turfe withers, and is presently useless, and unprofitable
to the sheep, but if you dig never so low after, down to the Center of the
earth, it is impossible ever to find any more grass under it: so some
traditions do utterly oppose the word of God, without having under them, any
mysterious signification, or any occasion or provocation of our devotion, which
is the ordinary pretext of traditions, and Ceremonial additions in their
Church. And of this sort was that amongst the Jews, of which our blessed
Savior reproaches them, Mat. 15.
that whereas by the law, children were to relieve decayed parents, they had
brought in a tradition, of Commutation, of Compensation, that if those children
gave a gift to the Priest, or compounded with the Priest, they were discharged
of the former obligation. And of this sort are many traditions in the Roman
Church; where, not only the doctrines of men but the doctrine of Devils, (as
the Apostle calls the forbidding of Marriage, and of meats) did not only tread
down, 1 Timothy 1.
but root up the true grass.

The other sort of Traditions, Sicut Talpa.
and Ceremonies, do not as the Hog, root up the grass, but as a Mole, cast a
slack, and thin earth upon the face of the grass. Now, if the shepherd, or
husbandman be present to scatter this earth again, the sheep receive no great
harm, but may safely feed upon the wholesome grass, that is under; but if the
sheep, who are not able to scatter this earth, nor to find the grass that lies
under, be left to their own weakness, they may as easily starve in this case,
as in the other; the Mole may damnifie them as much as the Hog. And of this
sort, are those traditions, which induce Ceremonies into the Church, in
vestures, in postures of the body, in particular things, and words, and
actions, in Baptism or Marriage, or any other thing to be transacted in the
Church. These ceremonies are not the institutions of God immediately, but they
are a kind of light earth, that has under it good and useful significations,
which when they be understood conduce much to the increase and advancement of
our devotion, and of the glory of God. And this is the iniquity that we
complain of in the Roman Church, that when we accuse them of multiplying
impertinent, and insupportable ceremonies, they tell us, of some mysterious and
pious signification, in the institution thereof at first; They tell us this,
and it is sometimes true; But neither in Preaching nor practice, do they
scatter this earth to their own sheep, or show them the grass that lies under,
but suffer the people, to inhere, and arrest their thoughts, upon the ceremony
it self, or that to which that ceremony mis-leads them; as in particular, (for
the time will not admit many examples) when they kneel at the Sacrament, they
are not told, that they kneel because they are then in the act of receiving an
inestimable benefit at the hands of God, (which was the first reason of
kneeling then) And because the Priest is then in the act of prayer in their
behalf, that that may preserve them, in body and soul, unto eternal life.
But they are suffered to go one, in kneeling in adoration of that bread, which
they take to be God. We deny not that there are Traditions, nor that there must
be ceremonies, but that matters of faith should depend of these, or be made of
these, that we deny; and that they should be made equal to Scriptures; for
with that especially does Tertullian reproach the Heretics, that being pressed
with Scriptures, they fled to Traditions, as things equal or superior to the
word of God. I am loath to depart from Tertullian, both because he is every
where a Patheticall expresser of himself, and in this point above himself.
Nobis curiositate opus non est, post Iesum Christum, nec Inquisitione, post
Evangelium. Have we seen that face of Christ Jesus here upon earth, which
Angels desired to see, and would we see a better face? Traditions perfecter
then the word? Have we read the four Evangelists, and would we have a better
Library? Traditions fuller then the word? Cum credimus^ nihil desideramus ultra
credere; when I believe God in Christ, dead, and risen again according to the
Scriptures, I have nothing else to believe; Hoc enim prius credimus, non esse
quod ultra credere debeamus; This is the first Article of my Faith, that I am
bound to believe nothing but articles of faith in an equal necessity to them.
Will we be content to be well, and thank God, when we are well? Hilary tells
us, when we are well; Been habet quod iis, quae scripta sunt, contentus sis;
then thou art well, when thou satisfiest thy self with those things, which God
has vouchsafed to manifest in the Scriptures. Si aliquis aliis verbis, quam
quibus a Deo dictum est, demonstrare velit, if any man will speak a new
language, otherwise then God has spoken, and present new Scriptures, (as he
does that makes traditions equal to them) Aut ipse non intelligit, aut
legentibus non intelligendum relinquit, either he understands not himself, or I
may very well be content not to understand him, if I understand God without
him. The Fathers abound in this opposing of Traditions, when out of those
traditions, our adversaries argue an insufficiency in the Scriptures. Solus
Christus audiendus, says Saint Cyprian, we hearken to none but Christ; nec
debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos faciendum putarit, neither are we to
consider what any man before us thought fit to be done, sed quid qui ante emnes
est, fecerit; but what he, who is before all them, did; Christ Jesus and his
Apostles, who were not only the primitive but the pre-primitive Church, did
and appointed to be done. In this treading down of our grass then in the Roman
Church, first by their supine Ignorance, and barbarism, and then by
traditions, of which, some are pestilently iufectious and destroy good words,
some cover it so, as that not being declared to the people in their
signification, they are useless to them, no Babylon could exceed the Italian
Babylon, Rome, in treading down their grass.

Their oppression was as great in the other, Aqua. Psalm. 23. 2.
In troubling their water, My sheep drink that which you have troubled. When
the Lord is our shepherd, he leads us ad aquas quietudinum, to the waters of
rest, of quietness; of these, in the plural, quietudinum, quietness of body,
and quietness of Conscience too. The endowments of heaven are Joy, and Glory;
joy, and glory are the two Elements, the two Hemispheres of Heaven; And of this
Joy, and this Glory of heaven, we have the best earnest that this world can
give, if we have rest; satisfaction and acquiescence in our religion, for our
belief, and for our life and actions, peace of Conscience. And where the Lord
is our shepherd he leads us, and ad aquas quietudinum, to the waters of rest,
multiplied rest; all kind of rest. But the shepherds, in our text, troubled the
waters; and more then so; for we have just cause to note the double
signification of this word, which we translate Trouble, and to transfer the two
significations to the two Sacraments, as they are exhibited in the Roman
Babylon; The word is Mirpas; and it denotes not only Conturbationem, a
troubling, a mudding, but Obturationem too, an interception, a stopping, as the
Septuagint translates it, Prove. 35. and in these two significations of the
word, a troubling, and a stopping of the waters, has the Roman Church
exercised her tyranny, and her malignity, in the two Sacraments. For, in the
Sacrament of Baptism, they had troubled the water, with additions of Oil, and
salt, and spittle, and exorcismes; But in the other Sacrament of they came Ad
obturationem, to a stopping, to an intercision, to an interruption of the
water, the water of life, Aquae quietudinum, the water of rest to our souls,
and peace to our consciences, in withholding the Cup of salvation, the blood of
Christ Jesus from us. Psalm. 116. 12.
So that if thou come to David's holy expostulation, Quid retribuam, what shall
I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me; And pursue it to David's
holy resolution, Accipiam Calicem, I will take the Cup of salvation, you shall
be told, Sir you must take Orders first, or you cannot take that Cup. But water
is as common as Air; And as that Element Air, in our spiritual food, that is
preaching, (which is Spiritus Domini, the breath of God) is common to all, I^e,
praedicate omni Creaturae, Mar. 16. 15. Mat. 26. 27.
go preach the Gospel to every Creature, so is this water of life in the
Sacrament, common to all, Bibite ex eo omnes, Drink ye all of this; and
thereby do the names of Communion, and participation accrue to it, because all
have an interest in it. This is that blood, of which Saint Chrysostom says,
Hic sanguis facit, ut Imago Dei in nobis floreat; That we have the Image of God
in our souls, we have by the benefit of the same nature, by which we have our
souls; There cannot be a humane soul without the Image of God in it. But, ut
floreat, that this Image appear to us, and be continually refreshed in us, ut
non Languescat animae nobilitas, that this holy nobleness of the soul do not
languish not degenerate in us, we have by the benefit of this blood of Christ
Jesus the seal of our absolution in that blessed and glorious Sacrament; And
that blood they deny us. This is that blood of which they can make as much as
they will, with a thought, with an intention; so, as they pretend a power, of
changing a whole vintage at once, all the wine of all the nations in the world,
into the blood of Christ, if the Priest have an intention to do so, in the
time of his Consecration; And yet, as easily as they come by it, they will
givesus none. They have told us, that we had it per Concomitantiam, by a
necessary concomitancy; That because we had the body in the bread, and that
body could not be without the blood, that therefore we had the blood also. But
if the bread alone be enough, if the Cup be impertinent, why did Christ give
it? If we have no loss in their detaining it from us, what gain have they in
retaining it to themselves, let all have it, or none? It is true that they can
perform all the ill, that they would do, by the bread alone. They can work
the spiritual ill, of inducing adoration to a Creature, by the bread alone;
And they could work the temporal ill, of poisoning an Emperor in the
Sacrament, by the bread alone. They can come to all their purposes, to all
their ill, by the bread alone, but we have not all our good, because we have
not Christ's entire Institution. And so in this troubling, and in this stopping
of these waters, in these confusions, we challenge any Babylon, in the behalf
of this Italian Babylon, Rome.

All these oppressions are aggravated by the last, Pedes.
and (as weightiest things sink to the bottom) so is this in the bottom the
heaviest pressure, that they did this with their feet, they corrupted the
grass with their feet, and troubled the waters with their feet. Now in the
Scriptures, when this word, feet, does not signify that part of man's body
which is ordinarily so called, but is transferred to a Metaphorical
signification, (as in our text it is) it does most commonly signify
Affections, 1 Samuel 2. 9.
or Power. So the Lord will keep the feet of his Saints; that is, direct their
desires, and affections in the ways of holiness. And then for Power, (which is
the more frequent acceptance of the word) he will not suffer thy foot to be
moved, that is, thy power to be shaked; And all such places, qui festinus, he
has hastes with his feet sins, our interpreters expound of a hasty abuse
of Power; Psalm. 121. 3.
And those, they have not refrained their feet, and then, Prove. 19. 2.
thy feet are sunk in the mire, are still interpreted of Power, of a wonton
abuse of Power, Ier. 14. 10. 38. 22.
or of a withdrawing this Power from man, by God; feet signifies Affections,
and them corrupted and depraved, and power, and that abused. David seems to
have joined them, (as when they are joined, they must necessarily be the most
heavy) in that prayer, Psalm. 36. 11.
Let not the foot of pride come against me. The hand of pride, nay the sword of
pride, affects not a tender soul so much, as the foot of pride; to be
oppressed, and that with scorn; not so much in an anger, as in a wantonness.
Rehoboams people were more confounded, with that scornful answer of his to
them, when they were come, (My little finger shall be thicker then my Fathers
loins; my father chastised you with whips, 1 King. 12. 10.
but I will chastise you with Scorpions) then they were with the grievances
themselves, for which they came; when the King would not only be cruelly
sharp, but wittily sharp upon them, this cut on every side, and pierced deep.
And so do the Rabbis, the Jewish expositors expound this text, literally,
that in the captivity of Babylon, the great men of their Synagogues, compounded
with the State, and for certain tributes, had commissions, by which they
governed their people at their pleasure, and so milked them to the last drop,
the last drop of blood, and sheared them to the naked skin, and then flead off
that, and all this while laughed at them, contemned them, because they had no
where, to appeal, nor relieve themselves: And this we complain to have been the
proceeding in the Italian Babylon, Rome, with our Fathers, They oppressed them,
with their feet, that is, with Power, and with scorn.

First, Pes-potestatis.
for their illimited and enormous Power, they had so slumbred, so intoxicated
the Princes of the Earth, the weaker by intimidations, the stronger by
communicating the spoil, and suffering those Princes to take some fleeces,
from some of the sheep in their dominions, as there was no relief any way.
They record, nay they boast, gloriously, triumphantly, of three score thousand
of the Waldenses, slain by them in a day, in the beginning of the Reformation;
and Possevine the Jesuit will not lose the glory of recording the five hundred
thousand, slain in a very few years, only in France, and the low Country, for
some declarations of their desire of a Reformation. Let all those innumerable
numbers of wretches, (but now victorious Saints in the Triumphant Church) who
have breathed out their souls in the Inquisition (where even the solicitations
of Kings, and that for their own sons, have not prevailed) confess the power,
the immensness of that power, then, when as under some of the Roman Emperors,
it was treason to weep, treason to sigh, treason to look pale, treason to fall
sick, and all these were made arguments of discontent, and ill affection, to
the present government: so in Rome, there were Heretical sighs, Heretical
tears, palenesse, and Heretical sickness; every things was interpreted to be
an accusation of the present times, and an anhelation after a Reformation, and
that was formal heresy, three pil'd, deep-died heresy: so that a man durst
scarce have prayed for the enlarging of Gods blessings to the Church, because
to with it better, seemed a kind of accusing of it, that it was not well
already; and it was heresy to think so. Let those Israelites, which found no
way from this Egypt, but by the red sea, no way out of Idolatry, but by
Martyrdom, as they have testified for Christ, so testify against Antichrist,
how heavy his feet, as feet signify Power, trod upon the necks of Princes and
people.

But that that affected and afflicted most, Pessuperbiae.
was the scorn and the contempt, that accompanied their oppressions. To bring
Kings to Kiss his feet, was a scorn; but that scorn determined in man; but
it was a scorn to God himself, to say that he had said, it should be so, to
apply Scripture to the justification thereof, Kings and Queens shall bow down
to thee, Esaias. 49. 23.
their faces toward the Earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet. But limit we
all considerations of their scorn in one; In this, that they did these wrongs
professedly, and without any disguise. Great men will oppress and ruin others,
a great while before they will be content to be seen and known to do it. There
is such a kind of reverence, not only to Law, but even to honor, and
opinion, as that men are loathe to publish their evil actions; To sin as
Sodom did, and not to hide it, is an evidence, of neglecting, and scorning of
all the world. And therefore the Roman Historiographers would not forbear to
note the insolency of that young gallant, who knowing what any man whom he
struck could recover by action against him, would strike every poor soul or
inferior person, whom he met in the street and then bid his man give him so
much money, as the Law would for damages. And this oppressing with scorn, this
proceeding without any respect of fame, we note (for have) but in two things,
in the Italian Babylon Rome; Taxa camerae.
first, in that Book, their Taxa Camerae, and then in that doctrine, their
Reservatio Casuum, that they durst compose, and divulge such a book, as their,
Taxa Camerae, which is an Index, a Repertory for all sins, and in which every
man may see beforehand, how much money, an Adultery, an Incest, a Murder, a
Parricide, or any other sin, whose name he would never have thought of, but
by that Remembrancer, that book will cost him, that so, he may sin, and not
undo himself, sin according to his means, and within his compass, that they
durst let the world see such a book, was argument enough that they were feared
up, and scorned all that all men could think, or say, or do in opposition.

So also is their Reservation of Cases; that though all Priests have an equal
power of remitting all sins, Reservatio casuuim.
yet are some sins reserved only to Prelates, some only to the Popes
Legates, some only to the Pope himself. Is not this a scornful spurning and
kicking of the world, a plain telling them that all is done for money, and
shall be so, say all the world what it can. They have a national custom in
civil courtesies in that place in Italy, to offer entertainments and lendings
of money, and the like, but it must not be accepted. It is a discurtesie, to
take their courteous offers in earnest. Will they play so with the great Seal
of heaven, the remission and absolution of sins, and send out their Priests
with that commission, whose sins ye forgive, are forgiven, but see you
forgive none upon which we have set a higher price, and reserved to our selves.
They had such a fashion in old Rome, whilst the Republique stood; He that was
admitted to Triumph must invite the Consuls to the feast, and the Consuls must
promise to come, but they must forbear, lest their presence should diminish
the glory of the Triumpher. So the Priest must profess that he has (as he
has indeed) power to remit all sins, but there are a great many, that he
must not meddle withal. They practice this reservation upon higher persons
then their ordinary Priests, upon Cardinals. A Cardinal is created, and by
that creation he has a voice in all the great affairs of the world, but at his
creation Os clauditur a Papa, he that made him, makes him dumb, and he that
out of the nature of his place is duly to be heard over all the world, must not
be heard in the Consistory, the Pope gives him an universal voice, and then
shuts his mouth; He makes him first a Giant, and then a dwarf in an hour; He
makes him thunder, and speechless, all at once; fearful to the Kings of the
earth, if he might speak, but he must not. They were not content to make
Merchandise of our souls, but they make plays, jests, scorns, of matter of
salvation, and play fast and loose with that sovereign Balsamum of our souls,
the absolution and remission of sins. Though, no doubt, many of them confess in
their own bosoms, that which one of them professes ingenuously, Tapperus.
and publicly, Diffiteri non possumus abusum Reservationum, and stragem
animarum in iis; we cannot deny the abuse of reservations, even to the butchery
of those poor souls, who, by reason of these reservations, want their
absolution, Dolendum, deflendum, pecunia numerata, omnia dispensare; This
deserves all our tears, all our sighs, that for money, and not without it, all
sins are dispensed withal; but there are fixed seasons for salvation, (some
remissions and pardons are reserved to certain times of the year) and there are
fixed shops of salvation, (some remissions and pardons are appropriated to
certain Fairs and Markets, and cannot be given (that is sold) at any other
time, or place. And farther we cannot (we need not) extend this accommodation
of the words of our text, literally intended of the condition of Gods Children
in Babylon, but pregnantly appliable to the condition of our Fathers in the
Italian Babylon, Rome. But having at this time seen the oppressions that those
shepherds inflicted there, for the rest which are many and important
considerations, as first that they staid, that they eat that grass, that yet
they remained Gods sheep, and remained his flock, his Church, though a Church
under a greater Church; And then the behavior of the sheep, whilst they staid
there, their obedience to Gods call in coming from them when he called them,
and made them way; And lastly the little ground that our Separatists can have,
for their departing from us either by Isreal's departing from Babylon, or our
Fathers departing from Rome, must be the exercise of your devotion another day.

SERMON XXV.
Preached at White Hall.
The second Sermon on EZEKIEL. 34. 19. And as for my flock, they eat that, which
ye have trodden with your feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with
your feet.
AS by way of accommodation, we have considered these words, as they concern
the iniquity and oppression of the shepherds, (that is, the chief rulers
amongst the Jews) in the Chaldean Babylon, and as they are appliable to the
condition of our Fathers in the Italian Babylon, Rome, so now in this exercise
are we to consider, the behavior of the sheep, their nature, and their
demeanor under all these pressures; in which we have many steps to go; All
these; first, Manebant, that for all this ill usage there they did stay, they
did not break out, not scatter themselves, manebant; And then Edebant, though
their grass were trodden, and their water troubled, yet they did eat that
grass, and they did drink that water, Edebant; And doing so, Manebant Oves,
they continued sheep, they lost not the nature, nor property of sheep, Manebant
Oves, and Oves Dei, they continued Gods sheep; (for the Devil has his sheep
too) my sheep, says God; not those which bad been mine, when they eat fresh
grass, and drunk pure water, but then, when they eat trodden grass, and
drunk troubled water, they were Gods sheep; And more then that, they were Grex
Dei, Gods flock; for those whom our former translation calls my sheep, the
latter calls my flock; God has single sheep in many corners of the heathen,
but these, though thus fed, were his flock, his Church. But then, though they
staid Gods leisure, and lived long upon this ill diet, yet when God was pleased
to call them out of Babylon, out of Babylon they went, when God was pleased to
lead our Fathers out of Rome, they left it. And justly, howsoever our
Adversaries load us with contumelious names for that departure; in which
branch, we shall see the vanity of their criminations, and imputations to us
for that secession from them. And then lastly, by way of condoling and of
instructing, we shall make it appear to our weak brethren, that our departing
from Rome, can be no example, no justification of their departing from us. Our
branches then, from whence we are to gather our fruit, being thus many, it is
time to lay hold upon the first, which is Manebant, Though these sheep were
thus ill fed, yet they did stay.

Optimis ovibus pedes breves; Manebant. Pliny. Prove. 19. 2. Chrysostom.
The best sheep have-shortest legs; Their commendation is, not to make have in
straying away. He that hastes with his feet sins; that is, from the station
in which God has placed him. Si innumera bona fecerimus, If we have abounded
in good works, and done God never so good service, Non minores Poenas dabimus,
quam qui Christi corpus proscindebant, si integritatem Ecclesiarum
discerpserimus, we are as guilty in the eyes of God, as they that crucified the
Lord of life himself, if we violate his spouse, or rent the entireness of his
Church. Vir quidam sanctus dixit, (says the same father of another, Chrysostom
of Cyprian) A certain holy man has ventured to say, Quod audacius sapere
videtur, attamen dixit, That which perchance may seem bodily said, but yet he
said it; what was it? This, peccatum istud nec martyrio deleri; That this sin
of schism, of renting the unity of the Church, cannot be expiated no not by
Martyrdom it self. When God had made but a hedge about Job, Job 1. 10.
yet that hedge was such a ^ence as the Devil could not break in: Ier. 1. 18.
when God has carried Murum aeneum a wall of brass, nay Murum igneum, a wall
of fire about his Church, will thou break out through that wall, Zech. 2. 5.
that brass, that fire? Paradise was not walled, nor hedged; and there were
serpents in Paradise too; Genesis 3. 24.
yet Adam offered not to go out of Paradise, till God drove him out; and God
saw that he would have come in again, if the Cherubims and the flaming sword
had not been placed by God to hinder him. Charm the Charmer never so wisely,
Psalm. 58. 5.
(as David speaks) he cannot utter a sweeter, nor a more powerful charm, ^hen
that, Ego te baptizo, I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost; And, Nos admittimus, we receive this child, into
the congregation of Christ's slock; There is a sweet and a powerful charm, in
the Ego te absolvo, I absolve thee from all thy sins; But this blessed charm I
may hear from another, if I stray into another Church. But the Ego te baptizo
I can hear but once; and to depart from that Church, in which I have received
my baptism, and in which I have made my Contracts and my stipulations with God,
and pledged and engaged my sureties there, deserve a mature consideration; for
I may mistake the reasons upon which I go, and I may find after, that there
are more true errors in the Church I go to, then there were imaginary in that
that I left. Truly I have been sorry to see some persons converted from the
Roman Church, to ours; because I have known, that only temporal respects have
moved them, and they have lived after rather in a nullity, or indifferency to
either religion, then in a true, and established zeal. Of which kind, I
cannot forbear to report to you so much of the story of a French gentleman,
P^le^er.
who though he were of good parts, and learned, yet were not worthy to be
mentioned in this place, but that he soared so high, as to write against the
learned King, that any age has produced, our incomparable King James. This
man, who was turned from the Reformed to the Roman religion, being asked, half
in jest; Sir, which is the best religion, you must needs know, that have been
of both? answered, Certainly, the religion I left, the reformed religion, must
needs be the best religion, for when I changed, I had this religion, the Romans
religion, for it, and three hundred Crowns a year to boot; which was a pension
given him, upon his conversion. Neither truly does any thing more loosen a
man's footing, nor slacken his hold upon that Church in which he was baptized,
nor open him more to an undervaluation of all Churches, then when he gives
himself leave, to think irreverently, slightly, negligently of the
Sacraments, as of things, at best, indifferent, and, many times, impertinent. I
should think I had no bowels, if they had not earned and melted, when I heard
a Lady, whose child of five or six days, being ready to die every minute, she
being moved often that the child might be christened, answered, That, if it
were Gods will, that the child should live to the Sabbath, that it might be
baptized in the Congregation, she should be content, otherwise, Gods will be
done upon it, for God needs no Sacrament. With what sorrow; with what holy
indignation did I hear the Son of my friend, who brought me to that place,
to minister the Sacrament to him, then upon his deathbed, and almost at his
last gasp, when my service was offered him in that kind, answer his Father,
Father, I thank God, I have not lived so in the sight of my God, as that I
need a Sacrament. I name a few of these, because our times abound with such
persons as undervalue, not only all rituall, and ceremonial assistances of
devotion, which the wisdom, and the piety of the Church has induced, but even
the Sacraments themselves, of Christ's own immediate institution, and are
always open to solicitations to pass to another Church, upon their own
surmises of errors in their own. Whereas there belongs much consideration, and
a well grounded assurance, of fundamental errors in one Church, and that
those errors are repaired, and no other, as great as those, admitted, in the
other Church, before, upon any collateral pretenses, we abandon that Church,
in which God has sealed us to himself in Baptism. Our Fathers stayed in Rome;
Manebant, They stayed, and Edebant, they eat that grass, and they drunk that
water, which was trodden and troubled.

Alas, Edebant.
what should they have eaten, what should they have drunk? should a man
strangle himselse rather then take in an ill air? Or forbear a good table,
because his stomach cannot digest every dish? We do not call money, base
money, till the Allay exceed the pure metal; and if it do so, yet it may be
current, and serve to many offices; Those that are skillful in that art, know
how to sever the base from the pure, the good parts of the religion from the
bad; and those that are not, will not cast it away, for all the corrupt
mixture. It is true, they had been better to have stayed at home and served God
in private, then to have communicated in a superstitious service. Domum vestram
Christi Ecclesian deputamus, I shall never doubt to call your House the Church
of Christ. Aug. Iuli^^^ae viduae. cp. 242.
But this was not permitted to our Fathers; to serve God at home; to Church
they must come, and there, all their grass was trodden, and all their water
troubled. What should they do? God never brings us to a perplexity, so as that
we must necessarily do one sin to avoid another. Never^ It seems that the
Apostles had been traduced, and insimulated of teaching this Doctrine, That in
some cases evil might be done that good might follow; Romans 3. 8.
and therefore does S. Paul with so much diligence discharge himself of it. And
yet, long after this, when those men, who attempted the Reformation, whom they
called Pauperes de Lugduno, taught that Doctrine, That no less sin might he
done, to escape a greater, this was imputed to them, then, by the Roman Church,
for an Heresy; Pra^eolus Art. 23.
That that was Orthodox in Saint Paul, was Heresy in them that ^studyed a
Reformation. But the Doctrine stands like a rock against all waves, That
nothing that is naturally ill, intrinsecally sin, may upon any pretense be
done, not though our life's, nor the life's of all the Princes in the world,
though the frame, and being of the whole world, though the salvation of our
souls lay upon it; no sin, naturally, intrinsecally sin might be done, for
any respect. Christus peccatum factus est, August.
sed non fesit peccatum, Though Christ pursued our redemption with hunger, and
thirst, yet he would have left us unredeemed, rather then have committed any
sin. Of this kind therefore, naturally, intrinsecally sin, and so known to
be to them that did it, certainly our Fathers coming to the superstitious
service in the Church of Rome, was not: for had it been, naturally sin, and
so known to them, when they did it, they could not have been saved, otherwise
then by repentance after, which we cannot presume in their behalf, for there
are not testimonies of it. If any of them had invested at any time a scruple, a
doubt whether they did well or no, alas how should they divest and overcome
that scruple? To whom durst they communicate that doubt? They were under an
invincible ignorance, and sometimes under an indevestible scruple. They had
heard that Christ commanded to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, Mat. 16.
6.
and Sadduces, and so of the Herodians; that is, of the doctrines of those
particular sects; Man. 8. 15.
of affirming Fate, and Destiny, and Stoicall necessity, with the Pharisees; of
denying Spirits, and Resurrection with the Sadduces; of mis-applying the
prophesies concerning the Messiah, to the person of Herod, or any earthly King;
Mat. 23. 1.
But yet, after all this, he commands them to observe, and perform the
doctrine of the Pharisees, because they sat in Moses chair; Though with much
vehemence and bitterness, he call them Hypocrites, though with many
ingeminations upon every occasion, he reiterate that name, though he aggravate
that name with other names of equal reproach, Fools, blind guides, painted
tombs, and the like, yet he commands to obey them; and, which is most
remarkable, this is said, not only to the common sort, but even to his own
disciples too; Christ had begun his work of establishing a Church, which
should empty their Synagogues; but because that work was not yet perfected, he
would not withdraw the people from their Synagogues; for there wrought Gods
Ordinance, (though corrupted by the workmen) which Ordinance was, that the law
should be publicly expounded to the people; and so it was there; There God
was present; And though the Devil (by their corruption) were there too, yet,
the Devil came in at the window, God at the door; the Devil by stealth, God
by his declared Ordinance, and Covenant. And this was the case of our Fathers
in the Roman Church; They must know that all that has passed between God and
man has passed Ex pacto, by way of contact and covenant.

The best works of the best man have no proportion with the kingdom of heaven,
The best.
for I give God but his own: But I have it Ex pacto, God has covenanted so,
Fac, hoc and vives, Do this and thou shall live; and at the last judgment,
Christ shall ground his Venite benedicti, Come ye blessed, and his Ite
maledicti, Go ye accursed, upon the Quia, and upon the Quia non, Because you
have, and Because you have not done this and this. Faith, that is of infinite
value above works, has yet no proportion to the kingdom of heaven; Faith
saves me, as my hand feeds me; It reaches the food, but it is not the food;
but faith saves Ex pacto, Mar. 5. 36.
by virtue of that Covenant; which Christ has made, Tantummodo creed, Only
believe. To carry it to the highest, the merit of Christ Jesus himself, though
it be infinite so, as that it might have redeemed infinite worlds, yet the
working thereof is safeliest considered in the School to be Ex pacto, by virtue
of that contract which had passed between the Father and him, that all things
should thus and thus be transacted by Christ, and so man should be saved; for,
if we shall place it merely, only in the infiniteness of the merit, Christ's
death would not have needed; for his first drops of blood in his Circumcision,
nay his very Incarnation (that God was made man) and every act of his
humiliation after, being taken singly, yet, in that person, God and man, were
of infinite merit; and also, if it wrought merely by the infiniteness of the
merit, it must have wrought, not only upon all men, but to the salvation of
the Devil; for, certainly there is more merit in Christ then there is sin
in the Devil. But the proceeding was Ex pacto, according to the contract made,
and to the conditions given; Ipse conteret caput tuum, That the Messiah should
bruise the Serpents head for us, included our redemption, That the Serpents
head should be bruised, excluded the Serpent himself. This contract, then
between God and man, as it was able to put the nature of a great fault, in a
small offense, if we consider only the eating of an apple, and so to make even
a Trespass High Treason, (because it was so contracted) so does this contract,
the Ordinance of God, infuse a great virtue and efficacy, in the instruments
of our reconciliation, how mean in gifts, or how corrupt in manners soever they
be. Circumcision in it self a low thing, yea obscene, and subject to
mis-interpretation, yet by reason of the covenant, He that is not circumcised,
Genesis 17. 14.
that person shall be cut off from my people. So also Baptism, considered in it
self, John 3. 3.
a vulgar, and a familiar thing; yet, except a man be born of water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. The Sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ, a domestique, a daily thing; if we consider only the
breaking of the bread and participation of the Cup, but if we ascend up to the
contract in the institution, it is to every worthy receiver, the seal, and the
Conduit of all the merits of Christ, Ios. 6. 4.
to his soul. God threw down the walls of Jericho, with the sound of Horns,
not of Trumpets. A homely sound; yet it did the work; so neither is the
weakness, no, nor the corruptnesse of the instruments always to be considered
in the Church of God. Our Fathers knew there had passed a contract between God
and man, A Church there should be Ad consummationem, to the end of the world,
therefore they might safely make their recourse thither; and Porta Inferi, Mat.
16. 18.
the gates of hell should not prevail against it, therefore they might
confidently dwell there; Mat. 18. 17.
They knew there was a Dic Ecclesiae a bill to be exhibited to the Church, upon
any disorder, and a Si noluerit, an excommunication upon disobedience, If he
neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a heathen man, and as a
Publican. This Church they saw, and Gods contract upon them sealed in Baptism,
they knew, God had revealed no other Church, nor contract to them. And
therefore, though they did not eat their trodden grass, with that ridiculous
tentation, as the Friar is boasted to have eaten a Toad which was set upon the
Table, because he had read, 1 Cor. 10. 27.
whatsoever is set before you eat; Nor, as their Dorotheus, who when his man
had reachd him rats-bane, in stead of honey, which he called for, refused it
not, because said he, If Gods will had been, that I should have had honey, he
would have directed thy hand to the honey, but being under an invi
ciblenignorance, and indevestible scruples, and having this contract, and this
Church, to give them some satisfaction and acquiescence, they were partakers of
that blessing, That though Serpents and Scorpions lurked in their grass, Luke
10. 19.
they had power to tread on scorpions and on serpents, and nothing could hurt
them, and That if they drink any deadly thing, it shall do them no harm.
Mar. 16. 18.
And so our Fathers with a good conscience, Manebant, stayed there, and Edebant,
they eat trodden grass, and drunk troubled water, and yet Manebantoves, they
continued sheep still.

Sheep, Oves.
that is, without Barking, or biting. Some faint and humble bleatings there
were always in the days of our Fathers; In every age there arose some men,
who did modestly, and devoutly, but yet courageously and confidently appear,
and complain against those treadings, and those troublings. Every age, every
nation had some such bleatings, some men who by writing or preaching against
those abuses, interrupted the tyrannical prescriptions of that Church, and
made their continual claim, to their Christian liberty; But still they
continued sheep, without denying either their fleece or their throats to those
Pastors. We read in Natural story of diverse pastures, and diverse waters, which
will change the color of cattle, or sheep, but none that changes the form,
and makes them no such cattle, or no sheep. Some waters change sheep of any
color to white. And these troubled waters, temporal or spiritual
afflictions, may bring Gods children to a faint and lean, 1. 15.
and languishing palenesse. If it do, as Daniel and his fellows, appeared
fairer, and fatter in flesh, with their pults and water, which they desired
rather then the Kings polluted delicates, then others that sed voluptuously: so
the hearts of Gods children shall be filled, Psalm 63. 5.
as with marrow and with fatness, when others shall have all their hearts
desire, but leanness in their souls. There are waters that change all
colored sheep to black. Joel 2. 6.
So may these troubled waters, afflictions, effect that upon Gods children, The
enemy shall come, and before him all faces shall gather blackness; Lam. 4. 8.
as Jerusalem complains, That their faces were blacker then coals. If it do,
yet as long as they stay, and continue sheep, members of the body, as long as
they partake of the body, they shall partake of the complexion of the Church,
who says of her self, I am black, O daughters of Jerusalem, but comely,
(acceptable in the sight of my Christ) and that shall be verifyed in them,
Eccles. 7. 5.
which Solomon says, By the sadness of the countenance, the heart is made
better; that is, by the occasion of the sadness, Gods correction. But the
strangest change is, that some waters change sheep into red, the most unlikely,
most extraordinary, most unproper color for sheep, of any other. Yet there is
one redness natural to our sheep in the Text, the redness of blushing, and
modesty, and selfe-accusing; And there is another redness, which is not
improper, the redness of zeal and godly anger. The worst redness that can
befall them, is the redness of sin, and yet, lest that should deject them,
Esai. 1. 18.
God proceeds familiarly with them, Come now, and let us reason together,
Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow, though they
be red like Crimson, they shall be as wool. Romans 5. 20.
Yea, to show, that where sin abounds, grace also may abound, to show that
that whiteness of Gods mercy does pursue and overtake this redness of sin,
it pleases the Holy Ghost to use such a phrase as expresses a redness in
whiteness it self; He says, that the religious men of the Jews before that
time, Lam. 4. 7.
were whiter then milk, and redder then pearl: Mippeninim is the original
word, which the Rabbis translate pearl; And the Vulgate Edition has it,
Rubicundiores ebore antiquo, redder then the oldest yvory, which is the whitest
thing, that can be presented. Perchance to intimate thus much, that there is
neither in the holiest actions, of the holiest man, any such degree of
whiteness, but that it is always accompanied with some rednes, some tincture,
some aspersion of sin, nor any such deep redness in sin, any sin so often, and
deeply died in grain, but that it is capable of whiteness, in the application
of the candor, and pureness, and innocence of Christ Jesus: Therefore may the
Holy Ghost have wrapped up this whiteness in redness, redder then Pearl. Our
Fathers were not discouraged, when they were discolored; what palenesse, what
blackness, what redness soever, these troubled waters induced upon them,
still they were sheep; They become not Foxes, to delude the State with
equivocations; nor Wolves, to join with the State to the oppression of the
rest; nor Horses, to suffer themselves to be ridden by others, and so made
instruments of their passions; no nor Unicorns, to think to purge and purify
the waters for all the forest, to think to reform all abuses in State, and
Church at once; but they continued sheep; opened not their mouths in biting,
nor barking, in murmuring, or reproaching the present government. So our
Fathers staid, Manebant, so they eat that grass, so they continued sheep, and,
as it follows next, Oves Dei, Gods sheep, my sheep have eaten, my sheep have
drunken.

Gods sheep; Oves Dei.
for nature has her sheep; some men by natural constitution, are lazy,
drowsy, frivolous, unactive, sheepish men. And States have their sheep;
timorous men, following men, speechless men, men, who because they abound in a
plentiful State, are loath to stire. Nay the Devil has his sheep too; Men
whom he possesses so entirely, that, as the Law says, Domintum est potestas,
tum utendi, tum abutendi, Only he is truly Lord of any thing, who may do what
he will with it, he does what he will with those men, even to their own ruin.
And from these folds and flocks did the Devil always serve his shambles, in
his false Martyrdomes in the Primitive Church; when (as Eusebius notes) envying
the honor which the Orthodox Christians had in their thousands of Martyrs, the
Heretics studied ways of equalling them in that. And though within four
hundred years after Christ, the Church, (who could not possibly take knowledge
of all) was come to celebrate, by name, five thousand Martyrs (as some books
have the account) for every day in the year, yet the Heretics went so far
toward equalling them, as that they had some whole sects, (particularly the
Euphemitae) which called themselves Martyrians, men exposed to the slaughter.
One limb of the Donatists, the Circumcelliones, might have furnished their
shambles; They would provoke others to kill them; and if they failed in that,
they would kill themselves. And this was, as Saint Augustine says, Ludus
quotidianus, their daily sport, they played at no other game. And left all these
means should not have provided Martyrs enough, Petilian, against whom Saint
Augustine writes, invented a new way of Martyrdom, when he taught, that if a
man were guilty in his Conscience of any great offense to God, and only to
punish that fault, did kill himself, he was by that act of Justice a Martyr.
The Devil had his sheep then; He has so still; Those Emissarii papae, those
whom the Bishop of Rome sends hither into this kingdom; whom Baronius calls
Candidates Martyrii, pretenders to Martyrdom, suitors for Martyrdom; Men, who
(as he adds there) do sacramento spondere sanguinem, take an oath at Rome that
they will be hanged in England; and, in whose behalf he complains de
sterilitate Martyrii, that there is such a dearth of Martyrdom, that they
find it hard to be hanged; and therefore, (perchance) they find it necessary
to enter into Powder plots, and actual Treasons, because they see that for
Religion merely, this State would never draw drop of blood, and sacramento
sanguinem, they have taken an oath to be hanged, and are loath to be forsworn.
But the sheep of our text, were not Natures sheep, men naturally lazy, and
unactive, nor State sheep, men loath to adventure, by stirring, nor the Devils
sheep, men headlong to their own ruin, even by way of provocation; But they
were Gods sheep, men, who, out of a rectified conscience, would not
prevaricate, not betray nor forsake God, if his glory required the expense of
their lives, and yet would not exasperate nor provoke their superiors, how
corrupt soever, by unseasonable, and unprofitable complaints: so our Fathers
stayed in Rome, so they eat trodden grass, and drunk troubled waters, so they
continued harmless sheep toward others, and the sheep of God, such as though
they staid there and fed upon an ill diet, God had distinguished from Goats,
and reserved for his right hand, at the day of separation. And they were more
then so; they were not only his sheep, but his flock; for so, this translation
reads it, my flock has eaten, my flock has drunk.

God had single sheep in many nations; Grex.
Jobs, and Naamans, and such; servants, and yet not in the Covenants, sheep,
and yet not brought into his flock. For though God have revealed no other way
of salvation to us, but by breeding us in his Church, yet we must be so far,
from straitning salvation, to any particular Christian Church, of any
subdivided name, Papist or Protestant, as that we may not straiten it to the
whole Christian Church, as though God could not, in the largeness of his
power, or did not, in the largeness of his mercy, afford salvation to some,
whom he never gathered into the Christian Church. But these sheep in our text,
were his flock, that is, his Church. Though they durst not communicate their
sense of their miseries, and their desires to one another, yet they were a
flock. When Elias complained, I, even I only am left, 1 King. 19. 14.
and God told him, that he had seven thousand besides him, perchance Elias knew
none of this seven thousand, perchance none of this seven thousand and knew one
another, and yet, they were his flock, though they never met. That timber that
is in the forest, that stone that is in the quarry, that Iron, that Lead that
is in the mine, though distant miles, Counties, Nations, from one another, meet
in the building of a material Church; So does God bring together, living
stones, men that had no relation, no correspondence, no intelligence together,
to the making of his Mystical body, his visible Church. Who ever would have
thought, that we of Europe, and they of the Eastern, or Western Indies, should
have met to the making of Christ a Church? And yet, before we knew, on either
side, that there was such a people, God knew there was such a Church. He that
lies buried, in the consecrated dust under your feet, knows not who lies next
him; but one Trumpet at last shall raise them both together, and show them to
one another, and join them, (by Gods grace) in the Triumphant Church. These
that knew not one another, that knew not of one another, were yet Gods flock,
the Church in his eye; for there, (and only there) the Church is always
visible. So were our Fathers in Rome, though they durst not meet, and
communicate their sorrows, nor fold themselves so in the fold of Christ Jesus,
that is in open, and free Confessions. They therefore that ask now, Where was
your Church before Luther, would then have asked of the Jews in Babylon, Where
was your Church before Esdras; that was in Babylon, ours was in Rome.

Now, Secessio.
beloved, when our Adversaries cannot deny us this truth, that our Church was
enwrapped, (though smothered) in theirs, that as that Balsamum natural, which
Paracelsus speaks of, that natural Balm which is in every body, and would
cure any wound, if that wound were kept clean, and recover any body, if that
body were purged, as that natural balm is in that body, how diseased soever
that body be, so was our Church in theirs, they vex us now, with that
question, Why, if the case stood so, if your Fathers, when they eat our trodden
grass, and drunk our troubled waters, were sound and in health, and continued
sheep, and Gods sheep, and Gods flock, his Church with us, why went they from
us? They ought us their residence, because they had received their Baptism
from us. And truly, it is not an impertinent, a frivolous reason, that of
Baptism, where there is nothing but convenience, and no necessity in the case.
But, if I be content to stay with my friend in an aguish air, will he take it
ill, if I go when the plague comes? Or if I stay in town till 20 die of the
plague, shall it be lookd that I should stay when there die 1000? The infection
grew hotter and hotter in Rome; and their may, came to a must, those things
which were done before de facto, came at last to be articles of Faith, and de
jure, must be believed and practiced upon salvation. They chide us for going
away, and they drove us away; If we abstained from communicating with their
poisons, (being now grown to that height) they excommunicated us; They gave us
no room amongst them but the fire, and they were so forward to burn
Heretics, that they called it heresy, not to stay to be burnt.

Yet we went not upon their driving, Vox Dei.
but upon Gods calling. As the whole prophecy of the deliverance of Israel,
from Babylon, belongs to the Christian Church, both to the Primitive Church, at
first, and to the Reformed since, so does that voice, spoken to them, reach
unto us, Egredimini de Babylone, Go ye out of Babylon with a voice of singing,
Esaias 48. 20.
declare, show to the ends of the earth, that the Lord has redeemed his
servant Jacob. Lud. Vives.
For, that Rome is not Babylon, they have but that one half-comfort, that one
of their own authors has ministered, that Romae regulariter male agitur; that
Babylon is Confusion, disorder, but at Rome all sins are committed in order,
by the book, and they know the price, and therefore Rome is not Babylon. And
since that many of their authors confess, 1 Pet. 5. 13.
that Rome was Babylon, in the time of the persecuting Emperors, and that Rome
shall be Babylon again, in the time of Antichrist, how they will hedge in a
Jerusalem, a holy City, between these two Babylons, is a cunning piece of
Architecture. From this Babylon then were our Fathers called by God; not only
by that whispering sibilation of the holy Ghost, Zech. 10. 8.
sibilab^ populum, I will hiss for my people, and so gather them, for I have
redeemed them, and they shall increase, not only by private inspirations, but
by general acclamations; every where principal writers, and preachers, and
Princes too, (as much as could stand with their safety) crying out against them
before Luther, howsoever they will needs do him that honor, to have been the
first mover, in this blessed revolution.

They reproach to us our going from them, Curia.
when they drove us, and God drew us, and they discharge themselves for all, by
this one evasion; That all that we complain of, is the fault of the Court of
Rome, and not of the Church; of the extortion in the practice of their
Officers, not of error in the doctrine of their Teachers. Let that be true, (as
in a great part it is) for, almost all their errors proceed from their
covetousness and love of money) this is that that we complain most of, and in
this especially lies the conformity of the Jewish Priests in the Chaldean
Babylon, and these Prelates in the Roman Babylon, that the Court, and the
Church, joined in the oppression. But since the Court of Rome, and the Church
of Rome are united in one head, I see no use of this distinction, Court and
Church. If the Church of Rome be above the Court, the Church is able to amend
these corruptions in the Court. If the Court be got above the Church, the
Church has lost, or sold away, her supremacy.

To oppress us, Miracula.
and ease themselves, now, when we are gone from them, they require Miracles at
out hands; when indeed it was miracle enough, how we got from them. But,
Chrysostom.
magnum charitatis argumentum, credere absque pignoribus miraculorum, He loves
God but a little that will not believe him without a miracle. Miracles are for
the establishing of new religions; All the miracles of, and from Christ and his
Apostles, are ours, because their Religion is ours. Indeed it behooves our
adversaries to provide new miracles every day, because they make new articles
of Faith every day. As Esop therefore answered in the Market, when he that sold
him was asked what he could do, that he could do nothing, because his fellow
had said, that he could do all, so we say, we can do no miracles, because they
do all; all ordinary cures of Agues, and toothach being done by miracle amongst
them. We confess that we have no such tie upon the Triumphant Church, to make
the Saints there do those anniversary miracles, which they do by their relics
here, upon their own holy days, ten days sooner every year, then they did
before the new computation. We pretend not to raise the dead, but to cure the
sick; and that but by the ordinary Physique, the Word, and Sacraments, and
therefore need no miracles. Ios. Acosta.
And we remember them of their own authors, who do not only say, that
themselves do no miracles, in these latter times, but assign diligently strong
reasons, why it is that they do none. If all this will not serve, we must tell
them, that we have a greater miracle, then any that they produce; that is, that
in so few years, they that forsook Rome, were become equal, even in number, to
them that adhered to her. We say, with Saint Augustine, That if we had no other
miracle, hoc unum stupendum and potentissimum miraculum esse, that this alone
were the most powerful, and most a mazing miracle, ad hanc religionem, totius
orbis amplitudinem, sine miraculis subjugatam, that so great a part of the
Christian world, should become Protestants of Papists, without any miracles.

They pursue us still, Dissensiones.
being departed from them, and they ask us, How can ye pretend to have left
Babylon confusion, Dissension, when you have such dissentions, and confusions
amongst your selves? But neither are our differences in so fundamental points,
as theirs are, (for a principal author of their own, who was employed by
Clement the eight, to reconcile the differences between the Jesuits and the
Dominicans, Beni^^s.
about the concurrence of the grace of God, and the free will of man, confesses
that the principal articles, and foundations of faith were shaken between
them, between the Jesuits, and Dominicans) neither shall we find such heat,
and animosity, and passion between any persons amongst us, as between the
greatest amongst them; The succeeding Pope mangling the body of his
predecessor, casting them into the river for burial, disannulling all their
decrees, and ordinations; their Ordinations; so that no man could be sure who
was a Priest, nor whether he had truly received any Sacrament, or no.
Howsoever, as in the narrowest way there is most justling, the Roman Church
going that broad way, to believe as the Church believes, may escape some
particular differences, which we that go the narrower way, to try every thing
by the exact word of God, De doctri. Christia.
may fall into. Saint Augustine tells us of a City in Mauritania Caesarea, in
which they had a custom, that in one day in the year, not only Citizens of
other parishes, but even neighbors, yea brethren, yea Fathers, did fling
stones dangerously, and furiously at one another in the streets, and this they
so solemnized, as a custom received from their ancestors; which was a
licentious kind of Carnavall. If any amongst us have fallen into that disease,
to cast stones, or dirt at his friends, it is an infection from his own
distemper, 1 Cor. 11. 16.
not from our doctrine; for, if any man list to be contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Church of God. We departed not from them then, till it was
come to a hot plague, in a necessity of professing old opinions to be new
articles of Faith; not till we were driven by them, and drawn by the voice of
God, in the learnedest men of all nations; when they could not discharge
themselves by the distinction of the Court of Rome, and the Church of Rome,
because, if the abuses had been but in the Court, it was the greatest abuse of
all, for that Church, which is so much above that Court, not to mend it. Nor
can they require Miracles at our hands, who do none themselves, and yet need
them, because they induce new articles of Religion; neither can they reproach
to us our Dissentions amongst our selves; because they are neither in so
fundamental points, nor pursued with so much uncharitableness, as theirs. So
we justify our secession from them; but all this justifies in no part, the
secession of those distempered men, who have separated themselves from us,
which is our next, and our last consideration.

When the Apostle says, Separatistae.
study to be quiet, (1 These. 4. 11. me thinks he intimates something toward
this, that the less we study for our Sermons, the more danger is there to
disquiet the auditory; extemporall, unpremeditated Sermons, that serve the
popular care, vent, for the most part, doctrines that disquiet the Church.
Study for them, and they will be quiet; consider ancient and fundamental
doctrines, and this will quiet and settle the understanding, and the
Conscience. Many of these extemporall men have gone away from us, and vainly
said, that they have as good cause to separate from us, as we from Rome. But
can they call our Church, a Babylon; Confusion, disorder? All that offends
them, is, that we have too much order, too much regularity, too much binding to
the orderly, and uniforme service of God in Church. It affects all the body,
Ambros.
when any member is cut off; Cum dolor amputatur, etiam quae putruit, pars
corporis; and they cut off themselves, and feel it not; when we lose but a
mystical limb, and they lose a spiritual life, we feel it and they do not.
When that is pronounced sit tibi sicut ethnicus, if he hear not the Church, let
him be to thee as a Heathen, August.
gravius est quam si gladio feriretur, flammis absumeretur, feris subigeretur,
it is a heavier sentence, then to be beheaded, to be burnt, or devoured with
wild beasts; and yet these men, before any such sentence pronounced by us,
excommunicate themselves. Of all distempers, Calvin falls oftenest upon the
reproof of that which he calls Morositatem, a certain peevish frowardness,
which, as he calls in one place, deterrimam pestem, the most infectious
pestilence, that can fall upon a man, so, in another, he gives the reason, why
it is so, semper nimia morositas est ambitiosa, that this peevish frowardness,
is always accompanied with a pride, and a singularity, and an ambition to have
his opinions preferred before all other men, and to condemn all that differ
from him. A civil man will depart with his opinion at a Table, at a Council
table, rather then hold up an argument to the vexation of the Company; so will
a peaceable man do, in the Church, in questions that are not fundamental.
That reverend man whom we mentioned before, who did so much in the establishing
of Geneva, professes, that it was his own opinion, that the Sacrament might be
administered in prisons, and in private houses; but because he found the Church
of Geneva, of another opinion, and another practice before he came, he applied
himself to them and departed, ( in practice) from his own opinion, even in so
important a point, as the ministration of the Sacrament. Which I present to
consideration the rather, both because thereby it appears, that greater matters
then are now thought fundamental, were then thought but indifferent, and
arbitrary, (for, surely, if Calvin had thought this a fundamental thing, he
would never have suffered any custom to have prevailed against his conscience)
and also, because diverse of those men, who trouble the Church now, about things
of less importance, and this of private Sacraments in particular) will needs
make themselves believe, that they are his Disciples, and always conclude that
whatsoever is practiced at Geneva was Calvin's opinion. Saint Augustine says
excellently, Ep. 209. Feliciae virgini.
and appliably, to a holy Virgin, who was ready to leave the Church, for the
ill life of Churchmen, Christus nobis imperavit Congregationem, sibi servavit
separationem; Christ Jesus has commanded us to gather together, and
recommended to us the Congregation; as for the separation, he has reserved it
to himself, to declare at the last day, who are Sheep and who are Goats. And
he wrought that separation which our Fathers made from Rome, by his express
written Word, and by that which is one word of God too, Vox populi, The
invitation and acclamation of Doctors, and People, and Princes; but have our
Separatists any such public, and concurrent authorizing of that which they
do, since of all that part from us, scarce a dozen meet together in one
confession? When you have heard the Prophet say, Amos.
Can two walk together, except they be agreed, when you have heard the Apostle
say, 1. Cor. 1. 10.
I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same things, and that there be no divisions among you, (for, if
preachers speak one one way, another another, there will be divisions among
the people) And then, it is not only, that in obedience to authority, they
speak the same things; But, Be perfectly joined in the same mind, and in the
same judgment, you had need make haste to this union, this pacification; for
when we are come thither, to agree among our selves, we are not come to our
journeys end.

Our life is a warfare; Conclusio.
other wars, in a great part, end in marriages: Ours in a divorce, in a divorce
of body and soul in death. Till then, though God have brought us, from the
First Babylon, the darkness of the Gentiles, and from the Second Babylon, the
superstitions of Rome, and from the third Babylon, the confusion of tongues, in
bitter speaking against one another, after all this, every man shall find a
fourth Babylon, enough to exercise all his forces, The civil war, the
rebellious disorder, the intestine confusion of his own Concupiscencies. This
is a transmigration, a transportation laid upon us all, by Adams rebellion,
from Jerusalem to Babylon, from our innocent State in our Creation, to this
confusion of our corrupt nature. God would have his children first brought to
Babylon, before he would be glorified in their deliverance, Mich. 4. 10.
Venies usque ad Babylonem; Ibi liberaberis; To Babylon thou shall come; there
I will deliver thee; but not till then; that is, till you come to a holy sense
of the miseries you are in, and what has brought you to them.

Though then you have suffered the calamities of all these Babylons in some
proportions, though you be not Incolae but Indigenae, not naturalized but borne
Babylonians, (Original sin makes you so) yet since you are within the
Covenant, hear him, Genesis 12. 1.
that said to you in Abraham's ears, Egredere de terra tua, Get thee out of thy
Country, and from thy kindred, unto the land I will show thee; Come out of
Babylon to Jerusalem; since ye are within his Adoption, and may cry Abba
father, hear that voice, Cant. 3. 11.
Egredimini filiae Sion, Come forth ye daughters of Sion, come to Jerusalem.
Though ye be dead, and buried, and putrefyed in this corrupted, and corrupting
flesh, yet since he cries with a loud voice, (as it is said in that Text)
Lazare veni for as, Ioh. 11. 43.
Lazarus come forth, come forth of your Tombs in Babylon, to this Jerusalem,
come from your troubled waters, your waters of contention, of anxiety, of envy,
of solicitude, and vexation for worldly encumbrances, and come Ad aquas
quietudinum, Psalm. 23.
to the waters of rest, the application of the merits of Christ, in a true
Church: Vinum non habetis? have ye no wine to refresh your hearts; no merits of
your own to take comfort in? Ioh. 2. 4.
Implete Hydrias aqua, fill all your vessels with water, that water of life,
remorsefull tears, perchance he will change your water into wine, as he did in
that place; perchance he will give you abundance of temporal blessings;
perchance he will change that water into blood, as in Egypt; that is, into
persecutions, into afflictions, into Martyrdom, for his sake, for he will
accept our water for blood, our tears of repentance and contrition for
Martyrdom, ut cum desit Martyrium sanguinis, habeamus Martyrium aquae, that we
may be Martyrs in his sight, and shed no blood; Martyrs of a new die, white
Martyrs. That our waters of sorrow for sin may answer our Saviors tears over
Lazarus and over Jerusalem; and the sweat of our brows in a lawful calling may
answer our Saviors sweat of water and blood in his agony; and that our
reverent and profitable receiving of the Sacrament, may answer the water and
blood that issued from his side, which represented omnia Sacramenta, all the
Sacraments; That, as we do, we may still feed upon grace that is not trodden,
and drink water, that is not troubled, with the feet of others, or our own;
that we be never shaked in the sincerity nor in the integrity of Religion
with their power, nor our own distempers of fears or hopes. But that our meat
may be, to do the will of him that sent us, and to finish his work, Joh. 4. 2.

SERMON XXVI.
Preached to the King, at White Hall, the first Sunday in Lent.
ESAI. 65. 20. For the child shall die a hundred years old; But the sinner,
being a hundred years old, shall be accursed.
PEace is in Sion; Gods whole Quire is in tune; Nay, here is the music of the
Spears; all the Spears (all Churches) all the Stars in those Spears (all
Expositours in all Churches) agree in the sense of these words; and agree the
words to be a Prophecy, of the Distillation, nay Inundation, of the
largeness, nay the infiniteness of the blessings, and benefits of Almighty
God, prepared and meditated before, and presented, and accomplished now in the
Christian Church. The Sun was up betimes, in the light of nature, but then the
Sun moved but in the winter Tropic, short and cold, dark and cloudy days; A
Diluculum and a Crepusculum, a Dawning and a Twilight, a little Traditionall
knowledge for the past, and a little Conjecturall knowledge for the future,
made up their day. The Sun was advanced higher to the Jews in the Law; But
then the Sun was but in Libra; as much day as night: There was as much
Baptism, as Circumcision in that Sacrament; and as much Lamb as Christ, in
that Sacrifice; The Law was their Equinoctial, in which, they might see both
the Type, and that which was figured in the Type: But in the Christian Church
the Sun is in a perpetual Summer Solstice; which are high degrees, and yet
there is a higher, the Sun is in a perpetual Meridian and Noon, in that Summer
solstice. There is not only a Surge Sol, but a Siste Sol: God has brought the
Sun to the height, and ^ixt the Sun in that height in the Christian Church^
where he in his own Son by his Spirit has promised to dwell, usque ad
consummationem, till the end of the world. Here is Manna; and not in Gomers,
but in Barns; and Quails; and not in Heaps, but in Hills; the waters above the
Firmament, and not in drops of Dew, but in showers of former and latter Rain;
and the Land of Canaan; not in Promise only, nor only in performance, and
Possession, but in Extention, and Dilatation. The Graces, and blessings of God,
that is, means of salvation, are so abundantly poured upon the Christian
Church, as that the triumphant Church if they needed means, might fear they
should want them. And of these means and blessings, long life, as it is a
Model and abridgement of Eternity, and a help to Eternity, is one^ and one in
this Text, The Child shall die 100. Io^ 2. 10.
years old. But shall we receive good from God, and not receive evil too?
shall I shed upon you Lumen visionis, the light of that vision, which God has
afforded me in this Prophecy, the light of his countenance, and his gracious
blessings upon you, and not lay upon you Onus visionis, as the Prophetts speak
often, The burden of that vision which I have seen in this Text too? It was a
scorn to David, that his servants were half clothed; The Samaritane woman
believed, that if she might see Christ, Ioh. 4. 25.
he would tell her all things: Christ promises of the Holy Ghost, that he
should lead them into all Truth: 16. 3. 2 Cor. 7^ 14.
And the Apostles discharge in his office was, that he had spoken to them all
Truth: And therefore lest I should be defective in that integrity, I say with
Saint Augustine, Non vos fallo, non praesumo, non vos fallo; I will not be so
bold with you as flatter you, I will not presume so much upon your weakness,
as to go about to deceive you, as though there were nothing but blessing in
God, but show you the Commination, and judgment of this Text too, that though
the child should die a hundred years old, yet the sinner being a hundred years
old shall be accursed. If God had not lengthened his childs life, extended my
days, but taken me in the sins of my youth, where had I been, may every soul
here say? And where would you be too; if no man should tell you, that though
The child should die a hundred years old, yet the sinner being a hundred years
old shall be accursed? What can be certain in this world, if even the mercy of
God admit a variation? what can be endless here, if even the mercy of God
receive a determination? and sin does vary the nature, sin does determine even
the infiniteness of the mercy of God himself, for though The child shall die
a hundred years old, yet the sinner being a hundred years old shall be
accursed. Disconsolate soul, dejected spirit, bruised and broken, ground and
trodden, attenuated, evaporated, annihilated heart come back; hear thy
reprieve, and sue for thy pardon; God will not take thee away in thy sins, thou
shall have time to repent, The child shall die a hundred years old. But then
lame and decrepit soul, gray and inveterate sinner, behold the full ears of
corn blasted with a mildew, behold this long day shutting up in such a night,
as shall never see light more, the night of death; in which, the deadliest pang
of thy Death will be thine Immortality: In this especially shall thou die, that
thou can not die, when thou art dead; but must live dead for ever: for The
sinner being a hundred years old, shall be accursed, he shall be so for ever.

In this discovery from this Red Sea, Divisio.
to this dead Sea; from the mercy of God, in the blood of his Son, to the
malediction of God, in the blood of the sinner, be pleased to make these the
points of your Compass, and your Landmarks by the way, in those, the two
parts of this exercise. First, in the first, consider the precedencie, and
primogeniture of Mercy; God begins at Mercy, and not at Judgment: God's method
here, is not, The sinner shall be accursed, but The child shall have long
life: but first, the blessing, and then the malediction. And then secondly, we
shall see, in what form the particular blessing is given here; In long life;
The child shall die a hundred years old. And then also, because we find it in
the company of Mercies, in the region of Mercies, in this first part of the
Text, which is the Sphere of Mercy; we shall look also how this very dying is a
Mercy too: The mercy is especially placed in the long life: The child shall
live a hundred years; but the Holy Ghost would not leave out that, that he
should die; The child shall die a hundred years old. And in these three,
first the precedencie, and primogeniture of God's mercy, and then the
specification of that mercy in long life, and lastly, the association of mercy,
that death as well as life is a blessing to the Righteous; we shall determine
that first part. And in the second, But the sinner being a hundred years old,
shall be accursed, we shall see first, that the malediction of God has no
object but a sinner: God antidates no malediction: Till there be a sinner,
there is no malediction; nay not till there be an inveterate sinner; A sinner
of a hundred years, at least, such a sinner, as would be so, if God would
spare him a hundred years here. And upon such a sinner, God thunders out this
Prosternation, this Consternation, in this one word of our Text, which involves
and inwraps all kinds of miseries, feebleness in body, infatuation in mind,
evacuation of power, dishonor in ^ame, eclipses in favor, ruin in fortune,
dejection in spirit, He shall be accursed. Where, because in this second part
we are in the Region and Sphere of maledictions, we cannot consider this
future, He shall be, as a future of favor, a prorogation, a deferring of the
malediction: He shall be, is not, he shall be hereafter, but not yet: but it is
a future of continuation; He shall be accursed, that is, he shall be so for
ever. And so have you the frame, and partitions of this B^thel, this House of
God in which he dwells, which is both Iosuah's Beth-hagla, the house of Joy,
and John's Bethania, his house of affliction too; and we pass now to the
furnishing of these rooms, with such stuff as I can have laid together.

First, Part. 1.
in our first part, we consider the precedence, and primogeniture of Mercy. It
is a good thing to be descended of the eldest Brother; To descend from God, to
depend upon God, by his eldest Son, the Son of his love, the Son of his right
hand, Mercy, and not to put God to his second way, his sinister way, his way of
judgment. David prophesies of God's exaltation of Solomon so, Psalm. 89. 27.
Ponam in Primogenitum, I will make him my firstborn: Though Solomon were not
so, God would make him so. And in that Title, Ecclus. 36. 12.
the Wiseman makes his prayer for Israel; Quem coaequasti Primogegenito, whom
thou have named thy firstborn; for so God had in Exodus Israel is my Son, 4.
22.
even my firstborn: and in Job, the fiercest terror of death is expressed so,
Primogenitus mortis, 18. 13.
the firstborn of Death shall devour his strength: Still the exaltation, the
Superlative is called so; The firstborn. And in such a sense; if we could
think of more degrees of goodness in God, of an exaltation of God himself in
God, of more God in God, of a Superlative in God, we must necessarily turn upon
his mercy, for that Mercy must be the Superlative: So is it too, if we
consider Gods first action, or God's first thought toward Man; Mercy was the
firstborn by every Mother; by that Understanding, by that Will, by that Power,
which we conceive in God; Mercy was the firstborn, and first-mover in all. We
consider a preventing Grace in God; and that preventing Grace is before all;
for that prevents us so, as to Visit us when we sit in darkness. And we
consider an Antecedent-Will in God, and that Antecedent Will is before all; for
by that Will, God would have all men saved. And when we call Gods Grace by
other names then Preventing, whether Assisting Grace, that it stand by us and
sustain us, or Concomitant Grace, that it work with us, and inanimate our
action, when it is doing, or his Subsequent Grace, that rectifies or corrects
an action, when it is done; when all is done, still it is the Preventing Power,
and quality of that Grace, that did all that in me: If I stand by his Assisting
Grace, if I work with his Concomitant Grace, if I rectify my error by his
Subsequent Grace, that that moves upon me in all these, is still the preventing
power of that Grace. For as all my Natural actions of life are done by the
power of that Soul, which was in me before, so all the Supernatural actions of
that Soul, are done by that power of that Grace, that prevents and
preinanimates that action; and all my cooperation is but a post-operation, a
working by the Power of that All-preventing Grace. I moved not at first by the
Tide, by the strength of natural faculties, nor do I move after by that wind^
which had formerly filled my sails: I proceed not now by the strength of that
Grace which God gave me heretofore. But as God infuseth a Soul into every man,
and that Soul elicites a new Act in it self, before that man produce any
action; so God infuses a particular Grace into every good work of mine, and so
prevents me, before I cooperate with him. For as Nature in her highest
exaltation, in the best Moral man that is, cannot flow into Grace, Nature
cannot become Grace; so neither does former Grace flow into future Grace, but I
need a distinct influence of God, a particular Grace, for every good work I do,
for every good word I speak, for every good thought I conceive.

When God gives me access into his Library, Liber vitae.
leave to consider his proceedings with man, I find the first book of Gods
making to be the Book of Life. The Book where all their names are written that
are elect to Glory. But I find no such Book of Death: All that are not written
in the Book of Life, are certainly the sons of Death: To be pretermitted
there, there to be left out, wraps them up, at least leaves them wrapped up, in
death. But God has not wrought so positively, nor in so primary a
consideration in a book of Death, as in the Book of Life. As the aftertimes
made a Book of Wisdom out of the Proverbs, of Solomon, and out of his
Ecclesiastes; but yet it is not the same Book, nor of the same certainty: so
there is a Book of Life ^ere, but that is not the same book that is in Heaven,
nor of the same certainty: For in this Book of Life, which is the Declaration
and Testimony which the Church gives of our Election, by those marks of the
Elect, which she sees in the Scriptures, and believes that she sees in us,
Psalm. ^9. ^8.
a man may be Blotted out of the Book of the living, as David speaks; and as
it is added there, Not written with the Righteous: Intimating that in some
cases, and in some Book of Life, a man may have been written in, and blotted
out, and written in again. The Book of Life in the Church, The Testimony of our
Election here, admits such expunctions, and such redintegrations: but Gods
first Book, his Book of Mercy; (for this Book in the Church, is but his Book of
Evidence) is inviolable in it self, and all the names of that Book indelible.

In Gods first Book, Liber Scripturae
the Book of Life, Mercy has so much a precedence, and primogeniture, as that
there is nothing in it, but Mercy. In Gods other Book, his Book of Scripture,
in which he is put often to denounce judgments, as well as to exhibit
mercies, still the Tide sets that way, still the Biass leads on that hand,
still his method directs us ad Primogenitum, to his firstborn, to his Mercy.
So he began in that Book: He made man to his Image, Genesis 1. 26.
and then he blessed him. Here is no malediction, no intermination mingled in
Gods first Act, in Gods first purpose upon man: In Paradise there is, That if
he eat the forbidden fruit, Genesis 2. 17.
if he will not forbear that, that one Tree, He shall die. But God begins not
there: before that, he had said, of every tree in the Garden thou may freely
eat; neither is there more vehemence in the punishment, then in the liberty.
For as in the punishment there is an ingemination, Morte morieris, Dying thou
shall die; that is, thou shall surely die; so in the liberty, there was an
ingemination too, Comedendo comedes, Deuteronomy. 27.
Eating thou shall eat; that is, thou may freely eat. In Deuteronomy. we have a
fearful Chapter of Maledictions; but all the former parts of that Chapter, are
blessings in the same kind: And he that reads that Chapter, will begin at the
beginning, and meet Gods firstborn, his Mercy first. And in those very many
places of that Book where God divides the condition, If you obey you shall
live, if you rebel you shall die, still the better Act, and the better
condition, and the better reward, is placed in the first place, that God might
give us possession, In jure Primogeniti, in the right of his firstborn, his
mercy. And where God pursues the same method, and first dilates himself, Psalm.
89. 23.
and expatiates in the way of mercy, I will beat down his foes before his face,
and plague them that hate him; when after that he is brought to say, If his
children forsake my Law, I will visit their transgression with the rod; where
first he puts it off for one Generation from himself, verse 30.
to his Children, which was one Mercy: And then he puts it upon a forsaking, an
Apostasy, and not upon every sin of infirmity, which was another Mercy; when
it comes to a correction, it is but a mild correction, with the r^d: And in
that, he promises to visit them; to manifest himself, and his purpose to them
in the correction; all which are higher and higher degrees of Mercy: yet
because there is a spark of anger, a tincture of judgment mingled in it, God
remembers his firstborn, verse 33.
his Mercy, and returns where he begun: Nevertheless my Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the things that is gone out of my lips; once have I sworn by
my Holiness, that I will not lie unto David. There are elder pictures in the
world of Water, then there are any of oil; but those of oil have got above
them, and shall outlive them. Water is a frequent emblem of Affliction, in the
Scriptures; and so is oil of Mercy; If at any time in any place of Scripture,
God seemed to begin with water, with a judgment, yet the oil will get to the
top: in that very judgment, you may see that God had first a merciful purpose
in inflicting that medicinal judgment; for his mercy is his firstborn. His
Mercy is new every morning, says the Prophet; not only every day, but as soon
as it is day.

Trace God in thy self, and thou shall find it so. If thou be drowzie now,
and unattentive, curious or contentious, or quarrelsome now, now God leaves
thee in that indisposition, and that is a judgment: But it was his Mercy that
brought thee hither before. In every sin thou have some remorse, some
reluctation, before thou do that sin; and that pre-reluctation, and
pre-remorse was Mercy. If thou had no such remorse in thy last sin, before
the sin, and have it now, this is the effect of Gods former mercy, and former
good purpose upon thee, to let thee see that thou need the assistance of his
Minister, and of his Ordinance, to enable thee to lay hold on Mercy when it is
offered thee. Can any calamity fall upon thee, in which thou shall not be bound
to say, I have had blessings in a greater measure then this? If thou have had
losses, yet thou have more, out of which God took that. If all be lost,
perchance thou art but where thou begunst at first, at nothing. If thou begunst
upon a good height, and be fallen from that, and fallen low, yet as God
prepared a Whale to transport Jonas, before Jonas was cast into the Sea, God
prepared thee a holy Patience, before he reduced thee to the exercise of that
Patience. If thou could apprehend nothing done for thy self, yet all the
mercies that God has exhibited to others, are former mercies to thee, in the
Pattern, and in the Seal, and in the Argument thereof: They have had them,
therefore thou shall. All Gods Prophecies, are thy Histories: whatsoever he
has promised others, he has done in his purpose for thee: And all Gods
Histories are thy Prophesies; all that he has done for others, he owes thee.
Have thou a hardness of heart? know thou not that Christ has wept before
to entender that hardness? have thou a palenesse of soul, in the apparition of
God in fire, and in judgment? know thou not, that Christ has bled before,
to give a vigor, and a vegetation, and a verdure to that palenesse? is thy
sin Actual sin? know thou not, that there is a Lamb bleeding before
upon the Altar, to expiate that? Is thy terror from thy inherence, and
encombrance of Original sin? know thou not, that the effect of Baptism
has blunted the sting of that sin before? art thou full of sores, putrid and
ulcerous sores? full of wounds, through and through piercing wounds? full of
diseases, namelesse and complicate diseases? know thou not that there is a
holy Charm, a blessed Incantation, by which thou art, though not invulnerable,
yet invulnerable unto death, wrapped up in the eternal Decree of thine Election?
that is thy pillar, the assurance of thine Election: If thou shake that, if thou
cast down that Pillar, if thou distrust thine Election, with Samson, who pulled
down pillars in his blindness, in thy blindness thou destroyest thy self.
Begin where thou will at any Act in thy self, at any act in God, yet there was
mercy before that, for his mercy is eternal, eternal even toward thee. I
could easily think that that, that past between God and Moses in their long
conversation; that that, that past between Christ and Moses in his
trans-figuration; that that, that past between Saint Paul and the Court of
Heaven in his ecstasy was instruction and manifestation on one part, and
admiration and application on the other part of the mercy of God. Earth cannot
receive, Heaven cannot give such another universal soul to all: all persons,
all actions, as Mercy. And were I the child of this Text, that were to live a
hundred years, I would ask no other marrow to my bones, no other wine to my
heart, no other light to mine eyes, no other art to my understanding, no other
eloquence to my tongue, then the power of apprehending for my self, and the
power of deriving and conveying upon others by my Ministry, the Mercy, the
early Mercy, the everlasting Mercy of yours, and my God. But we must pass to
the consideration of this immense Light, in that one Beam, wherein it is
exhibited here, that is, long life: The child shall die a hundred years old.

Long life is a blessing, Vita longa.
as it is an image of eternity: as Kings are blessings, because they are Images
of God. And as to speak properly, a King that possessed the whole earth, has no
proportion at all to God, (he is not a dram, not a grain, not an atome to
God) so neither if a thousand Methusalems were put in one life, had that long
life any proportion to eternity; for Finite and Infinite have no proportion to
one another. But yet when we say so, That the King is nothing to God, we speak
then between God and the King; and we say that; only to assist the Kings
Religious humiliation of himself in the presence of God. But when we speak
between the King and our selves his Subjects, there we raise our selves to a
just reverence of him, by taking knowledge that he is the Image of God to us.
So though long life be nothing to eternity, yet because we need such Glasses
and such Images, as God shows us himself in the King, so he shows us his
eternity in a long life. In this, that the Patriarchs complain every where of
the shortness of life, Genesis 4. 9.
and neernesse of death; (Jacob at a hundred and thirty years tells Pharaoh,
that his days were few,) In this, that God threatens the shortness of life
for a punishment to Eli, 1 Samuel 2. 32.
God says, There shall not be an old man in thy house for ever: In this, that
God brings it into Promise, and enters it, as into his Audite, and his revenue,
( With long life will I satisfy him, Psalm. 91. 16.
and show him my salvation,) That God would give him long life, and make that
long life a Type of Eternity; In this, that God continues that promise into
performance, and brings it to execution, in some of his chosen servants; at a
hundred and twenty Moses his eyes were not dim, Deuteronomy. 24. 7.
nor his natural force abated; and Caleb says of himself, Ios. 14. 10.
I am this day 85. years old, and as my strength was at first, for war, so
is my strength now; In all these and many others, we receive so many
testimonies that God brings long life out of his Treasury, as an immediate
blessing of his. And therefore, as such his blessing, let us pray for it, where
it is not come yet, in that apprecation and acclamation of the ancient general
Counsels, Multos annos Caesari, Aetern^s annos Caesari, Long life to our Caesar
in this world, everlasting life to our Caesar in the world to come: and then let
us reverence this blessing of long life, where it is come, in honoring those
Ancient heads, by whose name, God has been pleased to call himself, Antiquu^
dierum, the ancient of days: and let us not make this blessing of long life,
impossible to our selves, by disappointing Gods purpose of long life upon us,
by our surfets, our wantonness, our quarrels, which are all Goths, and
Vandals, and Giants, called in by our selves to fight with God against us. But
yet, so receive we long life, as a blessing, as that we may also find a
blessing in departing from this life: For so manifold, and so multiforn are his
blessings, as even death it self has a place in this Sphere of blessings, The
child shall live a hundred years, but yet The child shall die.

When Paradise should have extended, Morietur.
as man should have multiplied, and every holy family, every religious Colony
have constituted a new Paradise, that as it was said of Egypt, when it abounded
with Hermitages in the Primitive persecutions, That Egypt was a continual City
of Hermitages; so all the world should have been a continual Garden of
Paradises, when all affections should have been subjects, and all creatures
servants, and all wives helpers, then life was a sincere blessing. But, but a
mixed blessing now, when all these are so much vitiated; only a possible
blessing; a disputable, a conditionable, a circumstantiall blessing now. If
there were any other way to be saved and to get to Heaven, then by being born
into this life, I would not wish to have come into this world. And now that God
has made this life a Bridge to Heaven; it is but a giddy, and a vertiginous
thing, to stand long gazing upon so narrow a bridge, and over so deep and
roaring waters, and desperate whirlpools, as this world abounds with: Psalm. 90.
12.
So teach us to number our days, says David, that we may apply our hearts
unto wisdom: Not to number them so, as that we place our happiness, in the
increase of their number. Psalm. 21. 14.
What is this wisdom? he tells us there; He asked life of thee, and thou
gave it him: But was that this life? It was Length of days for ever and
ever, the days of Heaven.

As houses that stand in two Shires, trouble the execution of Justice, the
house of death that stands in two worlds, may trouble a good man's resolution.
As death is a sordid Postern, by which I must be thrown out of this world, I
would decline it: But as death is the gate, by which I must enter into Heaven,
would I never come to it? certainly now, now that Sin has made life so
miserable, if God should deny us death, he multiplied our misery. We are in
this Text, upon blessings appropriated to the Christian Church, and so to these
times. And in theseTimes, we have not so long life, as the Patriarchs had
before. They were to multiply children for replenishing the world, and to that
purpose had long life. We multiply sins, and the children and offspring of
sins, miseries, and therefore may be glad to get from this generation of
Vipers. God gave his Children Manna and Quails, in the Wilderness, where
nothing else was to be had; but when they came to the Land of Promise, that
Provision ceased: God gave them long life in the times of Nature, and long,
(though shorter then before) in the times of the Law; because in nature
especially, but in the Law also, it was hard to discern, hard to attain the
ways to Heaven. But the ways to Heaven are made so manifest to us in the
Gospel, as that for that use, we need not long life; and that is all the use of
our life here. He that is ready for Heaven, has lived to a blessed age; and to
such an intendment, a child newly baptized may be elder then his Grandfather.
Therefore we receive long life for a blessing, when God is pleased to give it;
though Christ entered it into no Petition of his Prayer, that God would give
it: and so though we enter it into no Petition, nor Prayer, we receive it as a
blessing too, when God will afford us a deliverance, a manumission, an
emancipation from the miseries of this life. Truly I would not change that joy
and consolation, which I proposed to my hopes, upon my Deathbed, at my passage
out of this world, for all the joy that I have had in this world over again.
And so very a part of the Joy of Heaven is a joyful transmigration from hence,
as that if there were no more reward, no more recompense, but that I would put
my self to all that belongs to the duty of an honest Christian in the world,
only for a joyful, a cheerful passage out of it. And farther we shall not
exercise your patience, or your devotion, upon these three pieces which
constitute our first part: The Primogeniture of Gods Mercy, which is first in
all; The specification of Gods Mercy, long Life, as it is a figure of, and a
way to eternity; and then the association of Gods Mercy; that Death, as well as
Life, is a blessing to the Righteous.

So then we have brought our Sun to his Meridianall height, Part. 2.
to a full Noon, in which all shadows are removed: for even the shadow of
death, death it self is a blessing, and in the number of his Mercies. But the
Afternoon shadows break out upon us, in our second part of the Text. And as
afternoon shadows do, these in our Text do also; they grow greater and greater
upon us, till they end in night, in everlasting night, The sinner being a
hundred years old shall be accursed. Now of shadows it is appliably said,
Vmbrae non sunt tenebrae sed densior lux, shadows are not utter darkness, but
a thicker light; shadows are thus much nearer to the nature of light then
darkness is, that shadows presume light, which darkness does not; shadows
could not be, except there were light. The first shadows in this dark part of
our Text, have thus much light in them, that it is but the sinner, only the
sinner that is accursed. The Object of Gods malediction, is not man, but
sinful man. If God make a man sin, God curses the man; August.
but if sin make God curse, God curses but the sin. Non talem Deum tuum
putes, qualis nec tu debes esse, Never propose to thy self such a God, as thou
were not bound to imitate: Thou mistakest God, if thou make him to be any such
thing, or make him to do any such thing, as thou in thy proportion should not
be, or should not do. And should thou curse any man that had never
offended, never transgrest, never trespast thee? Can God have done so? Imagine
God, as the Poet says, Ludere in humanis, to play but a game at Chesse with
this world; to sport himself with making little things great, and great things
nothing: Imagine God to be but at play with us, but a gamester, yet will a
gamester curse, before he be in danger of losing any thing? Deuteronomy. 27. 13.
Will God curse man, before man have sinned? In the Law there are denuntiations
of curses enjoined and multiplied: There is maledictus upon maledictus; but it
is maledictus homo, cursed be the man; He was not cursed by God, before he was a
man; nor cursed by God, because he was a man; but if that man commit Idolatry,
Adultery, Incest, Beastiality, Bribery, Calumny, (as the sins are reckoned
there) there he meets a particular curse, upon his particular sin. The book
of Life is but names written in Heaven; all the Book of Death, that is, is but
that in the Prophet, when names are written in the Earth. Ier. 17. 13.
But whose names are written in the Earth there? They that depart from thee,
shall be written in the Earth: They shall be, when they depart from thee. For
says he, They have forsaken the Lord, the Fountain of Living water; They did
not that, because their names were written in the Earth, but they were written
there, because they did that. Our Savior Christ came hither to do all his
Fathers will; and he returned cheerfully to his Father again, as though he had
done all, when he had taken away the sins of the world by dying for all
sins, and all sinners. But if there were an Hospital of miserable men, that
lay under the reprobation and malediction of Gods decree, and not for sin;
the blood of that Lamb is not sprinkled upon the Postills of that door.
Forgive me O Lord, O Lord forgive me my sins, the sins of my youth, and my
present sins, the sin that my Parents cast upon me, Original sin, and
the sins that I cast upon my children, in an ill example; Actual sins,
sins which are manifest to all the world, and sins which I have so labored
to hide from the world, as that now they are hid from mine own conscience, and
mine own memory; Forgive me my crying sins, and my whispering sins, sins of
uncharitable hate, and sins of unchaste love, sins against Thee and Thee,
against thy Power O Almighty Father, against thy Wisdom, O glorious Son,
against thy Goodness, O blessed Spirit of God; and sins against Him and Him,
against Superiors and Equals, and Inferiors; and sins against Me and Me,
against mine own soul, and against my body, which I have loved better then my
soul; Forgive me O Lord, O Lord in the merits of thy Christ and my Jesus, thine
Anointed, and my Savior; Forgive me my sins, all my sins, and I will put
Christ to no more cost, nor thee to more trouble, for any reprobation or
malediction that lay upon me, otherwise then as a sinner. I ask but an
application, not an extention of that Benediction, Blessed are they whose
sins are forgiven; Let me be but so blessed, and I shall envy no man's
Blessedness: say thou to my sad soul, Son be of good comfort, thy sins are
forgiven thee, and I shall never trouble thee with Petitions, to take any other
Bill off of the fyle, or to reverse any other Decree, by which I should be
accursed, before I was created, or condemned by thee, before thou saw me as a
sinner; For the object of malediction is but a sinner, (which was our first)
and an Inveterate sinner, A sinner of a hundred years, which is our next
consideration.

First, 100. Annorum.
Quia centum annorum, because he is so old; so old in sin, He shall be accur
sed. And then, Quamvis centum annorum, though he be so old, though God have
spared him so long, Ecclus. 4. 30.
he shall be accursed. God is not a Lion in his house, nor frantic amongst his
servants, says the Wiseman; God does not rore, nor tear in pieces for every
thing that displeases him. Amos 1. 3.
But when God is pressed under us, as a cart is pressed that is full of sheaves;
the Lord will groan under that burden a while, but he will cast it off at
last. That which is said by David, Psalm. 18. 26.
is, if it be well observed, spoken of God himself, Cum perverso perverteris;
from our frowardness God will learn to be froward: But he is not so, Levit.
26. 21.
of his own nature. If you walk contrary unto me, I will walk contrary unto
you, says God. But this is not said of one, first, wry step; but it is a
walking, which implies a long, and a considerate continuance. And if man come
to sin so, and will not walk with God, God will walk with that man in his own
pace, and overthrow him in his own ways. Nay, it is not only in that place,
If you walk contrary to me, In occursu, as Calvin has it, ex adverso, as the
vulgate has it, which implies an Actual Opposition against the ways of God:
but the word is but Chevi, and Chevi is but In accidente, in contingente; if
you walk negligently, inconsiderately; if you leave out God, pretermit, and
slight God; if you come to call Gods Providence Fortune, to call Gods
Judgments Accidents, or to call the Mercies of a God, favors of great
Persons, if you walk in this neglect of God, God shall proceed to a neglect of
you; and then though God be never the worse for your leaving him out, (for if
it were in your power to annihilate this whole world, God were no worse, then
before there was a World) yet if God neglect you, forget, pretermit you, it is
a miserable annihilation, a fearful malediction. But God begins not before
sin, nor at the first sin. God did not curse Adam and Eve for their sin;
it was there first, and God foresaw they would not be sinners of a hundred
years. But him that was in the Serpent, that inveterate sinner, him, who had
sinned in Gods Court, in Heaven, before, and being banished from thence, fell
into this transmarine treason, in another land, to seduce Gods other Subjects
there, him God accursed. Who amongst us can say, that he had a Fever upon his
first excess, or a Consumption upon his first wantonness, or a Commission put
upon him for his first Briberie? Till he be a sinner of a hundred years, till
he have brought age upon himself, by his sin, before the time, and thereby be
a hundred years old at forty, and so a sinner of a hundred years, till he
have a desire that he might, and a hope that he shall be able to sin to a
hundred years; and so be a sinner of a hundred years; Till he sin hungerly
and thirstily, and ambitiously, and swiftly, and commit the sins of a hundred
years in ten, and so be a sinner of a hundred years; till he infect and
poison that age, and spoil that time that he lives in by his exemplary sins,
till he be Pestis secularis, the plague of that age, peccator secularis, the
proverbiall sinner of that age, and so be a sinner of a hundred years, till in
his actions he have been, or in his desires be, or in the foreknowledge of God
would be a sinner of a hundred years, an inveterate, an incorrigible, an
everlasting sinner, God comes not to curse him.

But then Quamvis centum annorum, though he have lived a hundred years, though
God have multiplied upon him Evidences, and Seals, and Witnesses, and
Possessions, and Continuances, and prescriptions of his favor, all this has
not so riveted God to that man, as that God must not depart from him. God was
crucified for him, but will not be crucified to him; still to hang upon this
Cross, this perverseness of this habitual sinner, and never save himself and
come down, never deliver his own Honor, by delivering that sinner to
malediction. It is true, that we can have no better Title to Gods future
Blessings, then his Blessings formerly exhibited to us; God former blessings
are but his marks set up there, that he may know that place, and that man the
better against another time, when he shall be pleased to come thither again
with a supply of more Blessings: God gives not Blessings as payments, but as
obligations; and becomes a debtor by giving. If I can produce that, Remember
thy mercies of old, I need ask no new; for even that is a Specialty by which
God has bound himself to me for more. But yet not so, if I abuse his former
Blessings, and make them occasions of sin. How often would I have gathered
you as a hen gathers her chickens, says Christ, I know not how often; surely
very often; for many hundreds of years: But yet, how often soever, God left
them open to the Eagle, the Roman Eagle at last. God gives thee a recovery
from sickness, that does not make thee Immortal. God gives thee a good
interpretation of thine actions from a gracious Prince, this does not make thee
impeccable in thy self. God gives thee titles of Honor upon thy self, this
does not always give thee honor, Psalm. 113. 7.
and respect from others. For as it is God that Raises up the poor out of the
dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill, that he may set him with
Princes; Psalm. 86. 12.
so it is God that Cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to the Kings
of the Earth. Psalm. 33. 10.
It is God that makes the devices of the People of none effect, and it is God
that destroys the Counsels of Egypt. Esaias 19. 3.
It is God that makes their Nobles like Oreb, and like Zeb, and like them that
perished at Endor, and became as dung for the Earth; that is, profitable only
in their ruin, and conculcation. And so with the same unwillingnesse, that God
comes to the execution, we come to the denunciation of this malediction. They,
They, these inveterate, incorrigible sinners, Quamvis centum annorum, though
God have spared them so long, yet Quia centum annorum, because they have
employed all that time in sin, They shall be accursed.

Accursing is malediction, Maledictus.
malediction is literally but maledicence; and that is but evil speaking. Now
all kinds of evil speaking do not inwrap a man within the curse of this Text;
For, though it be a shrewd degree of this curse of God, to be generally ill
spoken of by sad, sober, and discreet, and dis-passioned, and dis-interessed
Men, yet we are fallen into times, when men will speak ill of men, in things
which they do not know, nor should not know, and out of credulity and easy
believing of men, whom they should not believe; men distempered and transported
with passion: So men speak evil out of passion, and out of compassion; out of
humor, and out of rumor. But malediction in our Text, is an Imprecation of
evil, by such men as would justly inflict it if they could, and because they
cannot, they pray to God that he would, and he does: When God seconds the
Imprecations of good men, that is this curse. The Person that is cursed here is
Peccator centum annorum; an habitual, an incorrigible sinner. If you put me to
assign, in what rank of men, Magistrates or Subjects, rich or poor, Judges or
prisoners, All. If you put me to assign, for what sins, sins of complexion
and constitution, sins of society and conversation, sins of our
profession, and calling, sins of the particular place, or of the whole times,
that we live in, sins of profit, or sins of pleasure, or sins of glory; (for we
all do some sins which are sins merely of glory; sins that we make no profit
by, nor take much pleasure in, but do them only out of a mis-imagined
necessity, left we should go too much less, and sink in the estimation of the
World, if we did them not;) if I must say which of these sins put us under
this curse, All; If he be centum annorum, Inveterate, Incorrigible, He is
accursed. But then who curses him? God put an extraordinary spirit, and
produced extraordinary effects from curses, in the mouths of his Prophets which
have been since the World began. 2 Reg. 2.
So Elizeus curses, and two Bears destroy forty two persons. These curses are
deposited by God, in the Scriptures, and then inflicted by the Church, in her
ordinary jurisdiction, by excommunications, and other censures. But this may be
but matter of form in the Church, or matter of indignation in the Prophet. Not
so, but as God says, Esaias.
That the rod in Ashurs hand is his rod, and the sword in Babylons hand his
sword, so the curse deposited in the Scripture, and denounced by the Church, is
his curse. Amos.
For as the Prophet says, Non est malum, all the evil (that is, all the
penal ill, all plagues, all war, all famine,) that is done in the World, God
does; so all the evil that is spoken, all the curses deposited in the
Scriptures, and denounced by the Church, God speaks. But be all this so; there
is a curse deposited, denounced, seconded by God; yet, all this is but
malediction, but a speaking, here is no execution spoken of: yes, there is, for
as the sight of God is Heaven, and to be banished from the sight of God, is Hell
in the World to come, so the blessing of God, is Heaven, and the curse of God
is Hell and damnation, even in this Life. The Hieroglyphique of silence, is the
hand upon the mouth; If the hand of God be gone from the mouth, it is gone to
strike. Esaias.
If it be come to an Os Domini locutum, that the mouth of the Lord have spoken
it, it will come presently to an Immittam manum, That God will lay his hand
upon us, in which one Phrase, Exodus 7. 4.
all the plagues of Egypt are denounced. Solomon puts both hand and tongue
together; Prove. 18. 21.
In manibus linguae, says he, Death and Life are in the hand of the tongue:
Gods Tongue has a hand; where his Sentence goes before, the execution
follows. Nay, in the execution of the last sentence, we shall feel the Hand,
before we hear the Tongue, the execution is before the sentence; It is, Ite
maledicti, go ye accursed: First, you must Go, go out of the presence of God;
and by that being gone, you shall know, that you are accursed; Whereas in other
proceedings, the sentence denounces nounces the execution, here the execution
denounces the sentence. But be all this allowed to be thus; There is a
malediction deposited in the Scriptures, denounced by the Church, ratified by
God, brought into execution, yet it may be born, men do bear it. How men do
bear it, we know not; what passes between God and those men, upon whom the
curse of God lies, in their dark horrors at midnight, they would not have us
know, because it is part of their curse, to envy God that glory. But we may
consider in some part the insupportablenesse of that weight, if we proceed but
so far, as to accommodate to God, that which is ordinarily said of natural
things. Corruption optimi pessima; when the best things change their nature,
they become worst. When God, who is all sweetness, shall have learned
frowardness from us, as David speaks; and being all rectitude, shall have
learned perverseness and crookedness from us, as Moses speaks; and being all
providence, shall have learned negligence from us: when God who is all
Blessing, has learned to curse of us, and being of himself spread as an
universal Hony-combe over All, takes in an impression, a tincture, an infusion
of gall from us, what extraction of Wormwood can be so bitter, what exaltation
of fire can be so raging, what multiplying of talents can be so heavy, what
stiffness of destiny can be so inevitable, what confection of gnawing worms, of
gnashing teeth, of howling cries, of scalding brimstone, of palpable darkness,
can be so, so insupportable, so inexpressible, so in-imaginable, as the curse
and malediction of God? And therefore let not us by our works provoke, Iam. 3.
9.
nor by our words teach God to curse. Lest if with the same tongue that we
bless God, we curse Men; that is, seem to be in Charity in our Prayers here,
and carry a ranckerous heart, and venomous tongue home with us God come to say,
Psalm. 10^. 7.
(and Gods saying is doing) As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him; as he
clothed himself with cursing, as with a garment, so let it be as a girdle,
wherewith he is girded continually: When a man curses out of Levity, and makes
a loose habit of that sin, God shall so gird it to him, as he shall never
divest it. The Devils grammar is Applicare Activa Passivis, to apply Actives to
Passives; where he sees an inclination, to subminister a temptation; where he
sees a froward choler, to blow in a curse. And Gods grammar is to change
Actives into Passives: where a man delights in cursing, to make that man
accursed. And if God do this to them who do but curse men, will he do less to
them, who blaspheme himself? where man wears out Aeternum suum, (as Saint
Gregory speaks) his own eternity, his own hundred years; that is, his whole
life, in cursing and blaspheming, God shall also extend his curse, In aeterno
suo, in his eternity, that is, for ever. Which is that, that falls to the
bottom, as the heaviest of all, and is our last consideration; that all the
rest, that there is a curse deposited in the Scriptures, denounced by the
Church, avowed by God, reduced to execution, and that insupportable in this
life, is infinitely aggravated by this, that he shall be accursed for ever.

This is the Anathema Maran-atha, Aeternum.
accursed till the Lord come; and when the Lord comes, he comes not to
reverse, nor to alleviate, but to ratify and aggravate that curse. As soon as
Christ cursed the fig tree, it withered, and it never recovered: for says that
Gospel, Matthew. 2^. ^9.
he cursed it Inaeternum, for ever. In the course of our sin, the Holy Ghost
has put here a number of years, a hundred years: We sin long, as long as
we can, but yet sin has an end. But in this curse of God in the Text, there
is no number; it is an indefinite future; He shall be accursed: A mile of
ciphers or figures, added to the former hundred, would not make up a minute of
this eternity. Men have calculated how many particular grains of sand, would
fill up all the vast space butween the Earth and the Firmament: and we find,
that a few lines of ciphers will design and express that number. But if every
grain of sand were that number, and multiplied again by that number, yet all
that, all that inexpressible, inconsiderable number, made not up one minute of
this eternity; neither would this curse, be a minute the shorter for having
been endured so many Generations, as there were grains of sand in that number.
Our Esse, our Being, is from Gods saying, Dixit and facti, God spoke, and we
were made: our Been esse, our well-being, is from Gods saying too; Bene-dicit
God blesses us, in speaking graciously to us. Even our ill-being, our
condemnation is from Gods saying also: for Malediction is Damnation. So far God
has gone with us that way, as that our Being, our well-being, our ill-being is
from his saying: But God shall never come to a Non esse, God shall never say to
us, Be nothing, God shall never succor us with an annihilation, nor give us
the ease of resolving into nothing, for this curse flows on into an
everlasting future, He shall be accursed, he shall be so for ever. In a true
sense we may say, that Gods foreknowledge grows less and less every day;
for his foreknowledge is of future things, and many things which were future
heretofore are past, or present now; and therefore cannot fall under his
foreknowledge: His foreknowledge in that sense, grows less, and decaieth.
But his eternity decays in no sense; and as long as his eternity lasts, as
long as God is God, God shall never see that soul, whom he has accursed,
delivered from that curse, or eased in it.

But we are now in the work of an hour, and no more. If there be a minute of
sand left, (There is not) If there be a minute of patience left, hear me say,
This minute that is left, is that eternity which we speak of; upon this
minute depends that eternity: And this minute, God is in this Congregation,
and puts his ear to every one of your hearts, and hearkens what you will bid
him say to your selves: whether he shall bless you for your acceptance, or
curse you for your refusal of him this minute: for this minute makes up your
Century, your hundred years, your eternity, because it may be your last
minute. We need not call that a Fable, but a Parable, where we hear, That a
Mother to still her froward child told him, she would cast him to the Wolf,
the Wolf should have him; and the Wolf which was at the door, and within
hearing, waited, and hoped he should have the child indeed: but the child
being stilled, and the Mother pleased, then she says, so shall we kill the
Wolf, the Wolf shall have none of my child, and then the Wolf stole away. No
metaphor, no comparison is too high, none too low, too trivial, to imprint in
you a sense of Gods everlasting goodness toward you. God bids your Mother the
Church, and us her Servants for your Souls, to denounce his judgments upon
your sins, and we do it; and the executioner Satan, believes us, before you
believe us, and is ready on his part. Be you also ready on your part, to lay
hold upon those conditions, which are annexed to all Gods maledictions,
Repentance of former, preclusion against future sins, and we shall be always
ready, on our part to assist you with the Power of our Intercession, to deliver
you with the Keys of our Absolution, and to establish you with the seals of
Reconciliation, and so disappoint that Wolf, that roaring Lion, that seeks whom
he may devour: Go in Peace, and be this your Peace, to know this, Maledictus
qui pendet in Cruce, God has laid the whole curse belonging to us upon him,
that hangs upon the Cross; But Benedictus qui pendet in pendentem; To all them
that hang upon him, that hangs there, God offers now, all those blessings,
which he that hangs there has purchased with the inestimable price of his
Incorruptible blood; And to this glorious Son of God, who has suffered all
this, and to the most Almighty Father, who has done all this, and to the
blessed Spirit of God, who offers now to apply all this, be ascribed by us,
and by the whole Church, All power, praise, might, majesty, glory, and
dominion, now and for evermore Amen.

SERMON XXVII.
Preached to the King, at White Hall, the first of April, 1627.
MARK. 4. 24. Take heed what you hear.
WHether that which is recorded by this Evangelist, in, and about this Chapter,
be one entire Sermon of our Saviors, preached at once, or Notes taken and
erected from several Sermons of his, we are no further curious to inquire,
then may serve to ground this Note, that if it were one entire Sermon our
Savior preached methodically, and eased his hearers with certain landmarks by
the way, with certain divisions, certain transitions, and callings upon them,
verse 3.
to observe the points as they arose: For as he begins so, Hearken, Behold,
so he returns to that refreshing of their considerations, Et dixit illis, He
said unto them; and, Again, he said unto them, seven or eight times, in this
Chapter; so many times he calls upon them, to observe his passing from one
point to another. If they be but Notes of several Sermons, we only note this
from that, That though a man understand not a whole Sermon, or remember not a
whole Sermon, yet he does well, that lays hold upon such Notes therein as may
be appliable to his own case, and his own conscience, and conduce to his own
edification. The widow of Sarepta had no Palaces to build, 1 Reg. 17.
and therefore she went not out to survay Timber; she had only a poor cake to
bake to save her own and her child's life, and she went out to gather a few
sticks, two sticks as she told the Prophet Elias, to do that work. Every man
that comes to hear here, every man that comes to speak here, comes not to
build Churches, nor to build Commonwealths; to speak only of the duties of
Kings, and of Prelates, and of Magistrates; but that poor soul that gathers a
stick or two, for the baking of her own cake, that lays hold upon any Note
for the rectifying of her own perverseness has performed the commandment of
this Text, Take heed what ye hear. He that is drowning, will take hold of a
bulrush; and even that bulrush may stay him, till stronger means of succor
come. If you would but feel, that you are drowning in the whirlepooles of
sin, and Gods judgments for sin, and would lay hold upon the shallowest man,
(be that man dignified with Gods Character, the Character of Orders,) and lay
hold upon the meanest part of his speech, (be that speech dignified with Gods
Ordinance, be it a Sermon) even I, and any thing that I say here, and say thus,
(spoken by a Minister of God, in the house of God, by the Ordinance of God)
might stop you till you heard better, and you might be the fitter for more, if
you would but take heed now what you heard; Take heed what you hear.

These words were spoken by Christ, Divisio.
to his Apostles upon this occasion. He had told them before, That since there
was a candle lighted in the world, it must not be put under a bushel, nor
under a bed, verse 21. That all that is hid, should be made manifest; That all
that was kept secret, should come abroad, verse 22. That if any man had ears to
hear, he might hear, verse 23. That is, that the Mystery of salvation, which
had been hid from the world till now, was now to be published to the world, by
their Preaching, their Ministry, their Apostleship: And that therefore, since
he was now giving them their Commission, and their instructions; since all that
they had in charge for the salvation of the whole world, was only that, that
he delivered unto them, that which they heard from him, they should take heed
what they heard; Take heed what you hear. In which he lays a double
obligation upon them: First, All that you hear from me, you are to preach to
the world; and therefore Take heed what you hear; forget none of that; And
then, you are to preach no more then you hear from me; and therefore Take heed
what you hear; add nothing to that. Be not over-timorous so to prevaricate
and forbear to preach that, which you have truly heard from me; But be not
over-venturous neither, to pretend a Commission when you have none, and to
preach that for my word, which is your own passion, or their purpose that set
you up. And when we shall have considered these words in this their first
acceptance, as they were spoken literally, and personally to the Apostles, we
shall see also, that by reflection they are spoken to us, the Ministers of the
Gospel; and not only to us, of the Reformation, but to our Adversaries of the
Roman persuasion too; and therefore, in that part, we shall institute a short
comparison, whether they or we do best observe this commandment, Take heed what
you hear; Preach all that, preach nothing but that, which you have received
from me. And having passed through these words, in both those acceptations,
literally to the Apostles, and by reflection to all the Ministers of the
Gospel, the Apostles being at this time, when these words were spoken, but
Hearers, they are also by a fair accommodation appliable to you that are
Hearers now, Take heed what you hear: And since God has extended upon you
that glorification, that beatification, as that he has made you regale
Sacerdotium, a royal Priesthood, since you have a Regality and a Priesthood
imprinted upon you, since by the prerogative which you have in the Gospel of
the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and the co-inheritance which you have in that
Kingdom with Christ Jesus himself, you are Regum genus, and Sacerdotum genus,
of kin to Kings, and of kin to Priests, be careful of the honor of both
those, of whose honor, you have the honor to participate, and take heed what
you hear of Kings, take heed what you hear of Priests, take heed of harkening
to seditious rumors, which may violate the dignity of the State, or of
schismatic rumors, which may cast a cloud, or aspersion upon the government
of the Church; Take heed what you hear.

First then as the words are spoken, in their first acceptance, literally to
the Apostles, the first obligation that Christ lays upon them, 1 Part.
is the publication of the whole Gospel. Take heed what you hear; for, all
that, which you hear from me, the world must hear from you; for, for all my
death and resurrection the world lies still surrounded under sin, and
Condemnation, if this death and resurrection, be not preached by you, Acts 1. 8.
unto them. Therefore the last words that ever our Savior spoke unto them,
were a ratification of this Commission, You shall be my witnesses both in
Jerusalem, and in Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost parts of the
earth. God proceeds legally; Publication before Judgment. God shall condemn no
man, for not believing in Christ, to whom Christ was never manifested. It Is
true, that God is said to have come to Eliah in that still small voice, and not
in the strong wind, not in the Earthquake, 1. Reg. 19. 12. Zech. 10. 8. Mat.
10. 27.
not in the fire. So God says, Sibilab^ populum meum, I will but kiss, I will
but whisper for my people, and gather them so. So Christ tells us things in
darkness; And so Christ speaks to us in our Ear; And these low voices, and
holy whisperings, and halfe-silences, denote to us, the inspirations of his
Spirit, as his Spirit bears witness with our spirit; as the Holy Ghost
insinuates himself into our souls, and works upon us so, by his private
motions. But this is not Gods ordinary way, to be whispering of secrets. The
first thing that God made, was light; The last thing, that he has reserved to
do; is the manifestation of the light of his Essence in our Glorification. And
for Publication of himself here, by the way, he has constituted a Church, in
a Visibility, in an eminency, as a City upon a hill; And in this Church, his
Ordinance is Ordinance indeed; his Ordinance of preaching batters the soul,
and by that breach, the Spirit enters; His Ministers are an Earthquake, and
shake an earthly soul; They are the sons of thunder, and scatter a cloudy
conscience; They are as the fall of waters, and carry with them whole
Congregations; 3000 at a Sermon, 5000 at a Sermon, a whole City, such a City as
Niniveh at a Sermon; and they are as the roaring of a Lion, where the Lion of
the tribe of Juda, cries down the Lion that seeks whom he may devour; that is,
Orthodoxall and fundamental truths, are established against clamorous, and
vociferant innovations. Therefore what Christ tells us in the dark, he bids us
speak in the light; and what he says in our ear, he bids us preach on the
house top. Nothing is Gospel, not Evangelium, good message, if it be not put
into a Messengers mouth, and delivered by him; nothing is conducible to his
end, nor available to our salvation, except it be avowable doctrine, doctrine
that may be spoke alowd, though it awake them, that sleep in their sin, and
make them the more froward, for being so awaked.

God has made all things in a Roundnesse, from the round superficies of this
earth, which we tread here, to the round convexity of those heavens, which (as
long as they shall have any being) shall be our footstool, when we come to
heaven, God has wrapped up all things in Circles, and then a Circle has no
Angles; there are no Corners in a Circle. Corner Divinity, clandestine Divinity
are incompatible terms; If it be Divinity, it is avowable. The heathens served
their Gods in Temples, sub dio, without roofs or coverings, in a free
opennesse; and, where they could, in Temples made of Specular stone, that was
transparent as glass, or crystal, so as they which walked without in the
streets, might see all that was done within. And even nature it self taught the
natural man, to make that one argument of a man truly religious, Aperto vivere
voto, That he durst pray aloud, and let the world hear, what he asked at Gods
hand; which duty is best performed, when we join with the Congregation in
public prayer. Saint Augustine, has made that note upon the Donatists, That
they were Clancularii, clandestine Divines, Divines in Corners. And in Photius,
we have such a note almost upon all Heretics; as the Nestorian was called
Coluber, a snake, because though he kept in the garden, or in the meadow, in
the Church, yet he lurked and lay hid, to do mischief. And the Valentinian was
called a Grasshopper, because he leaped and skipped from place to place; and
that creature, the Grasshopper, you may hear as you pass, but you shall hardly
find him at his singing; you may hear a Conventicle Schismatic, hear him in
his Pamphlets, hear him in his Disciples, but hardly surprise him at his
exercise. Publication is a fair argument of truth. That tastes of Luthers holy
animosity, and zealous vehemence, when he says, Audemus gloriari Christum a
nobis primo vulgatum; other men had made some attempts at a Reformation, and
had felt the pulse of some persons, and some Courts, and some Churches, how
they would relish a Reformation; But Luther rejoices with a holy exultation,
That he first published it, that he first put the world to it. So the Apostles
proceeded; when they came in their peregrination, to a new State, to a new
Court, to Rome it self, they did not enquire, how stands the Emperor affected
to Christ, and to the preaching of his Gospel; Is there not a Sister, or a Wife
that might be wrought upon to further the preaching of Christ? Are there not
some persons, great in power and place, that might be content to hold a party
together, by admitting the preaching of Christ? This was not their way; They
only considered who sent them; Christ Jesus: And what they brough; salvation to
every soul that embraced Christ Jesus. That they preached; and still begun
with a Vae si non; Never tell us of displeasure, or disgrace, or detriment, or
death, for preaching of Christ. For, woe be unto us, if we preach him not: And
still they ended with a Qui non crediderit, Damnabitur, Never deceive your own
souls, He, to whom Christ has been preached, and believes not, shall be
damned. All Divinity that is bespoken, and not ready made, fitted to certain
turns, and not to general ends; And all Divines that have their souls and
consciences, so disposed, as their Libraries may be, (At that end stand
Papists, and at that end Protestants, and he comes in in the middle, as near
one as the other) all these have a brackish taste; as a River has that comes
near the Sea, so have they, in coming so near the Sea of Rome. In this the
Prophet exalts our Consolation, Esai. 30. 20.
Though the Lord give us the bread of Adversity, and the water of Affliction,
yes shall not our Teachers be removed into corners; (They shall not be silenced
by others, they shall not affect of themselves Corner Divinity. But (says he
there) our eyes shall see our Teachers, and our ears shall hear a word,
saying, This is the way, walk in it. For so they shall declare, that they have
taken to heart this Commandment of him that sent them, Christ Jesus. All that
you receive from me, you must deliver to my people; therefore, Take heed what
you hear; forget none of it. But then you must deliver no more then that; and
therefore in that respect also, Take heed what you hear; add nothing to that,
and that is the other obligation which Christ lays here upon his Apostles.

That reading of those words of Saint John, Oblig. 2. 1 Ioh. 4. 3.
Omnis spiritus qui solvit Iesum, Every spirit that dissolves Jesus, that takes
him asunder, in pieces, and believes not all, is a very ancient reading of that
place. And upon that Ancient reading, the Ancients infer well, That not only
that spirit that denies that Christ being God, assumed our flesh, not only he
that denies that Christ consists of two natures, God and Mam, but he also that
affirms this Christ, thus consisting of two natures, to consist also of two
persons, this man dissolves Jesus, takes him asunder, in pieces, and slackens
the band of the Christian faith, which faith is, That Christ consisting of two
natures, in one person, suffered for the salvation of man. So then, not only
to take from Jesus, one of his natures, God or man, but to add to him, another
person, this addition is a Diminution, a dissolution, an annihilation of Jesus.
So also to add to the Gospel, to add to the Scriptures, to add to the
articles of faith, this addition is a Diminution, a Dissolution, an
Annihilation of those Scriptures, that Gospel, that faith, and the Author, and
finisher thereof. Jesus grew in stature, says the Gospel; But he grew not to
his life's end; we know to, how many feet he grew. So the Scriptures grew to;
the number of the books grew; But they grow not to the worlds end, we know to
how many books they grew. The body of man and the vessels thereof, have a
certain, and a limited capacity, what nourishment they can receive and digest,
and so a certain, measure and stature to extend to. The soul, and soul of the
soul, Faith, and her faculties, has a certain capacity too, and certain
proportions of spiritual nourishments exhibited to it, in certain vessels,
certain measures, so many, these Books of Scriptures. And therefore as Christ
says, Mat. 6. 27.
Which of you can add one Cubit to your stature? (how plentifully, and how
delicately soever you feed, how discreetly, and how providently soever you
exercise, you cannot do that) so may he say to them who pretend the greatest
power in the Church, Which of you can add another book to the Scriptures, A
Codicill to either of my Testaments? 22. 18.
The curse in the Revelation falls as heavy upon them that add to the book of
God, as upon them that take from it: Nay, it is easy to observe, that in all
those places of Scripture which forbid the taking away, or the adding to the
Book of God, still the commandment that they shall not, and still the
malediction if they do, is first placed upon the adding, and after upon the
taking away. So it is in that former place, Plagues upon him, 4. 2.
that takes away: but first, Plagues upon him, that adds: so in Deuteronomy. you
shall not diminish, 12. 32.
but first, you shall not add: So again in that Book, whatsoever I command you
observe to do it: Thou shall not diminish from it; but first, Thou shall not
add to it. And when the same commandment seems to be given in the Proverbs,
30. 6.
there is nothing at all said of taking away, but only of adding, as though
the danger to Gods Church consisted especially in that; Every word of God, is
pure, says Solomon there: Add thou not unto his word, lest thou be reproved
and found a liar. For, though heretofore some Heretics have offered at that
way, to clip Gods coin in taking away some book of Scripture, yet for many
blessed Ages, the Church has enjoyed her peace in that point: None of the
Books are denied by any church, there is no substraction offered; But for
addition of Apocryphal Books to Canonical, the Church of God is still in her
Militant state, and cannot triumph: and though she have victory, in all the
Reasons, the cannot have peace. You see Christ's way, to them that came to hear
him; Matthew. 5.
Audiistis, and Audiistis, This, and that you have heard others say; Eg^ autem
dico; your Rule is, what I say; for Christ spoke Scripture; Christ was
Scripture. As we say of great and universal Scholars, that they are viventes
Bibliothecae, living, walking, speaking Libraries; so Christ was l^quens
Scriptura; living, speaking Scripture. Our Sermons are Text and Discourse;
Christ Sermons were all Text: Christ was the Word; not only the Essential
Word, which was always with God, but the very written word too; Christ was the
Scripture, and therefore, when he refers them to himself, he refers them to
the Scriptures, for though here he seem only, to call upon them, to hearken to
that which he spoke, yet it is in a word, of a deeper impression; for it is
Videte; See what you hear. Before you preach any thing for my word, see it, see
it written, see it in the body of the Scriptures. Here then lies the double
obligation upon the Apostles, The salvation of the whole world lies upon your
preaching of that, of All That, of only That, which you hear from me now, And
therefore, take heed what you hear. And farther we carry not your
consideration, upon this first acceptance of the words as they are spoken
personally to the Apostles, but pass to the second, as by reflection, they are
spoken to us, the Ministers of the Gospel.

In this consideration, Part. 2.
we take in also our Adversaries; for we all pretend to be successors of the
Apostles; though not we, as they, in the Apostolical, yet they as well as we
in the Evangelicall, and Ministerial function: for, as that which Christ said
to Saint Peter, he said in him, to all the Apostles, Upon this Rock will I
build my Church, so in this which he says to all the Apostles, he says to all
us also, Take heed what you hear. Be this then the issue between them of the
Roman distemper, and us; whether they or we, do best perform this commandment,
Take heed what you hear, conceal nothing of that which you have heard, obtrude
nothing but that which you have heard: Whether they or we do best apply our
practice to this rule, Preach all the Truth, preach nothing but the Truth, be
this lis contestata, the issue joined between us, and it will require no long
pleading for matter of evidence; An omnem. Matthew. 4. 4. Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
first, our Savior says, Man lives by every word, that proceeds out of the
mouth of God. And this Christ says from Moses also: so that in the mouth of
two unreproachable witnesses, Moses, and Christ, the Law, and the Gospel, we
have this established, Man's life is the Word of God, the Word is the Scripture.
And then our Savior says further, The Holy Ghost shall teach you all things,
and bring all things to your remembrance: Ioh. 14. 26.
and here is the Latitude, the Totality, the Integrality of the means of
salvation; you shall have Scriptures delivered to you, by them the Holy Ghost
shall teach you all things; and then you shall be remembered of all, by the
explication and application of those Scriptures, at Church, where lies the
principal operation of the Holy Ghost. Now, is this done in the Roman Church?
Are the Scriptures delivered, and explicated to them? To much of the Scriptures
as is read to them, in their Lessons and Epistles, and Gospels, is not
understood when it is read, for it is in an unknown language; so that, that
way, the Holy Ghost teaches them nothing. Neither are all the Scriptures
distributed into these Lessons and Epistles, and Gospels which are read: so
that if they did understand all they heard, yet they did not hear all they
were bound to understand. And for remembering them by the way of preaching,
though it be true, that the Reformation (by way of example, though not by
Doctrine) have so much prevailed upon them, as that they have now twenty
Sermons in that Church, for one that they had before Luther, yet if a man could
hear six Sermons a day, all the days of his life, he might die without having
heard all the Scriptures explicated in Sermons: But when men have a Christian
liberty afforded to them to read the Scriptures at home, and then are remembered
of those things at Church, and there taught to use that liberty modestly, to
establish their faith upon places of Scripture that are plain, and to suspend
their judgment upon obscurer places, till they may, by due means, preaching or
conference, receive farther satisfaction therein, from them, who are thereunto
authorized by God in his Church, there certainly is this Rule of our Saviors,
Take heed what you hear, preach all that you have received from me, likelyer to
be observed then there, where the body of the conveyance, the Scripture it self
is locked up from us; and the soul of the conveyance, the sense, and
interpretation of the Scriptures, is locked into one man's breast; and the Great
Seal of that conveyance, the Sacrament of our Reconciliation, is broken, and
mutilated, and given us but by half.

But they do not only stray on that hand, An solam.
in not giving all that the Scripture gives; (They do not give the liberty of
meats, nor the liberty of marriage, which the Scripture gives; Nay, they do
not give the liberty of trying, whether the Scripture give it or no; for they
do not give the liberty of reading the Scriptures) But on the other hand, they
stray too, and further, That they deliver more then the Scriptures do, and
make other Rules and Canons equal to Scriptures. In which excess, they do
not only make the Apocryphal Books, (Books that have always had a favorable
aspect, and benign countenance from the Church of God) equal to Canonical
Scriptures, But they make their decretall Epistles of their Popes and of their
Extravagants, (as they call them) and their occasional Bulls, nay their
Bull-baitings, their Bulls fighting, and crossing and contradicting one another,
equal to Canonical Scripture. So that these men have put the salvation of the
world, upon another science, upon another profession; It is not the Divine,
that is the Minister of salvation, but the Canonist. I must not determine my
belief in the Apostles Creed, nor in Athanasius, nor in that of the Nicen
Fathers; not only not the Scriptures, but not the Councels, nor Fathers must
give the Materials, and Elements of my faith, but the Canon law; for so they
rule it: Gratian that has collected the sentences of Fathers and Councels, and
digested them into heads of Divinity, he is no rule of our belief, because, say
they, he is no part of the body of the Canon law; But they that first compiled
the Decretals, and the Extravagants, and they who have since recompiled more
Decretals, and more Extravagants, the Clementins, and the Sextins, and of late
years the Septims, with those of John the 22. these make up the body of the
Canon law, and these must be our Rule; what to believe. How long? Till they
fall out with some State, with whom they are friends yet, or grown friends with
some State, that they are fallen out with now; and then upon a new Decretall, a
new Extravagant, I must contract a new, or enlarge, or restrain my old belief.
Certainly, as in natural things, the assiduity takes off the admiration, (The
rising, and the setting of the sun, would be a miracle to him, that should
see it but once) and as in civil things, the profuseness, and the
communication, and the indifferency takes off the Dignity, (for, as gold is
gold still, the heaviest metal of all, yet if it be beat into leaf gold, I can
blow it away; so Honor is honor still, the worthyest object of the worthyest
spirits, and the noblest reward of the greatest Princes, yet the more have it,
the less every one has of it) So in the Roman Church, they have not found a
better way to justify their blasphemy of the insufficiency of the Scriptures,
then by making contemptible writings, as sufficient as Scriptures, equal to
Scripture. If they could make me believe, the Scriptures were no more
sufficient then their Decretals, and Extravagants, I should easily confess
there were no Scriptures sufficient for salvation. And farther we press not
this evidence, how far they depart from this rule, Take heed what you hear,
How much less, and how much more then Christ gave, they give, but pass to the
third acceptance of these words, as, in a fair accommodation, they are spoken
to you, who are now as the Apostles were then, Hearers, Take heed what you
hear.

And into this part I enter with such a protestation, 3 Part.
as perchance may not become me: That this is the first time in all my life, (I
date my life from my Ministry; for I received mercy, as I received the
ministry, as the Apostle speaks) this is the first time, that in the exercise
of my Ministry, I wished the King away; That ever I had any kind of
loathnesse that the King should hear all that I said. Here, for a little while,
it will be a little otherwise; because in this branch, I am led, to speak of
some particular duties of subjects; and in my poor way, I have thought it
somewhat an Eccentrique motion, and off of the natural Poles, to speak of the
Duties of subjects before the King, or of the duties of Kings, in public and
popular Congregations. As every man is a world in himself, so every man has a
Church in himself; and as Christ referred the Church for hearing to the
Scriptures, so every man has Scriptures in his own heart, to hearken to.
Obedience to Superiors, and charity to others, are In-nate Scriptures;
Obedience and Charity, are the Natural man's, the Civil man's, the Moral man's
Old and New Testament. Take heed, that is, observe what you hear from them,
and they will direct you well. And first, Take heed what you hear, is, take
heed that you hear; That you do hearken to them, John 8. 47.
whom you should hear. Our Savior says, He that is of God, hears his words;
ye therefore hear them not, because you are not his. Transfer this to a
civil application; to obedience to Superiors. Christ makes account that he
has argued safely so; If you hear him not, you are none of his. If you hear
him not in his Laws, hear him not in his Proclamations, hear him not in the
Declarations of his wants and necessities, you are none of his, that is, you
had rather you were none of his: There is a Nolumus hunc regnare smothered in
our breasts, if we will not hear, and we had rather we might divest our
Allegiance, rather we might be no subjects. By the Law, Exodus 21. 6.
he that was willing to continue in the service of his Master, was willing to
be boared in the ear, willing to testify a readiness of hearing and
obedience. And when David describes the refractary man so, Psalm 53. 4.
He is like the deaf Adder, that stops her ear, which will not hearken to
the voice of Charmers, charming never so wisely, that word Charmer, signifies
an eloquent, a persuasive man, a powerful speaker; this Viper will not hear
such. And for the sins of a Nation, when those sins come to the height, 8.
17.
God will first inflict that punishment in the Prophet Jeremy, I will send
Serpents, Cockatrices amongst you, which will not be charmed, that is,
venomous, and mutinous, and seditious spirits, upon whom, no language, no
reason, no counsel, no persuasion can prevail; 3. 1.
And then, he will second, and aggravate that punishment, with that in Esaias,
The Lord shall take from Jerusalem, the man of war, and the Judge, and the
Prophet, and the honorable man, and the Counselor, and the eloquent Orator.
As when they will not embrace religious duties, God shall take away their
Preachers, so when they will not believe their Civil dangers, God shall take
from them the spirit of persuasibility, and the power of perswasivenesse
toward them, from them who should work upon them; and leave them a miserable
example of that fearful rule, whom God will destroy, he will infatuate first;
from that Nation from whom God will depart, as he is the Lord of hosts, and not
fight their battles, he will depart first, as he is the Angel of the great
counsel, and not enlighten their understandings, that they might see their
dangers. The Potion of jealousy, Number. 5. 12.
was a bitter potion, and a putrefying potion, where it was to be ministered;
and it was to be ministered to them, who gave the occasion of the jealousy. Now
not to have brought Saul presents, not to have contributed to his present wars,
and his present wants, 1 Samuel 10. ult.
this occasioned the jealousy; for so, says the text, They despised Saul, and
brought him no presents; This was evidence enough of their contempt, That they
brought him no presents. And where jealousies are so occasioned, much
bitterness may follow; many bitter potions may be administered; many bitter
pills may be swallowed. And therefore, take heed that you hear, and hear so,
as may in one act testify your obedience to Superiors, and charity toward
others, who are already enwrapped in the same miseries, that may reach you; for
obedience and charity are an Old, and a New Testament.

Take heed that you hear them whom God has appointed to speak to you; But,
when you come abroad, take heed what you hear; for, certainly, the Devil does
not cast in more snares at the eye of man, then at the ear. Our Savior Christ
proposes it as some remedy against a mischief, Mat. 18. 8.
That if the eye offend thee, thou may pull it out, and if thy hand or foot
offend thee, thou may cut it off, and thou art safe from that offense. But he
does not name nor mention the ear: for, if the ear betray thee, though thou do
cut it off, yet thou art open to that way of treason still, still thou can
hear. Where one man libels with the tongue, or hand, a hundred libel with the
ear; One man speaks, or writes, but a hundred applaud and countenance a
calumny. Therefore sepi aures tuas spinis, Ecclus. 28. 28.
as the Vulgate reads that place, hedge thine ears with thorns; that he that
would whisper a calumny in thine ear, against another man, may be pricked with
those thorns, that is, may discern from thee, that he is not welcome to thee,
and so forbear; or if he will press upon thee, those thorns may prick thee,
and warn thee that there is an uncharitable office done which thou should
not countenance.

Neither only may thy charity toward another, be violated by such a
whisperer, but thine own safety endangered; And therefore, Take heed what you
hear. There are two dangerous sorts of men, whom we call Auricularios, Earwigs
transformed into men. And certainly there is no Lycanthropie so dangerous, not
when men are changed into devouring wolfes, as when these Earwigs are
metamorphos'd into men. The first sort is of those, who take us into their
ears; the other, that put themselves into ours. The first are they, that
receive Auricular confessions; in which a man will propose to his Confessar,
treasonable and bloody purposes; and if he allow them, then it is no longer a
confession, but a consultation, and he may disclose it to any, whom he may
thereby draw in; But if his Confessar disallow it, then it retains the nature
of a confession still, and being delivered under that Seal, it may not be
revealed, though the concealing cost Christendom, or, (as they express it)
all the souls, that Christ has dyed for. And of these Earwigs, of these
Auricular men, we had shrewd experience in the carriage of that treason, the
Emphaticall Treason, in respect of which, all other Treasons are but
Trespasses, all Rebellions but Ryots, all Battayls but Frays. But then, the
more frequent, and the more dangerous Earwig is he, that upon pretense of
trusting thee with a secret, betrays thee, and therefore Take heed what you
hear. Bartelus that great Lawyer, had delivered it for law, that whosoever
hears treason, and reveals it not, is a Traitor. And though Baldus, a great
Lawyer, and one between whom, and Bartolus, the scales are even, say, That
Bartolus his soul, and all their souls that follow him in that opinion, burn
in hell for that uncharitableness, yet, to verify that, that the most do go
to hell, the most do follow Bartolus, and so thy danger, that huntest after
the knowledge of great secrets, is the greater, and therefore, Take heed what
you hear. Arridet tibi homo, and instar privati sermones occupat, says the
little great Epictetus, or Arrian upon him, a man will put himself into thy
company, and speak in the confidence of a dear friend, and then, De Principe
inclementer loquitur, he comes to speak boldly and irreverently of the
greatest persons; and thou think thou have found Exemplum and monumentum
fidei, a rare, a noble, an ingenuous, a free, and confident Spirit, Et
pertexis, quod prior inceperat; Thou do but say on that which he was saying,
and make up his sentence, or do but believe him, or do but not say, that
thou do not believe him, and thy few words, thy no words, may cost thee thy
life. Per ornamenta ferit, says the Patriarch, and Oracle of Moral men,
Seneca; This whisperer wounds thee, and with a stilletta of gold, he strangles
thee with scarfes of silk, he smothers thee with the down of Phoenixes, he
stifles thee with a perfume of Ambar, he destroys thee by praising thee,
overthrows thee by exalting thee, and undoes thee by trusting thee; By trusting
thee with those secrets that bring thee into a desperate perplexity, Aut alium
accusare in subsidium tui, (as the Patriarch, and Oracle of Statesmen,
Tacitus, says) Either to betray another, that pretends to have trusted thee, or
to perish thy self, for the saving of another, that plotted to betray thee.
And therefore, if you can hear a good Organ at Church, and have the music of
a domestique peace at home, peace in thy walls, peace in thy bosom, never
hearken after the music of spears, never hunt after the knowledge of higher
secrets, then appertain to thee; But since Christ has made you Regale
Sacerdotium, Kings and Priests, in your proportion, Take heed what you hear, in
derogation of either the State, or the Church.

In declaring ill affections toward others, Regnum. Exodus 21. 17.
the Holy Ghost has imprinted these steps. First, he begins at home, in
Nature, He that curses Father or Mother shall surely be put to death; and
then, as families grow out into Cities, the Holy Ghost goes out of the house,
Exodus 22. 28.
into the consideration of the State, and says, Thou shall not curse the Ruler
of the people, no Magistrate. 2 Samuel 19. 21.
And from thence he comes to the highest upon earth, for in Samuel, Lev. 24. 15.
it comes to a cursing of the Lords Anointed; and from thence to the highest in
heaven, Whosoever curses his God, shall bear his sin; and as though both
those grew out of one another, The cursing of the King, and the cursing of God,
the Prophet Esai has joined them together, 8. 21.
They shall be hungry, says he, (indigent, poor, penurious) and they shall
fret, (be transported with ungodly passion) and they shall curse their King and
their God: If they do one, they will do the other. The Devil remembers from
what height he is fallen, and therefore still clambers upward, and still
directs all our sins, in his end, upon God: Our end, in a sin, may be
pleasure, or profit, or satisfaction of affections, or passions; but the Devils
end in all is, that God may be violated and dishonored in that sin: And
therefore by casting in ill conceptions and distasts, first, against Parents
and Masters at home, and then against subordinate Magistrates abroad, and so
against the Supreme upon earth, He brings us to ill conceptions and distasts
against God himself; first, to think it liberty to be under no Governor, and
then, liberty to be under no God; when as, only those two services, of a
gracious God, and of a good King, are perfect freedom. Therefore the wise King
Solomon meets with this distemper in the root, at first ebullition, in the
heart; Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought; for, that Thought has a tongue,
and has spoken, and said Amen in the ears of God; That which thy heart has
said, though the Law have not, though the Jury have not, though the Peers have
not, God has heard thee say. The word which Solomon uses there, is Iadung; and
that our Translators have in the margin called Conscience; Curse not the King,
no not in thy conscience; Do not thou pronounce, that whatsoever thou
dislikest, cannot consist with a good conscience; never make thy private
conscience the rule of public actions; for to constitute a Rectitude, or an
Obliquity in any public action, there enter more circumstances, then can have
fallen in thy knowledge. But the word that Selomon takes there, Iad^ng,
signifies properly all ways of acquiring knowledge, and Hearing is one of
them, and therefore, Take heed what you hear: Come not so near evil
speaking, as to delight to hear them, that delight to speak evil of
Superiors. A man may have a good breath in himself, and yet be deadly
infected, if he stand in an ill air; a man may stand in a cloud, in a mist, in
a fogge of blasphemers, till, in the sight of God, himself shall be dissolved
into a blasphemous wretch, and in that cloud, in that mist, God shall not know
him, that endured the hearing, from him, that adventured the speaking of those
blasphemies. The ear, in such cases, is as the clift in the wall, that receives
the voice, and then the Echo is below, in the heart; for the most part, the
heart affords a return, and an inclination to those things that are willingly
received at the ear; The Echo returns the last syllables; The heart concludes
with his conclusions, whom we have been willing to hearken unto. We make
Satyrs; and we look that the world should call that wit; when God knows, that
that is in a great part, self-guiltinesse, and we do but reprehend those
things, which we our selves have done, we cry out upon the illness of the
times, and we make the times ill: so the calumniator whispers those things,
which are true, no where, but in himself. But thy greater danger, is that
mischievous purpose, (which we spoke of before) to endanger thee by hearing,
and to entangle thee in that Dilemma, of which, an ingenuous man abhors one
part, as much as a conscientious man does the other, That thou must be a
Delinquent, or an Accuser, a Traitor or an Informour: God has imprinted in
thee characters of a better office, and of more dignity, of a Royal
Priesthood; as you have sparks of Royalty in your souls, Take heed what you
hear of State-government; as you have sparks of holy fire, and Priesthood in
your souls, Take heed what you hear of Church Government, which is the other
consideration.

The Church is the spouse of Christ: Noble husbands do not easily admit
defamations of their wives. Ecclesia.
Very religious Kings may have had wives, that may have retained some tincture,
some impressions of error, which they may have sucked in their infancy, from
another Church, and yet would be loath, those wives should be publicly traduced
to be Heretics, or passionately proclaimed to be Idolaters for all that. A
Church may lack something of exact perfection, and yet that Church should not
be said to be a supporter of Antichrist, or a limme of the beast, or a thirster
after the cup of Babylon, for all that. From extreme to extreme, from east to
west, the Angels themselves cannot come, but by passing the middle way between;
from that extreme impurity, in which Antichrist had damped the Church of God,
to that intemerate purity, in which Christ had constituted his Church, the most
Angelical Reformers cannot come, but by touching, yea, and stepping upon some
things, in the way. He that is come to any end, remembers when he was not at
the middle way; he was not there as soon as he set out. It is the posture
reserved for heaven, to sit down, at the right hand of God; Here our
consolation is, that God reaches out his hand to the receiving of those who
come toward him; And nearer to him, and to the institutions of his Christ, can
no Church, no not of the Reformation, be said to have come, then ours does. It
is an ill nature in any man, to be rather apt to conceive jealousies, and to
suspect his Mothers honor, or his sisters chastity, then a strange woman's. It
is an irreverent unthankfulness, to think worse of that Church, which has
bred us, and fed us, and led us thus far toward God, then of a foreign Church,
though Reformed too, and in a good degree. How often have I heard our Church
condemned abroad, for opinions, which our Church never held? And how often have
I heard foreign Churches exalted and magnified at home, for some things in the
observation of the Sabbath, and in the administration of the Sacrament, which,
indeed, those Churches do not hold, nor practice? Take heed what you hear;
And that ill, which you hear of your own Church, at home, by Gods abundant
goodness to it, is not true; And, I would all that good, which you hear of
Churches abroad, were true; but I must but wish, that it were so, and pray that
it may be so, and praise God, for those good degrees toward it, which they
have attained; But no Church in the world, gives us occasion of emulation
toward them, or of undervaluing Gods blessings upon ours. And therefore, as to
us, who pretend an embassage from him, if we make our selves unworthy of that
employment, God shall say, Psalm. 50. ^6.
What have thou to do, to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my
Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hate instruction, and castest my words
behind thee? So to them, that hearken greedily after defamations of the persons
and actions of his Church, God shall say, Why take thou mine Ordinance into
thy construction, or my servants into thy consideration, since thou hate my
yoke, and proposest to thy self no other end, in defaming others, then a
licentious liberty, and an uncontrolled impunity in thy self? As you are
Christians, God has given you a Royal Priesthood; be so Noble, be so Holy, as
to take heed what you hear, of State and Church, and of those persons, whom
God has called Gods, in both those firmaments. And, for conclusion of all,
Take heed what you hear of yourselves.

Men speak to you, Conclusio.
and God speaks to you, and the Devil does speak to you too; Take heed what
you hear of all three. In all three the words look two ways; for, in them,
there is both a Videte, and a Cavete, first see that you do hear them, and
then take heed what you hear from them. Men will speak; and they will speak
of you: Men will discourse, and you must be their subject; Men will declame,
and you must be their Theme. And truly you should desire to be so: As only
man can speak, so only man can desire to be spoken of. If gold could speak,
if gold could wish, gold would not be content to lie in the dark, in the mine,
but would desire to come abroad, to entertain Armies, or to erect, or endow
Civil, or Ecclesiastical buildings. He that desires to Print a book, should
much more desire, to be a book; to do some such exemplar things, as men might
read, and relate, and profit by. He that has done nothing worth the speaking
of, has not kept the world in reparations, for his Tenement and his Term.
Videte, see that you do hear, That you do give occasion to be spoken of, that
you do deserve the praise, the thanks, the testimony, the approbation of the
good men of your own times, for that shall deliver you over fairly to
posterity. But then, Cavete, Take heed what you hear, that you suffer not these
approbations to swerve, Eccles. 7. 5.
or swell into flattery: for, it is better to hear the Rebuke of the wise, then
to hear the songs of fools, Prove. 26. 25.
says the wise King: And, when the flatterer speaks thee fair, says he,
believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart; And, (by the
way) the Holy Ghost at any time, had as lieve say seventy millions, as seven;
for seven is the holy Ghosts Cyphar of infinite; There are infinite
abominations, in the flatterers heart. And of these flatterers, these waspes,
that swarm in all sweet, and warm places, and have a better outside^ then the
Be, (the Waspe has a better shape, and a better shape, and a better
appearance then the Be, but a sharper and a stronger sting, and, at last, no
honey) of these, no authors of any books of the Bible, have warned us so much,
and armed us so well, as those two Royal Authors, those two great Kings,
David, and Solomon; In likelihood because they, as such, had been most offered
at by them, Psalm. 55. 22.
and could best give a true character of them, as David does, Their words are
smoother then butter, but war is in their hearts, and softer then oil, and
yet they are naked swords. Videte, Cavete, see that you do hear, that you give
good men occasion to speak well of you; But take heed what you hear, that you
encourage not a flatterer, by your over easy acceptance of his praises.

Man speaks; and God speaks too; and first Videte, Deus.
see that you do hear him; for, as he that fears God, fears nothing else, so
he that hears God hears nothing else, that can terrify him. Ab Auditione mala
non timebit, Psalm. 112. 7.
says David, a good man shall not be afraid of evil tidings, for his heart is
fixed, trusting in the Lord. A rumor shall come one year, 51. 46.
says Jeremy, and next year another rumor; new inventions from Satan, for new
intimidations; but still he is at home, for he dwells in God. Videte, see that
you hear him; But then Cavete, take heed what you hear, even from God
himself, that you mistake not what God says, for as all Gods pardons have an
Ita quod se been gerat; He whom God pardons, for that that is past, is bound to
the good behavior for the future, Es^. 1. 19.
so all Gods promises have a Si audiertis, si volueritis, if I hearken, if I
obey, I shall eat the good things of the land; otherwise I shall sterve, body,
and soul. There is a Vives proposed to me, I may conceive justly an
infallibility of eternal life, but still it is; fac hoc and vives, this I must
do, and then I shall live; otherwise, moriar, and morte moriar, I shall die
both ways, body and soul. There is not much asked of Joshua, but something
there is; It is but a Tantummodo hoc, only this; but a Tantummodo hoc, an
only this there is, Only be thou valiant, and of a good courage; forsake not
the cause of God, and God will never forsake thee. There is not much asked of
Iairus, for the resuscitation of his dead daughter, but something there is, it
is Tantummodo hoc, but only this; but an only this there is, Tantummodo
creed, and non metuas; do not mistrust Christ, do not disable Christ, from
doing a miracle, in thy behalf, by not believing; as, in one place, where he
came, it is said that Christ could not do much, by reason of their unbeleefe.
Hear God there, where God speaks to thee, and then thou shall hear, that,
that he speaks to thee. Above, in heaven, in his decrees, he speaks to
himself, to the Trinity: In the Church, and in the execution of those decrees,
he speaks to thee. Climb not up, to the search of unsearchable things, to the
finding out of investigable things, as Tertullian speaks; but look to that
which is near thee; not so much to those Decrees which have no conditions, as
to be able to plead conditions performed, or, at least, a holy sorrow, that
thou have not performed them. Videte, Cavete; see that you do hear God, else
every rumor will scatter you; But take heed what you hear, else you may come
to call conditional things absolute.

And lastly, since Satan will be speaking too, Videte, be sure you do hear
him, be sure you discern it to be his voice, and know what leads you into
tentation. For, you may hear a voice that shall say, youth must have pleasures,
and greatness must have State, and charge must have support. And this voice
may bring a young man to transfer all his wantonness upon his years, when it is
the effect of high diet, or licentious discourse, or wanton Images admitted,
and cherished in his fancy; and this voice may bring great officers, to
transfer their inaccessiblenesse, upon necessary State, when it is an effect of
their own laziness, or indulgence to their pleasures; and this voice may bring
rich landlords to transfer all their oppression of tenants, to the necessity of
supporting the charge of wives and children, when it is an effect of their
profuseness and prodigality. Nay you may hear a voice, that may call you to
this place, and yet be his voice; which is that, which Saint Augustine
confesses and laments, that even to these places persons come to look upon one
another, that can meet no where else. Videte; see you do hear, that you do
discern the voice; for, that is never Gods voice that puts upon any man, a
necessity of sinning, out of his years and constitution, out of his calling and
profession, out of his place, and station, out of the age, and times that he
lives in, out of the pleasure of them, that he lives upon, or out of the charge
of them, that live upon him. But then, Cavete, take heed what you hear from
him too, especially then, when he speaks to thee upon thy deathbed, at thy
last transmigration; then when thine ears shall be deaf, with the cries of a
distressed, and a distracted family, and with the found, and the change of the
found of thy last bell; then when thou shall hear a hollow voice in thy self,
upbraiding thee, that thou have violated all thy Makers laws, worn out all thy
Saviors merits, frustrated all the endeavors of his blessed Spirit upon thee,
evacuated all thine own Repentances, with relapses; then when thou shall see,
or seem to see his hand turning the stream of thy Saviors blood into another
channel, and telling thee, here is enough for Jew and Turk, but not a drop for
thee; then when in that multiplying glass of Despair, which he shall present,
every sinful thought shall have the proportion of an Act, and every Act, of a
Habit, when every Circumstance of every sin, shall enter into the nature of
the sin it self, and vary the sin, and constitute a particular sin; and
every particular sin, shall be a sin against the holy Ghost; Take heed what
you hear; and be but able to say to Satan then, as Christ said to Peter, in
his name, Vade retro Satan, come after me Satan, come after me tomorrow; come a
minute after my soul is departed from this body, come to me, where I shall be
then, and when thou see me washed in the blood of my Savior, clothed in the
righteousness of my Savior, lodged in the bosom of my Savior, crowned with
the merits of my Savior, confess, that upon my deathbed, thou wast a liar,
and would have been a murderer, and the Lord shall, and I, in him, shall
rebuke thee. See that ye refuse not him, that speaks, says the Apostle; Heb.
12. 25.
not any that speaks in his name; but especially not him, whom he names there,
that speaks better things, then the blood of Abel; for, the blood of Abel
speaks but by way of example, and imitation; the blood of Christ Jesus, by way
of Ransom, and satisfaction. Hear what that blood says for you, in the ears
of the Father, and then no singing of the flatterer, no lisping of the tempter,
no roaring of the accuser, no thunder of the destroyer shall shake thy holy
constancy. Take heed what you hear, remember what you have heard; and the God
of heaven, for his Son Christ Jesus sake, by the working of his blessed
Spirit, prosper and improve both endeavors in you. Amen.

SERMON XXVIII.
Preached to the King, at the Court in April, 1629.
GENESIS 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man, in our Image, after our likeness.
NEver such a frame, so soon set up, as this, in this Chapter. For, for the
thing it self, there is no other thing to compare it with. For it is All, it
is the whole world. And for the time, there was no other time to compare it
with, for this was the beginning of time, In the beginning God created Heaven
and Earth. That Earth, which in some thousands of years, men could not look
over, nor discern what form it had: (for neither Lactantius, almost three
hundred years after Christ, nor Saint Augustine, more then one hundred years
after him, would believe the earth to be round) that earth, which no man, in
his person, is ever said to have compassed, till our age; That earth which is
too much for man yet, (for, as yet, a very great part of the earth is
unpeopled) that earth, which, if we will cast it all but into a Map, costs
many Months labor to grave it, nay, if we will cast but a piece of an acre of
it, into a garden, costs many years labor to fashion, and furnish it: All that
earth, and then, that heaven, which spreads so far, as that subtle men have,
with some appearance of probability, imagined, that in that heaven, in those
manifold Spears of the Planets, and the Stars, there are many earths, many
worlds, as big as this, which we inhabit; That earth and that heaven, which
spent God himself, Almighty God, six days in furnishing; Moses sets up in a
few syllables, in one line, In principio, in the beginning God created heaven
and earth. If a Livy or a Guicciardine, or such extensive and voluminous
authors, had had this story in hand; God must have made another world, to have
made them a Library to hold their Books, of the making of this world. Into what
Wire would they have drawn out this earth? Into what leafe-gold would they have
beat out these heavens? It may assist our conjecture herein to consider, that
amongst those men, who proceed with a sober modesty, and limitation in their
writing, and make a conscience not to clogge the world with unnecessary books;
yet the volumes which are written by them, upon this beginning of Genesis, are
scarce less then infinite, God did no more but say, let this and this be done;
And Moses does no more but say, that upon Gods saying it was done. God required
not nature to help him to do it: Moses required not reason to help him to be
believed. The holy Ghost hovered upon the waters, and so God wrought: The holy
Ghost hovered upon Moses too, and so he wrote. And we believe these things to
be so, by the same Spirit in Moses mouth, by which they were made so, in Gods
hand. Only, beloved, remember, that a frame may be thrown down in much less
time, then it was set up. A child, an Ape can give fire to a Canon: And a
vapor can shake the earth: And these fires, and these vapors can throw down
cities in minutes. When Christ said, Throw down this Temple, and in three days
I will raise it; they never stopped upon the consideration of throwing it down;
they knew, that might be soon done; but they wondered at the speedy raising of
it. Now, if all this earth were made in that minute, may not all come to the
general dissolution in this minute? Or may not thy acres, thy miles, thy
Shires shrink into feet, and so few feet, as shall but make up thy grave? When
he who was a great Lord, must be but a Cottager; and not so well; for a
Cottager must have so many acres to his Cottage; but in this case, a little
piece of an acre, five foot, is become the house it self; The house, and the
land; the grave is all: lower then that; the grave is the Land, and the
Tenement, and the Tenant too: He that lies in it, becomes the same earth, that
he lies in. They all make but one earth, and but a little of it. But then raise
thy self to a higher hope again. God has made better land, the land of
promise; a stronger city, the new Jerusalem; and, inhabitants for that
everlasting city, Us; whom he made, not by saying, let there be men, but by
consultation, by deliberation, God said, Let us make Man in our Image, after
our likeness.

We shall pursue our great examples; Divisio.
God in doing, Moses in saying; and so make have in applying the parts. But
first receive them. And since we have the whole world in contemplation,
consider in these words, the four quarters of the world, by application, by
fair, and just accommodation of the words. First, in the first word, that God
speaks here, Faciamus, Let us, us in the plural, (a denotation of diverse
Persons in one Godhead) we consider our East where we must begin, at the
knowledge and confession of the Trinity. For, though in the way to heaven, we
be traveled beyond the Gentiles, when we come to confess but one God, (The
Gentiles could not do that) yet we are still among the Jews, if we think that
one God to be but one Person. Christ's name is Oriens the East, if we will be
named by him, (called Christians) we must look to this East, Zech. 6. 12.
the confession of the Trinity. There Is then our East, in the Faciamus; Let us,
us make man: And then our West is in the next word, Faciamus Hominem. Though we
be thus made, made by the counsel, made by the concurrence, made by the hand
of the whole Trinity; yet we are made but men: And man, but in the appellation,
in this text: and man there, is but Adam: and Adam is but earth, but red earth,
earth dyed red in blood, in Soul-bloud, the blood of our own souls. To that
west we must all come, Psalm. 104. 19.
to the earth. The Sun knows his going down: Even the Sun for all his
glory, and height, has a going down, and he knows it. The highest cannot
divest mortality, Luac. 22. 54.
nor the discomfort of mortality. When you see a cloud rise out of the west,
straightway you say there comes a storm, says Christ. When out of the region
of your west, that is, your later days, there comes a cloud, a sickness, you
feel a storm, even the best moral constancy is shaked. But this cloud, and
this storm, and this west there must be; And that is our second consideration.
But then the next words design a North, a strong, and powerful North, to
scatter, and dissipate these clouds: Ad imaginem, and similitudinem; That we
are made according to a pattern, to an image, to a likeness, which God
proposed to himself for the making of man. This consideration, that God did
not rest, in that praeexistent matter, out of which he made all other
creatures, and produced their forms, out of their matter, for the making of
man; but took a form, a pattern, a model for that work, this is the North
wind, Cant. 4. 16. 37. 22.
that is called upon to carry out of the perfumes of the garden, to spread the
goodness of God abroad. This is that which is intended in Job; fair weather
comes out of the North. Our West, our declination is in this, that we are but
earth, our North, our dissipation of that darkness, is in this, that we are
not all earth; Though we be of that matter, we have another form, another
image, another likeness. And then, whose image and likeness it is, is our
Meridionall height, our noon, our south point, our highest elevation. In
Imagine nostra, Let us make man in our Image. Though our Sun set at noon, as
the Prophet Amos speaks; 8. 8.
though we die in our youth, or fall in our height: yet even in that Sunset, we
shall have a Noon. For this Image of God shall never depart from our soul; no,
not when that soul departs from our body. And that is our South, our
Meridionall height and glory. And when we have thus seen this East, in the
faciamus, That I am the workmanship and care of the whole Trinity; And this
West in the Hominem, That for all that, my matter, my substance, is but earth:
But then a North, a power of overcomming that low and miserable state, In
Imagine; That though in my matter, the earth, I must die; yet in my form, in
that Image which I am made by, I cannot die: and after all a South, a
knowledge, That this Image is not the Image of Angels, to whom we shall be
like, but it is by the same life, by which those Angels themselves were made;
the Image of God himself: When I am gone over this east, and west, and north,
and south, here in this world; I should be as sorry as Alexander was, if there
were no more worlds. But there is another world, which these considerations
will discover, and lead us to, in which our joy, and our glory shall be, to see
that God essentially, and face to face, after whose Image, and likeness we
were made before. But as that Pilot which had harbor'd his ship so far within
land, as that he must have change of Winds, in all the points of the Compass,
to bring her out, cannot hope to bring her our in one day: So being to
transport you, by occasion of these words, from this world to the next; and in
this world, through all the Compass, all the four quarters thereof; I cannot
hope to make all this voyage to day. To day we shall consider only our
longitude, our East, and West; and our North and South at another tide, and
another gale.

First then we look toward our East, the fountain of light, and of life.
There this world began; 1 Part. Oriens.
the Creation was in the east. And there our next world began too. There the
gates of heaven opened to us; and opened to us in the gates of death; for, our
heaven is the death of our Savior, and there he lived, and dyed there, and
there he looked into our west, from the east, from his Terasse, from his
Pinnacle, from his exaltation (as himself calls it) the Cross. The light which
arises to us, in this east, the knowledge which we receive in this first word
of our text, Faciamus, Let us, (where God speaking of himself, speaks in the
Plural) is the manifestation of the Trinity; the Trinity, which is the first
letter in his Alphabet, that ever thinks to read his name in the book of life;
The first note in his Gammut, that ever thinks to sing his part, in the Quire
of the Triumphant Church. Let him him have done as much, as all the Worthies;
and suffered as much as all Natures Martyrs, the penurious Philosophers; let
him have known as much, as they that pretend to know, Omne scibile, all that
can be known nay, and in-intelligibilia, In-investigabilia, (as Turtullian
speaks) un-understandable things, unrevealed decrees of God; Let him have writ
as much, as Aristotle writ, or as is written upon Aristotle, which is,
multiplication enough: yet he has not learnt to spel, that has not learnt the
Trinity; not learnt to pronounce the first word that cannot bring three Persons
into one God. The subject of natural philosophy, are the four elements, which
God made, the Subject of supernatural philosophy, Divinity, are the three
elements, which God is; and (if we may so speak) which make God, that is,
constitute God, notify God to us, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. The natural
man, that hearkens to his own heart, and the law written there; may produce
Actions that are good, good in the nature and matter, and substance of the
work. He may relieve the poor, he may defend the oppressed. But yet, he is
but as an open field; and though he be not absolutely barren, he bears but
grass. The godly man; he that has taken in the knowledge of a great, and a
powerful God, and enclosed, and hedged in himself with the fear of God, may
produce actions better then the mere natural man, because he referres his
actions to the glory of his imagined God. But yet this man, though he be more
fruitful, then the former, more then a grassy field; yet he is but a ploughed
field, and he bears but corn, and corn, God knows, choked with weeds. But
that man, who has taken hold of God, by those handles, by which God has
delivered, and manifested himself in the notions of Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; he is no field, but a garden, a Garden of Gods planting, a Paradise in
which grow all things good to eat, and good to see, (spiritual resection, and
spiritual recreation too) and all things good to cure. He has his being, and
his diet, and his physique, there, in the knowledge of the Trinity; his being
in the mercy of the Father; his physique in the merits of the Son; his diet,
his daily bread, in the daily visitations of the holy Ghost. God is not
pleased, not satisfied, with our bare knowledge, Heb. 11. 6.
that there is a God. For, it is impossible to please God, without faith: and
there is no such exercise of faith, in the knowledge of a God, but that reason,
and nature will bring a man to it. When we profess God, in the Creed, by way
of belief, Credo in Deum, I believe in God, in the same article we profess
him to be a Father too, I believe in God the father Almighty: And that notion,
the Father, necessarily implies, a second Person, a Son: And then we profess
him to be maker of heaven, and earth: And in the Creation, the holy Ghost, the
Spirit of God, is expressly named. So that we do but exercise reason, and
nature, in directing our selves upon God. We exercise not faith, (and without
faith it is impossible to please God) till we come to that, which is above
nature, till we apprehend a Trinity. We know God, we believe in the Trinity.
The Gentiles multiplied Gods. There were almost as many Gods as men, that
believed in them. And I am got out of that thrust, and out of that noise, when
I am come into the knowledge of one God: But I am got above stairs, got in the
Bedchamber, when I am come to see the Trinity, and to apprehend not only, that
I am in the care of a great, and a powerful God, but that there is a Father,
that made me, a Son that Redeemed me, a holy Ghost, that applies this good
purpose of the Father, and Son, upon me, to me. The root of all is God. But
it is not the way to receive fruits, to dig to the root, but to reach to the
boughs. I reach for my Creation to the Father, for my Redemption to the Son,
for my sanctification to the holy Ghost: and so I make the knowledge of God, a
Tree of life unto me; and not otherwise. Truly it is a sad Contemplation, to
see Christians scratch and wound and tear one another, with the ignominious
invectives, and uncharitable names of of Heretic, and Schismatique, about
Ceremonial, and Problematicall, and indeed but Critical, verbal
controversies: and in the mean time, the foundation of all, the Trinity,
undermined by those numerous, those multitudinous Anthills of Socinians, that
overflow some parts of the Christian world, and multiply every where. And
therefore the Adversaries of the Reformation, were wise in their generation,
when to supplant the credit of both those great assistants of the Reformation,
Luther, and Calvin, they impute to Calvin fundamental error, in the Divinity
of the second Person of the Trinity, the Son; And they impute to Luther, a
detestation of the very word Trinity, and an expunction thereof, in all places
of the Liturgy, where the Church had received that word. They knew well, if
that slander could prevail against those persons, nothing that they could say,
could prevail upon any good Christians. But though in our doctrine, we keep up
the Trinity aright; yet, God knows, in our practice we do not. I hope it
cannot be said of any of us, that he believes not the Trinity, but who amongst
us thinks of the Trinity, considers the Trinity? Father, and Son do
naturally imply, and induce one another; and therefore they fall oftener into
our consideration. But for the holy Ghost, who feels him, when he feels him?
Who takes knowledge of his working, when he works? Indeed our Fathers provided
not well enough, for the worship of the whole Trinity, nor of the holy Ghost in
particular, in the endowments of the Church, and Consecrations of Churches, and
possessions in their names. What a spiritual dominion, in the prayers, and
worship of the people, what a temporal dominion in the possessions of the
world had the Virgin Mary, Queen of heaven, and Queen of earth too? She was
made joint purchaser of the Church with her Son, and had as much of the
worship thereof as he, though she paid her fine in milk, and he in blood. And,
till a new Sect came in her Sons name; and in his name, the name of Jesus,
took the regency so far out of that Queen Mothers hands, and sued out her
Sons Livery so far, as that though her name be used, the Virgin Mary is but
a feoffee in trust, for them; all was hers. And if God oppose not these new
usurpers of the world, posterity will soon see Saint Ignatius worth all the
Trinity in possessions and endowments, as that sumptuous, and splendid
foundation of his first Temple at Rome, may well create a conjecture, and
suspicion. Travail no farther; Survay but this City; And of their not one
hundred Churches, the Virgin Mary has a dozen; The Trinity has but one;
Christ has but one; The holy Ghost has none. But not to go into the City,
nor out of our selves; which of us does truly, and considerately ascribe the
comforts, that he receives in dangers, or in distresses, to that God of all
comfort, the comforter, the holy Ghost? We know who procured us, our
Presentation, and our dispensation: you know who procured you, your offices,
and your honors. Shall I ever forget who gave me my comfort in sickness? Who
gave me my comfort, in the troubles, and perplexities, and diffidencies of my
conscience? The holy Ghost brought you hither. The holy Ghost opens your ears,
and your hearts here. Till in all your distresses, you can say, Veni Creator
Spiritus, come holy Ghost, and that you feel a comfort in his coming: you can
never say Veni Domine Jesus, come Lord Jesus, come to Judgment. Never to
consider the day of Judgment, is a fearful thing. But to consider the day of
Judgment, without the comfort of the holy Ghost, is a thousand times more
fearful.

This Seal then, this impression, this notion of the Trinity being set upon
us, Trinitarii.
in the first Creation, in this first plural word of our text, Faciamus; Let
us, (for Father, Son, and holy Ghost made man) and this seal being
re-imprinted upon us, in our second Creation, our Regeneration, in Baptism,
(Man is Baptized In the name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy
Ghost) This notion of the Trinity being our distinctive Character, from Jew and
Gentile; This being our specifique form: why does not this our form, this
soul of our Religion denominate us? why are we not called Trinitarians, a name
that would embrace the profession of all the Persons, but only Christians,
which limits, and determines us upon one? The first Christians, amongst whose
manifold Persecutions, scorn, and contempt, was not the least, in contempt and
scorn, were called Nazarai, Nazarites in the mouth of the Vulgar; and Galil^i,
Galilaeans in the mouth of Julian; and Iudaei, Jews in the mouth of Nero, when
he imputed the burning of Rome (his own act) to them; and Christiani; (as
Tertullian says) that they could accuse Christians of nothing, but the name of
Christians; and yet they could not call them by their right name, but
Chrestians, (which was gentle, quiet, easy patient men, made to be trodden
upon) They gave them diverse names in scorn, yet never called them
Trinitarians. Christians themselves amongst themselves were called by diverse
names in the Primitive Church, for distinction; Fideles, the faithful, and
Fratres, the Brethren, and Discipuli, Disciples; And, after, by common custom
at Antioch, Christians. And after that, (they say) by a council which the
Apostles held, Act. 11. 26.
at the same city, at Antioch, there passed an express Canon of the Church,
that they should be called so, Christians. And before they had this name at
Antioch, first by common usage, after by a determinate Canon, to be called
Christians, from Christ, at Alexandria, Epiph. Here Is. 29
they were called (most likely from the name of Jesus) Iesseans. And so Philo
Iudaeus, in that book, which he writes De Iessenis, intends by his Iessenis,
Christians; and in diverse parts of the world, into which Christians travel
now, they find some elements; some fragments, some relics of the Christian
Religion, in the practice of some religious Men, whom those Countries call,
Iesseans, doubtlesly derived, and continued from the name of Jesus. So that the
Christians took many names to themselves for distinction, (Brethren, Disciples,
faithful) And they had many names put upon them in scorn, (Nazarites,
Galilaeans, Jews, Chrestians,) and yet they were never, never by Custom
amongst themselves, never by commandment from the Church, never in contempt
from others, called Trinitarians, the profession of the Trinity being their
specifique form, and distinctive Character; why so? Beloved, the name of
Christ involved all: not only, because it is a name, that has a dignity in
it, more then the rest; (for Christ is an anointed person, a King, a Messiah,
and so the profession of that Name, conferrs an Unction, a regal and a holy
Unction upon us) (for we are thereby a royal Priesthood) but because in the
profession of Christ, the whole Trinity is professed. How often does the Son
say, that the Father sent him? And how often that the Father will, and that he
will send the Holy Ghost? This is life eternal, John 17. 3.
says he, to know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have
sent; And sent, with all power, in heaven, and in earth. This must be
professed, Father, and Son; And then, no man can profess this; no man can
call Jesus the Lord, but by the holy Ghost. So that, as in the persecutions, in
the primitive Church, the Martyrs which were hurried to tumultuary executions,
and could not be heard for noise, in excusing themselves of Treason, and
sedition, and crimes imputed to them, to make their cause odious, did use in
the sight of the people, (who might see a gesture, though they could not hear
a protestation) to sign themselves with the sign of the Cross, to let them
know, for what profession they died, so that the sign of the Cross, in that
use thereof, in that time, was an abridgement, and a Catechism of the whole
Christian Religion, so is the professing of the name of Christ, the professing
of the whole Trinity. As he that confesses one God, is got beyond the mere
natural man; And he that confesses a Son of God, beyond him: So is neither
got to the full truth, till he confess the holy Ghost too. The fool says in
his heart, there is no God. The fool, says David, The emphaticall fool, in
the highest degree of folly. But though he get beyond that folly, he is a fool
still, if he say there is no Christ; For Christ is the wisdom of the Father:
And a fool still, if he deny the holy Ghost: for who shall apply Christ to
him, but the holy Ghost? Etiam Christiani Nomen superficies est, is excellently
said by Tertullian, the name, and profession of a Christian, is but a
superficial outside, sprinkled upon my face in Baptism, or upon mine outward
profession, in actions: if I have not in my heart, a sense of the holy Ghost,
that he applies the mercies of the Father, and the merits of the Son to my
soul. As Saint Paul said, Whilst you are without Christ, you are without God.
It is an Atheism, with Saint Paul, to be no Christian. So whilst you are
without the holy Ghost, you are without Christ. It is Antichristian, to deny,
or not to confess the holy Ghost. For as Christ is the manifestation of the
Father, so the holy Ghost is the application of the Son. Therein only are we
Christians, that in the profession of that name of Christ, we profess all the
three Persons: In Christ is the whole Trinity; because, as the Father sent him,
so he sent the holy Ghost. And that is our specifique form, that is our
distinctive Character, from Jew, and Gentile, the Trinity.

But then, An in textu.
is this specifique form, this distinctive Character, the notion of the
Trinity, conveied to us, exhibited, imprinted upon us, in our Creation, in this
word, this plural word, in the mouth of our one God, Faciamus, Let us, us. It
is here, and here first. This is an intimation, and the first intimation, of
the Trinity, from the mouth of God, in all the Bible. It is true, that though
the same faith, which is necessary to salvation now, were always necessary, and
so in the old Testament, they were bound to believe in Christ, as well, as in
the new, and consequently in the whole Trinity; yet not so explicitly, John 17.
6.
nor so particularly as now. Christ calling upon God, in the name of Father,
says; I have manifested thy name unto the men, thou gave me out of the world.
They were men appropriated to God, men exempt out of the world; yet they had
not a clear manifestation of Father, and Son, the doctrine of the Trinity,
till Christ manifested it to them. I have manifested thy name, thy name of
Father. And therefore the Jewish Rabbis say that the Septuagint, the first
translators of the Bible, did disguise some places of the Scriptures, in their
translation, lest Ptolomee, for whom they translated it, should be scandalized
wh those places, and that this textwasone of those places, which say they
though it be otherwise in the Copies of the Septuagint, which we have now, they
translated Faciam, and not Faciamus, that God said here, I will make, in the
singular; and not, Let us make man, in the plural, lest that plural word,
might have misled King Pt^lomee to think, that the Jews had a plural
Religion, and worshipped diverse Gods. So good an evidence do they confess
this text to be, for some kind of plurality in the Godhead.

Here then God notified the Trinity; and here first, Primo hic.
for though we accept an intimation of the Trinity, in the first line of the
Bible, where Moses joins a plural name, Elohim, with a singular Verb, Bara;
and so in construction, it is, Creavit Dii, Gods created heaven, and earth:
yet, besides that, that is rather a mysterious collection, then an evident
conclusion of a plurality of Persons, though we read that in that first verse,
before this in the twenty sixth, yet Moses writ that, which is in the beginning
of this chapter, more then two thousand years after God spoke this, that is in
our text. So long was Gods plural, before Moses his plural; Gods Faciamus,
before Moses Bara Elohim. So that in this text, begins our Catechism. Here
we have, and here first the saving knowledge of the Trinity.

For, Cui dixit.
when God spoke here, to whom could God speak but to God? Non cum rebus
Creandis, nox cum re nihili, says, Athanasius, speaking of Gods first speaking,
when he said, of the first creature, Let there be light. God spoke not then to
future things, to things that were not. When God spoke first, there was no
creature at all, to speak to. When God spoke of the making of man, there were
creatures. But were there any creatures able to create, or able to assist him,
in the creation of man? Who? Angels? Some had thought so in Saint Basils time;
and to them Saint Basil says, Suntne Illi? God says, let us make man to our
Image, And could he say so to Angels? Are Angels and God all one? Or is that
that is like an Angel, therefore like God? It was Sua Ratio, Suum verbum, Sua
sapientia, says that Father, God spoke to his own word, and wisdom, to his own
purpose, and goodness. And the Son is the word and wisdom of God: and the
holy Ghost is the goodness, and the purpose of God; that is, the
administration, the dispensation of his purposes. It Is true, that when God
speaks this over again in his Church, as he does every day, now, this minute
then God speaks it to Angels; to the Angels of the Church, to his Ministers,
he says Faciamus, Let us, us both together, you, and we make a man; join mine
Ordinance (your preaching) with my Spirit, (says God to us) and so make man.
Preach the oppressor, and preach the wanton, and preach the calumniator into
another nature. Make the ravening Wolf a Man, that licentious Goat a man,
that insinuating Serpent a man, by thy preaching. To day if you will hear his
voice, hear us. For here he calls upon us, to join with him for the making of
man. But for his first Faciamus, which is in our text; it is excellently said,
Rupertus.
Dictum in senatu, and soliloquio; It was spoken in a Senate, and yet in a
solitariness; spoken in private, and yet publicly spoken; spoken where there
were diverse, and yet but one; one God, and three Persons.

If there were no more intended in this plural expression, Rex.
us, but, (as some have conceived) that God spoke here in the person of a
Prince, and Sovereign Lord, and therefore spoke as Princes do, in the
plural, We command, and We forbid, yet Saint Gregory's caution would justly
fall upon it, Reverenter pensandum est, it requires a reverend consideration,
if it be but so. For, God speaks so, like a King, in the plural, but seldom,
but five times, (in my account) in all the Scriptures; and in all five, in
cases of important consequence. In this text first, where God creates man, whom
he constitutes his Viceroy in the World: here he speaks in his royal plural.
And then in the next Chapter, ver. 18.
where he extends man's term in his Vicegerency to the end of the world, in
providing man, means of succession; Faciamus, Let us, us make him a helper;
There he speaks in his royal plural. And then also in the third Chapter, 1.
22:
in declaring the heinousness of man's fault, and arraigning him, and all us,
in him, God says, Sicut unus ex nobis, Man is become as one of us, not content
to be our Viceroy, but our selves; There Is his royal plural too. And again
in that declaration of his Justice, Genesis 11. 7.
in the confusion of the builders of Babel, Descendamus, confundamus, Let us
do it: And then lastly, in that great work of mingling mercy with justice,
which (if we may so speak) is Gods masterpiece, Esa^. 6. 8.
when he says, Quis ex nobis, who will go for us, and publish this? In these
places, and these only, (and not all these neither, if we take it exactly
according to the original; for in the Second, the making of Eve, though the
Vulgat have it in the plural, it is indeed but singular in the Hebrew) God
speaks as a King in his royal plural still. And when it is but so,
Reverenter pensandum est, says that Father; it behooves us to hearken reverently
to him, for Kings are Images of God; such Images of God, as have ears, and can
hear; and hands and can strike. But I would ask no more premeditation at your
hands, when you come to speak to God in this place, then if you sued to speak
with the King: no more fear of God here, then if you went to the King, under
the conscience of a guiltiness toward him; and a knowledge that he knew it.
And that is your case here; Sinners, and manifest sinners. For even midnight is
noone in the sight of God, and when your candles are put out, Psalm. 19. 7.
his Sun shines still. Nec quid absconditum a calcre ejus, says David, there
is nothing hid from the heat thereof: not only, no sin, hid from the light
thereof, from the sight of God; but not from the heat thereof, not from the
wrath and indignation of God. If God speak plurally only in the Majesty of a
sovereign Prince, still Reverenter pensandum, that calls for reverence. What
reverence? There are national differences in outward worships, and reverences.
Some worship Princes, and Parents, and Masters, in one, some in another
fashion. Children kneel to ask blessing of Parents in England, but where
else? Servants attend not with the same reverence upon Masters, in other
nations, as with us. Accesses to their Princes are not with the same
difficulty, nor the same solemnity in France, as in Turkey. But this rule goes
thorough all nations, that in that disposition, and posture, and action of the
body which in that place is esteemed most humble, and reverend, God is to be
worshipped. Do so then here, God is your Father: ask blessing upon your
knees; pray in that posture. God is your King: worship him with that worship,
which is highest in our use, and estimation. We have no Grandees that stand
covered to the King; where there are such, though they stand covered in the
Kings presence, they do not speak to him, for matters of Grace; they do not
sue to him: so ancient Canons make differences of Persons in the presence of
God; where, and how, these, and these shall dispose of themselves in the
Church, dignity, and age, and infirmity will induce differences. But for prayer
there is no difference, one humiliation is required of all; As when the King
comes in here; howsoever, they sat diversely before, all return to one manner
of expressing their acknowledgement of his presence. So at the Oremus, Let us
pray, let us all fall down, and worship, and kneel before the Lord our maker.

So he speaks in our text; not only as the Lord our King, In concilio.
intimating his providence, and administration; but as the Lord our maker, and
then a maker so, as that he made us in a council, Faciamus, Let us; and that
that he speaks, as in council, is another argument for reverence. For what
interest, or freedom soever I have, by his favor, with any Counselor of
State: yet I should surely use another manner of behavior toward him, at the
Council Table, then at his own Table. So does there belong another manner of
consideration to this plurality in God, to this meeting in Council, to this
intimation of a Trinity, then to those other actions in which God is presented
to us, singly, as one God, for so he is presented to the natural man, as well,
as to us. And here enters the necessity of this knowledge, John 3. 3:
Oportet denuo nasci; without a second birth no salvation; And no second birth
without Baptism; no Baptism, but in the name of Father, Son, and holy
Ghost. It was the entertainment of God himself, his delight, his
contemplation, for those infinite millions of generations, when he was without
a world, without Creatures, to joy in one another, in the Trinity, as Gregory
Nazianz: (a Poet, as well as a Father, as most of the Fathers were) expresses
it: ille suae splendorem cernere formae, Gaudebat: It was the Fathers delight,
to look upon himself in the Son; Numenque suum triplicique parique Luce
nitens, and to see the whole Godhead, in a threefold, and an equal glory. It
was Gods own delight, and it must be the delight of every Christian, upon
particular occasions to carry his thoughts upon the several persons of the
Trinity. If I have a bar of Iron, that bar in that form will not nail a
door; If a Sow of Lead, that Lead in that form will not stop a leake; If a
wedge of Gold, that wedge will not buy my bread. The general notion of a
mighty God, may less fit my particular purposes. But I coin my gold into
current money, when I apprehend God, in the several notions of the Trinity.
That if I have been a prodigal Son, I have a Father in heaven, and can go
to him, and say, Father I have sinned, and be received by him. That if I be a
decayed Father, and need the sustentation of mine own children; there is a
Son in heaven, that will do more for me, then mine own, of what good means
or what good nature so ever they be, can or will do. If I be dejected in
spirit, there is a holy Spirit in heaven, which shall bear witness to my
spirit, that I am the child of God. And if the ghosts of those sinners, whom I
made sinners, haunt me after their deaths, in returning to my memory, and
reproaching to my conscience, the heavy judgments that I have brought upon
them: If after the death of mine own sin, when my appetite is dead, to some
particular sin, the memory and sinful delight of passed sins, the ghosts
of those sins haunt me again; yet there is a holy Ghost in heaven, that
shall exorcise these, and shall overshadow me, the God of all Comfort and
Consolation. God is the God of the whole world, in the general notion, as he
is so, God; but he is my God, most especially, and most applyably, as he
receives me in the several notions of Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

This is our East, 2 Part. Occidens.
here we see God, God in all the persons, consulting, concurring to the making
of us. But then my West presents it self, that is, an occasion to humble me in
the next words. Adam.
He makes but Man; A man that is but Adam, but Earth. I remember four names,
by which man is often called in the Scriptures: and of those four, three do
absolutely carry misery in their significations: Three to one against any man,
that he is miserable. One name of Man is Ish; and that they derive a Sonitu;
Man is but a voice, but a sound, but a noise, he begins the noise himself,
when he comes crying into the world, and when he goes out; perchance friends
celebrate, perchance enemies calumniate him, with a diverse voice, a diverse
noise. A melancholique man, is but a groaning; a sportfull man, but a song; an
active man, but a Trumpet; a mighty man, but a thunderclap. Every man but Ish,
but a found, but a noise. Another name is Enosh. is mere Calamity, misery,
depression. It is indeed most properly Oblivion. And so the word is most
elegantly used by David, Quid est homo? Psalm. 8. 4.
where the name of man, is Enosh: And so, that which we translate What is man,
that thou art mindful of him; is indeed, What is forgetfulness, that thou
should remember it; That thou should think of that man, whom all the
world has forgotten? First, man is but a voice, but a sound. But because fame,
and honor may come within that name of a sound, of a voice; therefore he is
overtaken, with another dampe: man is but oblivion: his fame, his name shall be
forgotten. One name man has, that has some taste of greatness, and power in
it, Gheber. And yet, I that am that man, Lam. 1. 3.
says the Prophet, (for there that name of man Gheber is used) I am the man,
that has seen affliction, by the rod of Gods wrath. Man, Ish, is so miserable,
as that he afflicts himself, cries, and whines out his own time. And man,
Enosh, so miserable, as that others afflict him, and bury him, in ignominious
oblivion; And man, that is Gheber, the greatest, and powerfullest of men, is
yet, but that man, that may possibly, nay that may justly see affliction by the
rod of Gods wrath, and from Gheber be made Adam, which is the fourth name of
man, indeed the first name of man, the name in this text, and the name to which
every man must refer himself, and call himself by, Earth, and red Earth.

Now God did not say of man, Adam:
as of other creatures; Let the earth bring forth herbs, and fruits, and trees
as upon the third day; nor let the earth bring forth cattle, and worms, as
upon the sixth day, the same day that he made man; Non imperia^i verbo, sed
familiari manu, says Tertullian, God calls not man out with an imperious
Command, but he leads him out, with a familiar, with his own hand. And it is
not Fiat homo, but Faciamus; not let there be, but let us make man. Man is but
an earthen vessel. It Is true, but when we are upon that consideration, God is
the Potter. If God will be that, I am well content to be this. Let me be any
thing, so that that I am be from my God, I am as well content to be a sheep, as
a Lion, so God will be my Shepherd: and the Lord is my shepherd: To be a
Cottage, as a Castle, so God will be the builder; And the Lord builds, and
watches the City, the house, this house this City, me, To be Rye, as Wheat,
so God will be the husbandman; And the Lord plants me: and waters, and weeds,
and gives the increase: and to be clothed in leather, as well, as in silk, so
God will be the Merchant: and he clothed me in Adam, and assures me of
clothing, in clothing the Lillies of the field, and is fitting the robe of
Christ's righteousness to me now, this minute. Adam is as good to me as Ghebaer,
a clod of earth, as a hill of earth; so God be the Potter.

God made man of earth, Nonster.
not of air, not of fire. Man has many offices, that appertain to this
world, and whilst he is here, must not withdraw himself, from those offices
of mutual society, upon a pretense of zeal, or better serving God in a
retired life. A ship will no more come to the harbor without Ballast, then
without Sails; a man will no more get to heaven, without discharging his
duties to other men, then without doing them to God himself. Luke 4. 4.
Man lives not by bread only, says Christ; But yet he lives by bread too.
Every man must do the duties; every man must bear the encumbrances of some
calling.

Pulvises: Thou art earth, he whom thou treadest upon is no less; and he that
treads upon thee is no more. Positively it is a low thing, to be but earth; and
yet thy low earth, is the quiet Center. There may be rest, acquiescence,
content in the lowest Condition. But comparatively earth is as high as the
highest. Challenge him, that magnifies himself above thee, to meet thee in
Adam. There bid him, if he will have more Nobility, more Greatness, then thou,
take more original sin then thou have. If God have submitted thee, to as
much sin, and penalty of sin, as him; he has afforded thee as much, and as
noble earth as him. And if he will not try it in the root, in your equality in
Adam; yet, in another Test, another Furnace, in the grave he must. There all
dusts are equal. Except an Epitaph tell me, who lies there, I cannot tell by
the dust; nor by the Epitaph, know which is the dust it speaks of, if another
have been laid before, or after in the same grave. Nor can any Epitaph be
confident in saying here lies; but here was laid. For, so various, so
vicissitudinary is all this world, as that even the dust of the grave has
revolutions. As the motions of an upper Sphere, imprint a motion in a lower
Sphere, other then naturally it would have: So the changes of this life work
after death. And, as envy supplants, and removes us alive; a shovell removes
us, and throws us out of our grave, after death. No limbeque, no weights can
tell you, this is dust Royal, this Plebeian dust: no Commission, no
Inquisition can say, this is Catholic, this is Heretical dust. All lie
alike; and all shall rise alike: alike, that is, at once, and upon one Command.
The Saint cannot acclerate; The Reprobate cannot retard the Resurrection. And
all that rise to the right hand, shall be equally Kings: and all at the left,
equally, what? The worst name we can call them by, or affect them with, is
Devil. And then they shall have bodies to be tormented in, which Devils have
not. Miserable, unexpressible, unimaginable. Miserable condition, where the
sufferer would be glad to be but a Devil; where it were some happiness, and
some kind of life, to be able to dye; and a great preferment, to be nothing.

He made us all of earth, and all of red earth. Our earth was red, even when it
was in Gods hands: Terra rub^a.
a redness that amounts to a shamefastness, to a blushing at our own
infirmities, is imprinted in us, by Gods hand. For this redness, is but a
Conscience, a guiltiness of needing a continual supply, and succession of
more, and more grace. And we are all red, red so, even from the beginning, and
in our best state. Adam had, the Angels had thus much of this infirmity, that
though they had a great measure of grace, they needed more. The prodigal child
grew poor enough, after he had received his portion: and he may be wicked
enough, that trusts upon former, or present grace, and seeks not more. This
redness, a blushing, that is, an acknowledgement, that we could not subsist,
with any measure of faith, except we pray for more faith; nor of grace, except
we seek more grace, we have from the hand of God: And another redness from his
hand too, the blood of his Son, so that blood was effused by Christ, in the
value of the ransom for All, and accepted by God, in the value thereof for
All: and this redness, is, in the nature thereof, as extensive, as the redness
derived from Adam is; Both reach to all. So we were red earth in the hands of
God, as redness denotes our general infirmities, and as redness denotes the
blood of his Son, our Savior, all have both. But that redness, which we have
contracted from blood shed by our selves, the blood of our own souls by sin,
was not upon us, when we were in the hands of God. That redness is not his
tincture, not his complexion. No decree of his is writ in any such red ink.
Our sins are our own, and our destruction is from ourselves. We are not as
accessaries, and God as principal in this soule-murder. God forbid, we are not
as executioners of Gods sentence, and God the Malefactor, in this
soule-damnation. God forbid. Cain came not red in his brothers blood, out of
Gods hands; nor David red with Vriahs blood; nor Achitophel with his own; nor
Judas with Christ's, or his own. That that Pilat did illusorily, God can do
truly; wash his hands from the blood of any of these men. It were a weak Plea
to say, I killed not that man; but it is true, I commanded one, who was under my
command to kill him. It is rather a prevarication, then a justification of God
to say, God is not the author of sin in any man, but it is true, God makes that
man sin, that sin. God is Innocence; and the beams that flow from him are
of the same nature, and color. Christ when he appeared in heaven, Apoc. 14. 14.
was not red but white. His head and hairs were white, as white wool, and as
snow; not head only, but hairs too. He, and that that grows from him; he,
and we, as we come from his hands are white too. His Angels that provoke us to
the Imitation of that pattern, Act. 1. 10.
are so; in white. Two men, two Angels stood by the Apostles in white apparel.
The imitation is laid upon us by precept too: At all times let thy garments be
white; Eccles. 9. 8.
Those actions in which thou appearest to the world, innocent. It is true, that
Christ is both. Cant. 5. 10.
My beloved is white and ruddy, says the Spouse. But the white was his own:
his redness is from us. That which Zipporah said to her husband Moses in
anger; the Church may say to Christ in thankfulness, Exodus 4. 25.
Vere sponsus Sanguinum, thou art truly a bloody husband to me; Damim,
sanguinum, of bloods, bloods in the plural; for all our bloods are upon him.
This was a mercy to the Militant Church, that even the Triumphant Church
wondered at it. Esai. 63. 1.
They knew not Christ, when he came up to heaven in red. Who is this that
comes in red garments? Wherefore is thy apparel red, like him that treads
in the winepresse? They knew he went down in white, in entire innocence: and
they wondered to see him return in red. But he satisfies them; Calcavi, you
think I have trodden the winepresse, and you mistake it not: I have trodden the
winepresse; and Calcavi solus, I have trodden it alone, all the redness, all the
blood of the whole world is upon me. And as he adds Non vir de gentibus, of all
people there was none with me, with me so, as to have any part in the Merit;
So, of all people there was none without me; without me so, as to be excluded
by me, without their own fault, from the benefit of my merit. This redness he
carried up to heaven: for, by the blood of his Cross came peace, Coals. 1. 20.
both to the things in earth, and the things in heaven. For that peccability,
that possibility, of sinning, which is in the Nature of the Angels of heaven,
would break out into sin, but for that confirmation, which those Angels have
received in the blood of Christ. This redness he carried to heaven; and this
redness he has left upon earth, that all we miserable clods of earth, might
be tempered with his blood; that in his blood exhibited in his holy and blessed
Sacrament, Apoc. 7. 13.
our long robes might be made white in the blood of the Lamb: that though our
sins be robes, habits of sin; though long robes, habits of long continuance
in sin: yet through that redness, which our sins have cast upon him, we
might come to participate of that whiteness, that righteousness, which is his
own. We, that is, all we; for, as to take us in, who are of low condition, and
obscure station, a cloud is made white by his sitting upon it, Apoc. 14. 14.
He sat upon a great white cloud, so to let the highest see, that they have no
whiteness, Apoc. 20. 11.
but from him, he makes the Throne white by sitting upon it. He sat upon a
great white Throne. It had not been great, if it had not been white. White is
the color of dilatation; goodness only enlarges the Throne. It had not been
white, if he had not sat upon it. That goodness onley, which consists in
glorifying God, and God in Christ, and Christ in the sincerity of his truth, is
true whiteness. God has no redness in himself, no anger toward us, till he
considers us as sinners. God cast no redness upon us; inflicts no necessity,
no constraint of sinning upon us. We have dyed ourselves in sins, as red as
Scarlet: we have drowned our selves in such a red Sea. But as a garment, that
were washed in the red Sea, would come out white, (so wonderful works has God
done at the red Sea, Psalm. 105. 13.
says David) so does his whiteness work through our red, Apoc. 2. 17.
and makes this Adam, this red earth, Calculum candidum, that white stone, that
receives a new name, not Ish, not Enosh, not Gheber, no name that tastes of
misery or of vanity; but that name, renewed, and manifested, which was
imprinted upon us, in our elections, the Sons of God; the irremoveable, the
undisinheritable Sons of God.

Be pleased to receive this note at parting, Macula Alba. Levit. 1^.
that there is Macula Alba, a spot, and yet white, as well as a red spot: a
whiteness, that is an indication of a Leprosy, as well as a redness.
Whole-pelagianisme, to think nature alone sufficient; Halfe-pelagianisme, to
think grace once received to be sufficient; Super-pelagianisme, to think our
actions can bring God in debt to us, by merit, and supererogation, and
Catarisme, imaginary purity, in Canonizing our selves, as present Saints, and
condemning all, that differ from us, as reprobates. All these are white spots,
and have the color of goodness; but are indications of leprosy. So is that
that God threatens, Joel. 17.
Decorticatio ficus and albi rami, that the figtree shall be barked, and the
boughs thereof left white: to be left white without bark, was an indication
of a speedy withering. Ostensa candescunt, and arescunt, says Saint Gregory of
that place, Greg.
the bough that lies open without bark looks white, but perishes: the good
works that are done openly to please men have their reward, says Christ, that
is, shall never have reward. To pretend to do good, and not mean it; To do
things, good in themselves, but not to good ends; to go toward good ends, but
not by good ways; to make the deceiving of men, thine end; or the praise of
men, thine end: all this may have a whiteness, a color of good: but all this,
is a barking of the bough, and an indication of a mischievous leprosy. There
is no good whiteness, but a reflection from Christ Jesus, in an humble
acknowledgement that we have none of our own, and in a consident assurance,
that in our worst estate we may be made partakers of his. We are all red earth.
In Adam we would not, since Adam we could not, avoid sin, and the
Concomitants thereof, miseries; which we have called our West, our cloud, our
darkness. But then we have a North that scatters these clouds, in the next
word, Ad imaginem; that we are made to another pattern, in another likeness,
then our own. Faciamus hominem; so far are we gone, East, and West; which is
half our Compass, and all this days voyage. For we are struck upon the sand;
and must stay another Tide, and another gale for our North, and South.

SERMON XXIX.
Preached to the King, at the Court.
The second Sermon on GENESIS 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man, in our Image,
after our likeness.
BY fair occasion from these words, we proposed to you the whole Compass of
man's voyage, from his lanching forth in this world, to his Anchoring in the
next; from his hoysing sail here, to his striking sail there. In which
Compass we designed to you his four quarters; first, his East, where he must
begin, the fundamental knowledge of the Trinity (for, that we found to be
the specification, and distinctive Character of a Christian) where, though that
be so, we showed you also, why we were not called Trinitarians, but Christians:
and we showed you, the advantage, that man has, in laying hold upon God, in
these several notions; that the Prodigal son has an indulgent Father; that
the decayed Father has an abundant Son; that the dejected spirit has a
Spirit of comfort, to fly to in heaven. And, as we showed you from Saint Paul,
that it was an Atheism to be no Christian, (without God, says he, as long as
without Christ) so we lamented the slacknesse of Christians, that they did not
seriously, and particularly, consider the persons of the Trinity, and
especially the holy Ghost, in their particular actions. And then we came to
that consideration, whether this doctrine were established, or directly
insinuated, in this plural word of our text, Faciamus, Let us, us make man:
and we found that doctrine, to be here, and here first of any place in the
Bible. And finding God to speak in the plural, we accepted (for a time) that
interpretation, which some had made thereof; that God spoke in the Person of a
Sovereign Prince; and therefore (as they do) in the plural, We. And thereby
having established reverence to Princes, we claimed in Gods behalf the same
reverence to him: That men would demean themselves, here, when God is spoken
to in prayer, as reverently, as when they speak to the King. But after this,
we found God to speak here, not only as our King; but as our maker; as God
himself; and God in Counsel, Faciamus: and we applied thereunto, the
difference of our respect to a Person of that honorable rank, when we came
before him at the Counsel Table, and when we came to him at his own Table: and
thereby advanced the seriousness of this consideration, God in the Trinity.
And farther we failed not, with that our Eastern wind. Our West we considered
in the next word, Hominem; that though we were made by the whole Trinity, yet
the whole Trinity made us but men, and men, in this name of our text, Adam; and
Adam is but earth, and that is our West, our declination, our Sunset. We passed
over the four names, by which man is ordinarily expressed in the Scriptures;
and we found necessary misery in three of them; and possible, nay likely misery
in the fourth, in the best name. We insisted upon the name of our text, Adam,
earth; and had some use of these notes; First, that if I were but earth, God
was pleased to be the Potter; If I but a sheep, he a shepherd; If I but a
cottage, he a builder. So he work upon me, let me be what he will. We noted
that God made us earth, not air, not fire: That man has bodily, and worldly
duties to perform; and is not all Spirit in this life. Devotion, is his soul;
but he has a body of discretion, and usefulness to invest in some calling. We
noted too, that in being earth, we are equal. We tried that equality, first in
the root, in Adam; There if any man will be nobler earth then I, he must have
more original sin then I: for that was all Adams patrimony, all that he
could give. And we tried this equality in another furnace, in the grave; where
there is no means to distinguish Royal from Plebeian, nor Catholic from
Heretical dust. And lastly we noted, that this our earth, was red earth: and
considered in what respect it was red, even in Gods hands, but found that in
the bloud-rednesse of sin, God had no hand: but sin, and destruction for
sin, was wholly from our selves: which consideration, we ended with this,
that there was Macula alba, a white spot of leprosy, as well, as a red; and we
found the overvaluation of our own purity, and the uncharitable condemnation of
all that differ from us, to be that white spot. And so far we sailed, with that
Western wind. And are come to our third point in this our Compass, our North.

In this point, Aquilo.
the North, we place our first comfort. The North is not always the
comfortablest clime: nor is the North always a type of happiness in the
Scriptures. Many times God threatens storms from the North. But even in those
Northern storms, we consider that action, that they scatter, they dissipate
those clouds, which were gathered, and so induce a serenity: Job. 37. 12.
And so, fair weather comes from the North. And that is the use which we have of
the North in this place. The consideration of our West, our low estate; that we
are but earth, but red earth, dyed red by our selves: and that imaginary white,
which appears so to us, is but a white of leprosy. This West enwraps us in
heavy clouds of murmuring, in this life; that we cannot live so freely as
beasts do; and in clouds of desperation for the next life; that we cannot dye
so absolutely as beasts do, we dye all our lives, and yet we live after our
deaths. These are our clouds; Prove. 25. 23.
And then the North shakes these clouds. The North Wind drives away the
rain, says Solomon. There is a North in our text, that drives all those tears
from our eyes. Cant. 4. 16.
Christ calls upon the North, as well as the South, to blow upon his Garden,
and to diffuse the perfumes thereof. Adversity, as well as prosperity, opens
the bounty of God unto us: and oftentimes better. But that is not the benefit of
the North in our present consideration. But this is it, that first our sun
sets in the West. The Eastern dignity, which we received in our first Creation,
as we were the work of the whole Trinity, falls under a Western cloud, that
that Trinity made us but earth. And then blows our North, and scatters this
cloud. That this earth has a nobler form, then any other part or limb of the
world. For, we are made by a fairer pattern, by a nobler Image, by a higher
likeness. Faciamus; Though we make but a man, Let us make him, in our Image,
after our likeness.

The variety which the holy Ghost uses here, Imago similitudo.
in the pen of Moses, has given occasion to diverse, to raise diverse
observations, upon these words, which seem diverse, Image and likeness; as also
in the variety of the pharse. For it is thus conceived, and laid, in our Image
and then after our likeness. I know it is a good rule, that Damascen gives,
Parva, parva non sunt, ex quibus magna proveniunt: Nothing is to be neglected
as little, from which great things may arise. If the consequence may be great,
the thing must not be thought little. No Jod in the Scripture shall perish;
therefore no Jod is superfluous. If it were superfluous, it might perish.
Words, and less particles then words have busied the whole Church. In the
Council of Ephesus, where Bishops in a great number excommunicated Bishops in
a greater, Bishop, against Bishop, and Patriarch, against Patriarch; in which
case, when both parties had made strong parties in Court, and the Emperor
forbear to declare himself, on either side for a time, he was told, that he
refused to assent to that, which six thousand Bishops had agreed in: the strife
was but for a word, whether the blessed Virgin might be called Deipara, the
mother of God, for Christipara, the mother of Christ, (which Christ all agree
to be God) Nestorius, and all his party agreed with Cyrill, that she might be.
In the Council of Chalcedon, the difference was not so great, as for a word
composed of syllables. It was but for a syllable, whether Ex, or In. The
Heretics condemned then, confessed Christ, to be Ex duabus naturis, to be
composed of two natures, at first; but not to be in duabus naturis, not to
consist of two natures after: and for that In, they were thrust out. In the
council of Nice, it was not so much as a syllable made of letters. For it was
but for one letter; whether Homoousion, or Homousion, was the issue. Where the
question has not been of diverse words, nor syllables, nor letters, but only
of the place of words; what tempestuous differences have risen? How much Sola
fides and fides sola, changes the case? Nay where there has been no quarrel
for precedence, for transposing of words, or syllables, or letters; where there
has not been, so much as a letter in question; how much does an accent vary a
sense? An interrogation, or no interrogation will make it directly contrary.
All Christian expositors read those words of Cain, My sin is greater then can
be pardoned, positively; and so they are evident words of desperation. The Jews
read them with an interrogation, Are my sins greater, then can be pardoned?
And so they are words of compunction, and repentance. The Prophet Micah says,
that Bethlehem is a small place; the Evangelist Saint Matthew says no small
place. ^. ^. 2. 6.
An interrogation in Micahs mouth reconciles it; Art thou a small place?
amounts to that, thou art not. Sounds, voices, words must not be neglected.
For, Christ's forerunner John Baptist qualified himself no otherwise: He was
but a voice. And Christ himself is Verbum; the Word, is the name, even of the
Son of God. No doubt but Statesmen and magistrates find often the danger of
having suffered small abuses to pass uncorrected. We that see State business
but in the glass of story, and cannot be shut out of Chronicles, see there,
upon what little objects, the eye, and the jealousy of the State is oftentimes
forced to bend it self. We know in whose times in Rome a man might not weep;
he might not sigh; he might not look pale; he might not be sick; but it was
informed against, as a discontent, as a murmuring against the present
government, and an inclination to change. And truly many times upon Damascens
true ground, though not always well applied, Parva non sunt parva, nothing may
be thought little, where the consequence may prove great. In our own Sphere,
in the Church, we are sure it is so. Great inconveniences grew upon small
tolerations. Therefore in that business, which occasioned all that trouble,
which we mentioned before, in the Council of Ephesus, when Saint Cyrill writ
to the Clergy of his Dioces about it; at first, he says prastiterat abstinere,
it had been better, these questions had not been raised. But says he, Si his
nugis nos adoriantur, if they vex us with these impertinencies these trifles;
And yet these which were but trifles at first, came to occasion Counsels; and
then to divide Council, against Council; and then to force the Emperor to
take away the power of both Counsels, and govern in Council, by his Vicar
general, a secular Lord, sent from Court. And therefore did some of the
Ancients, (particularly Philastrius) cry down some opinions for Heresies, which
were not matters of faith, but of Philosophy; and even in Philosophy truly held
by them, who were condemned for heretics, and mistaken by their Judges, that
condemned them. Little things were called in question, left great things should
pass unquestioned. And some of these upon Damascens true ground, (still true
in the rule, but not always in the application) Parva non sunt parva, nothing
may be thought little, where the consequence may be great. Descend we from
those great Spheres, the State, and the Church, into a lesser, that is, the
Conscience of particular men, and consider the danger of exposing those vines
to little Foxes; C^ct. 2. 15.
of leaving small sins unconsidered, unrepented, uncorrected. In that
glistring circle in the firmament, which we call the Galaxy, the milky way,
there is not one Star of any of the six great magnitudes, which Astronomers
proceed upon, belonging to that circle. It is a glorious circle, and possesses
a great part of heaven: and yet is all of so little stars, as have no name, no
knowledge taken of them. So certainly are there many Saints in heaven, that
shine as stars; and yet are not of those great magnitudes, to have been
Patriarchs, or Prophets, or Apostles, or Martyrs, or Doctors, or Virgins: but
good and blessed souls, that have religiously performed the duties of
inferior callings, and no more. And, as certainly are there many souls
tormented in hell, that never sinned sin of any of the great magnitudes,
Idolatry, Adultery, Murder, or the like; but inconsiderately have slid, and
insensibly continued in the practice, and habit of lesser sins. But Parva
non sunt parva, nothing may be thought little, where the consequence may prove
great. When our Savior said, that we shall give an account of every Idle word,
Mat 12. 36.
in the day of Judgment; what great hills of little sands will oppress us
then? And, if substances of sin were removed, yet what circumstances of sin
would condemn us? If idle words have this weight, there can be no word thought
idle, in the Scriptures. And therefore I blame not in any, I decline not in
mine own practice, the making use of the variety, and copiousnesse of the holy
Ghost, who is ever abundant, and yet never superfluous in expressing his
purpose, in change of words. And so no doubt we might do now, in observing a
difference between these words in our text, Image, and likeness; and between
these two forms of expressing it, in our Image, and after our likeness. This
might be done: but that that must be done, will possess all our time; that is,
to declare, (taking the two words for this time to be but a farther
illustration of one another, Image, and likeness, to our present purpose, to
be all one) what this Image, and this likeness imparts; and how this North
scatters our former cloud, what our advantage is, that we are made to an Image,
to a pattern; and our obligation to set a pattern before us, in all our actions.

God appointed Moses to make all that he made according to a pattern. God
himself made all that he made according to a pattern. God had deposited, and
laid up in himself certain forms, patterns, Idea's of every thing that he
made. He made nothing of which he had not preconceived the form, and
predetermined in himself, I will make it thus. And when he had made any thing,
he saw it was good; good because it answered the pattern, the Image; good,
because it was like to that. And therefore, though of other creatures, God
pronounced they were good, because they were presently like their pattern, that
is, like that form, which was in him for them, yet of man, he forbore to say
that he was good because his conformity to his pattern was to appear after in
his subsequent actions. Now, as God made man after another pattern, and
therefore we have a dignity above all, that we had another manner of creation,
then the rest: so have we a comfort above all, that we have another manner of
Administration then the rest. God exercises another manner of Providence upon
man, then upon other creatures. Mat. 10. 23.
A Sparrow falls not without God, says Christ: yet no doubt God works otherwise
in the fall of eminent persons, then in the fall of Sparrows. For ye are of
more value then many Sparrows, says Christ there of every man; and some men
single, are of more value then many men. God does not thank the Ant for her
industry, and good-husbandry in providing for her self. God does not reward
the Foxes, Judge. 15.
for concurring with Sampson in his revenge. God does not fee the Lion, which
was the executioner upon the Prophet, 1 Reg. 13. 23.
which had disobeyed his commandment: nor those two she-Beares, 2. Reg. 2. 25.
which slew the petulant children, who had caluminated and reproached Elisha.
God does not fee them before, nor thank them after, not take knowledge of
their service. But for those men, Exodus 32. 25.
that served Gods execution upon the Idolaters of the Goden Calfe, it is
pronounced in their behalf, that therein they consecrated themselves to God;
and for that service God made that tribe, the tribe of Levi his portion, Gen,
22. 16.
his Clergy, his consecrated Tribe. So, Quiae fecisti hoc, says God to Abraham,
by my self I have sworn; because thou have done this thing, and have not
withheld thy Son thine only son: in blessing, I will bless thee, and in
multiplying, I will multiply thee. So neither is God angry with the dog that
turns to his vomit, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
nor with the sow, that after her washing wallowes in the mire. But of Man in
that case he says; It is impossible for those who were once enlightened, Heb. 6.
4.
if they fall away, to renew them again by repentance. The creatures live
under his law; but a law imposed thus, This they shall do, this they must do.
Man lives under another manner of law; This you shall do; that is, this you
should do, this I would have you do: And fac hoc, do this, and you shall
live; disobey, and you shall die. But yet, the choice is yours: Choose ye this
day life, or death. So that this is Gods administration in the Creature, that
he has imprinted in them an Instinct, and so he has something to preserve in
them: In man his administration is this, that he has imprinted in him a
faculty of will, and election; and so has something to reward in him. That
instinct in the creature God leaves to the natural working thereof in it
self: But the free will of man God visites, and assists with his grace to do
supernatural things. When the creature does an extraordinary action above the
nature thereof, (as, when Balaams Ass spoke) the creature exercises no
faculty, no will in it self; but God forced it to that it did. When man does
any thing conducing to supernatural ends; though the work be Gods, the will
of man is not merely passive. The will of man is but Gods agent; but still an
agent it is: And an agent in another manner, then the tongue of the beast. For,
the will considered, as a will, (and grace never destroys nature, nor, though
it make a dead will a live will, or an ill will a good will, does it make the
will, no will) might refuse or omit that that it does. So that because we are
created by another pattern, we are governed by another law, and another
providence.

Go thou then the same way. If God wrought by a pattern, and writ by copy, and
proceeded by a precedent, do thou so too. Never say, there is no Church
without error: therefore I will be bound by none; but frame a Church of mine
own, or be a Church to my self. What greater injustice, then to propose no
Image, no pattern to thy self to imitate; and yet propose thy self for a
pattern, for an Image to be adored? Thou will have singular opinions, and
singular ways differing from all other men; and yet all that are not of thy
opinion must be heretics; and all reprobates, that go not thy ways. Propose
good patterns to thy self; and thereby become a fit pattern for others. God,
we see, was the first, that made Images; and he was the first, that forbad
them. He made them for imitation; he forbad them in danger of adoration. Arnob.
For, Qualis dementiae est id colere, quod melius est? What a drowzinesse, what
a laziness, what a cowardlinesse of the soul is it, to worship that, which
does but represent a better thing then it self? Worship belongs to the best,
know thou thy distance, and thy period, how far to go, and where to stop.
Dishonor not God by an Image in worshipping it; and yet benefit thy self by it,
in following it. There is no more danger out of a picture, then out of a
history, if thou intend no more in either, then example. Though thou have a
West, a dark and a sad condition, that thou art but earth, a man of
infirmities, and ill counseled in thy self: yet thou have herein a North,
that scatters and dispells these clouds that God proposes to thee in his
Scriptures, and otherwise; Images, patterns, of good and holy men to go by.
But beyond this North this assistance of good examples of men; thou have a
South, a Meridionall height, by which thou see thine Image, they pattern, to
be no copy; no other man, but the original it self, God himself: Faciamus ad
nostram, Let us make man in our Image, after our likeness.

Here we consider first, 4 Part. Meridies. Vbi Imago.
where this Image is, and then what it does: first, in what part of man God
has imprinted this his Image; And then what this Image confers, and derives
upon man; what it works in man. And, as when we seek God in his essence, we are
advised to proceed by negatives, God is not mortal, not passible: so when we
seek the Image of God in man, we begin with a negative; This Image is not in
his body. Non in Corpore.
Teriullian declined to think it was; nay Tertullian inclined others to think
so. For he is the first, that is noted, to have been the author of that
opinion, that God had a body. Deus non est Corpus.
Yet Saint Augustine excuses Tertullian from heresy: because (says he)
Tertullian might meance, that it was so sure, that there is a God; and that
that God was a certain, though not a finite Essence; that God was so far from
being nothing, as that he had rather a body. Because it was possible to give a
good interpretation of Tertullian, that charitable Father Saint Augastine,
would excuse him of heresy. I would Saint Augustines charity might prevail
with them, that pretend to be Augustinianissimi, and to adore him so much in
the Roman Church, not to cast the name of Heresy upon every problem; nor the
name of Heretic, upon every inquirer of Truth. Saint Augustine would deliver
Tertullian from heresy in a point concerning God, and they will condemn us of
heresy, in every point that may be drawn to concern not the Church, Chrysostom.
but the Court of Rome; not their doctrine, but their profit. Malo de
Misericordia Deo rationem reddere, quam de crudelitate, I shall better answer
God for my mildness, then for my severity. And, though anger toward a
brother, or a Raca, or a fool, will bear an action: yet he shall recover
less against me at that bar, whom I have called weak, or mislead, (as I must
necessary call many in the Roman Church) then he whom I have passionately and
peremptorily called heretic. For, I dare call an opinion heresy for the
matter, a great while before I dare call the man that holds it an heretic.
For that consists much in the manner. It must be matter of faith, before the
matter be heresy. But there must be pertinacy after convenient instruction,
before that man be an heretic. But how excusable so ever Tertullian be herein
in Saint Augustines charity: there was a whole sect of heretics, one hundred
years after Tertullian, the Audiani, who over literally taking those places of
Scripture, where God is said to have hands, and feet, and eyes, and ears,
believed God to have a body like ours; and accordingly interpreted this text;
that in that Image, and that likeness, a bodily likeness, consisted this
Image of God in man. And yet even these men, these Audians, Epiphanius, who
first takes knowledge of them, calls but Schismatiques, not Heretics: so loath
is charity to say the worst of any. Yet we must remember them of the Roman
persuasion, that they come too near giving God a body in their pictures of God
the Father. And they bring the body of God, that body which God the Son has
assumed, the body of Christ too near, in their Transubstantiation: not too
near our faith, (for so it cannot be brought too near; so, it is as really
there as we are there) too near to our sense: not too near in the Vbi; for so
it is there: There, that is, in that place to which the Sacrament extends it
self. For the Sacrament extends as well to heaven, from whence it fetches
grace, as to the table, from whence it delivers Bread and Wine: but too near
in modo. For it comes not thither that way. We must necessarily complain, that
they make Religion too bodily a thing. Our Savior Christ corrected Mary
Magdalens zeal, where she flew to him, Ioh. 20. 17.
in a personal devotion; and he said, Touch me not: for I am not yet ascended
to my Father. Fix your meditations upon Christ Jesus so, as he is now at the
right hand of his Father in heaven, and entangle not your selves so with
controversies about his body, as to lose real charity, for imaginary zeal;
nor enlarge your selves so far in the pictures and Images of his body, as to
worship them, more then him. As Damdscen says of God, that he is
Super-principale principium, a beginning, before any beginning we can conceive;
and prae-aeterna aeternitas, an eternity infinitely elder then any eternity we
can imagine: so he is Super-spiritualis Spiritus, such a Super-spirit, as that
the soul of man, and the substance of Angels is but a body, compared to this
Spirit. God has no body, though Tertullian disputed it; though the Audians
preached it; though the Papists paint it. And therefore this Image of God is
not in the body of man, that way.

Nor that way neither, Non Corpus assumptum.
which some others have assigned, that God, who has no body as God, yet in the
creation did assume that form, which man has now, and so made man in his
Image, that is, in that form, which he had then assumed. Some of the Ancients
thought so; and some other men of great estimation in the Roman Church have
thought so too; In particular, Oleaster, a great officer in the Inquisition of
Spain. But great inquirers into other men, are easy neglecters of themselves.
The Image of God is not in man's body this way. Non ut venturus Christus.
Nor that third way, which others have imagined; that is, that when God said,
Let us make man after our likeness, God had respect to that form, which in
the fullness of time, his Son was to take upon him, upon earth. Let us make
him now, (says God at first) like that which I intend hereafter, my Son shall
be. For, though this were spoken before the fall of man, and so before any
occasion of decreeing the sending of Christ: yet in the School a great part of
great men adhered to that opinion, that God from all eternity had a purpose
that his Son should become man in this world, though Adam had not fallen: Non
ut Medicus, sed ut Dominus ad nobilitandum genus humanum, say they: though
Christ had not come as a Redeemer, if man had not needed him by sin, but had
kept his first state; yet as a Prince that desired to heap honor upon him whom
he loves, to do man an honor, by his assuming that nature, Christ, say they,
should have come, and to that Image, that form, which he was to take then was
man made in this text, say these imaginers. But alas, how much better were wit,
and learning bestowed to prove to the Gentiles; that a Christ must come; (that
they believe not) to prove to the Jews, that the Christ is come; (that they
believe not) to prove to our own Consciences, that the same Christ may come
again this minute to Judgment, (we live as though we believed not that) then to
have filled the world, and torn the Church, with frivolous disputations,
whether Christ should have come, if Adam had not fallen? Woe unto fomentors of
frivolous disputations. None of these ways, not because God has a body; not
because God assumed a body, not because it was intended, that Christ should be
born, before it was intended, that man should be made, is this Image of God in
the body of man. Nor has it in any other relation, respect to the body, but as
we say in the School, Arguitive, and Significative that because God has given
man a body of a nobler form, then any other creature; we infer, and argue,
and conclude from thence, that God is otherwise represented in man, then in any
other creature. So far is this Image of God in the body, that as you see some
Pictures, to which the very tables are Jewels; some. Watches, to which the
very cases are Jewels, and therefore they have outward cases too; and so the
Picture, and the Watch is in that outward case, of what meaner stuff soever
that be: so is this Image in this body as in an outward case; so, as that you
may not injure, nor enfeeble this body, neither by sinful intemperance and
licentiousness, nor by inordinate fastings or other disciplines of imaginary
merits, while the body is alive; (for the Image of God is in it) nor to defraud
thy body of decent burial, and due solemnities after death; for the Image of
God is to return to it. But yet the body is but the out-cafe, and God looks
not for the gilding, or enamelling, or painting of that: but requires the
labor, and cost therein to be bestowed upon the Tablet it self, in which this
Image is immediately, that is the soul. And that is truly the Vbi, the place
where this Image is: And there remains only now, the operation thereof, how
this Image of God in the soul of man works.

The Sphere then of this intelligence, In anima.
the Gallery for this Picture, the Arch for this Statue, the Table, and frame
and shrine for this Image of God, is properly immediately the soul of man. Not
immediately so, as that the soul of man is a part of the Essence of God: For
so effentially, Christ only is the Image of God. Saint Augustine at first
thought so: Putaham te Deus, Corpus Lucidum, and me frustum de illo Corpore; I
took thee, o God, (says that Father) to be a Globe of fire, and my soul a
spark of that fire; thee to be a body of light, and my soul to be a beam of
that light. But Saint Augustine does not only retract that in himself, but
dispute against it, in the Manichees. But this Image is in our soul, as our
soul is the wax, and this Image the seal. The Comparison is Saint Cyrills,
and he adds well, that no seal but that, which printed the wax at first, can
fit that wax, and fill that impression after. No Image, but the Image of God
can fit our soul. Every other seal is too narrow, too shallow for it. The
magistrate is sealed with the Lion; The woolfe will not fit that seal: the
Magistrate has a power in his hands, but not oppression. Princes are sealed
with the Crown; The Miter will not fit that seal. Powerfully, and graciously
they protect the Church, and are supreme heads of the Church; But they
minister not the Sacraments of the Church. They give preferments; but they give
not the capacity of preferment. They give order who shall have; but they give
not orders, by which they are enabled to have, that have. Men of inferior and
laborious callings in the world are sealed with the Cross; a Rose, or a bunch
of Grapes will not answer that seal. Ease, and plenty in age, must not be
looked for without Crosses and labor and industry in youth. All men, Prince,
and People; Clergy, and Magistrate, are sealed with the Image of God, with the
profession of a conformity to him: and worldly seals will not answer that, nor
fill up that seal. We should wonder to ses a Mother in the midst of many sweet
Children passing her time in making babies and puppets for her own delight. We
should wonder to see a man, whose Chambers and Galleries were full of curious
master-peeces, thrust in a Village Fair to look upon six-penny pictures, and
three farthing prints. We have all the Image of God at home, and we all make
babies, fancies of honor, in our ambitions. The masterpiece is our own, in
our own bosom; and we thrust in country Fairs, that is, we endure the
distempers of any unseasonable weather, in night-journies, and watchings: we
endure the oppositions, and scorns, and triumphs of a rival, and competitor,
that seeks with us, and shares with us: we endure the guiltiness, and reproach
of having deceived the trust, which a confident friend reposes in us, and
solicit his wife, or daughter: we endure the decay of fortune, of body, of
soul, of honor, to possess lower Pictures; pictures that are not originalls,
not made by that hand of God, nature; but Artificial beauties. And for that
body, we give a soul, and for that drugge, which might have been bought, where
they bought it, for a shilling, we give an estate. The Image of God is more
worth then all substances; and we give it, for colors, for dreams, for
shadows.

But the better to prevent the loss, Tota Trinitas in omni facultate.
let us consider the having of this Image: in what respect, in what operation,
this Image is in our soul. For, whether this Image, be in those faculties,
which we have in Nature; or in those qualifications, which we may have in
Grace; or in those super-illustrations, which the blessed shall have in Glory;
has exercised the contemplation of many. Properly this Image is in Nature; in
the natural reason, and other faculties of the immortal Soul of man. For,
thereupon does Saint Bernard say, Imago Dei uri potest in Gehenna, non exuri:
Till the soul be burnt to ashes, to nothing, (which cannot be done no not in
hell) the Image of God cannot be burnt out of that soul. For it is radically,
primarily, in the very soul it self. And whether that soul be infused into
the Elect, or into the Reprobate, that Image is in that soul, and as far, as
he has a soul by nature, he has the Image of God by Nature in it. But then
the seal is deeper cut, or harder pressed, or better preserved in some, then
in others; and in some other considerations, then merely natural. Therefore we
may consider Man who was made here to the Image of God; and of God, in three
Persons, to have been made so, in Gods intendment, three ways: Man had this
Image in Nature, and does deface it; he has it also in Grace here, and so does
refresh it; and he shall have it in Glory hereafter, and that shall fix it,
establish it. And in every of these three, in this Trinity in man, Nature,
Grace, and Glory, man has not only the Image of God, but the Image of all the
Persons of the Trinity, in every of the three capacities. He has the Image of
the Father, the Image of the Son, the Image of the holy Ghost in Nature; and
all these also in Grace; and all in Glory too. How all these are in all, I
cannot hope to handle particularly; not though I were upon the first grain of
our sand, upon the first dram of your patience, upon the first flash of my
strength. But a clear repeating of these many branches, that these things are
thus, that all the Persons of the heavenly Trinity, are (in their Image) in
every branch of this humane Trinity, in man, may, at least must suffice.

In Nature then, In natura Deus,
man, that is, the soul of man has this Image, of God, of God considered in
his Unity, entirely, altogether, in this, that this soul is made of nothing,
proceeds of nothing. All other creatures are made of that pre-existent matter,
which God had made before, so were our bodies too; But our souls of nothing.
Now, not to be made at all, is to be God himself: Only God himself was never
made. But to be made of nothing; to have no other parent but God, no other
element but the breath of God, no other instrument but the purpose of of God,
this is to be the Image of God. For this is nearest to God himself, who was
never made at all, to be made of nothing. And then man, (considered in nature)
is otherwise the nearest representation of God too. For the steps, which we
consider are four; First, Esse, Being; for some things have only a being,
and no life, as stones: Secondly, Vivere, Living; for some things have life,
and no sense; as Plants: and then, thirdly, Sentire Sense; for some things have
sense, and no understanding. Which understanding and reason, man has with his
Being, and Life, and Sense; and so is in a nearer station to God, then any
other creature, and a livelier Image of him, who is the root of Being, then
all they, because man only has all the declarations of Beeings. Nay if we
consider Gods eternity, the soul of man has such an Image of that, as that
though man had a beginning, which the original, the eternal God himself had
not; yet man shall no more have an end, then the original, the eternal God
himself shall have. And this Image of eternity, this past Meridian, this
afternoon eternity, that is, this Perpetuity and after everlastingnesse is in
man merely as a Natural man, without any consideration of grace. For the
Reprobate can no more die, that is, come to nothing, then the Elect. It is but
of the natural man, that Theodoret says, a King built a City, and erected his
statue in the midst of the City; that is, God made man, and imprinted his Image
in his soul. How will this King take it, (says that Father) to have his statue
thrown down? Every man does so, if he do not exalt his natural faculties; If
he do not hearken to the law written in his heart; if he do not as much as
Plato, or as Socrates in the ways of virtuous actions, he throws down the
Statue of this King; he defaces the Image of God. How would this King take it
(says he) if any other Statue, especially the Statue of his enemy, should be
set up in this place? Every man does so too, that embraces false opinions in
matter of doctrine, or false appearances of happiness in matter of
conversation. For these a natural man may avoid in many cases, without that
addition of grace, which is offered to us as Christians. That comparison of
other creatures to man, 40. 14.
which is intimated in Ieb, is intended but of the natural man. There speaking
of Behemoth, that is, of the greatest of Creatures, he says, in our
translation, that he is the chief of the ways of God: Saint Hierome has it,
Principium; and others before him, Initium viarum Dei: That when God went that
progress over all the world, in the Creation thereof, he did but begin, he
did but set out at Behemoth, at the best of all such Creatures; he, all they
were but Initium viarum, the beginning of the ways of God. But Finis viarum,
the end of his journey, and the Eve, the Vespers of his Sabbath was the making
of man, even of the natural man. Behemoth, and the other creatures were
Vestigia, (says the School) in them we may see, where God has gone, for all
being is from God, and so every thing that has a being has filiationem
vestigii a testimony of Gods having passed that way, and called in there. But
man has filiationem Imaginis, an expression of his Image; and does the office
of an Image or Picture, to bring him, whom it represe^ts, the more lively to
our memory. Gods abridgement of the whole world was man. Reabridge man into his
least volume, in pura naturalia, as he is but mere man, and so he has the
Image of God in his soul.

He has it, Pater in Intellectu.
as God is considered in his Unity, (for as God is, so the soul of man is,
indivisibly, impartibly one, entire) and he has it also, as God is notified to
us in a Trinity. For as there are three Persons in the Essence of God: so there
are three faculties in the Soul of man. The Attributes, and some kind of
specification of the Persons of the Trinity are, Power to the Father, Wisdom
to the Son, and Goodness to the holy Ghost. And the three faculties of the
Soul have the Images of these three. The Understanding is the Image of the
Father, that is, Power. For no man can exercise power, no man can govern well
without understanding the natures and dispositions of them whom he governes.
And therefore in this consists the power, which man has over the creature,
that man understands the nature of every creature, For so Adam did, when he
named every creature according to the nature thereof. And by this advantage of
our understanding them, and comprehending them, we master them, and so
obliviscuntur quod nata sunt, says Saint Ambrose; the Lion, the Bear, the
Elephant have forgot what they were borne to. Induuntur quod jubentur; they
invest and put on such a disposition, and such a nature, as we enjoine them,
and appoint to them. Serviunt ut famuli; (as that Father pursues it elegantly)
and verberantur, ut timidi: they wait upon us as servants; who, if they
understood us as well, as we understand them, might be our Masters: and they
receive correction from us, as though they were afraid of us; when, if they
understood us, they would know, that we were not able to stand in the teeth of
the Lion, in the horn of the Bull, in the heels of the Horse. And adjuvantur
ut infirmi; they counterfeit a weakness, that they might be beholden to us
for help: and they are content to thank us, if we afford them any rest, or any
food; who, if they understood us, as well, as we do them, might tear our
meat out of our throats; nay tear out our throats for their meat.

So then in this first natural faculty of the soul, the Understanding, stands
the Image of the first Person, Filius in Voluntate.
the Father, Power: and in the second faculty which is the Will, is the Image,
the Attribute of the second Person the Son, which is Wisdom: for wisdom is
not so much in knowing, in understanding, as in electing, in choosing, in
assenting. No man needs go out of himself, nor beyond his own legend, and
the history of his own actions for examples of that, that many times we know
better, and choose ill ways. Wisdom is in choosing in Assenting. And then,
Spiritus in Memoria.
in the third faculty of the soul, the Memory, is the Image of the third
person, the holy Ghost, that is, Goodness. For to remember, to recollect our
former understanding, and our former assenting, so far as to do them, to
Crown them with action, that is true goodness. The office, that Christ
assigns to the holy Ghost, and the goodness, which he promises in his behalf
is this, Job. 14. 20.
that he shall bring former things to our remembrance. The wiseman places all
goodness in this faculty, the memory, properly nothing can fall into the
memory, but that which is past, and yet he says, Whatsoever thou take in
hand, Eccles. 7. 36.
remember the end, and thou shall never do amiss. The end cannot be yet come,
and yet we are bid to remember that. Visus per omnes sensus recurrit, says
Saint Augustine. As all senses are called fight, in the Scriptures, (for there
is Gustate Dominum, and Audite, and Palpate; Taste the Lord, and hear the
Lord, and feel the Lord, and still the Videte, is added, taste, and see the
Lord) so all goodness is in remembering, all goodness, (which is the Image of
the holy Ghost) is in bringing our understanding and our assenting into action.
Certainly beloved, if a man were like the King but in countenance, and in
proportion, he himself would think somewhat better of himself, and others
would be the less apt to put scorns, or injuries upon him, then if he had a
Vulgar, and course aspect. With those, who have the Image of the Kings power,
(the Magistrate) the Image of his Wisdom, (the Counsel) the Image of his
Goodness, (the Clergy) it should be so too. There is a respect due to the
Image of the King in all that have it. Now, in all these respects man, the mere
natural man, has the Image of the King of Kings. And therefore respect that
Image in thy self, and exalt thy natural faculties. Aemulate those men, and
be ashamed to be outgone by those men, who had no light but nature. Make thine
understanding, and thy will, and thy memory (though but natural faculties)
serviceable to thy God; and auxiliary and subsidiary for thy salvation. For,
though they be not naturally instruments of grace; yet naturally they are
susceptible of grace, and have so much in their nature, as that by grace they
may be made instruments of grace: which no faculty in any creature, but man,
can be. And do not think that because a natural man cannot do all,
therefore he has nothing to do for himself.

This then is the Image of God in man, In Gratia.
the first way, in nature; and most literally this is the intention of the
text. Man was this Image thus; and the room furnished with this Image was
Paradise. But there is a better room then that Paradise for the second Image,
(the Image of God in man by grace) that is, the Christian Church. For though
for the most part this text be understood De naturalibus, of our natural
faculties: yet Origin, and not only such Allegorical Expositors, but Saint
Basil, and Nyssen and Ambrose, and others, who are literal enough, assign
this Image of God, to consist in the gifts of Gods grace, exhibited to us here
in the Church. A Christian then in that second capacity, as a Christian, and
not only as a man, has this Image of God; of God first considered entirely.
And those expressions of this impression, those representations of this Image
of God, in a Christian by grace, which the Apostles have exhibited to us; that
we are the sons of God; the feed of God; the offspring of God; and partakers
of the divine nature, (which are high and glorious exaltations) are enlarged,
and exalted by Damascen to a farther height, Orat. de Assumpt. Mariae.
when he says; Sicut Deus homo, it a ego Deus; As God is man, so I am God, says
Damascen. I, taken in the whole mankind, (for, so Damascen takes it out of
Nazianzen; and he says, Sicut verbum caro, ita caro verbum, as God was made
man, man may become God) but especially I; I, as I am wrought upon by grace, in
Christ Jesus. So a Christian is made the Image of God entirely. To which
expression Saint Cyrill also comes near, when he calls a Christian Deiformem
hominem, man in the form of God; which is a mysterious, and a blessed
metamorphosis, and transfiguration: that, whereas it was the greatest
trespass, Esai. 14. 14.
of the greatest trespasser in the world, the Devil, to say Similis ero
Altissimo, I will be like the Highest: it would be as great a trespasle in me,
not to be like the Highest, not to conform my self to God, by the use of his
grace, in the Christian Church. And whereas the humiliation of my Savior is in
all things to be imitated by me: yet herein I am bound to depart, from his
humiliation; that whereas he being in the form of God, took the form of a
servant; I being in the form of a servant, Phil. 2. 5.
may, nay must take upon me the form of God, in being Deiformis homo, a man
made in Christ, the Image of God. So have I the Image of God entirely, in his
unity, because I profess that faith, Ephe. 4. 5.
which is but one faith; and under the seal of the Baptism, which is but one
Baptism. And then, as of this one God; so I have also the Image of the
several persons of the Trinity, in this capacity, as I am a Christian, more
then in my natural faculties.

The Attributes of the first Person, Pater.
the Father, is Power, and none but a Christian has power over those great
Tyrants of the world, Sin, Satan, Death, and Hell. For thus my Power accrues
and grows unto me. First, Possum Iudicare, 1 Cor. 6. 5.
I have a Power to Judge; a judiciary, a discretive power; a power to discern
between a natural accident; and a Judgment of God, and will never call a
Judgment, an accident; and between an ordinary occasion of conversation and
atentation of Satan, Possum judicare, and then Possum resistere, Ephe. 6. 13.
which is another act of power. When I find it to be a tentation, I am able to
resist it: and Possum stare, (which is another) I am able, not onley to
withstand, Ibid.
but to stand out this battle of tentations to the end; And then Possum
capere, Mat. 19. 12.
that which Christ proposes for a trial of his Disciples, Let him, that is
able to receive it, receive it, I shall have power to receive the gift of
continency, against all tentations of that kind. Bring it to the highest act
of power, that with which Christ tried his strongest Apostles, 20. 21.
Possum bibere calicem, I shall be able to drink of Christ's Cup; even to
drink his blood, and be the more innocent for that, and to power out my blood,
Phil. 4. 13.
and be the stronger for that. In Christo omnia possum, there is the fullness of
Power, in Christ I can do all things, I can want, or I can abound, I can live,
or I can die. And yet there is an extension of Power, 1 John 39.
beyond all this, in this Non possum peccare, being borne of God in Christ, I
cannot sin. This that seems to have a name of impotence, Non possum, I
cannot, is the fullest omnipotence of all, I cannot sin; not sin to death;
not sin with a desire to sin; not sin, with a delight in sin; but that
tentation, that overthrowes another, I can resist, or that sin, which being
done, casts another into desperation, I can repent. And so I have the Image of
the first Person, the Father, in Power.

The Image of the second Person, Filius.
whose Attribute is Wisdom, I have in this, that Wisdom being the knowledge
of this world, and the next, I embrace nothing in this world, but as it leads
me to the next. For, thus my wisdom, my knowledge grows. First, 2 Timothy 1. 12,
Scio cui credidi, I know whom I have believed in: Romans 6. 9.
I have not mislaid my foundation; my foundation is Christ; and then Scio non
moriturum; my foundation cannot sink, 8. 27.
I know that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; again Scio quod
desideret Spiritus, I know what my spirit, enlightened by the Spirit of God,
desires; I I am not transported with illusions, and singularities of private
spirits. And as in the Attribute of Power, we found an omnipotence in a
Christian, so in this, there is an omniscience, 1. Cor. S. 1.
Scimus, quia omnem Scientiam habemus; there is all together; we know that we
have all knowledge, for all Saint Paul's universal knowledge was but this,
Iesum Crucifixum, 2. 2.
I determine not to know any thing, save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; and
then, the way by which he would proceed, and take degrees in this Wisdom, was
Sultitia praedicandi, 1. 21.
the way that God had ordained, when the world by Wisdom knew not God, it
pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. These
then are the steps of Christian Wisdom, my foundation is Christ, of Christ I
enquire no more, but fundamental doctrines, him Crucified, and this I apply to
my self, by his ordinace of Preaching. And in this wisdom, I have the Image
of the second Person.

And then, of the third also in this, that his Attribute being Goodness, I as
a true Christian, Spiritus Sanctus.
call nothing good, that conduces not to the glory of God in Christ Jesus, nor
any thing ill, that draws me not from him. Thus I have an express Image of
his Goodness, Romans 8. 28.
that Omnia cooperantur in bonum, all things work together for my good, if I
love God. I shall thank my fever, bless my poverty, praise my oppressor, nay
thank, and bless, and praise, even some sin of mine, which by the
consequences of that sin, which may be shame, or loss, or weakness, may
bring me to a happy sense of all my former sins; and shall find it to have
been a good fever, a good poverty, a good oppression, yea a good sin. Vertit
in bonum, says Joseph to his brethren, you thought evil, Genesis 50. 20.
but God meant it unto good; and I shall have the benefit of my sin,
according to his transmutation, that is, though I meant ill, in that sin, I
shall have the good, Amos 3. 6.
that God meant in it. There is no evil in the City, but the Lord does it;
But, if the Lord do it, it cannot be evil to me. I believe that I shall see
Bona Dei, the goodness of the Lord, Psalm. 27. 13.
in the land of the living, that is in heaven; but David speaks also of Signum
in bonum, show me a token of good, and God will show me a present token of
future good, an inward infallibility, that this very calamity shall be
beneficial, and advantageous unto me. And so, as in Nature I have the Image of
God, in my whole soul, and of all the three Persons, in the three faculties
thereof, the Understanding, the Will, and the Memory, so in Grace, in the
Christian Church, I have the same Images, of the Power of the Father, of the
Wisdom of the Son, of the Goodness of the holy Ghost, in my Christian
profession: And all this we shall have in a better place, then Paradise, where
we considered it in nature, and a better place then the Church, as it is
Militant, where we considered it in grace, that is, in the kingdom of heaven,
where we consider this Image in glory; which is our last word.

There we shall have this Image of God in perfection; for, if Origin could
lodge such a conceit, In gloria Deus.
that in heaven, at last, all things should ebb back into God, as all things
flowed from him, at first, and so there should be no other Essence but God, all
should be God, even the Devil himself, how much more may we conceive an
unexpressible association, (that is too far off) an assimilation, (that is not
near enough) an identification, (the School would venture to say so) with God
in that state of glory. Where, as the Sun by shining upon the Moon, makes
the Moon a Planet, a Star, as well, as it self, which otherwise would be but
the thickest, and darkest part of that Sphere, so those beams of Glory which
shall issue from my God, and fall upon me, shall make me, (otherwise a clod of
earth, and worse, a dark Soul, a Spirit of darkness) an Angel of Light, a
Star of Glory, a something, that I cannot name now, not imagine now, nor to
morrow, nor next year, but, even in that particular, I shall be like God, that
as he, that asked a day to give a definition of God, the next day asked a week,
and then a month, and then a year, so undeterminable would my imaginations
be, if I should go about to think now, what I shall be there: I shall be so
like God, as that the Devil himself shall not know me from God, so far, as to
find any more place, to fasten a tentation upon me, then upon God, nor to
conceive any more hope of my falling from that kingdom, then of Gods being
driven out of it; for, though I shall not be immortal as God, yet I shall be as
immortal, as God. And there is my Image of God; of God considered altogether,
and in his unity, in the state of Glory.

I shall have also then; the Image of all the three Persons of the Trinity.
Pater.
Power is the Fathers; and a greater Power, then he exercises here, I shall
have there: here he overcomes enemies; but yet here he has enemies; there,
there are none; here they cannot prevail, there they shall not be. So Wisdom
is the Image of the Son; Filius.
And there I shall have better Wisdom, then spiritual Wisdom it self is
here: for, here our best Wisdom is, but to go toward our end, there it is
rest in our end; here it is to seek to be Glorified by God, there it is, that
God may be everlastingly glorified by me. The Image of the holy Ghost is
Goodness, Spiritus Sanctus.
here our goodness is mixed with some ill; faith mixed with scruples and good
works mixed with a love of praise, and hope of better, mixed with fear of
worse. There I shall have sincere goodness, goodness impermixt, intemerate,
and indeterminate goodness; so good a place, as no ill accident shall annoy
it; so good company, as no impertinent, no importune person shall disorder it;
so full a goodness, as no evil of sin, no evil of punishment for former
sins, can enter; so good a God, as shall no more keep us in fear of his
anger, nor in need of his mercy, but shall fill us first, and establish us in
that fullness in the same instant; and give us a satiety, that we can with no
more, and an infallibility, that we can lose none of that, and both at once.
Where, as the Cabalists express our nearenesse to God, in that state, in that
note, that the name of man, and the name of God, Adam, and Jehovah; in their
numerall letters, are alike, and equal, so I would have leave, to express
that inexpressible state, so far, as to say, that if there can be other world
imagined besides this that is under our Moon, and if there could be other Gods
imagined of those worlds, besides this God, to whose Image we are thus made, in
Nature, in Grace, in Glory; I had rather be one of these Saints in this heaven,
then of those Gods in those other worlds; I shall be like the Angels in a
glorified Soul, and the Angels shall not be like me in a glorified body. The
holy nobleness, and the religious ambition, that I would imprint in you, for
attaining of this Glory, makes me medismiss you with this note, for the fear
of missing that Glory; that as we have taken just occasion, to magnify the
goodness of God, toward us, in that he speaks plurally, Faciamus, Let us,
All us do this, and so powers out the blessings of the whole Trinity upon us,
in this Image of himself, in every Person of the three, and in all these
ways, which we have considered: so when the anger of God is justly kindled
against us, God collects himself, summons himself assembles himself, musters
himself, and threatens plurally too: for, of those four places in Scripture,
in which only (as we noted before) God speaks of himself in a Royal
plural, God speaks in anger, and in a preparation to destruction, in one of
those four, entirely; as entirely, he speaks of mercy, but in one of them, in
this text; here he says, merely out of mercy, Faciamus, Let us, us, all us,
make man, and in the same plurality, Genesis 11.
the same universality, he says after, Descendamus and confundamus, Let us, us,
all us, go down to them, and confound them, as merely out of indignation, and
anger, as here out of mercy. And in the other two places where God speaks
plurally, he speaks not merely in mercy, nor merely in justice, in neither;
but in both he mingles both. So that God carries himself so equally herein, as
that no Soul, no Church, no State, may any more promise it self patience in
God, if it provoke him, then suspect anger in God, if we conform our selves to
him. For, from them, that set themselves against him, God shall withdraw his
Image, in all the Persons, and all the Attributes; the Father shall withdraw
his Power, and we shall be enfeebled in our forces, the Son his Wisdom, and
we shall be infatuated in our counsels, the holy Ghost his Goodness, and we
shall be corrupted in our manners, and corrupted in our Religion, and be a prey
to temporal, and spiritual enemies, and change the Image of God into the
Image of the Beast: and as God loves nothing more then the Image of himself,
in his Son, and then the Image of his Son Christ Jesus, in us, so he hates
nothing more, then the Image of Antichrist, in them, in whom he had imprinted
his Sons Image, that is, declinations toward Antichrist, or concurrencies
with Antichrist in them, who were borne, and baptized, and catechized, and
blessed in that profession of his truth. That God who has hitherto delivered
us from all cause, or color of jealousies, or suspicions thereof, in them,
whom he has placed over us, to conform us to his Image, in a holy life, that
sins continued, and multiplied by us against him, do not so provoke him
against us, that those two great helps, the assiduity of Preaching, and the
personal, and exemplary piety and constancy in our Princes, be not by our
sins made unprofitable to us. For that is the height of Gods malediction upon
a Nation, when the assiduity of preaching, and the example of a Religious
Prince, does them no good, but aggravates their fault.

SERMON XXX.
Preached to the Countess of Bedford, then at Harrington house. January 7.
1620.
JOB 13. 15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.
THe name, by which God notified himself, to all the world, at first, was,
Exodus 3. 14.
Qui sum, I am; this was his style, in the Commission, that he gave to Moses to
Pharaoh; say, that he whose name is, I am, has sent thee, forthere, God would
have it made known, that all Essence, all Being, all things, that fall out, in
any time, past, or present, or future, had their dependece upon him, their
derivation from him, their subsistence in him. But then, when God contracts
himself into a narrower consideration, not to be considered as God, which
implies the whole Trinity, but as Christ, which is only the second Person, and
when he does not so much notify himself to the whole world, as to the
Christian Church, then he contracts his name too, from that spacious and
extensive Qui sum, I am, which includes all time, to Alpha and Omega, first and
last, which are pieces of time, as we see, in several places of the
Revelation, he styles himself: when God speaks to the whole world, his name
is, Qui sum, I am, that all the world may confess, that all that is, is
nothing, but with relation to him; when he speaks to a Christian, his name is
Alpha and Omega, first and last, that a Christian may, in the very name of God,
fix his thoughts upon his beginning, and upon his end, and ever remember, that
as a few years since, in his Cradle, he had no sense of that honor, those
riches, those pleasures, which possesses his time now, so, God knows how few
days hence, in his grave, he shall have no sense, no memory of them. Our whole
life is but a parenthesis, our receiving of our soul, and delivering it back
again, makes up the perfect sentence; Christ is Alpha and Omega, and our Alpha
and Omega is all we are to consider.

Now, for all the letters in this Alphabet of our life, that is, for all the
various accidents in the course thereof, we cannot study a better book, then
the person of Job. His first letter, his Alpha, we know not, we know not his
Birth; His last letter, his Omega, we know not, we know not his Death: But all
his other letters, His Children, and his riches, we read over and over again,
How he had them, how he lost them, and how he recovered them. By which though
it appear that those temporal things do also belong to the care and
provision of a godly man, yet it appears too, that neither his first care, nor
his last care appertains to the things of this world, but that there is a
Primum quaerite, something to be sought for before, The kingdom of God; And
there is a Memorare novissima, something to be thought on after, The Joys of
heaven; And then, Catera adjicientur, says Christ, All other cares are
allowable by way of Accessory, but not as principal. And therefore, though
this History of Job, may seem to spend it self, upon the relation of Jobs
temporal passages, of his wealth, and poverty, of his sickness, and recovery,
yet, if we consider the Alpha and Omega of the book it self, the first
beginning, and the later end thereof, we shall see in both places, a care of
the Holy ghost, to show us first Jobs righteousness, and then his riches,
first his Goodness, and then his Goods; in both places, there is a Catechism,
a Confession of his faith before, and then an Inventory, and Catalogue of his
wealth; for, in the first place, it is said, He was an upright and just man,
and feared God, and eschewed evil, and then, his Children, and his substance
follow; And in the last place, it is said, That Job was accepted by God, and
that he prayed for those friends, which had vexed him, and then it is, that his
former substance was doubled unto him.

This world then is but an Occasional world, a world only to be used; and
that but so, as though we used it not: The next world is the world to be
enjoyed, and that so, as that we may joy in nothing by the way, but as it
directs and conduces to that end; Nay, though we have no Joy at al, though God
deny us all conveniences here, Etiamsi occiderit, though he end a weary life,
with a painful death, as there is no other hope, but in him, so there needs
no other, for that alone is both abundant, and infallible in it self.

Now, as no History is more various, then Jobs fortune, so is no phrase, no
style, more ambiguous, then that in which Jobs history is written; very many
words so expressed, very many phrases so conceived, as that they admit a
diverse, a contrary sense; for such an ambiguity in a single word, there is an
example in the beginning, in Jobs wife; we know not (from the word it self)
whether it be Benedicas, or maledicas, whether she said Bless God, and die or
Curse God: And for such an ambiguity, in an entire sentence, the words of this
text are a pregnant, and evident example, for they may be directly, and
properly thus rendered out of the Hebrew, Behold he will kill me, I will not
hope; and this seems to differ much from our reading, Behold, though he kill
me, yet will I trust in him. And therefore to make up that sense, which our
translation has, (which is truly the true sense of the place) we must first
make this paraphrase, Behold he will kill me, I make account he will kill me, I
look not for life at his hands, his will be done upon me for that; And then,
the rest of the sentence (I will not hope) (as we read it in the Hebrew,) must
be supplied, or rectified rather, with an Interrogation, which that language
wants, and the translators use to add it, where they see the sense require it:
And so reading it with an Interrogation, the Original, and our translation
will constitute one and the same thing; It will be all one sense to say, with
the Original, Behold he will kill me, (that is, let him kill me) yet shall not
I hope in him? and to say with our translation, Behold though he kill me, yet
will I hope in him: And this sense of the words, both the Chaldee paraphrase,
and all translations ( excepting only the Septuagint) do unanimously establish.

So then, the sense of the words being thus fixed, we shall not distract your
understandings, Divisio.
or load your memories, with more then two parts: Those, for your ease, and to
make the better impression, we will call propositum, and praepositum; first,
the purpose, the resolution of a godly man, which is, to rely upon God; and
then the consideration, the inducement, the debatement of this beforehand, That
no Danger can present it self, which he had not thought of before, He has
carried his thoughts to the last period, he has stirred the potion to the last
scruple of Rheuharb, and Wormewod, which is in it, he has digested the worst,
he has considered Death it self, and therefore his resolution stands
unshak'd, Etiamsi occiderit, Though he die for it, yet he will trust in God.

In the first then, 1 Part.
The Resolution, the purpose it self, we shall consider, Quem, and Quid; The
Person, and the Affection: To whom Job will bear so great, and so reverent a
respect; Quis.
and then, what this respect is, I will trust in him. I would not stay you,
upon the first branch, upon the person, as upon a particular consideration
(though even that, The person upon whom, in all cases, we are to rely, be
entertainment sufficient for the meditation of our whole life) but that there
arises an useful observation, out of that name, by which Job delivers that
person, to us, in this place: Job says, though He kill me, yet he will trust in
him; but he tells us not in this verse, who this He is. And though we know, by
the frame, and context, that this is God, yet we must have recourse to the
third verse, to see, in what apprehension, and what notion, in what Character,
and what Contemplation, in what name, and what nature, what Attribute, and what
Capacity, Job conceived and proposed God to himself, when he fixed his
resolution so entirely to rely upon him; for, as God is a jealous God, I am
sure I have given him occasion of jealousy, and suspicion, Ezck. 16.
I have multiplied my fornications, and yet am not satisfied, as the prophet
speaks: As God is a Consuming fire, I have made my self fuel for the fire,
and I have brought the fires of lust, and of ambition, to kindle that fire: As
God visits the sins of fathers upon Children, I know not what sins my
fathers and grandfathers have laid up in the treasure of Gods indignation: As
God comes to my notion, in these forms, Horrendum, it were a fearful thing
to flesh and blood, to deliver ones self over to him, as he is a jealous God,
and a Consuming fire; But in that third verse, Job sets before him, that God,
whom he conceives to be Shaddai, that is, Omnipotens, Allmighty; I will speak
to the Allmighty, and I desire to dispute with God. Now, if we propose God to
our selves, in that name, as he is Shaddai, we shall find that word in so many
significations in the scriptures, as that no misery or calamity, no prosperity
or happiness can fall upon us, but we shall still see it (of what kind so
ever it be) descend from God, in this acceptance, as God is Shaddai. For,
first, this word signifies Dishoner, as the Septuagint translate it in the
Proverbs, 19. 26.
He that Dishonoreth his parents, is a shameless child; There Is this word;
Shaddai is the name of God, 33. 1.
and yet Shaddai signifies Dishonor. In the prophet Esaias it signifies
Depredation, a forcible and violent taking away of our goods; vae praedanti,
says God in that place, woe to thee that spoyledst, and wast not spoiled;
Shaddai is the name of God, and yet Shaddai is spoil, and violence and
depredation. In the prophet Jeremy, the word is carried farther, there it
signifies Destruction, and an utter D^vastation; D^vastati sumus, says he, we
unto us, for we are Destroyed; The word is Shaddai, and is Destruction, though
Shaddai be the name of God: yea, the word reaches to a more spiritual
affection, it extends to the understanding, and error in that, and to the
Conscience, and sin in that; for so the Septuagint makes use of this word in
the Proverbs, Prove. 24. 15. Psalm. 91.
To deceive, and to ly; and in one place of the Psalms, they interpret the
word, of the Devil himself. So that, (recollecting all these heavy
significations of the word) Dishonor and Disreputation, force and Depredation,
Ruin and Devastation, Error and Illusion, the Devil and his Tentations, are
presented to us, in the same word, as the name and power of God is, that, when
so ever any of these do fall upon us, in the same instant when we see and
consider the name and quality of this calamity that falls, we may see and
consider the power and the purpose of God which inflicts that Calamity; I
cannot call the calamity by a name, but in that name, I name God; I cannot feel
an affliction, but in that very affliction I feel the hand (and, if I will, the
medicinal hand) of my God. If therefore our Honor and Reputation decay, all
honor was a beam of him, and if he have sucked that beam into himself, let
us follow it home, let us labor to be honorable in him, glorified in him, and
our honor is not extinguished in this world, but grown too glorious for this
world to comprehend. If spoil and Depredation come upon us, that we be covered
with wrath, and persecuted, slain and not spared, That those that fed
delicately perish in the streets, and they that were brought up in scarlet
embrace the Dunghill, and that the hands of pitiful women have sodden their
own children, as the prophet complains in the Lamentations; if there be such
an irreparable Devastation upon us, as that we be broken as an Earthern
vessel, in the breaking whereof there remains not a sheard to fetch fire from
the hearth, nor water from the pit, That our estate be ruined so, as that there
is nothing left, not only for future posterity, but not for the present
family, yet still God and the calamity are together; God does not send it, but
bring it, he is there as soon as the calamity is there, and calling that
calamity by his own name, Shaddai, he would make that very calamity a candle
to thee, by which thou might see him; that, if thou were not so puffed up
before, as that thou forgotst to say, Dominus dedit, It was the Lord that gave
all, thou should not be so dejected, so rebellious now, as not to say Dominus
tulit, It is the Lord that has taken, and committed to some better steward,
those treasures of his, which he saw, thou do employ to thine own danger.

Yea, if those spiritual afflictions, which reach to the understanding, and
are intimated and involved in this word, Lam. 1. 19.
in this name of God, do fall upon us, That we call for our lovers, and they
deceive us (as we told you, the word did signify deceit) that is, we come to
see how much we mistook the matter, when we fell in love with wordly things,
(as certainly, once in our lives, though it be but upon our Death beds, we do
come to discover that deceit) yea, when the deceit is so spiritual, as that it
reaches not only to the understanding, but to the Conscience, that that have
been deceived either with security at one time, or with anxieties, and
unnecessary scruples, and impertinent perplexities at another; if this
spiritual deceit have gone so high, as that we came to think our selves to
be amongst them, Ier. 4. 10.
of whom the prophet says, Ah Lord God, surely thou have deceived thy people,
and Jerusalem, that we come to suspect, that God has misled us in a false
religion all this while, and that there is a better then this, if we would
look to it; if God to punish our negligence, Ier. 5. 31. Hose. 9. 7.
and surfeit of his word, should suffer the prophet to prophecy lies, That the
prophet should be a fool, and the spiritual man mad, (that is, as Saint
Hierom reads that place, Arreptitius, possessed, possessed with the spirit of
ambition, and flattery, and temporizing, to preach to their appetites, who
govern the times, and not to his instructions, who sent them to preach) yea,
where this word is carried the highest of all, that this word, which is the
name of God, is used for the Devil, (as we noted before, Lam. 2. 2.
out of the Psalms) That Satan was let loose, and polluted the kingdom, and
the princes thereof, with false worships, yet to what height to ever, this
violence, or this deceit, or this tentation should come, God comes with it;
and, with God, there is strength and wisdom, He discerns our Distresses, and
is able to succor us in them; Job 12. 16.
And, (as it is added there) He that is deceived, and he that deceives are his;
The deceiver is his, because he catches the crafty in their own nets, and the
deceived are his, that he may rectify and unbeguile them. So then the children
of God, are the Marble, and the Ivory, upon which he works; In them his
purpose is, to re-engrave, and restore his Image; and affliction, and the
malignity of man, and the deceits of Heretics, and the tentations of the
Devil him self, are but his instruments, his tools, to make his Image more
discernible, and more dnrable in us. Job will speak to God, he will dispute
with God, he will trust in God, therefore, because he is Shaddai, because
neither dishonor, nor Devastation, of fortune, or understanding, or Conscience,
by deceit of treacherous friends, by backsliding of false teachers, by illusion
of the Devil himself, can be presented him, but the name and power of God
accompanies that calamity, and he sees that they came from God, and therefore
he should be patient in them, and how impatient so ever he be, he sees he must
bear them, because they came from him.

But Job has another hold too, another assurance, for his Confidence in God,
from this name Shaddai; It is not only because all Calamity comes from him,
and therefore should be borne, or therefore must be borne; but all Restitution,
all Reparation of temporal, or spiritual detriment, is included in that name
too, for Shaddai is Omnipotens, Almighty, He can do all things; And the
consolation is brought nearer then so, in one place, it is Omnia faciens, That,
not only for the future he can, Job. 8. 3.
but for the present, he does study, and he does accomplish my good; even then,
when his hand is upon me, in a calamity, his hand is under me, to raise me up
again; as he that flings a ball to the ground, or to a wall, intends in that
action, that that ball should return back, so even now, when God does throw me
down, it is the way that he has chosen to return me to himself. Since
therefore this name Shaddai assured Job, that all which we call Good; and all
which we call Evil, that is, prosperity, and adversity, proceed from God; that
God (who in the signification of this name) is able to shatter, and scatter, to
devastate and depopulate, not only our estate, but our Conscience, in an
instant, with the horror of his Judgments; and then is able to bind up, and
consolidate all this again, with his temporal, and spiritual Comforts, since
he can destroy in an instant that Temple, which was so long in building, that
is, overthrow that fortune, which employed the industry of man, the favor of
princes, and the ruin and supplantations of other men, for many years, to the
making thereof, and then can raise this ruined Temple, this overthrown man, in
three days, or hours, or minutes, as it pleases him, to measure his own
purposes since good and bad, peace and anguish, life and death proceed from
him, who is Shaddai, the Almighty God, Job had good reasons, to trust in him,
in that God, though he, that God, should kill him; which Emphaticall, and
applyable significations of the name, has occasioned me (though it be obvious
and present to every apprehension, that God is the person, who in this text, is
to be relied upon) to insist upon this, as a particular part of branch; And so
we pass to that, which we proposed for a second branch, from the person, (God,
and God in this notion, Shaddai, Almighty) to the respect, which he promises,
Trust, Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him.

It is a higher degree of Reverence and Confidence, Quid.
to trust in one, then to trust one. we see it so expressed in the Articles of
our Creed; Credimus in Deum, we believe in God, and in Christ, and in the Holy
Ghost; And then Credimus Ecclesiam Catholicam, we believe the Catholic
Church. We will believe a honest man, that he will do as he says, we believe
God much more, that he will perform his promises; we will trust God, that he
will do as he says; But then, Job will trust in God, That though God have not
spoken to his soul as yet, though he have not interessed him in his promises,
and in his Covenant, (for Job is not conceived to be within the Covenant made
by God to his people) yet he will trust in him, that in his due time, he will
visit him, and will apply him those mercies, and those means, which no man,
that had interest in them, can doubt, or distrust. And therefore Job professes
his trust in God, in that word, which has in the use thereof in Scriptures,
ordinarily three acceptations; The word is Iakal, and Iakal signifies
Expectavit Deum, (...)
his eye, his expectation was upon nothing but God; And then it signifies
speravit, he Hoped for him, As he looked for nothing else, so he doubted not of
him; And then it is Moratus est, As he was sure of him, so he prescribed him
not a time, but humbly attended his Ieasure, and received his temporal, or
spiritual blessings thankefully, whenever it should be his pleasure to
afford them.

First then, Expectavit.
Expectavit, He trusted in him, that is, he trusted in nothing but him. For,
beloved, as we have in the Schools, a short and a round way, to prove that the
world was made of nothing, which is, only to ask that man, who will need deny
the world to be made of nothing, of what it was made; and, if he could find a
preexistent matter, of which he thought the world was made, yet we must ask
him again, of what, that preexistent matter was made, and so upwards still,
till at last it must necessarily come to nothing: so we must ask that man,
that will not be of Jobs mind, to trust in God, in what he would trust; would
he trust in his riches? who shall preserve them to him? The Law? Then he trusts
in the Law. But who shall preserve the Law? The King? Then his trust is in him.
And who shall preserve him? Almighty God; and therefore his trust must be at
last in him. Deuteronomy. 14.
To what nation is their God come so near to them as the Lord our God is come
near unto us? what nation has laws, and ordinances, so righteous as we have?
Moses said this historically of the Jew, and prophetically of us; It Is true, we
are governed by a peaceable, and a just law; Moses his prophecy is fulfilled
upon us, and so is Esays too, 49. 23.
Reges nutricii, Kings shall be thy nursing fathers; It is true to us, The law
is preserved to us, by a just, and a peaceful prince; but how often have the
sins of the people, and their unthankfulness especially, induced new laws,
and new princes? The prince, and the law, are the two most reverend, and most
safe things, that man can rely upon; but yet (in other nations at least)
sacred, and secular story declares, that for the iniquity of the people the law
has been perverted by princes, and for the sin of the people, the prince
has been subverted by God. Howsoever there may be some collateral, and
transitory trust in by things, the radical, the fundamental trust, is only
in God.

Job trusted in him, that is, in nothing but him: but then, speravit, Speravit.
he hoped for something at his hands; none can give but God; but God will give
to none that do not hope for it, and that do not express their hope, by
asking, by prayer; God scatters not his blessings, as Princes do money, in
Donatives at Coronations or Triumphs, without respect upon whom they shall
fall. God rained down Manna and Quails, plentifully, abundantly; but he knew
to what hand every bird, and every grain belonged. To trust in nothing else,
is but half way; it is but a stupid neglecting of all; It is an ill affection
to say, I look for nothing at the worlds hands, nor at Gods neither. God only
has all, and God has made us capable of all his gifts; and therefore we must
neither hope for them, any where else, nor give over our hope of them, from
him, by intermitting our prayers, or our industry in a lawful calling; for we
are bound to suck at those breasts which God puts out to us, and to draw at
those springs, which flow from him to us; and prayer, and industry, are these
breasts, and these springs; and whatsoever we have by them, we have from him.
Expectavit, Job trusted not in the means, as in the fountain, but yet
speravit, he doubted not, but God, who is the fountain, would, by those
means, derive his blessings, temporal and spiritual, upon him.

He Hoped; now Hope is only, or principally of invisible things, for Hope
that is seen, Romans 8. 24.
is not hope, says the Apostle. And therefore, though we may hope for temporal
things, for health, wealth, strength, and liberty, and victory where Gods
enemies oppress the Church, and for execution of laws, where Gods enemies
undermine the Church; (for, whatsoever we may pray for, we may hope for, and
all those temporal blessings are prayed for, by Christ's appointment, in that
petition, Give us this day our daily bread) yet our Hope is principally
directed upon the invisible part, and invisible office of those visible and
temporal things; which is, that by them, we may be the better able to perform
religious duties to God, and duties of assistance to the world. When I expect a
friend, I may go up to a window, and wish I might see a Coach; or up to a
Cliffe, and wish I might see a ship, but it is because I hope, that that friend
is in that Coach, or that ship: so I wish, and pray, and labor for temporal
things^ because I hope that my soul shall be edified, and my salvation
established, and God glorified by my having them: And therefore every Christian
hope being especially upon spiritual things, is properly, and purposely
grounded, upon these stones; that it be spes veniae, a hope of pardon, for that
which is past, and then spes gratiae, a hope of Grace, to establish me in that
state with God, in which, his pardon has placed me, and lastly spes gloriae,
a hope that this pardon, and this grace, shall lead me to that everlasting
glory, which shall admit no night, no eclipse, no cloud.

First, for the first object of this hope, pardon, we are to consider sin, in
two aspects, Spes veniae.
two apprehensions; as sin is an injury, a treason; yea a wound to God; And
then as sin is a Calamity, a misery fallen inevitably upon man. Consider it
the first way, and there is no hope of pardon, Nectalem Deum tuum putes, qualis
nec tu debes esse, is excellently said by Saint Augustine: never imagine any
other quality to be in Christ, then such, as thou, as a Christian, art bound to
have in thy self. And, if a Snake have stung me, must I take up that Snake,
and put it into my bosom? If so poor a snake, so poor a worm as I, have
stung my Maker, have crucified my Redeemer, shall he therefore, therefore take
me into his bosom, into his wounds, and save me, and glorify me? No, if I
look upon sin, in that line, in that angle, as it is a wound to God, I shall
come to that of Cain, Major iniquitas, my sin is greater, then can be
forgiven, and to that of Judas, Peccavi tradens, I have sinned in betraying the
innocent blood, that is, in Crucifying him again, who was crucified for me, in
betraying his righteous blood, as much, by my unworthy receiving, as Judas did,
in an unjust delivering of it. But if I look upon sin, as sin is now, the
misery and calamity of man, the greater the misery appears, the more hope of
pardon I have; Abyssus Abyssum, Psalm. 42. 7.
as David speaks, One Depth calls upon another; Infinite sins call for
infinite mercy; and where sin did abound, grace, and mercy shall much more.
First David presents the greatness of his sins, and then follows the
Miserere mei, have mercy upon me, according to the greatness of thy mercy. Is
there any little mercy in God? Is not all his mercy infinite, that pardons a
sin done against an infinite majesty? yes; but herein the greatness appears
to us, that it delivers us from a great calamity. Quia infirmus, Because I am
weak, (borne weak, and subject to continual infirmities) Quia oss a
conturbata, Because my bones are troubled, (my best repentances, and
resolutions are shaked) Quia vexata anima, because my soul is in anguish, when
after such resolutions, and repentances; and vows, I relapse into those
sins, these miseries of his, were David's inducements why God should pardon
him, because it is thus with me, have mercy upon me. And so God himself seems
to have had a diverse, a twofold apprehension of our sins, when he says,
Genesis 6. 5.
that because all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, were only
evil continually, therefore he would spare none, 8, 21.
he would destroy all, and after he says, that because the imaginations of the
thoughts of man's heart, were evil from his youth, he would no more smite all
things living, as he had done; for sin, he would destroy them, and yet for
sin, he would spare them: when we examine our sins, and find them to be
out of infirmity, and not out of rebellion, we may conclude Gods corrections,
to be by way of Medicin, and not of poison, to be for our amendment, and not
for our annihilation, and in that case, there is spes veniae, just hope of
pardon.

Another degree of hope is, spes gratiae, Spes Gratiae. Romans 5. 10.
hope of subsequent grace; for, as Saint Paul builds his argument, If when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more,
being reconciled, shall we be saved by his life: in like manner, every sinner
may build his trust, and hope in God, He that has pardoned us, the sins we
have done, will much more assist us with his grace, that we may be able to
stand in that state with him, to which he has brought us. He that succored
us, when there was nothing in us, but his enemies, will much more send new
supplies, when the town is held for him, and by his friends. And this hope of
pardon, for that which is past, and of grace for the present, Spes Gloriae.
continues to the hope of glory to come: of which glory we apprehend strong and
effectual beams here, by conforming our selves, to that Gospel, which the
Apostle calls the glorious Gospel of the blessed God; and for the consummation
of this glory, 1 Timothy 1. 11.
we do with patience abide for it, Romans 8. 25.
says the Apostle: which is the last of those three senses, in which we noted,
this word, in which Job expresses his trust in God, to be used in the
Scriptures, Iakal, moratus est; he did trust in nothing else, did trust in him,
and then, he stayed his leisure.

Jacob makes a solemn prayer to God, Moratus est.
in Genesis, 32. O God of my Fathers, Abraham, and Isaac, then he remembers God
of his promise, (Thou saydst unto me return, and I will do thee good) he
tells him his danger, (I fear my brother Esau, will come and smite me) he
makes his petition, (Deliver me from the hand of my brother) And yet, for all
this, though he trusted in God, yet God infuses not that confidence into him,
as to go on: He sent his present to his brother, but himself tarried there
all night, says the text. Yea, God was so far, from giving him present means
of deliverance, that he made him worse able to deliver himself, he wrastled
with him, and lamed him: but after all, in Gods appointed time, he and his
brother were reconciled. If thou pray to Almighty God, in temporal, in
spiritual calamities, if God do not presently enlighten thine understanding
in every controversy of Religion, in every scruple of Conscience, if he do
not rectify thine estate, when it is decayed, thy reputation, when thou art
reproached, yea if he wrestle with thee, and lame thee, that is, bring all to a
greater impotency, and improbability of amendment then before, yet thou have
thy Rule from Job, thou have thy example from Jacob, that to trust in God, is
not only to trust in nothing else, nor only to hope particularly, for pardon,
for grace, for glory from him, but it is to stay his leisure, for the outward,
and inward seals of all his mercies, and his benefits, which he shall, in his
time, bestow upon thee. The ambitious man must stay, till he, whose office he
expects, be dead: the Covetous man must stay, till the six months be run,
before his use come in. Though thou have a religious ambition, a holy
covetousness even at Gods graces, Psalm. 119. 131.
thou must stay his time. Os aperui, and attraxi, says David, I opened my
mouth, and panted, because I loved thy Commandments; He loved them, and he
longed for them, yet he had not presently a full satisfaction. Domine labia mea
aperies, says he also first it must be the Lord that must open our lips, in
all our petitions; It must not be the anguish of the calamity only, nor the
desire of that which thou prayest for only, that must open thy lips, but the
Lord, that is, the glory of God: when the Lord has opened thy lips in a
rectified prayer, Psalm: 145. 16.
then follows the Aperuit manus, the eyes of all things wait upon him, and he
gives them their meat in due season; he opens his hand, and filles every
living thing, at his good pleasure: Here Is plentiful opening, and filling, and
filling every thing, but still in due season, and that due season expressed, At
his pleasure: for, as that is the Nature of every thing, which God has
imprinted in it, Augustine.
so that is the season of every thing, which God has appointed for it. Thou
would not pray for harvest at Christmas; seek not unseasonable comforts, out
of Music, or Comedies, or Conversation, or Wine in thy distresses, but seek
it at the hand of God, and stay his leisure, for else thou do not trust in
him.

We have now passed over all those branches, 2 Part.
which constituted our first part, that which we called Propositum, what is the
purpose and resolution of a godly man, in Job: that he would not scatter his
thoughts in trusting upon Creatures, and yet he would not suffer his thoughts
to vanish and evaporate, he would rest them upon something, and not leave all
to fortune, he would rest upon God, and yet stay his time for the execution of
his gracious purposes. There remains yet, that which we called praepositum, in
which we intended, the foundation, and ground of that purpose and resolution;
which seems in Job, to have been, a debatement in himself, a contemplation of
all dangers, the worst was death, and yet, Si occiderit, if I dye for it, and
dye at his hands, Though he kill me, yes will I trust in him. For when the
children of God take that resolution, to suffer any affliction, which God shall
lay upon them, patiently, and cheerfully, it must not be a sudden, a rash, an
undebated resolution, but they must consider why they undertake it, and in
whose strength, they shall be able to do it: They must consider what they have
done for God, before they promise themselves the glory of suffering for him.
When they which enterprised the building of Babel, Genesis 11.
did no more but say to one another, Come let us make brick, go to, let us
build a tower, whose top may reach to heaven, how quickly they were scattered
over the earth? The way is, Luke 14. 28.
if you mind to build, to sit down and count the cost; if you purpose to
suffer for Christ, to look to your stock, your strength, and from whence it
comes. The King that intends a war, in that Gospel, takes counsel, whether
he be able with his ten thousand to meet the enemy with twenty thousand. We
are too weak for our enemy; the world, the flesh, and the Devil, are mustered
against us; but yet, with our ten thousand, we may meet their twenty thousand,
if we have put on Christ, and be armed with him, and his holy patience, and
constancy; but from whom may we derive an assurance, that we shall have that
armor, that patience, that constancy? First, a Christian must purpose to Do,
and then in cases of necessity, to suffer: And give me leave to make this short
note by the way, no man shall suffer like a Christian, that has done nothing
like a Christian: God shall thank no man, for dying for him, and his glory,
that contributed nothing to his glory, in the actions of his life: very hardly
shall that man be a Martyr in a persecution, that did not what he could, to
keep off persecution.

Thus then Job comes first, to the Si occiderit; If he should kill me; If Gods
anger should proceed so far, as so far, it may proceed. Let no man say in a
sickness, or in any temporal calamity, this is the worst; for a worse thing
then that may fall: five and thirty years sickness may fall upon thee; and,
(as it is in that Gospel) a worse thing then that; Distraction, and
desperation may fall upon thee: let no Church, no State, in any distress say,
this is the worst, for only God knows, what is the worst, that God can do to
us. Job does not deny here, but that this Si occiderit, if it come to a matter
of life, it were another manner of trial, then either the si irruerent Sabaei,
if the Sabaeans should come, and drive his Cattle, and slay his servants;
more, then the si ignis caderet; if the fire of God should fall from heaven,
and devoute all; more, then the si ventus concuteret, if the wind of the
wilderness, should shake down his house, and kill and all his children. The
Devil in his malice saw, that if it came to matter of life, Job was like
enough to be shaked in his faith; Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has
will he give for his life. God foresaw that, in his gracious providence too;
and therefore he took that clause out of Satan's Commission, and inserted his
veruntamen animam ejus servae, meddle not with his life. The love of this life,
which is natural to us, and imprinted by God in us, is not sinful: Few and
evil have the days of my pilgrimage been, says lacob to Pharaeoh: though they
had been evil, (which makes our days seem long) and though he were no young
man, when he said so, yet the days which he had past, he thought few, and
desired more. When Eliah was fled into the wilderness, and that in passion,
and vehemence he said to God, Sufficit Domine, toll animam meam, It is enough
O Lord, now take away my life, if he had been heartily, thoroughly weary of his
life, he needed not to have fled from Iesabel, for he fled but to save his
life. The Apostle had a Cupie dissolvi, a desire to be dissolved; but yet a
love to his brethren corrected that desire, and made him find that it was far
better for him to live. Our Savior himself, when it came to the pinch, and to
the agony, had a Transeat Calix, a natural declining of death. The natural
love of our natural life is not ill: It is ill, in many cases, not to love
this life: to expose it to unnecessary dangers, is always ill; and there are
overtures to as great sins, in hating this life, as in loving it; and
therefore Jobs first consideration is, si occideret, if he should kill me, if I
thought he would kill me, this were enough to put me from trusting in any.

But Jobs consideration went farther, then to the si occideret, Though he
should kill me, for it comes to an absolute assurance that God will kill him;
for so it is in the Original, Ecce occidet, Behold, I see he will kill me; I
have, I can have no hope of life, at his hands. It Is all our cases; Adam might
have lived, if he would, but I cannot. God has placed an Ecce, a mark of my
death, upon every thing living, that I can set mine eye upon; every thing is a
remembrancer, every thing is a Judge upon me, and pronounces, Heb. 9. 27.
I must dye. The whole frame of the world is mortal, Heaven and Earth pass
away: and upon us all, there is an irrecoverable Decree past, statutum est, It
is appointed to all men, that they shall once dye. But when? quickly; If thou
look up into the air, Job 7. 7.
remember that thy life is but a wind; Iam. 4. 14.
If thou see a cloud in the air, ask St. James his question, what is your
life? and give St. James his answer, It is a vapor that appears and
vanishes away. If thou behold a Tree, then Job gives thee a comparison of thy
self; A Tree is an emblem of thy self; nay a Tree is the original, thou art
but the copy, Job 14. 7.
thou art not so good as it: for, There is hope of a tree (as you read there)
if the root wax old, if the stock be dead, if it be cut down, yet by the sent
of the waters, it will bud, but man is sick, and dies, and where is he? he
shall not wake again, till heaven be no more. Look upon the water, and we are
as that, and as that spilt upon the ground: Look to the earth, and we are not
like that, but we are earth it self: At our Tables we feed upon the dead, and
in the Temple we tread upon the dead: and when we meet in a Church, God has
made many echoes, many testimonies of our death, in the walls, and in the
windows, and he only knows, whether he will not make another testimony of
our mortality, of the youngest amongst us, before we part, and make the very
place of our burial, our deathbed. Jobs contemplation went so far; not only
to a Si occideret, to a possibility that he might dye, but to an Ecce occidet,
to an assurance that he must dye; I know there is an infalliblenesse in the
Decree, an inevitableness in nature, an inexorablenesse in God, I must dye.
And the word bears a third interpretation beyond this; for si occiderit, is
not only, if he should kill me, as he man, if he will, and it may be he will;
nor only, that I am sure he will kill me, I know I must dye, but the word may
very well be also, though he have killed me. So that Jobs resolution that he
will trust in God, is grounded upon all these considerations, That there is
exercise of our hope in God, before death, in the agony of death, and after
death. First, in our good days, and in the time of health, Memorare novissima,
says the wise man, we must remember our end, our death. But that we cannot
forget, every thing presents that to us; But his counsel there, is, in omnibus
operibus, In all thine undertakings, in all thine actions, remember thine end;
when thou art in any worldly work, for advancing thy state, remember thy
natural death, but especially when thou art in a sinful work, for satisfying
thy lusts, remember thy spiritual death: Be afraid of this death, Psalm. 120. 5.
and thou will never fear the other: Thou will rather sigh with David, My
soul has too long dwelt with him that hates peace: Thou will be glad when a
bodily death may deliver thee from all farther danger of a spiritual death:
And thou will be ashamed of that imputation, which is laid upon worldly men, by
St. Cyprian, Ad nostros navigamus, and ventos contrarios optamus, we pretend to
be sailing homewards, and yet we desire to have the wind against us; we are
traveling to the heavenly Jerusalem, and yet we are loath to come thither.
Here then is the use of our hope before death, that this life shall be a
gallery into a better room, and deliver us over to a better Country: for, 1.
Cor. 15. 19.
if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most
miserable.

Secondly, in the agony of death; when the Sessions are come, and that as a
prisoner may look from that Tower, and see the Judge that must condemn him to
morrow, come in to night; so we lie upon our deathbed, and apprehend a present
judgment to be given upon us, when, if we will not plead to the Indictment,
if we will stand mute, and have nothing to say to God, we are condemned
already, condemned in our silence; and if we do plead, we have no plea, but
guilty; nothing to say, but to confess all the Indictment against our selves;
when the flesh is too weak, as that it can perform no office, and yet would
feign stay here, when the soul is laden with more sins then she can bear, and
yet would feign contract more; in this agony, there is this use of our hope,
that as God shall then, when our bodily ears are deaf, whisper to our souls,
and say, Memento homo, Remember, consider man, that thou art but dust, and art
now returning into dust, so we, in our hearts, when our bodily tongues are
speechless, may then say to God, as it is in Job, 10.
Memento quaeso, Remember thou also, I beseech thee, O God, that it is thou
that have made me as clay, and that it is thou that bring me to that state
again; and therefore come thou, and look to thine own work; come and let
thy servant depart in peace, in having seen his salvation. My hope before death
is, that this life is the way; my hope at death is, that my death shall be a
door into a better state.

Lastly, the use of our hope, is after death, that God by his promise, has
made himself my debtor, till he restore my body to me again, in the
resurrection: My body has sinned, and he has not redeemed a sinner, he has
not saved a sinner, except he have redeemed and saved my body, as well as my
soul. To those souls that lie under the Altar, and solicit God, for the
resurrection, in the Revelation, God says, 6. 11.
That they should rest for a little season, until their fellow servants, and
their brethren, that should be killed, even as they were, were fulfilled. All
that while, while that number is fulfilling, is our hopes exercised after our
death. And therefore the bodies of the Saints of God, which have been Temples
of the Holy Ghost, when the soul is gone out of them, are not to be neglected,
as a sheath that had lost the knife, as a shell that had spent the kernel; but
as the Godhead did not depart from the dead body of Christ Jesus, then when
that body lay dead in the grave, so the power of God, and the merit of Christ
Jesus, does not depart from the body of man, but his blood lives in our ashes,
and shall in his appointed time, awaken this body again, to an everlasting
glory.

Since therefore Job had, and we have this assurance before we dye, when we
dye, after we are dead, it is upon good reason, that he did, and we do trust in
God, though he should kill us, when he does kill us, after he has killed us.
Especially since it is Ille, He who is spoken of before, Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
he that kills, and gives life, he that wounds, and makes whole again. God
executes by what way it pleases him; condemned persons cannot choose the manner
of their death; whether God kill by sickness, by age, by the hand of the law,
by the malice of man, si ille, as long as we can see that it is he, he that is
Shaddai, Vastator, and Restaurator, the destroyer, and the repairer, howsoever
he kill, yet he gives life too, howsoever he wound, yet he heales too,
howsoever he lock us into our graves now, yet he has the keys of hell, and
death, and shall in his time, extend that voice to us all, Lazare veni for as,
come forth of your putrefaction, to incorruptible glory. Amen.

SERMON XXXI.
Preached at Hanworth, to my Lord of Carlisle, and his company, being the Earls
of Northumberland, and Buckingham, etc. Aug. 25. 1622.
JOE 36. 25. Every man may see it, man may behold it afar off.
THe words are the words of Elihu; Elihu was one of Jobs friends, and a mere
natural man: a man not captivated, not fettered, not enthralled, in any
particular form of Religion, as the Jews were; a man not macerated with the
fear of God; not infatuated with any preconceptions, which Nurses, or
Godfathers, or Parents, or Church, or State had infused into him; not dejected,
not suppled, not matured, not entendred, with crosses in this world, and so
made apt to receive any impressions, or follow any opinions of other men, a
mere natural man; and in the mere use of mere natural reason, this man says
of God in his works, Every man may see it, Man may behold it afar off. It is
the word of a natural man; and the holy Ghost having canonized it, sanctified
it, by inserting it into the book of God, it is the word of God too. Saint
Paul cites sometimes the words of secular Poets; and approves them; and then
the words of those Poets, become the word of God; Elihu speaks, a natural
man, and God speaks, in canonizing his words; and therefore when we speak to
godly men, we are sure to be believed, for God says it; if we were to speak
to natural men only, we might be believed, for Elihu, a natural man, and
wise in his generation, says it, that for God in his works, Every man may see
it, man may behold it afar off.

Be pleased to admit, Divisio.
and charge your memories with this distribution of the words; Let the parts be
but two, so you will be pleased to stoop, and gather, or at least to open your
hands to receive some more (I must not say flowers, for things of sweetness,
and of delight grow not in my ground) but simples rather, and medicinal herbs;
of which as there enter many into good cordials, so in this supreme cordial,
of bringing God into the eyes of man, that every man may see it, men may behold
it afar off, there must necessarily arise many particulars to your
consideration. I threaten you but with two parts; no farther tediousness; but
I ask room for diverse branches; I can promise no more shortness. The first
part is a discovery, a manifestation of God to man; though that be undeniably
true, Psalm. 18. 11.
Posuit tenebra s latibulum, God has made darkness his secret place, yet it
is as true, which proceeds from the same mouth, and the same pen, Amictus
tanquam pallio, 104. 2.
God covers himself with light as with a garment, he will be seen through his
works: As we shall stand naked to one another, and not be ashamed of our scars,
or morphews, in the sight of God, so God stands naked to the eyes of man, and
is not ashamed of that humiliation, Every man may see it, man may behold it
afar off. This proposition, this discovery, will be the first part; and the
other will be a tacit answer, to a likely objection, is not God far off, and
can man see at that distance? yes, he may. Man may behold that afar off. Every
man may see it, man may behold it afar off.

God is the subject of both parts; God alone; one God. But in both parts there
is a Trinity too; three branches in each part; for in each, there is an object,
something to be apprehended; there is a means of apprehending it, it is to be
seen; there is a person enabled to see it, Every man may see it, man may
behold it afar off. But these three are not alike in each part; for in the
first, that object is determined, limited; it is illud; it; God in his works.
In the second, there is no object limited, for it is not illud, but there is
more left to be seen; not only God in his works, as here below, but God in
his glory above; Man may behold, but he does not offer to tell us what; there
is an object, but another object. In the second there is a difference too, in
the means of apprehending: It is but Casah in the first, it is Nibbat in the
second; in that, every man may see, in the other, man may behold. And in the
third, there is also a difference, the man, that may see God, is Adam; Adam is
a man, made of earth, the weakest man, even in nature may see God; but the man
that must behold afar off, is Enoch, and Enoch is homo aeger, a miserable man,
a man that has tasted affliction, and calamity, for that man looks after God
in the next world, and as he feels God with a rod in his hand here, so he
beholds God with a crown in his hand there. And of those sticks of sweet wood,
of those drops of sweet gums, shall we make up this present sacrifice.

In our first part, 1 Part. Illud.
the manifestation of God to man, the first branch is the object, the limited
object, illud, Optus.
Every man may see it; what is that? That which was proposed in the verse
immediately before, Remember that thou magnify his work which men behold;
First, it is a work, and therefore it is made, it has an author, a creator;
and then it is his work, the work of God, and therefore manifests him. It is
a work, a deliberate, not a casual matter, this frame, this world. It is a
work, it was begun, and made up, Epipha.
not an eternal matter, this frame, this world. Epiphanius says well, Omnis
error a caecitate ad vanitatem; that is the progress of error; every error
begins in blindness, and ignorance, but proceeds, and ends, in absurdity, in
frivolousnesse. If men had not put out the light of nature, they might discern
a creation in the world, that that was made, it is a work; but when they do
put out that light, and deny a creation, into what frivolous opinions they
scatter themselves; what contradictory things, men that seem constant, say;
what childish, what ridiculous things, men that seem grave, and sober fathers
in Philosophy, say of this world? when they have said all, this one thing will
destroy all, if the world be eternal, it is God; for whatsoever had no
beginning, whatsoever needed nothing to give it a being, whatsoever was always
of it self, is God. So that to build up their opinions in one part, they
destroy it in another; and to overthrow our Hall, they build up our Chapel;
by denying that the world was made, they imply, they confess a God; for if it
had no Creator, it is no Creature, it is God; so that they lose more then they
gain, and they seek damnation, unthriftily, and perish prodigally; they deny
the Creation, left by the Creation, we should prove God, and their very denial
of a Creation, their making of the world eternal, constitutes it to be God.
They deny any God, and then make a worse God.

This world then is a work, Opus ejus.
a limited, a determined, a circumscribed work; and it is Opus ejus, his work,
says Elihu there. But whose? Will you lay hold upon that? upon that, that Elihu
only says, Remember his work, but names none? But two verses before, (with
which this verse has connection) he does name God. But let the work be whose it
will, whosoever be this He, this He must be God, whosoever gave the first
being to Creatures, must be the Creator. If you will think, that Chance did
it, and fortune, then fortune must be your God; and destiny must be your God,
if you think destiny did it; and therefore you were as good attribute it to
the right God, for a God it must have; if it be a work, it was made, if it be a
Creature, there is a Creator; and if it be his work, that He, must be God, and
there are no more Gods, but one. Every man has a delight, and complacency in
knowledge, and is ashamed of ignorance, even in booklearning: a man would have
a Library pro supellectile; even for a part of furniture, Senec^.
a man would read for Ornament: His house is not well furnished, he is not well
furnished, without books. Many a man, who lets the Bible dust, and rust,
because the Bible has a kind of majesty and prerogative, and command over a
man; it will not be jested withal, it will not be disputed against; a man can
very hardly divest the reverence, that appertains to that book, and therefore
he had rather deal with his fellows, more humane Authors, that will hear
reason, and not bind his faith; many a man can let the Fathers stand, because
they write out of a pious credulity, and such anticipations, and
preconceptions, as the Bible has submitted them under, and captivated them to;
But if thou let the Bible, and Fathers alone, and yet love books, what book
(what kind of book) can thou take into thy hand, that proves not this world
to be Opus, a work, made, and opus ejus, his work made by him, by God? Do
thou love learning, as it is expounded, Cicero.
dilated, by Orators? The Father of Orators testifies, Nihil tam perspicuum,
there is nothing so evident, as that there is a sovereign power, that made,
and governes all. Do thou love learning, as it is contracted, brought to a
quintessence, wrought to a spirit, by Philosophers? the eldest of all them in
that whole book, Quod Deus latens, simul and patens est, testifies all that,
Trismeg.
and nothing but that, that as there is nothing so dark, so there is nothing so
clear, nothing so remote, nothing so near us, as God. Do thou love
learning, as it is sweetened and set to music by Poets? the King of the Poets
testifies the same, Virgil.
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet; that is, a great, an
universal spirit, that moves, a general soul, that inanimates, and agitates
every piece of this world. But Saint Paul is a more powerful Orator, then
Cicero, and he says, The invisible things of God, are seen by things which are
made; and thereby man is made inexcuseable: Moses is an ancienter Philosopher,
Romans 1. 20.
then Trismegistus; and his picture of God, is the Creation of the world. David
is a better Poet then Virgil; and with David, Coeli enarrant, the heavens
declare the glory of God; The power of oratory, in the force of pe^swasion, the
strength of conclusions, in the pressing of Philosophy, the harmony of Poetry,
in the sweetness of composition, never met in any man, so fully as in the
Prophet Esaias, nor in the Prophet Esaias more, then where he says, Levate Oculos,
40. 20.
Lift up your eyes, on high, and behold who has created these things; behold
them, therefore, to know that they are created, and to know who is their
creator. All other authors we distinguish by tomes, by parts, by volumes; but
who knows the volumes of this Author; how many volumes of Spheres involve one
another, how many tomes of Gods Creatures there are? Have thou not room, have
thou not money, have thou not understanding, have thou not leisure, for great
volumes, for the books of heaven, (for the Mathematiques) nor for the books of
Courts, (the Politiques) take but the Georgiques, the consideration of the
Earth, a farm, a garden, nay seven foot of earth, a grave, and that will be
book enough. Goel lower; every worm in the grave, lower, every weed upon the
grave, is an abridgement of all; nay lock up all doors and windows see
nothing but thy self; nay let thy self be locked up in a close prison, that
thou can not see thy self, and do but feel thy pulse; let thy pulse be
intermitted, or stupefied, that thou feel not that, and do but think, and a
worm, a weed, thy self, thy pulse, thy thought, are all testimonies, that
All, this All and all the parts thereof, are opus, a work made, and opus ejus,
his work, made by God. He that made a Clock or an Organ, will be sure to
ingrave his Me fecit, such a man made me; he that builds a fair house, takes
it ill, if a passenger will not ask, whose house is it; he that bred up his
Son to a capacity of noble employments, looks that the world should say, he
had a wise and an honorable Father; Can any man look upon the frame of this
world, and not say, there is a powerful, upon the administration of this
world, and not say, there is a wise and a just hand over it? Thus is the
object, it is but Illud, the world; but such a world, as may well justify Saint
Hieromes translation, who renders it Illum; not only that every man may see
it, the work, the world; but may see him; God in that work.

That Is the object, Vid^re possunt.
not only the work, but the workman, God in the work; and the means is, that
man may see it; that is, by that spectacle, he may see God; what of God? how
much of God? Is it his essence? D^^and.
For that, the resolution of the School is sufficient; Nulla visio naturalis in
terris; no man can see God in this world, and live, but no man can see God in
the next world, and dye, there visio is beatitudo, sight is salvation. Yet,
Nulla visio corporalis in Coelis: These bodily eyes, even then, when they are
glorified, shall not see the Essence of God: our mortal eyes do not see bodies
here; they see no substance, they see only quantities, and dimensions; our
glorified bodily eyes, shall see the glory shed out of God, but the very
essence of God, those glorified bodily eyes shall not see: but the eyes of our
soul, shall be so enlightened, as that they shall see God Sicuti est, even in his
essence, which the best illumined and most sanctified men are very far from in
this life. Now the sight of God in this text, is the knowledge of God, to see
God, is but to know, that there is a God. And can man as a natural man, do
that? See God so, as to know that there is a God? Can he do it? Nay can he
choose but do it? The question has divided the School; those two great,
Boveriax so. 14.
and well known families of the School, whom we call, Thomists, and Scotists:
the first say, that this proposition, Deus est, is per se nota, evident in it
self, and the others deny that. But yet they differ, but thus far, that Thomas
thinks that it is so evident, that man cannot choose but know it, though he
resist it; The other thinks, in it self, it is but so evident, as that a man
may know it, if he employ his natural faculties, without going any farther;
Viderunt.
thus much, indeed, thus little, they differ. Now the holy Ghost is the God of
Peace, and does so far reconcile these two, in this text, as that first in our
reading, it is, That man may see God; and that Scotus does not deny; but in the
Original, in the Hebrew, it is Casu, and Casu is, viderunt: not, every man
may, but every man has seen God: Though it go not absolutely, so far, as
Thomas, every man must, no man can choose but see God, yet it goes so far
further then Scotus, (who ends in every man may) as that it says, every man
has seen God. So that our labor never lies in this, to prove to any man, that
he may see God, but only to remember him that he has seen God: not to make
him believe that there is a God, but to make him see, that he does believe it.
Quid habes, quod non accepisti? And have thou received any thing and not seen,
not known him that gave it? Who has infused comfort into thee, into thy
distresses? Thine own Moral constancy? Who infused that? Who has imprinted
terrors in thee? A dampe in thine own heart? Who imprinted it? Swear to me
now that thou beleevest not in God, and before midnight, thou will tell God,
that thou do; Miserable distemper! not to see God in the light, and see him
in the dark: not to see him at noon, and see him fearfully at midnight: not to
see, where we all see him, in the Congregation, and to see him with terror, in
the Suburbs of despair, in the solitary chamber.

Man may, Omnis home.
says Scotus, man must, he cannot choose, says Thomas, man has seen God,
says the holy Ghost. Man, that is, every man; and that is our last branch in
this first part. The inexcusablenesse goes over man, Romans 1. 20.
over all men: Because they would not see invisible things in visible, they are
inexcusable, all. Death passed upon all men, for all have sinned. 5. 12.
All sinners, all dead. Is Gods right hand shorter then his left? his mercy
shrunk, and his justice stretched? no certainly; certainly every man may see
him. Man cannot hide himself from God; God does not hide himself from man:
not from any man. Col-Adam, Omnis home; even in that low name, that lowest
acceptance of man, as he is but derived from earth, as he is but earth, he may
see God. We have diverse names for man in Hebrew, at least four; This that
makes him but earth, Adam, is the meanest, and yet Col-Adam, Every man may see
God. David calls us to the contemplation of the heavens, 38. 31.
Coeli enarrant, and Job to the contemplation of the firmament, of the
Pleiades, and Orion, and Arcturus, and the ordinances of heaven; but it is not
only the Mathematician, that sees God, Demini terra, the earth is the Lords,
and all that dwell therein; all, Psalm. 107. 23.
in all corners of the earth, may see him. David tells us, They that go down to
the sea, in ships, they see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep:
but it is not only the Mariner, Luke 9. 62.
the discoverer, that discovers God: but he that puts his hand to the plough,
and looks not back, may see God there. Let him be filius terra, the son of
the earth, without noble extraction, without known place, of uncertain
parents, (even Melchisedeck was so) Let him be filius percussionis, the son
of affliction, a man that has inward heavy sentences, and heavy executions of
the law; Let him be filius mortis, Deuteronomy. 25. 2.
the son of death (as Saul said to Jonathan of David) a man designed to dye;
1 Samuel 20. 31.
nay let him be filius Belial, Deuteronomy. 13. 13.
the son of iniquity, and of everlasting perdition, there is no lowness, no
natural, no spiritual dejection so low, but that that low man may see God.
Let him be filius terrae, the son of the earth, and of no body else, let him
be Dominus terrae, Lord of the earth, busied upon the earth, and nothing else,
let him be hospes terrae, a guest, a tenant, an inmate of the earth, half of
him in the earth, and the rest no where else, this poor man, this worldly man,
this dying man, may see God. To end this, you can place the sphere in no
position, in no station, in which the earth can eclipse the Sun; you can place
this clod of earth, man, in no ignorance, in no melancholy, in no oppression,
in no sin, but that he may, but that he does see God. The Marrigold opens to
the Sun, though it have no tongue to say so, the Atheist does see God, though
he have not grace to confess it.

We have past through our first part, 2 Part.
and the three branches of that; The object, God in his works, and the faculty
that apprehends, seeing, that is knowing, and the person endued with the
faculty, every man, even Adam. In our second part, which is a tacit answer to
a likely objection, (Is not God in the highest heaven, afar off? yes; but man
may see afar off) we have the same three branches too, and yet not the same;
the same object, God, but in another manifestation, then in his work, in
glory; the same faculty, seeing, but with other manner of eyes, glorified eyes;
the same person, man, but not man, as he is Adam, a mere natural and earthly
man, but man, as he is Enosh, who by having tasted Gods corrections, or by
having considered the miseries of this world, is prepared for the joy and glory
of the next. And in this part we will begin with the person, man; Man may
behold it afar off.

How different are the ways of God, Enosh.
from the ways of man? the eyes of God from the eyes of man? and the ways, and
eyes of a godly man, from the eyes, and ways of a man of this world? We look
still upon high persons, and after high places, and from those heights, we
think, we see far; but he that will see this object, must lie low; it is best
discerned in the dark, in a heavy, and a calamitous fortune. The natural way
is upward; I can better know a man upon the top of a steeple, then if he were
half that depth in a well; but yet for higher objects, I can better see the
stars of heaven, in the bottom of a well, then if I stood upon the highest
steeple upon earth. If I twist a cable of infinite fadomes in length, if there
be no ship to ride by it, nor anchor to hold by it, what use is there of it? If
Manor thrust Manor, and title flow into title, and bags power out into
chests, if I have no anchor, (faith in Christ) if I have not a ship to carry to
a haven, (a soul to save) what is my long cable to me? If I add number to
number, a span, a mile long, if at the end of all that long line of numbers,
there be nothing that notes, pounds, or crowns, or shillings, what is that long
number, but so many millions of millions of nothing? If my span of life become
a mile of life, my penny a pound, my pint a gallon, my acre a sheere; yet if
there be nothing of the next world at the end, so much peace of conscience, so
much joy, so much glory, still all is but nothing multiplied, and that is still
nothing at all. It Is the end that qualifies all; and what kind of man I shall
be at my end, upon my deathbed, what trembling hands, and what lost legs, what
deaf ears, and what gummy eyes, I shall have then, I know; and the nearer I
come to that disposition, in my life, (the more mortified I am) the better I am
disposed to see this object, future glory. God made the Sun, and Moon, and
Stars, glorious lights for man to see by; but man's infirmity requires
spectacles; and affliction does that office. Gods meaning was, that by the
sunshine of prosperity, and by the beams of honor, and temporal blessings,
a man should see far into him; but I know not how he is come to need
spectacles; scarce any man sees much in this matter, till affliction show it
him. God made the balance even; riches may show God, and poverty may show God;
let the two Testaments, the old and the new, be the balance, and so they are
even; the blessedness of the old Testament runs all upon temporal blessings,
and worldly riches; Blessed in the city, and in the field; blessed in the fruit
of thy cattle, and of thy womb; In the new Testament utterly otherwise;
Blessed are the poor, Blessed are they that mourn, Blessed are they that are
persecuted, and reviled; but the blessedness of the old Testament, temporal
blessings, are temporary, as the old Testament was; that is expired. The
blessedness of the Gospel, is as the Gospel, everlasting: and therefore the
low way is the best way; adversity will be the best way to see God by. I speak
not of mere beggary, of having nothing; but of having less then we had; the
loss of some of that possession, or honor, or wealth, or health, which we
had, conduces more to this sight of God, then the additions of any of these.
Extreme want may put a man out of his way to God, as far as abundance and
superfluity; as we say in civil things, the midde men aise the Subsidy, not
the great men, nor the beggars; so the middle men see farthest into God, and
serve him best; not the abounding, Prove. 30. 8.
not the wanting man. Solomon prays against both; against riches, and against
poverty too; but yet not as though the danger were equal, if the words be well
considered; the danger of his poverty is, lest he steal, and take the Name of
God in vain; that is, forswear the theft; a great fault, two great faults;
but these two amount not to that one, which arises out of abundance, Lest I be
full, and deny thee, and say, Hierome.
Who is the Lord? And that Proverb, that Solomon speaks of, Saint Hierome calls
not, paupertatem, but mendicitatem; and that is often indeed, the mother and
nurse of many enormous mischiefs. Bernard.
Saint Bernard takes the word, poverty, in that place, but he multiplies it,
Paupertates ne dederis, Give me not, O Lord, a double poverty; poverty indeed,
and poverty in opinion; poverty, and a murmurning with my poverty; for that
also is the mother, Phil. 4. 12.
and nurse of many enormous mischiefs. Chrysostom.
I know how to abound, and how to want; It is the harder work, far
abundantiam; abundance is a burden, want is but a weakness; and it is a
greater torment, to be pressed under a great weight, then to lie bedridden. To
end this, the person in our Text is Enosh, man; but not every man, as before,
Adam; but that man upon whom Gods hand has been in the loss of something,
that he had before. As the body of man is mellowed in the grave, and made fit
for glory in the resurrection, so the mind of man by suffering is suppled;
Adam is made Enosh; and he may see.

The person is the same, Intuebitur.
and yet changed; man, but another kind of man; The means of apprehending is
the same, and yet changed too, seeing, but another kind of seeing. This man,
thus disposed, thus matured, thus mellowed, thus suppled, thus entendred by
Gods easy corrections, he whom God has not left to himself, nor yet put him
beyond himself, not fulfilled all, but yet not frustrated all his desires
neither, laid his hand upon him, so as to keep him down from swelling up
against him, but yet so too, as to keep him up, from sinking, or falling from
him, that man, that Enosh may see the hand of God, and take God by the hand,
and bid him welcome, and find a rich, and a sweet advantage in that
correction; it is a seeing of God, not as before, in his works abroad, but in
his working upon himself, at home. Such a man God strikes so, as that when he
strikes, he strikes fire, and lights him a candle, to see his presence by; we
do not find that Job came to his Dominus dedit, to his confession, The Lord
gives, till he came to the Dominus abstulit; to the sense of Gods taking away,
not to express his sense of Gods blessings to him, till he felt his
corrections upon him; and then they came together, Dominus dedit, and abstulit,
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away. Darkness is that, by which the holy
Ghost himself has chosen to express hell; hell is darkness; and the way to
it, to hell, is Excacation in this life, blindness in our spiritual eyes.
Eternal life hereafter is Visio Dei, the sight of God, and the way to that
here, is to see God here: and the eye salve for that is, to be crossed in our
desires in this world, by the hand of God. When Christ presents things
necessary for his service, he proposes them thus; this is his Inventary; Gold
against poverty, white clothes against nakedness, Apo 3. 18.
and collyrium, eye salve to see by. Now for the two first he bids us buy them;
buy-gold, buy clothes, that is, labor, endeavor to get thm; he does not say,
buy the eye salve, that is, affliction; no man is to thrust himself into
unnecessary dangers, or persecutions, and call his indiscretion Martyrdom; It
is to be presumed, that every man, how high or how abundant soever, has eye
salve enough, affliction and crosses enough, if he do apply them: and therefore
Christ does not say, buy them; hunt after them, expose thy self to them; but
he says only, Anoint thy eyes with them, I will give thee the physic,
(crosses and calamities here) do thou apply them according to the nature of the
medicine, and to the purpose of the physician, and by them thou shall see God.

Our translation carries this word no farther in this part of the Text, then
the other in the former; There it was, every man may see; here it is, man, that
is, this man may behold. But as we showed you, that the former was in the
original Casu, viderunt, every man, (let him say what he will to the contrary)
yet he has seen God, so in this part, the word in the original, is Iabbit,
and that is videbit, in the future, he shall see, This sight of God is not in
him, naturally, that we can be sure he has seen him, but it is reserved to the
future; let him be thus wrought upon by Gods hand, and videbit, in the future,
he shall see. Now, you remember what designs the future; he shall see; is a
note of the future, and so is, he will see. This man, this Enosh, thus molded,
thus kneaded, by the hand of God, he shall see God, he shall (in a manner)
whether he will or no, a holy, and a heavenly violence shall be offered him, it
shall not be in the power of the world, the flesh or the devil, to blind him,
he shall see God; and then he will see God, his will shall be inclined, and
disposed to it, and every first beam of Gods grace, every influence of the
Spirit of God, shall open his eyes; God shall be so jealous of him, as that he
shall see God, he shall be so watchful upon God, and his motions, as that he
will see him.

And more then see him; for Iabbit, is Intuebitur, he will behold him,
contemplate God, ruminate, meditate upon God. Man sees best in the light, but
meditates best in the dark; for our sight of God, it is enough, that God gives
the light of nature; to behold him so, as to fix upon him in meditation, God
benights us, or eclipses us, or casts a cloud of medicinal afflictions, and
wholesome corrections upon us. Naturally we dwell longer upon the consideration
of God, when we see the Sun eclipsed, then when we see it rise, we pass by
that as an ordinary thing; and so in our afflictions we stand, and look upon
God, and we behold him. A man may see God, and forget that ever he saw him;
Mat. 25. 44.
When saw we thee hungry, or naked, or sick, or in prison, say those merciless
men; they forgot; but Christ remembers that they did see him, but not behold
him, see him, and look off, see him so as aggravated their sin, more then if
they had never seen him. But that man, who through his own red glass, can
see Christ, in that color too, through his own miseries, can see Christ Jesus
in his blood, that through the calumnies that have been put upon himself, can
see the revilings that were multiplied upon Christ, that in his own
imprisonment, can see Christ in the grave, and in his own enlargement, Christ
in his resurrection, this man, this Enosh, beholds God, and he beholds him e
longinquo, which is another step in this branch, he sees him afar off.

Now this seeing afar off, E longinqu^.
is not a phrase of diminution, a circumstance of extenuation, as though it
were less, to see God afar off, and more to see him nearer. This far off, is
far from that; it is a power of seeing him so, as wheresoever I am, or
wheresoever God is, I can see him at any distance. Being established in my
foundation upon God, being built up by faith, in that notion of God, in which
he has manifested himself to me in his Son, being mounted, and raised by
dwelling in his Church, being made like unto him, in suffering, as he suffered,
I can see round about me, even to the Horizon, and beyond it, I can see both
Hemispheres at once, God in this, and God in the next world too. I can see him,
in the Zenith, in the highest point, and see how he works upon Pharaoh, on the
Throne, and I can see him in the Nadir, in the lowest dejection, and see how he
works upon Joseph in the prison; I can see him in the East, see how mercifully
he brought the Christian Religion amongst us, and see him in the West, see how
justly he might remove that again, and leave us to our own inventions; I can
see him in the South, in a warm, and in the North, in a frosty fortune: I can
see him in all angles, in all postures; Abraham saw God coming to him, as he
fate at the door of his Tent; (...). 18. 1.
and though (as the Text says there) God stood by him, (yet says the Text
too) Abraham ran to meet God; I can see God in the visitation of his Spirit
come to me; and when he is so, he is already in me; but I must run out to meet
him; that is, labor to hold him there, and to advance that manifestation of
himself in me. Abraham saw God coming; Moses saw God going, his glory passing
by; he saw posteriora, Exodus 33. 23.
his hinder parts; so I can see God in the memory of his blessings formerly
conferred upon me; And Moses saw him too, in a burning bush, in thorns and
fire: And had I no other light, but the fire of a pile of faggots, in that
light I could see his light, I could see himself. Let me be the man of this
Text, this Enosh, Lam. 3. 1.
to say with Jeremy, I am the man that has seen affliction, by the rod of his
wrath, Let me have had this third concoction, that as I am Adam, a man of
earth, (wrought upon that wheel) and, as I am a Christian, a vessel in his
house, a member of his Church (wrought upon that wheel) so let me be vir
dolorum, a man of affliction, a vessel baked in that furnace, fitted by Gods
proportion, and dosis of his corrections, to make a right use of his
corrections, and I can see God, E longinquo, afar off, I can see him writing
down my name in the book of life, before I was borne, and I can see him
giving his Angels, The Angel of the great Counsel, Christ Jesus himself, and
his spirit, charge of my preservation, all the way, and of my transmigration
upon my deathbed, and that is E longinquo, from before I was, to after I shall
be no more.

There remains a word more; Objection.
It Is scarce well said; for there remains not a word more. There is not
another word, and yet there is another branch in the Text. This man, (not every
man, as before) this Enosh, (not every Adam as before) he sees not only as
before, but he beholds afar off; and so far we are gone; but what beholds
he afar off? That the Text tells us not. Before there was an illud, Every man
may see that, ask what is that, and I can tell you, I have told you out of the
coherence of the Text, It is Gods works, manifesting himself even to the
natural man. But this man, this Enosh, raised by his dejection, rectified by
humiliation, may behold, what? here is no illud, no such word as that, no
object limited, and therefore it is that which no eye has seen, nor ear
heard, nor heart of man conceived, it is God in the glory, and assembly of his
immortal Saints in heaven. How many times go we to Comedies, to Masks, to
places of great and noble resort, nay even to Church only to see the company?
If I had no other errand to heaven, but the communion of Saints, the fellowship
of the faithful, Lo see that flock of Lambs, Innocent, unbaptized children,
recompensed with the twice-baptized Martyrs, (baptized in water, and baptized
in their own blood) and that middle sort, the children baptized in blood, and
not in the water, that rescued Christ Jesus, by their death, under Herod; to
see the Prophets and the Evangelists, and not know one from the other, by their
writings, for they all write the same things (for prophecy is but antidated
Gospel, and Gospel but postdated prophecy;) to see holy Matrons saved by the
bearing, and bringing up of children, and holy Virgins, saved by restoring
their bodies in the integrity, that they received them, sit all upon one seat;
to see Princes, and Subjects crowned all with one crown, and rich and poor
inherit one portion; to see this scene, this Court, this Church, this
Catholic Church, not only Eastern and Western, but Militant and Triumphant
Church, all in one room together, to see this Communion of Saints, this
fellowship of the faithful, is worth all the pains, that that sight costs us
in this world.

But then to see the head of this Church, the Sun, that shed all these
beams, the God of glory face to face, to see him sicuti est, as he is, to know
him, at cognitus, as I am known, what dark, and inglorious fortune would I
not pass through, to come to that light, and that glory? How then has God
doubled his mercies upon those persons to whom he has afforded two great
lights, a Sun to rule their day, honor and prosperity, and a Moon to rule
their night, humiliation and adversity, to whom he has given both Types, in
themselves, to see this future glory by, that is, Titles and places of honor
in this world, and spectacles in themselves to see this glory by afflictions,
and crosses in this world. And therefore since God gives both these no where so
plentifully, as in Courts the place of Honor, and the place of Crosses too,
the place of rising and the place of falling too, you, you especially, who by
having your station there, in the Court it self, are in the Court exemplified,
and copied in your own noble house, you that have seen God characterized in
his Types, in titles of greatness, you that have beheld God presented in his
spectacle of Crosses and afflictions, the daily bread of Courts, Bless ye the
Lord; praise him, and magnify him for ever, and declare the wondrous works
that he has done for the Sons of men; for certainly many woes, and
invincible darkness attend those, to whom neither the hand of God in his
works, nor the hand of God upon themselves, neither the greatness of this
world, nor the cr^sses of this world, can manifest God; for what picture of God
would they have, that will neither have him in great, nor little?

SERMON XXXII.
Preached to the Earl of Exeter, and his company, in his Chapel at Saint
John's; 13. Iun. 1624.
APOC. 7. 9. After this, I beheld, and lo, a great Multitude, which no man
could number, of all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, and Palms
in their hands.
WE shall have occasion by and by, to say something of the danger of Curiosity,
and something of the danger of the broad way, in which, too many walk: we will
not therefore fall into either of these faults, at first, we will not be over
curious, nor we will not stray, nor cast our selves into that broad, and
boundless way, by entering into those various, and manifold senses, which
Expositors have multiplied, in the handling of this place, and this part of
this book; but we take the plainest way, and that in which, the best meet, and
concur, that these words are spoken of the Joys, and Glory, reserved for them,
who overcome the fraud, and the fury, the allurements, and the violences of
Antichrist; in whom, in that name, and person of Antichrist, we consider all
supplanters, and all seducers, all opposers of the kingdom of Christ, in us;
for, as every man has spontaneum daemonem, (as S. Chrysostom speaks) a
devil of his own making, (which is, some customary, and habitual sin in him)
so every man has spontaneu^ Antichristum, an Antichrist of his own making,
some objections in the weakness of his faith, some oppositions in the
perverseness of his manners, against the kingdom of Christ in himself; and as,
if God would suspend the devil, or slumber the devil a day, I am afraid we
should be as ill that day, as if the devil were awake, and in action, so if
those disputed, and problematical Antichrists, Eastern and Western Antichrist,
Antichrist of Rome, and Antichrist of Constantinople, Turk and Pope, were
removed out of the world, we should not for all that be delivered of
Antichrist, that is, of that opposition to the kingdom of Christ, which is in
our selves. This part of the book of the Revelation, is literally, and
primarily, the glorious victory of them, who, in the later end of the world,
having stood out the persecutions of the Antichrist, enter into the triumph of
heaven: And it extends it self to all, by way of fair accommodation, who after
a battle with their own Antichrists, and victory over their own enemies, are
also made partakers of those triumphs, those joys, those glories, of which S.
John, in this prophetical glass, in this perspective of visions, saw A great
multitude, which no man could number, of all nations etc.

We are then upon the contemplation of the joys of heaven, Divisio:
which are everlasting, and must we wring them into the discourse of an hour?
of the glory of heaven which is entire, and must we divide it into parts? we
must; we will; we do; into two parts; first, the number, the great number of
those that shall be saved; And then, the glorious qualities, which shall be
imprinted on them, who are saved: first, that salvation is a more extensive
thing, and more communicable, then sullen cloystrall, that have walled
salvation in a monastery, or in an ermitage, take it to be; or then the
over-valuers of their own purity, and righteousness, which have determined
salvation in themselves, take it to be; for, It is a great multitude, which no
man can number, of all nations etc. And then, in the second place, salvation is
the possession of such endowments, as naturally invite all, to the prosecution
of that, which is exposed and offered to all; that we all labor here, that we
may all stand hereafter, before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed in
white robes etc.

In the first of these, we shall pass by these steps; first, we shall consider
the sociablenesse, the communicablenesse of God himself, who gives us the
earth, and offers us heaven, and desires to have his kingdom well peopled; he
would have many, he would have all, he would have every one of them have all.
And then, the first word of the text, (After this) will carry us to the
consideration of that which was done before; which was, first, that they which
were of this number, were sealed, and then they which were so sealed before,
were a great number, one hundred forty four thousand; but they who were made
partakers of all this after, were innumerable, After this I beheld a great
multitude, which no man could number; And therefore we shall shut up that first
part with this consideration, what sense, what interpretation may belong unto
those places, where Christ says, that the way to heaven is narrow, and the gate
straight: of these pieces we shall make up our first part; And for the
particulars belonging to the second, we shall fitliest open them, then, when we
come to the handling of them.

Our first step then in this first part, 1 Part.
is, the sociablenesse, the communicablenesse of God; He loves holy meetings,
he loves the communion of Saints, the household of the faithful: Deliciae ejus,
says Solomon, his delight is to be with the Sons of men, and that the Sons of
men should be with him: Religion is not a melancholy; the spirit of God is not
a dampe; the Church is not a grave: it is a fold, it is an Arc, it is a net,
it is a city, it is a kingdom, not only a house, but a house that has many
mansions in it: still it is a plural thing, consisting of many: and very good
grammarians amongst the Hebrews, have thought, and said, that that name, by
which God notifies himself to the world, in the very beginning of Genesis,
which is Elohim, as it is a plural word there, so it has no singular: they
say we cannot name God, but plurally: so sociable, so communicable, so
extensive, so derivative of himself, is God, and so manifold are the beams,
and the emanations that flow out from him.

It is a garden worthy of your walking in it: Come into it, Deus unus.
but by the gate of nature: The natural man had much to do, to conceive God: a
God that should be but one God: and therefore scattered his thoughts upon a
multiplicity of Gods: and he found it, (as he thought) reasonable, to think,
that there should be a God of Justice, a God of Wisdom, a God of Power, and
so made the several Attributes of God, several Gods, and thought that one God
might have enough to do, with the matters of Justice, another with the causes
that belonged to power, and so also, with the courts of Wisdom: the natural
man, as he cannot conceive a vacuity, that any thing should be empty, so he
cannot conceive that any one thing, though that be a God, should fill all
things: and therefore strays upon a pluralty of Gods, upon many Gods, though,
in truth, (as Athanasius expresses it) ex multitudine numinum, nullitas
numinum, he that constitutes many Gods destroys all God; for no God can be God,
if he be not all-sufficient; yet naturally, (I mean in such nature, as our
nature is) a man does not easily conceive God to be alone, to be but one; he
thinks there should be company in the Godhead.

Bring it farther then so. 3 Personae.
A man that lies in the dregs of obscured, and vitiated nature, does not easily
discern, unicum Deum, a God that should be alone, a God that should be but one
God. Reason rectified, (rectified by the word of God) can discern this, this
one God. But when by that means of the Scripture, he does apprehend Deum
unicum, one God; does he find that God alone? are there not three Persons,
though there be but one God? It Is true the Romans mis-took infinitely, in
making 300 Jupiters; Varro mis-took infinitely, in making, Deos terrestres, and
Deos c^les^es, sub-lunary, and super-lunary, heavenly, and earthly Gods, and
Deus marinos, and fluviatiles, Sea Gods, and River Gods, salt, and freshwater
Gods, and Deos mares, and faeminas, he Gods, and she Gods, and (that he might
be sure to take in all) Deos certos and incertos, Gods, which they were sure
were Gods, and Gods which might be Gods, for any thing they knew to the contrary.
There is but one God; but yet was that one God ever alone? There were more
generations (infinitely infinite) before the world was made, then there have
been minutes, since it was made: all that while; there were no creasures; but
yet was God alone, any one minute of all this? was there not alwais a Father and
a Son, and a holy Ghost? And had not they, always an acquiescence in one
another, an exercise of Affection, (as we may so say) a love, a delight, and a
complacency toward one another? So, as that the Father could not be without
the Son and the holy Ghost, so as neither Son, nor holy Ghost could be
without the Father, nor without one another; God was from all eternity
collected into one God, yet from all eternity he derived himself into three
persons: God could not be so alone, but that there have been three persons, as
long as there has been one God.

Had God company enough of himself; Creatio.
was he satisfied in the three Persons? We see he proceeded further; he came to
a Creation; And as soon as he had made light, (which was his first Creature) he
took a pleasure in it; he said it was good; he was glad of it; glad of the Sea,
glad of the Earth, glad of the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and he said of
every one, It is good; But when he had made All, peopled the whole world,
brought all creatures together, then he was very glad, and then he said, not
only, that it was good, but that it was very good: God was so far from being
alone, as that he found not the fullness of being well, till all was made, till
all Creatures met together, in an Host, as Moses calls it, then the good was
extended into very good.

Did God satisfy himself with this visible and discernible world; Angeli.
with all on earth, and all between that, and him? were those four Monarchies,
the four Elements, and all the subjects of those four Monarchies, (if all the
four Elements have Creatures) company enough for God? was that Heptarchie, the
seven kingdoms of the seven Planets, conversation enough for him? Let every
Star in the firmament, be (so some take them to be) a several world, was all
this enough? we see, God drew persons nearer to him, then Sun, or Moon, or
Stars, or any thing, which is visible, and discernible to us, he created
Angels; How many, how great? Arithmetique lacks numbers to to express them,
proportion lacks Dimensions to figure them; so far was God from being alone.

And yet God had not shed himself far enough; he had the Leviathan, Homines.
the Whale in the Sea, and Behemoth and the Elephant upon the land; and all
these great heavenly bodies in the way, and Angels in their infinite numbers,
and manifold offices, in heaven; But, because Angels, could not propagate, nor
make more Angels, he enlarged his love, in making man, that so he might enjoy
all natures at once, and have the nature of Angels, and the nature of earthly
Creatures, in one Person. God would not be without man, nor he would not come
single, not alone to the making of man; but it is Faciamas hominem, Let us, us,
make man; God, in his whole counsel, in his whole College, in his whole
society, in the whole Trinity, makes man, in whom the whole nature of all the
world should meet.

And still our large, and our Communicable God, Christus.
affected this association so, as that having three Persons in himself, and
having Creatures of diverse natures, and having collected all natures in man,
who consisted of a spiritual nature, as well as a bodily, he would have one
liker himself, then man was; And therefore he made Christ, God and Man, in one
person, Creature and Creator together; One greater then the Seraphim, and yet
less then a worm; Sovereign to all nature, and yet subject to natural
infirmities; Lord of life, life, it self, and yet prisoner to Death; Before,
and beyond all measures of Time, and Born at so many months, yet Circumcised
at so many days, Crucified at so many years, Rose again at so many Hours; How
sure did God make himself of a companion in Christ, who united himself, in
his godhead, so inseparably to him, as that that godhead left not that body,
then when it lay dead in the grave, but staid with it then, as closely, as when
he wrought his greatest miracles.

Beyond all this, Ecclesia.
God having thus married soul and body in one man, and man and God, in one
Christ, he mary's this Christ to the Church. Now, consider this Church in the
Type and figure of the Church, the Arc; in the Arc there were more of every
sort of clean Creatures reserved, Genesis 7. 2.
then of the unclean; seven of those, for two of these: why should we fear,
but that in the Church, there are more reserved for salvation then for
destruction? Act. 2. 3.
And into that room (which was not a Type of the Church, but the very Church it
self) in which they all met upon whitsunday, the holy Ghost came so as that
they were enabled, by the gift of tongues, to convay, and propagate, and derive
God, (as they did) to every nation under heaven: so much does God delight in
man, so much does God desire to unite and associate man unto him; and then,
what shall disappoint, or frustrate Gods desires and intentions so far, as
that they should come to him, but singly, one by one, whom he calls, and wooes,
and draws by thousands, and by whole Congregations?

Be pleased to carry your considerations, Quam cito.
upon another testimony of Gods love to the society of man, which is, his
dispatch in making this match, his speed in gathering and establishing this
Church; for, forwardness is the best argument of love, and dilatory
interruptions by the way, argue no great desire to the end; disguises before,
are shrewd prophecies of jealousies after: But God made have to the
consummation of this Marriage, 1. 6.
between Christ and the Church. Such words as those to the Colosrians, (and
such words, that is, words to such purpose, there are diverse) The Gospel is
come unto you, as it is into all the world; 13.
And again; It brings forth fruit, as it does in you also; And so likewise,
The Gospel which is preached to every creature which is under heaven; such
words, I say, a very great part of the Ancients have taken so literally, as
thereupon to conclude, That in the life of the Apostles themselves, the Gospel
was preached, and the Church established over all the world.

Now will you consider also, who did this, what persons? cunning and crafty
persons are not the best instruments in great businesses, Quae Instrumenta.
if those businesses be good, as well as great. Here God employed such persons,
as would not have persuaded a man, that grass was green, that blood was red,
if it had been denied unto them: Persons that could not have bound up your
understanding, with a Syllogism, nor have entendred, or mollified it with a
verse: Persons that had nothing but that which God himself calls the
foolishness of preaching, to bring Philosophers that argued, Heretics that
wrangled, Lucians, and Iulians, men that whet their tongues, and men that whet
their swords against God, to God.

Unbend not this bow, Quae Doctrina.
blacken not these holy thoughts, till you have considered, as well, as how
soon, and by what persons, so to what Doctrine, God brought them. We ask but
St. Augustins question, Quis tantam multitudinem, ad legem, carni and sanguini
centrariam, induceret, nisi Deus? Who but God himself, would have drawn the
world to a Religion so contrary to flesh and blood? Take but one piece of the
Christian Religion, but one article of our faith, in the same Fathers mouth;
Res incredibilis resurrectio; That this body should be eaten by fishes in the
sea, and then those fishes eaten by other men, or that one man should be eaten
by another man, and so become both one man, and then that for all this
assimilation, and union, there should arise two men, at the resurrection, Res
incredibilis, says he, this resurrection is an incredible thing, Sed magis
incredibile, totum mundum credidisse rem tam incredibilem, That all the world
should so soon believe a thing so incredible, is more incredible, then the
thing it self. That any should believe any, is strange, but more that all such
believe all, that appertains to Christianity. The Valentinians, and the
Marcionites, pestilent Heretics, grew to a great number, Sed vix duo vel
tres, de iisdem, eadem docebant, says Irenaeus, scarce any two or three amongst
them, were of one opinion. The Acatians, the Eunomians, and the Macedonians,
omnes Arium parentem agnoscunt, says the same Father, they all call themselves
Arians, but they had as many opinions, not only as names, but as persons. And
that one Sect of Mahomet, Irenaeus.
was quickly divided, and sub-divided into 70 sects. But so God loved the
world, the society and company of good souls, ut quasi una Domus Mundus, the
whole world was as one well governed house; similiter credunt quasi una anima,
all believed the same things, as though they had all but one soul; Constanter
praedicabant, quasi unum os, At the same hour there was a Sermon at Jerusalem,
and a Sermon at Rome, and both so like, for fundamental things, as if they had
been preached out of one mouth.

And as this Doctrine, Durat adbue.
so incredible in reason, was thus soon, and by these persons, thus uniformely
preached over all the world, so shall it, as it does, continue to the worlds
end; which is another argument of Gods love to our company, and of his
loathnesse to lose us. All Heresies, and the very names of the Heretics, are
so utterly perished in the world, as that if their memories were not preserved
in those Fathers which have written against them, we could find their names no
where. Irenaeus, about one hundred and eighty years after Christ, may reckon
about twenty heresies: Tertullian, twenty or thirty years after him, perchance
twenty seven; and Epiphanius, some a hundred and fifty after him, sixty; and
fifty year after that, St. Augustine some ninety: yet after all these, (and
but a very few years, after Augustine) Theodoret says, that in his time,
there was no one man alive, that held any of those heresies: That all those
heresies should rot, being upheld by the sword, and that only the Christian
Religion should grow up, being mowed down by the sword, That one grain of
Corn should be cast away, and many ears grow out of that, (as Leo makes the
comparison) That one man should be executed, because he was a Christian, and
all that saw him executed, and the Executioner himself, should thereupon become
Christians, (a case that fell out more then once, in the primitive Church) That
as the flood threw down the Courts of Princes, and lifted up the Ark of God,
so the effusion of Christian blood, should destroy heresies, and advance
Christianity it self; this is argument abundantly enough, that God had a love
to man, and a desire to draw man to his society, and in great numbers to bring
them to salvation.

I will not dismiss you from this consideration, Reformatio.
till you have brought it thus much nearer, as to remember a later testimony of
Gods love to our company, in the reformation of Religion; A miracle scarce
less, then the first propagation thereof, in the primitive Church. In how few
years, did God make the number of learned ^riters, the number of persons of
all qualities, the number of Kings, in whose Dominions the reformed Religion
was exercised, equal to the number of them, who adhered to the Roman Church?

And yet, Tu ipse.
thou must not depart from this contemplation, till thou have made thy self an
argument of all this; till thou have concluded out of this, that God has made
love to thy soul, thy weak soul, thy sick, and foul, and sinful soul,
That he has written to thee, in all his Scriptures, sent Embassage to thee, in
all his preachers, presented thee, in all his temporal, and spiritual
blessings, That he has come to thee, even in actions of uncle annesse, in
actions of unfaithfulness toward men, in actions of distrustfulnesse toward
God, and has checked thy conscience, and delivered thee from some sins, even
then when thou wast ready to commit them, as all the rest, (That that God, who
is but one in himself, is yet three persons, That those three, who were
allsufficient to themselves, would yet make more, make Angels, make man, make a
Christ, make him a Spouse, a Church, and first propagate that, by so weak men,
in so hard a doctrine, and in so short a space, over all the world, and then
reform that Church again, so soon, to such a height) as these, I say, are
to all the world, so be thou thy self, and Gods exceeding goodness to thee, an
argument, That that God who has showed himself so loath to lose thee, is
certainly loath to lose any other soul; but as he communicates himself to us
all here, so he would have us all partake of his joy, and glory hereafter; he
that fills his Militant Church thus, would not have his Triumphant Church empty.

So far we consider the accessiblenesse, Sigillati.
the communicablenesse, the conversation of our good, and gracious God to us,
in the general. There is a more special manner intimated, even in the first
word of our Text, After this; After what? After he had seen the servants of
God sealed; sealed: This seal seals the contract between God and Man: And
then consider how general this seal is: First, God sealed us, in imprinting
his Image in our souls, and in the powers thereof, at our creation; and so,
every man has this seal, and he has it, as soon as he has a soul: The
wax, the matter, is in his conception; the seal, the form, is in his
quickening, in his inanimation; as, in Adam, the wax was that red earth, which
he was made of, the seal was that soul, that breath of life, which God
breathed into him. Where the Organs of the body are so indisposed, as that this
soul cannot exercise her faculties, in that man, (as in natural Idiots, or
otherwise) there, there is a curtain drawn over this Image, but yet there this
Image is, the Image of God, is in the most natural Idiot, as well as in the
wisest of men: worldly men draw other pictures over this picture, other images
over this image: The wanton man may paint beauty, the ambitious may paint
honor, the covetous wealth, and so deface this image, but yet there this image
is, and even in hell it self it will be, in him that goes down into hell: uri
potest in gehenna, non exuri, says St. Bernard, The image of God may burn in
hell, but as long as the soul remains, that image remains there too; And
then, thou who would not burn their picture, that loved thee, will thou
betray the picture of the Maker, thy Savior, thy Sanctifier, to the torments
of hell? Amongst the manifold and perpetual interpretations of that article,
He descended into hell, this is a new one, that thou sen^est him to hell in thy
soul: Christ had his Consummatum est, from the Jews; he was able to say at
last, All is finished, concerning them; shall he never have a Consummatum est
from thee; never be at an end with thee? Never, if his Image must burn
eternally in thy soul, when thou art dead, for everlasting generations.

Thus then we were sealed; ^ Christo.
all sealed; all had his image in our creation, in the faculties of our souls:
But then we were all sealed again, sealed in our very flesh, our mortal
flesh, when the image of the invisible God, Christ Jesus, the only Son of
God, took our nature: for, as the Tyrant wished, that all mankind were but
one body, that he might behead all mankind at a blow, so God took into his
mercy, all mankind in one person: As entirely, as all mankind was in Adam,
all mankind was in Christ; and as the seal of the Serpent is in all, by
original sin, so the seal of God, Christ Jesus, is on us all, by his
assuming our nature. Christ Jesus took our souls, and our bodies, our whole
nature; and as no Leper, no person, how infectiously soever he be diseased in
his body, can say, surely Christ never took this body, this Leprosy, this
pestilence, this rottenness, so no Leprous soul must say, Christ never took
this pride, this adultery, this murder upon himself; he sealed us all in soul
and body, when he took both, and though both dye, the soul in sin daily, the
body, in sickness, perchance this day, yet he shall afford a resurrection to
both, to the soul here, to the body hereafter, for his seal is upon both.

These two seals then has God set upon us all, In Baptism.
his Image in our souls, at our making, his Image, that is his Son, upon our
bodies and souls, in his incarnation; And both these seals he has set upon
us, then when neither we our selves, nor any body else knew of it: He sets
another seal upon us, when, though we know not of it, yet the world, the
congregation does, in the Sacrament of Baptism, when the seal of his Cross,
is a testimony, not that Christ was borne, (as the former seal was) but that
also he dyed for us; there we receive that seal upon the forehead, that we
should conform our selves to him, who is so sealed to us. And after all these
seals, he offers us another, C^^. 8. 6.
and another seal, Set me as a seal upon thy heart, and as a seal upon thine
arm, says Christ to all us, in the person of the spouse; in the Heart, by a
constant faith, in the Arm, by a declaratory works; for then are we sealed,
and delivered, and witnessed; that is our full evidence, then have we made sure
our salvation, when the works of a holy life, do daily refresh the contract
made with God there, at our Baptism, and testify to the Church, that we do
carefully remember, what the Church promised in our behalf, at that time: for,
otherwise beloved, without this seal upon the arm, that is, a steadfast
proceeding in the works of a holy life, we may have received many of the other
seals, and yet deface them all. Ephesians. 4. 30.
Grieve not the holy Ghost, whereby you are sealed, unto the day of Redemption,
says the Apostle: they were sealed, and yet might resist the Spirit, and grieve
the Spirit, and quench the Spirit, if by a continual watchfulness over their
particular actions, they did not refresh those seals (formerly received in
their Creation, in Christ's incarnation, in their Baptism, and in their
beginnings of faith) to themselves, and plead them to the Church, and to the
world, by such a declaration of a holy life. But these seals being so many,
and so univesall, that argues still, that which we especially seek to
establish, that is, the Accessiblenesse, the communicablenesse, the
sociablenesse, the affection, (shall I say) the Ambition, that God has, to
have us all.

Now how is this extensivenesse declared here, Ante.
in our text? It is declared in the great number of those who were sealed, both
before, and after; to the consideration of both which, we are invited, by this
phrase, which begins the text, After this: for, before that John saw this,
there were one hundred forty four thousand sealed; Is that then, (that one
hundred forty four thousand) intended for a small number? If it had been so,
it would rather have been said, of such a Tribe but twelve thousand, and but
twelve thousand of such a Tribe; but God as expressing a joy, that there were
so many, repeats his number of twelve thousand, twelve times over, of Judah
twelve thousand, of Levi twelve thousand, and twelve thousand of every Tribe.
So that then, we may justly take this number of twelve and twelve thousand, for
an indefinite, and uncertain number; and as Saint Augustine does, wheresoever
he finds that number of twelve, (as the twelve Thrones, where the Saints shall
judge the world, and diverse such) we may take that number of twelve, and
twelve, pro universitate salvandorum, that that number signifies, all those who
shall be saved. If we should take the number to be a certain and exact number,
so many, and no more, yet this number has relation to the Jews only; And of
the Jews, it is true, that there is so long a time of their exclusion, so few
of them do come in, since Christ came into the world, as that we may, with
Saint Augustine, 22. 17.
interpret that place of Genesis, where Abraham's seed is compared both to the
Stars of heaven, and to the dust of the earth, that the Stars of heaven
signify those that shall be saved in heaven, and the dust of the earth, those
that perish; and the dust of the earth may be more then the Stars of heaven;
though (by the way) there are an infinite number of Stars more then we can
distinguish, and so, by Gods grace, there may be an infinite number of souls
saved, more then those, of whose salvation, we discern the ways, and the
means. Let us embrace the way which God has given us, which is, the knowledge
of his Son, Christ Jesus: what other way God may take with others, how he
wtought upon Job, and Naaman, and such others as were not in the Covenant, let
us not inquire too curiously, determine too peremptorily, pronounce too
uncharitably: God be blessed, for his declaring his good-wil toward us, and
his will be done his way upon others. Truly, even those places, which are
ordinarily understood of the pa^city of the Jews, that shall be saved, will
receive a charitable interpretation, and extension. God says, 3. 17.
in Jeremy, I will take you, one out of a City, and two out of a family; yet he
says, he will do this therefore, because he is married to them; so that this
seems to be an act of his love; And therefore, I had rather take it, that God
would take a particular care of them, one by one, 27. 12.
then that he would take in but one and one: As it is in that place of Esaias, In
that day ye shall be gathered one by one, o ye children of Israel; that is, in
the day of Christ, of his coming to and toward Judgment; Howsoever they come
in but thinly yet, by the way, Romans 11. 1.
yet the Apostle pleads in their behalf thus, Has God cast away his people?
God forbid. At this present, 5.
says he, there is a Remnant; then when they had newly crucified Christ, God
had a care of them. God has given them the spirit of slumber, 8.
says he also; it is but a slumber, not a death, not a dead sleep. Have they
stumbled that they should fall? Fall utterly? God forbid. But says he, as
concerning the Gospel, they are enemies, for your sakes; (that is, that room
might be made for you the Gentiles) but, as touching election, they are beloved
for their Fathers sakes; that is, they have interest by an ancient title, which
God will never disannull. And therefore a great part, of the ancient, and later
men too, do interpret diverse passages of Saint Paul, of a general salvation
of the Jews, that all shall be effectually wrought upon, to salvation, before
the second coming of Christ. I end this, concerning the Jews, with this note,
that in all these Tribes, which yielded to this sealing, twelve thousand a
piece, the Tribe of Dan is left out, it is not said, that any were sealed of
the Tribe of Dan; many have enquired the reason, and satisfied themselves over
easily with this, that because Antichrist was to come of that Tribe, that Tribe
is forsaken. It is true, that very many of the Fathers, Irenaeus, Ambrose,
Augustine, Gregory, (and more then these) have thought so, that Antichrist must
be of that Tribe; but yet for all that profession, which they make in the Roman
Church, Tostat.
of adhering to the Fathers, one amongst them, says, Incertum, be the Fathers
as clear, and as unanimous as they will in it, it is a very uncertain, a very
disputable thing; and another says, fabulosum est, be the Fathers as earnest,
as they will, it is but a poetical and a fabulous thing, Oleast.
that Antichrist must come of the Tribe of Dan. But he that has most of the
works of Antichrist upon him, of any person in the world now, is thus far of
the Tribe of Dan; Dan signifies Judgment; And he will needs be the Judge of
all faith, and of all actions too, and so severe a Judge, as to give an
irrevocable Judgment of Damnation, upon all that agree not with them, in all
points. Certainly this Tribe of Dan, that is, of such uncharitable Judges of
all other men, that will afford no salvation to any but themselves, are in the
greatest danger to be left out, at this general seal; nothing hinders our own
salvation more, then to deny salvation, to all but our selves.

This then which was done before, Christiani.
though it concern but the Jews, was in a great number, and was a great
argument, of Gods sociable application of himself to man, but that which was
after, was more, A great multitude, which no man could number, of all nations
etc. Gods mercy was not confined, nor determined upon the Jews; Other sheep
have I, which are not of this fold, says Christ, them also I must bring in: I
must; it is expressed, not only as an act of his good will, but of that
eternal decree, to which, he had, at the making thereof, submitted himself: I
must bring them; who are they? Many shall come from the east, Mat. 8. 11.
and from the west, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isacc, and Jacob, in the
kingdom of heaven; from the Eastern Church, and from the WesterN Church too,
from the Greek Church, and from the Latin too, and, (by Gods grace) from them
that pray not in Latin too, from every Church, (so it be truly, and
fundamentally a Church) Many shall come; How many? a multitude that no man can
number: For, 23. 12^
the new Jerusalem, in the Revelation, (which is heaven) has twelve gates,
three to every corner of the world; so that no place can be a stranger, or
lack access to it: Nay, it has (says that Text) twelve foundations, Other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, Christ Jesus: But that
first foundation-stone being kept, though it be not hewed, nor laid alike in
every place, though Christ be not preached, nor presented in the same manner,
for outward Ceremonies, or for problematicall opinions, yet the foundation may
remain one, though it be, in such a sort, varied; and men may come in at any
of the twelve gates, and rest upon any of the twelve foundations, for they are
all gates, and foundations of one and the same Jerusalem; and they that enter,
are a multitude that no man can number.

If then there be this sociable, Via angusta.
this applyable nature in God, this large and open entrance for man, why does
Christ call it a strait gate, and a narrow way? Not that it is strait in it
self, Mat. 7. 13.
but that we think it so, and, indeed, we make it so. Christ is the gate, and
every wound of his admits the whole world. The Church is the gate; And in omnem
terram, Psalm. 119. 96.
says David, she has opened her mouth, and her voice is gone over all the
world. His word is the gate; And, thy Commandment is exceeding broad, says
David too; His word and his light reaches to all cases, and all distresses.
Lata porta Diabolus; says Saint Chrysostom, The Devil is a broad gate; but
he tells us how he came to be so, Mon magnitudine potestatis extensus, sed
superbiae licentia dilatatus; not that God put such a power into his hands, at
first, as that we might not have resisted him, but that he has usurped upon
us, and we have given way to his usurpations: so, says that Father, Angusta
porta Christus, Christ is a narrow gate, but he tells us also wherein, and in
what respect, Non parvitate potestatis exiguus, sed humilitatis ratione
collectus; Christ is not a narrow gate, so as that the greatest man may not
come in, but called narrow, because he fits himself to the least child, to the
simplest soul, that will come in: not so strait, as that all may not enter,
but so strait as that there can come in but one at once, for he that will not
forsake Father and Mother, and wife, and children for him, cannot enter in.
Therefore we call the Devils way broad, because men walk in that, with all
their equipage, all their sumpters, all their state, all their sins; and
therefore we call Christ's way strait, because a man must strippe himself of
all inordinate affections, of all desires of ill getting, and of all
possessions that are ill gotten. In a word, it is not strait to a man's self,
but if a man will carry his sinful company, his sinful affections with him,
and his sinful possessions, it is strait, for then he has made himself a
Camel, and to a Camel Heaven gate is as a needles eye: But it is better coming
into heaven with one eye, Mat. 18. 9.
then into hell with two; Better coming into heaven without Master, or
Mistress, Esac. 6^. 11.
then into hell for over-humouring of either. There, The gates are not shut all
day; says the Prophet, and, there is no night there; And here, if we shut the
door, yet Christ stands at the door and knocks; Apoc. 3.
Be but content to open thy door, be but content to let him open it, and he
will enter, and be but thou content to enter into his, content to be led in by
his preaching, content to be drawn in by his benefits, content to be forced in
by his corrections, and he will open his: since thy God would have dyed for
thee, if there had been no man born but thou, never imagine, that he who lets
in multitudes, which no man can number, of all Nations, etc. would ever shut
out thee, but labor to enter there; August.
ubi non intrat inimicus, ubi non exit amicus, where never any that hates thee,
shall get to thee, nor any that loves thee, part from thee.

We have but ended our first part, 2 Part.
The assurance which we have from Gods manner of proceeding, that Religion is
not a sullen, but a cheerful Philosophy, and salvation not cast into a corner,
but displayed as the Sun, over all. That which we called at first, our second
part, must not be a Part, admit it for a Conclusion; It is that, and beyond
that; It is beyond our Conclusion, for it is our everlasting endowment in
heaven: and if I had kept minutes enough for it, who should have given me words
for it? I will but paraphrase the words of the Text, and so leave you in that,
which, I hope, is your gallery to heaven, your own meditations: The words are,
You shall stand before the Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white
Fobes, and palms in their hands.

First, Stabunt.
stabitis, you shall stand; which is not, that you shall not sit, for the
Saints shall sit and judge the world; and they shall sit at the right hand of
God^ It is not, that you shall not sit, nor that you shall not lie, for you
shall lie in Abraham bosom: But yet you shall stand, that is, you shall stand
sure, you shall never fall, you shall stand, but yet you shall but stand, that
is, remain in a continual disposition and readiness to serve God, and to
minister to him. And therefore account no abundance, no height, no birth, no
place here, to exempt you from standing and laboring in the service of God,
since even your glorious state in heaven is but a station, but a standing in
readiness to do his will, and not a posture of idleness: you shall stand,
that is, stand sure, but you shall but stand, that is, still be bound to the
service of God.

Stabitis ante Thronum; Ante Thronum.
you shall stand, and stand before the Throne; Here in the militant Church, you
stand, but you stand in the porch, there, in the triumphant, you shall stand in
Sancto sanctorum, in the Quire, and the Altar. Here you stand, but you stand
upon Ice, perchance in high and therefore in slippery places; And at the
judgment you shall stand, but stand at the bar; But when you stand before
the Throne, you stand, (as it is also added in this place) before the Lamb:
Ante Agnum.
who having not opened his mouth, to save his own fleece, when he was in the
shearers hand, nor to save his own life, when he was in the slaughterers hand,
will much less open his mouth to any repentant sinners condemnation, or
upbrayd you with your former crucifyings of him, in this world, after he has
nailed those sins to that cross, to which those sins nailed him.

You shall stand amicti stolis, Stolis.
(for so it follows) covered with Robes, that is, covered all over: not with
Adams fragmentary rags of fig-leafes, nor with the halfe-garments of David's
servants: Though you have often offered God halfe-confessions, and
halferepentances, yet if you come at last, to stand before the Lamb, his
fleece covers all; he shall not cover the sins of your youth, and leave the
sins of your age open to his justice, nor cover your sinful actions, and
leave your sinful words and thoughts open to justice, nor cover your own
personal sins, and leave the sins of your Fathers before you, or the
sins of others, whose sins your tentations produced and begot, open to
justice; but as he has enwrapped the whole world in one garment, the
firmament, and so clothed that part of the earth, which is under our feet, as
gloriously as this, which we live, and build upon: so those sins which we
have hidden from the world, and from our own consciences, and utterly
forgotten, either his grace shall enable us, to recollect, and to repent in
particular, or (we having used that holy diligence, to examine our consciences
so) he shall wrap up even those sins, which we have forgot, and cover all,
with that garment of his own righteousness, which leaves no foulness, no
nakedness open.

You shall be covered with Robes, Albis.
All over; and with white Robes; That as the Angels wondered at Christ coming
into heaven, Esa. 93. 2.
in his Ascension, Wherefore art thou red in thine Apparel, and thy garments
like him that treads the wine fat? They wondered how innocence it self should
become red, so shall those Angels wonder at thy coming thither, and say,
Wherefore art thou white in thine apparel? they shall wonder how sin it
self shall be clothed in innocence.

And in thy hand shall be a palm, which is the last of the endowments specifyed
here. After the waters of bitterness, Palma.
they came to seventy (to innumerable) palms; even the bitter waters were
sweetened, with another wood cast in: The wood of the Cross of Christ Jesus,
Exodus 15. 23.
refreshes all tears, and sweetness all bitterness, even in this life: but
after these bitter waters, which God shall wipe from all our eyes, we come, to
the seventy, to the seventy thousand palms; infinite seals, infinite
testimonies, infinite extensions, infinite durations of infinite glory: Go in,
beloved, and raise your own contemplations, to a height worthy of this glory;
and chide me for so lame an expressing of so perfect a state, and when the
abundant spirit of God has given you some measure, of conceiving that glory
here, Almighty God give you, and me, and all, a real expressing of it, by
making us actual possessors of that Kingdom, which his Son, our Savior
Christ Jesus has purchased for us, with the inestimable price of his
incorruptible blood. Amen.

SERMON XXXIII.
Preached at Denmark house, some few days before the body of King James, was
removed from thence, to his burial, Apr. 26. 1625.
CANT. 3. 11. Go forth ye Daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon, with the
Crown, wherewith his mother crowned him, in the day of his espousals, and in
the day of the gladness of his heart.
IN the Creation of man, in that one word, Faciamus, let Us make man, God gave
such an intimation of the Trinity, as that we may well enlarge, and spread, and
paraphrase that one word, so far, as to hear therein, a council of all the
three Persons, agreeing in this gracious design upon Man, faciamus, let us
make him; make and him, mend him, and make him sure: I, the Father, will make
him by my power; if he should fall, Thou the Son shall repayr him, re-edify
him, redeem him; if he should distrust, that this Redemption belonged not to
him, Thou, the Holy Ghost, shall apply to his particular soul, and conscience,
this mercy of mine, and this merit of the Sons; and so let us make him. In
our Text there is an intimation of another Trinity. The words are spoken but by
one, but the persons in the text, Divisio.
are Three; For first, The speaker, the Director of all, is the Church, the
spouse of Christ, she says, Go forth ye daughters of Sion; And then the
persons that are called up, are, as you see, The Daughters of Sion, the
obedient children of the Church, that hearken to her voice: And then lastly,
the persons upon whom they are directed, is Solomon crowned, That is, Christ
invested with the royal dignity of being Head of the Church; And in this,
especially, is this applyable to the occasion of our present meeting (All our
meetings now, are, to confess, to the glory of God, and the rectifying of our
own consciences, and manners, the uncertainty of the prosperity, and the
assuredness of the adversity of this world) That this Crown of Solomon's in the
text, will appear to be Christ's crown of Thorns, his Humiliation, his Passion;
and so these words will dismiss us in this blessed consolation, That then we
are nearest to our crown of Glory, when we are in tribulation in this world,
and then enter into full possession of it, when we come to our dissolution and
transmigration out of this world: And these three persons, The Church, that
calls, The children that hearken, and Christ in his Humiliation, to whom they
are sent, will be the three parts, in which we shall determine this Exercise.

First then, 1 Part.
the person that directs us, is The Church; no man has seen God, and lives;
but no man lives till he have heard God; Ecclesia.
for God spoke to him, in his Baptism, and called him by his name, then. Now,
as it were a contempt in the Kings house, for any servant to refuse any thing,
except he might hear the King in person command it, when the King has already
so established the government of his house, as that his commandments are to be
signified by his great Officers: so neither are we to look, that God should
speak to us mouth to mouth, spirit to spirit, by Inspiration, by Revelation.
for it is a large mercy, that he has constituted an Office, and established a
Church, in which we should hear him. When Christ was baptized by John, it is
said by all those three Evangelists, that report that story, in particular
circumstances, that there was a voice heard from heaven saying, This is my
beloved Son in whom I am well pleased: and it is not added in any of those
three Evangelists, that that voice added, Hear him: for, after that
Declaration, that he, who was visibly and personally come amongst them, was the
Son of God, there was no reason to doubt of men's willingness to hear him,
who went forth in person, to preach unto them, in this world; As long as he was
to stay with them, it was not likely that they should need provocation, to hear
him, therefore that was not added at his Baptism, and entrance into his
personal ministry: But when Christ came to his Transfiguration, which was a
manifestation of his glory, in the next world, and an intimation of the
approaching of the time of his going away, to the possession of that glory, out
of this world, there that voice from heaven says, Mat. 17. 5.
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him: When he was
gone out of this world, men needed a more particular solicitation to hear him;
for how, and where, and in whom should they hear him, when he was gone? In the
Church, for the same testimony that God gave of Christ, to authorize and
justify his preaching, has Christ given of the Church, to justify her power:
The holy Ghost fell upon Christ, at his Baptism, and the holy Ghost fell upon
the Apostles, (who were the representative Church) at Whitsontide: The holy
Ghost tarried upon Christ then, and the holy Ghost shall tarry with the Church,
usque ad consummationem, till the end of the world, And therefore, as we have
that institution from Christ, Dic Ecclesiae, when men are refractary and
perverse, to complain to the Church, so have they who are complained of to the
Church, that institution from Christ also, Audi Ecclesiam, Hearken to the voice
of God, in the Church; and they have from him that commination, If you disobey
them, you disobey God; in what fetters soever they bind you, you shall rise
bound in those fetters; and, as he who is excommunicated in one Diocese, should
not be received in another; so let no man presume of a better state, in the
Triumphant Church, then he holds in the Militant, or hope for communion there,
that despises excommunication here. That which the Scripture says, God says,
(says St. Augustine) for the Scripture is his word; and that which the Church
says, the Scriptures say, for she is their word, they speak in her; they
authorize her, and she explicates them; The Spirit of God inanimates the
Scriptures, and makes them his Scriptures, the Church actuates the Scriptures,
and makes them our Scriptures: Nihil salubrius, says the same Father, There is
not so wholesome a thing; no soul can live in so good an air, and in so good a
diet, Quam ut Rationem praecedat authoritas, Then still to submit a man's own
particular reason, to the authority of the Church expressed in the Scriptures:
For, certainly it is very truly (as it is very usefully) said by Calvin, Semper
nimia morositas, est ambitiosa, A frowardness, and an aptness to quarrel at
the proceedings of the Church, and to be delivered from the obligations, and
constitutions of the Church, is ever accompanied with an ambitious pride, that
they might enjoy a licentious liberty; It is not because the Church does truly
take too much power, but because they would be under none; it is an ambition,
to have all government in their own hands, and to be absolute Emperors of
themselves, that makes them refractary: But, if they will pretend to believe in
God, they must believe in God so, as God has manifested himself to them, they
must believe in Christ; so if they will pretend to hear Christ, they must
hear him there, where he has promised to speak, they must hear him in the
Church.

The first reason then in this Trinity, 2 Part.
the person that directs, is the Church; the Trumpet in which God sounds his
Judgments, and the Organ, in which he delivers his mercy; And then the persons
of the second place, the persons to whom the Church speaks here, are Filiae
Sion, The daughters of Sion, her own daughters. We are not called, Filii
Ecclesiae, sons of the Church: The name of sons may imply more virility,
more manhood, more sense of our own strength, then becomes them, who profess
an obedience to the Church: Therefore, as by a name, importing more facility,
more supplenesse, more application, more tractablenesse, she calls her
children, Daughters. But then, being a mother, and having the dignity of a
Parent upon her, she does not proceed supplicatorily, she does not pray them,
nor entreat them, she does not say, I would you would go forth, and I would you
would look out, but it is Egredimini, and videte, imperatively,
authoritatively, Do it, you must do it: So that she shows, what, in important
and necessary cases, the power of the Church is, though her ordinary
proceedings, by us, and our Ministry, be, To pray you, in Christ's stead, to be
reconciled to God. In your baptism, your souls became daughters of the
Church; and they must continue so, as long as they continue in you; you cannot
divest your allegiance to the Church, though you would; no more then you can to
the State, to whom you cannot say, ^ will be no subject. A father may
dis-inherit his son, upon reasons, but even that dis-inherited child cannot
renounce his father. That Church which conceived thee, in the Covenant of God,
made to Christians, and their seed, and brought thee forth in baptism, and
brought thee up in catechizing, and preaching, may yet, for thy misdemeanor to
God in her; separate thee, a Mensa and Toro, from bed and board; from that
sanctuary of the soul, the Communion Table, and from that Sanctuary of the
body, Christian burial, and even that Christian burial gives a man a good
rise, a good help, a good advantage, even at the last resurrection, to be laid
down in expectation of the Resurrection, in holy ground, and in a place
accustomed to Gods presence, and to have been found worthy of that Communion of
Saints, in the very body, is some earnest, and some kind of first fruits, of
the joyful resurrection, which we attend: God can call our dead bodies from
the sea, and from the fire, and from the air, for every element is his; but
consecrated ground is our element. And therefore you daughters of Sion, holy
and religious souls, (for to them only this indulgent mother speaks here)
hearken ever to her voice; quarrel not your mothers honor, nor her discretion:
Despise not her person, nor her apparel; Do not say, she is not the same
woman, she was heretofore, nor that she is not so well dressed, as she was
then; Dispute not her Doctrine, Despise not her Discipline; that as you sucked
her breasts in your Baptism, and in the other Sacrament, when you entered, and
whilst you stayed in this life, so you may lie in her bosom, when you go out
of it. Hear her; and a good part of that, which you are to hear from her, is
envolv'd and inwrapped in that which we have proposed to you, for our third part,
Go forth, and behold Solomon, etc.

Here are two duties enjoined; at least two steps, 3 Part.
two degrees; Egredimini, Go forth, and then, Videte, Behold, contemplate; And,
after the duty, or wrapped in the duty, we have the Object, which we are to look
upon, and in that, diverse things to be considered; as we shall see in their
order. Egredimini.
First, when we are bid to Go forth, it is not to go so far, as out of that
Church, in which God has given us our station; for, as Moses says, That the
word of God is not beyond Sea; so the Church of God, is not so beyond Sea, as
that we must needs seek it there, either in a painted Church, on one side, or
in a naked Church, on another; a Church in a Dropsy, overflowne with
Ceremonies, or a Church in a Consumption, for want of such Ceremonies, as the
primitive Church found useful, and beneficial for the advancing of the glory
of God, and the devotion of the Congregation. That which Christ says to the
Church it self, the Church says to every soul in the Church: Go thy way
forth, Cant. 1. 8.
by the footsteps of the flock; Associate thy self to the true shepherd, and
true sheep of Christ Jesus, and stray not toward Idolatrous Chapels, nor
toward schismatic Conventicles, but go by the footsteps of the flock;
there must be footsteps, some must have gone that way before, take heed of
Opinions, that begin in thy self; and the whole flock must have gone that way,
take heed of opinions vented by a few new men, which have not had the
establishment of a Church. And truly the best way to discern footsteps, is
Daniels way, Daniels way was to straw ashes, and so their footsteps that had
been there, were easily discerned: Walk in thine own ashes, in the meditation
of thine own death, or in the ashes of Gods Saints, who are dead before thee,
in the contemplation of their example, and thou will see some footsteps of the
flock, some impressions, some directions, how they went, and how thou art to
follow, to the heavenly Jerusalem. In conversing evermore, with them which
tread upon Carpets, or upon Marbles, thou shall see no footsteps, Carpets and
Marbles receive no impressions; Amongst them that tread in ashes, in the ways
of holy sorrow, and religious humiliation, thou shall have the way best marked
out unto thee. Go forth, that is, go farther then thy self, out of thy
self; at least out of the love of thy self, for that is but a short, a giddy,
a vertiginous walk how little a thing is the greatest man? If thou have many
rooms in thy self, many capacities to contemplate thy self in, if thou walk
over the consideration of thy self, as thou have such a title of Honor, such
an Office of Command, such an Inheritance, such a pedigree, such a posterity,
such an Alliance, if this be not a short walk, yet it is a round walk, a
giddy, a vertiginous proceeding. Get beyond thine own circle; consider thy
self at thine end, at thy death, and then Egredere, Go further then that, Go
forth and see what thou shall be after thy death.

Still that which we are to look upon, Videte.
is especially our selves, but it is our selves, enlarged and extended into the
next world; for till we see, what we shall be then, we are but short-sighted.
Would thou say, thou knew'st a man, because thou had seen him in his
Cradle? no more can thou be said, to have known thy self, because thou
know the titles, and additions, which thou have received in this world; for
all those things which we have here, are but swaddling clouts, and all our
motions, and preferments, from place, to place, are but the rocking of a
cradle. The first thing that Christ says to his spouse in the Canticles, is, If
thou know not thy self, 1. 8.
(for so all the Ancients read it, and so the Original bears it) If thou know
not thy self, O thou fairest of women; she might know, that she was the
fairest of women, and yet not know her self; Thou may know, that thou art
the happyest of men, in this world, and yet not know thy self. All this life is
but a Preface, or but an Index and Repertory to the book of life; There, at
that book begins thy study; To grow perfect in that book, to be daily
conversant in that book, to find what be the marks of them, whose names are
written in that book, and to find those marks, ingenuously, and in a rectified
conscience, in thy self, To find that no murmuring at Gods corrections, no
disappointing of thy hopes, no interrupting of thy expectations, no frustrating
of thy possibilities in the way, no impatience in sickness, and in the agony
of death, can deface those marks, this is to go forth, and see thy self,
beyond thy self, to see what thou shall be in the next world. Now, we cannot
see our own face, without a glass: and therefore in the old Temple, Exodus 38.
8.
In, or about that laver of brass, where the water, for the uses of the Church
was reserved, Moses appointed looking-glasses to be placed; that so, at the
entering into the Temple, men might see themselves, and make use of that water,
if they had contracted any foulness, in any part about them. Here, at your
coming hither now, you have two glasses, wherein you may see your selves from
head to foot; One in the Text, your Head, Christ Jesus, represented unto you,
in the name and person of Solomon, Behold King Solomon crowned, etc. And
another, under your feet, in the dissolution of this great Monarch, our Royal
Master, now laid lower by death then any of us, his Subjects and servants.

First then, behold your selves in that first glass, Behold King Solomon;
Solomon the son of David, Solomon.
but not the Son of Bathsheba, but of a better mother, the most blessed Virgin
Mary. For, Solomon, in this text, is not a proper Name, but an Appellative; a
significative word: Solomon is pacificus, the Peacemaker, and our peace is made
in, and by Christ Jesus: and he is that Solomon, whom we are called upon to see
here. Now, as Saint Paul says, that he would know nothing but Christ, (that is
his first abridgement) and then he would know nothing of Christ, but him
crucified, (and that is the re-abridgement) so we seek no other glass, to see
our selves in, but Christ, nor any other thing in this glass, but his
Humiliation. What need we? Even that, his lowest humiliation, his death, is
expressed here, in three words of exaltation, It is a Crown, it is a Marriage,
it is the gladness of heart: Behold King Solomon crowned, etc.

The Crown, which we are called to see him crowned with, his mother put upon
him; The Crown which his Father gave him, Corona.
was that glory, wherewith he was glorified, with the Father, from all
eternity, in his divine nature: And the Crown wherewith his Father crowned his
Humane nature, was the glory given to that, in his Ascension. His Mother could
give him no such Crown: she her self had no Crown, but that, which he gave
her. The Crown that she gave him, was that substance, that he received from
her, our flesh, our nature, our humanity; and this, Athanasius, and this, Saint
Ambrose, calls the Crown, wherewith his Mother crowned him, in this text, his
infirm, his humane nature. Or, the Corwn wherewith his Mother corwned him, was
that Crown, to which, that infirm nature which he took from her, submitted
him, which was his passion, his Crown of thorns; for so Tertullian, and diverse
others take this Crown of his, from her, to be his Crown of thorns: Woe to the
Crown of pride, whose beauty is a fading flower, says the Prophet; Esa. 28. 1.
But blessed be this Crown of Humiliation, whose flower cannot fade. Then was
there truly a Rose amongst Thorns, when through his Crown of Thorns, you might
see his title, Jesus Nazarenus: for, in that very name Nazarenus, is involved
the signification of a flower; the very word signifies a flower. Esay's flower
in the Crown of pride fades, and is removed; This flower in the Crown of
Thorns fades not, nor could be removed; for, for all the importunity of the
Jews, Pilate would not suffer that title to be removed, or to be changed; still
Nazarenus remained, and still a rose amongst thorns. You know the curse of the
earth, Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth unto thee; It did so to our
Solomon here, it brought forth thorns to Christ, Genesis 3. 18.
and he made a Crown of those thorns, not only for himself, but for us too,
Omnes aculei mortis, in Dominici Corporis tolerantia, ^btusi sunt, All the
thorns of life and death, (...)
are broken, or blunted upon the head of our Solomon, and now, even our thorns,
make up our Crown, our tribulation in life, our dissolution in death, conduce
to our glory: Behold him crowned with his Mothers Crown, for even that brought
him to his Fathers Crown, his humiliation to exaltation, his passion to glory.

Behold your Solomon, your Savior again, Desponsatio.
and you shall see another beam of Comfort, in your tribulations from his; for
even this Humiliation of his, is called his Espousals, his marriage, Behold him
crowned in the day of his Espousals. His Spouse is the Church, His marriage is
the uniting of himself to this Spouse, in his becoming Head of the Church.
The great City, the heavenly Jerusalem, is called The Bride, and The Lambs
wife, 21. 19.
in the Revelation: And he is the Head of this body, the Bridegroom of this
Bride, the Head of this Church, as he is The firstborn of the Dead; Death,
that dissolves all ours, made up this marriage. His Death is his Marriage, and
upon his Death flowed out from his side, those two Elements of the Church,
water and blood; The Sacraments of Baptism, and of the Communion of himself.
Behold then this Solomon crowned and married; both words of Exaltation, and
Exultation, and both by Death and trust him for working the same effects upon
thee; That thou (though by Death) shall be crowned with a Crown of Glory, and
married to him, in whose right and merit thou shall have that Crown.

And Behold him once again, Letitia.
and you shall see not a beam, but a stream of comfort; for this day, which is
the day of his death, he calls here The day of the gladness of his heart.
Behold him crowned in the day of the gladness of his heart. The fullness, the
compass, the two Hemispheres of Heaven, are often designed to us, in these two
names, Joy and Glory: If the Cross of Christ, the Death of Christ, present us
both these, Heb. 2. 9.
how near does it bring, how fully does it deliver Heaven it self to us in
this life? And then we hear the Apostle say, We see Jesus, for the suffering
of Death, crowned with Honor and Glory: There is half Heaven got by Death,
Glory. And then, 12, 2.
for the joy that was set before him, he endured the Cross; There is the other
half, Joy; 1 Pet. 4. 16.
All Heaven purchased by Death. And therefore, if any man suffer as a
Christian, let him not be ashamed, says the Apostle; but let him glorify God,
In isto Nomine, as the vulgate read it; In that behalf, as we translate it.
But, In isto Nomine, says S. August: Let us glorify God, in that Name; Non
solum in nomine Christiani, sed Chriani patientis, not only because he is a
Christian in his Baptism, but a Christian in a second Baptism, a Baptism of
blood; not only as he has received Christ, in accepting his Institution, but
because he has conformed himself to Christ, in fulfilling his sufferings. And
therefore, though we admit natural and humane sorrow, in the calamities which
overtake us, and surround us in this life: (for as all glasses will gather
drops and tears from external causes, Matthew. 26. 38. Luc. 22. 44. Iam. 1. 2.
so this very glass which we look upon now, our Solomon in the Text, our
Savior, had those sadnesses of heart toward his Passion, and Agonies in his
passion) yet count it all Joy when you fall into tentations, says the Apostle:
All Joy, that is, both the interest, and the principal, has the earnest and
the bargain; for if you can conceive joy in your tribulations in this world,
how shall that joy be multiplied unto you, when no tribulation shall be mingled
with it? There is not a better evidence, nor a more binding earnest of
everlasting Joy in the next world, then to find Joy of heart in the
tribulations of this; fix thy self therefore upon this first glass, this
Solomon, thy Savior, Behold King Solomon crowned, etc. and by conforming thy
self to his holy sadness, and humiliation, thou shall also become like him, in
his Joy, and Glory.

But then the hand of God, Rex.
has not set up, but laid down another Glass, wherein thou may see thy
self; a glass that reflects thy self, and nothing but thy self. Christ, who
was the other glass, is like thee in every thing, but not absolutely, for
sin is excepted; but in this glass presented now (The Body of our Royal,
but dead Master and Sovereign) we cannot, we do not except sin. Not only
the greatest man is subject to natural infirmities, (Christ himself was so)
but the holiest man is subject to Original and Actual sin, as thou art, and
so a ^it glass for thee, to see thy self in. Ieat shows a man his face, as
well as Crystal; nay, a Crystal glass will not show a man his face, except
it be steeled, except it be darkened on the backside: Christ as he was a pure
Crystal glass, as he was God, had not been a glass for us, to have seen our
selves in, except he had been steeled, darkened with our humane nature; Neither
was he ever so thoroughly darkened, as that he could present us wholly to our
selves, because he had no sin, without seeing of which we do not see our
selves. Those therefore that are like thee in all things, subject to humane
infirmities, subject to sins, and yet are translated, and translated by
Death, to everlasting Joy, and Glory, are nearest and clearest glasses for
thee, to see thy self in; and such is this glass, which God has proposed to
thee, in this house. And therefore, change the word of the Text, in a letter or
two from Egredimini, to Ingredimini; never go forth to see, but Go in and see a
Solomon crowned with his mothers crown, etc. And when you shall find that hand
that had signed to one of you a Patent for Title, to another for Pension, to
another for Pardon, to another for Dispensation, Dead: That hand that settled
Possessions by his Seal, in the Keeper, and rectified Honors by the sword, in
his Marshall, and distributed relief to the Poor, in his Almoner, and Health
to the Diseased, by his immediate Touch, Dead: That Hand that balanced his own
three Kingdoms so equally, as that none of them complained of one another, nor
of him, and carried the Keys of all the Christian world, and locked up, and
let out Armies in their due season, Dead; how poor, how faint, how pale, how
momentany, how transitory, how empty, how frivolous, how Dead things, must you
necessarily think Titles, and Possessions, and Favors, and all, when you see
that Hand, which was the hand of Destiny, of Christian Destiny, of the
Almighty God, lie dead? It was not so hard a hand when we touched it last, nor
so cold a hand when we kissed it last: That hand which was wont to wipe all
tears from all our eyes, does now but press and squeaze us as so many
spunges, filled one with one, another with another cause of tears. Tears that
can have no other bank to bound them, but the declared and manifested will of
God: For, till our tears flow to that Height, that they might be called a
murmuring against the declared will of God, it is against our Allegiance, it is
Disloyalty, to give our tears any stop, any termination, any measure. It was
a great part of Annaes praise, Lue. 2. 37.
That she departed not from the Temple, day nor night; visit Gods Temple often
in the day, meet him in his own House, and depart not from his Temples, (The
dead bodies of his Saints are his Temples still) even at midnight; at midnight
remember them, who resolve into dust, and make them thy glasses to see thy self
in. Look now especially upon him whom God has presented to thee now, and with
as much cheerfulness as ever thou heardst him say, Remember my Favors, or
remember my Commandments; hear him say now with the wise man, Ecclus. 38. 22.
Remember my Judgment, for thine also shall be so; yesterday for me, and to
day for thee; He does not say to morrow, but to Day, for thee. Look upon him
as a beam of that Sun, as an abridgement of that Solomon in the Text; for
every Christian truly reconciled to God, and signed with his hand in the
Absolution, and sealed with his blood in the Sacrament, (and this was his case)
is a beam, and an abridgement of Christ himself. Behold him therefore Crowned
with the Crown that his Mother gives him: His Mother, The Earth. In an^ient
times, when they used to reward Soldiers with particular kinds of Crowns,
there was a great dignity in Corona graminea, in a Crown of Grass: That
denoted a Conquest, or a Defense of that land. He that has but Coronam
Gramineam, a turfe of grass in a Church yard, has a Crown from his Mother,
and even in that burial takes seizure of the Resurrection, as by a turfe of
grass men give seizure of land. He is crowned in the day of his Marriage; for
though it be a day of Divorce of us from him, and of Divorce of his body from
his soul, yet neither of these Divorces break the Marriage: His soul is
married to him that made it, and his body and soul shall meet again, and all
we, both then in that Glory where we shall acknowledge, that there is no way to
this Marriage, but this Divorce, nor to Life, but by Death. And lastly, he is
Crowned in the day of the gladness of his heart: He leaves that heart, which
was accustomed to the half joys of the earth, in the earth; and he has
enlarged his heart to a greater capacity of Joy, and Glory, and God has filled
it according to that new capacity. And therefore, to end all with the Apostles
words, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 13.
I would not have you to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning them, which are
asleep, that ye sorrow not, as others that have no hope; for if ye believe
that Jesus died, and rose again, even so, them also, which sleep in him, will
God bring with him. But when you have performed this Ingredimini, that you have
gone in, and mourned upon him, and performed the Egredimini, you have gone
forth, and laid his Sacred body, in Consecrated Dust, and come then to another
Egredimini, to a going forth in many several ways: some to the service of
their new Master, and some to the enjoying of their Fortunes conferred by their
old; some to the raising of new Hopes ^ some to the burying of old, and all;
some to new, and busy endeavors in Court, some to contented retirings in the
Country; let none of us, go so far from him, or from one another, in any of
our ways, but that all we that have served him, may meet once a day, the first
time we see the Sun, in the ears of almighty God, with humble and hearty
prayer, that he will be pleased to hasten that day, in which it shall be an
addition, even to the joy of that place, as perfect as it is, and as infinite
as it is, to see that face again, and to see those eyes open there, which we
have seen closed here. Amen.

SERMON XXXIIII.
LUKE ^^ ^^ Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.
THe word of God is either the co-eternall and co-essentiall Son, our
Savior, which took flesh (Verbum Caro factum est) or it is the spirit of his
mouth, by which we live, and not by bread only. And so, in a large
acceptance, every truth is the word of God; for truth is uniforme, and
irrepugnant, and indivisible, as God Omne verum est omni vero consentiens. More
strictly the word of God, is that which God has uttered, either in writing, as
twice in the Tables to Moses; or by ministry of Angels, or Prophets, in words;
or by the unborne, in action, as in John Baptists exultation within his mother;
or by newborn, from the mouths of babes and sucklings; or by things
unreasonable, as in Balaams Ass; or insensible, as in the whole book of such
creatures, The heavens declare the glory of God, etc. But nothing is more
properly the word of God to us, then that which God himself speaks in those
Organs and Instruments, which himself has assumed for his chiefest work, our
redemption. For in creation God spoke, but in redemption he did; and more, he
suffered. And of that kind are these words. God in his chosen manhood says,
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

These words shall be fitliest considered, like a goodly palace, if we rest a
little, as in an outward Court, upon consideration of prayer in general; and
then draw near the view of the Palace, in a second Court, considering this
special prayer in general, as the face of the whole palace. Thirdly, we will
pass through the chiefest rooms of the palace it self; and then insist upon
four steps: 1. Of whom he begs, (Father) 2. What he asks, (forgive them.) 3.
That he prays upon reason, (for.) 4. What the reason is, (they know not.) And
lastly, as into the backside of all, we will cast the objections: as why only
Luke remembers this prayer: and why this prayer, (as it seems by the
punishment continuing upon the Jews to this day) was not obtained at Gods hands.

So therefore prayer is our first entry, Of Prayer.
for when it is said, Ask and it shall be given, it is also said, Knock and it
shall be opened, showing that by prayer our entrance is. And not the entry
only, but the whole house: My house is the house of prayer. Of all the
conduits and conveyances of Gods graces to us, none has been so little subject
to cavillations, as this of prayer. The Sacraments have fallen into the hands
of flatterers and robbers. Some have attributed too much to them, some
detracted. Some have painted them, some have withdrawn their natural
complexion. It has been disputed, whether they be ^ how many they be, what
they be, and what they do. The preaching of the word has been made a servant
of ambitions, and a shop of many men's newfangled wares. Almost every means
between God and man, suffers some adulteratings and disguises: But prayer
least: And it has most ways and addresses. It may be mental, for we may
think prayers. It may be vocal, for we may speak prayers. It may be actual,
for we do prayers. For deeds have voice; the vices of Sodom did cry, and the
Alms of Toby. And if it were proper for St. John, in the first of the
Revelations to turn back to see a voice, it is more likely God will look
down, to hear a work. So then to do the office of your vocation sincerely, is
to pray. How much the favorites of Princes, and great personages labor, that
they may be thought to have been in private conference with the Prince. And
though they be forced to wait upon his purposes, and talk of what he will, how
fain they would be thought to have solicited their own, or their Dependants
business. With the Princes of Princes, this every man may do truly; and the
sooner, the more beggar he is: for no man is heard here, but in form^ pauperis.

Here we may talk long, welcomely, of our own affairs, and be sure to speed.
You cannot whisper so low alone in your Chamber, but he hears you, nor sing so
loud in the Congregation, but he distinguishes you. He grudges not to be
chidden and disputed with, by Job. The Arrows of the Almighty are in me, and
the venim thereof has drunk up my spirit. Is my strength, the strength of
stones, or is my flesh of brass, etc. Not to be directed and counseled by
Jonas: who was angry and said; Did not I say, when I was in my Country, thou
would deal thus? And when the Lord said, Do thou well to be angry? He
replied, I do well to be angry to the death. Nor almost to be threatened and
neglected by Moses: Do this, or blot my name out of thy book. It is an Honor
to be able to say to servants, Do this: But to say to God, Domine fac hoc, and
prevail, is more; And yet more easy. God is replenishingly every where: but
most contractedly, and workingly in the Temple. Since then every rectified man,
is the temple of the Holy Ghost, when he prays; it is the Holy Ghost it self
that prays; and what can be denied, where the Asker gives? He plays with us, as
children, shows us pleasing things, that we might cry for them, and have them.
Before we call, he answers, and when we speak, he hears: so Esaias 65. 24.
Physicians observe some symptoms so violent, that they must neglect the
disease for a time, and labor to cure the accident; as burning fevers, in
Dysenteries. So in the sinful consumption of the soul, a stupidity and
indisposition to prayer, must first be cured. For, Ye lust, and have not,
because ye ask net, Jam. 4. 2. The adulterous Mother of the three great
brothers, Gratian, Lombard, and Comestor, being warned by her Confessor, to be
sorry for her fact, said, she could not, because her fault had so much profited
the Church. At least, said he, be sorry that thou can not be sorry. So
whosoever thou be, that can not readily pray, at least pray, that thou may
pray. For, as in bodily, so in spiritual diseases, it is a desperate state, to
be speechless.

It were unmannerlinesse to hold you longer in the Entry. One turn in the
inner Court, Of this Prayer.
of this special prayer in general, and so enter the Palace. This is not a
prayer for his own ease, as that in his Agony seems. It has none of those
infirmities, which curious schismatikes find in that. No suspicion of
ignorance, as there, (If it be possible.) No tergiversation nor abandoning the
noble work which he had begun, as there, (Let this cup pass.) It is not an
exemplar, or form, for us to imitate precisely, (otherwise then in the
Doctrine) as that Prayer, Mat. 6. which we call the Lords Prayer, not because
he said it, for he could never say, forgive us our trespasses, but because he
commanded us to say it. For though by Matthew, which says, After this manner
pray, we seem not bound to the words, yet Luke says, When you pray, say, Our
Father which art, etc. But this is a prayer of God, to God. Not as the
Talmudists Jews feign God to pray to himself, Sit voluntas mea, ut
misericordia mea superet iram meam; But as when forain merchandise is
mis-ported, the Prince may permit, or inhibit his Subjects to buy it, or not to
buy it. Our blessed Savior arriving in this world fraited with salvation, a
thing which this world never had power to have without him, except in that short
time, between man's Creation and fall, he by this prayer begs, that even to
these despisers of it, it may be communicable, and that their ignorance of the
value of it, may not deprive them of it. Teaching that by example here, which
he gave in precept before, Mat. 5. 44. Pray for them which persecute you, that
you may be the children of your Father which is in heaven. Therefore, Father.
doing so now, he might well say, Father, forgive them, which is the first room
in this glorious Palace. And in this contemplation, my unworthy soul, thou art
presently in the presence. No passing of guards, nor ushers. No examination of
thy degree or habit. The Prince is not asleep, nor private, nor weary of
giving, nor refers to others. He puts thee not to prevail by Angels nor
Archangels. But lest any thing might hinder thee, from coming into his
presence, his presence comes into thee. And lest Majesty should dazell thee,
thou art to speak but to thy Father. Of which word, Abba, the root is, To
will; from which root, the fruit also must be willingness, and propensenesse
to grant. God is the Father of Christ, by that mystical and eternal
unexpressible generation, which never began nor ended. Of which
incomprehensible mystery, Moses and the ancient Prophets spoke so little, and
so indirectly, that till the dawning of the day of Christ, after Esdras time,
those places seem not to be intended of the Trinity. Nay, a good while after
Christ, they were but tenderly applied to that sense. And at this day, the most
of the writers in the reformed Churches, considering that we need not such
far fetched, and such forced helps, and withal, weighing how well the Jews of
these times are provided with other expositions of those places, are very
sparing in using them, but content themselves modestly herein, with the
testimonies of the New Testament. Truly, this mystery is rather the object of
faith then reason; and it is enough that we believe Christ to have ever been
the Son of God, by such generation, and our selves his sons by adoption. So
that God is Father to all; but yet so, that though Christ say, John 10. My
Father is greater then all, he adds, I and my Father are all one, to show his
eternal interest: and John 20. He seems to put a difference, I go to my
Father, and your Father, my God, and your God. The Roman stories have, that
when Claudius saw it conduce to his ends, to get the tribuneship, of which he
was incapable, because a Patrician, he suffered himself to be adopted. But
against this Adoption, two exceptions were found; one, that he was adopted by a
man of lower rank, a Plebeian; which was unnatural; and by a younger man then
himself, which took away the presentation of a Father. But our Adoption is
regular. For first, we are made the sons of the Most High, and of the ancient
of days, there was no one word, by which he could so nobly have maintained his
Dignity, kept his station, justified his cause, and withal expressed his
humility and charity, as this, Father. They crucified him, for saying himself
to be the Son of God. And in the midst of torment, he both professes the same
still, and lets them see, that they have no other way of forgiveness, but that
he is the Son of that Father. For no man comes to the Father but by the Son.

And at this voice (Father) O most blessed Savior, Forgive them.
thy Father, which is so fully thine, that for thy sake, he is ours too, which
is so wholly thine, that he is thy self, which is all mercy, yet will not
spare thee, all justice, yet will not destroy us. And that glorious Army of
Angels, which hitherto by their own integrity maintained their first and pure
condition, and by this work of thine, now near the Consummatum est, attend a
confirmation, and infallibility of ever remaining so; And that faithful
company of departed Saints, to whom thy merit must open a more inward and
familiar room in thy Fathers Kingdom, stand all attentive, to hear what thou will ask of this Father. And what shall they hear? what do thou ask?
Forgive them, forgive them? Must murderers be forgiven? Must the offended ask
it? And must a Father grant it? And must he be solicited, and remembered by the
name of Father to do it? Was not thy passion enough, but thou must have
compassion? And is thy mercy so violent, that thou will have a fellow-feeling
of their imminent afflictions, before they have any feeling? The Angels might
expect a present employment for their destruction: the Saints might be out of
fear, that they should be assumed or mingled in their fellowship. But thou will have them pardoned. And yet do not out of thine own fullness pardon
them, as thou did the thief upon the Cross, because he did already confess
thee; but thou tellest them, that they may be forgiven, but at thy request, and
if they acknowledge their Advocate to be the Son of God. Father, forgive them.
I that cannot revenge thy quarrel, cannot forgive them. I that could not be
saved, but by their offense, cannot forgive them. And must a Father, Almighty,
and well pleased in thee, forgive them? Thou art more charitable toward them,
then by thy direction we may be to our selves. We must pray for our selves
limitedly, forgive us, as we forgive. But thou will have their forgivenes
illimited and unconditioned. Thou seem not so much as to presume a
repentance; which is so essential, and necessary in all transgressions, as
where by man's fault the actions of God are diverted from his appointed ends,
God himself is content to repent the doing of them. As he repented first the
making of man, and then the making of a King. But God will have them within the
arms of his general pardon. And we are all delivered from our Debts; for God
has given his word, his co-essential word, for us all. And though, (as in
other prodigal debts, the Interest exceed the Principal) our Actual sins
exceed Original, yet God by giving his word for us, has acquitted all.

But the Affections of our Savior are not inordinate, nor irregular. He has a
For, For.
for his Prayer: Forgive them, for, etc. And where he has not this For, as in
his Prayer in his agony, he quickly interrupts the violence of his request,
with a But, Father, let this cup pass; but not my will: In that form of Prayer
which himself taught us, he has appointed a for, on Gods part, which is ever
the same unchangeable: For thine is the Kingdom; Therefore supplications
belong to thee: The power, Thou openest thy hand and fillest every living
thing: The Glory, for thy Name is glorified in thy grants. But because on our
part, the occasions are variable, he has left our for, to our religious
discretion. For, when it is said, James 4. You lust and have not, because you
ask not; it follows presently, You ask and miss, because you ask amiss.
It is not a fit for, for every private man, to ask much means, for he would
do much good. I must not pray, Lord put into my hands the strength of
Christian Kings, for out of my zeal, I will employ thy benefits to thine
advantage, thy Soldiers against thine enemies, and be a bank against that
Deluge, wherewith thine enemy the Turk threatens to overflow thy people. I must
not pray, Lord fill my heart with knowledge and understanding, for I would
compose the Schisms in thy Church, and reduce thy garment to the first
continual and seemlesse integrity; and redress the deafnesses and oppressions
of Judges, and Officers. But he gave us a convenient scantling for our fors,
who prayed, Give me enough, for I may else despair, give me not too much, for
so I may presume. Of Schoolmen, some affirm Prayer to be an act of our will;
for we would have that which we ask. Others, of our understanding; for by it
we ascend to God, and better our knowledge, which is the proper aliment and
food of our understanding; so, that is a perplexed case. But all agree, that it
is an act of our Reason, and therefore must be reasonable. For only reasonable
things can pray; for the beasts and Ravens, Psalm 147. 9. are not said to pray
for food, but to cry. Two things are required to make a Prayer. 1. Pius
affectus, which was not in the Devils request, Matthew. 8. 31. Let us go into
the Swine; nor Job 1. 2. Stretch out thy hand, and touch all he has; and,
stretch out thy hand, and touch his bones; and therefore these were not
Prayers. And it must be Rerum decentium: for our government in that point, this
may inform us. Things absolutely good, as Remission of sins, we may
absolutely beg: and, to escape things absolutely ill, as sin. But mean and
indifferent things, qualified by the circumstances, we must ask conditionally
and referringly to the givers will. For 2 Cor. 8. when Paul begged stimulum
Carnis to be taken from him, it was not granted, but he had this answer, My
grace is sufficient for thee.

Let us now (not in curiosity, but for instruction) consider the reason: They
know not.
They know not what they do. First, if Ignorance excuse: And then, if they
were ignorant. Ignorance.


Have thou, O God, filled all thy Scriptures, both of thy Recorders and
Notaries, which have penned the History of thy love, to thy People; and of thy
Secretaries the Prophets, admitted to the foreknowledge of thy purposes, and
instructed in thy Cabinet; have thou filled these with praises and persuasions
of wisdom and knowledge, and must these persecutors be pardoned for their
ignorance? Have thou bid Esaias to say, 27. 11. It is a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them, shall not have compassion of them.
And Hosea 4. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: and now do
thou say, Forgive them because they know not? Shall ignorance, which is often
the cause of sin, often a sin it self, often the punishment of sin, and
ever an infirmity and disease contracted by the first great sin, advantage
them? Who can understand his faults, says the man according to thy heart,
Psalm 19. 12. Lord cleanse me from my secret faults: He durst not make his
ignorance the reason of his prayer, but prayed against ignorance. But thy Mercy
is as the Sea: both before it was the Sea, for it overspreads the whole world;
and since it was called into limits: for it is not the less infinite for that.
And as by the Sea, the most remote and distant Nations enjoy one another, by
traffic and commerce, East and West becoming neighbors: so by mercy, the
most different things are united and reconciled; Sinners have Heaven; Traitors
are in the Princes bosom; and ignorant persons are in the spring of wisdom,
being forgiven, not only though they be ignorant, but because they are
ignorant. But all ignorance is not excusable; nor any less excusable, then not
to know, what ignorance is not to be excused. Therefore, there is an ignorance
which they call Nescientiam, a not knowing of things not appertaining to us.
This we had had, though Adam had stood; and the Angels have it, for they know
not the latter day, and therefore for this, we are not chargeable. They call
the other privation, which if it proceed merely from our own sluggishnesse, in
not searching the means made for our instruction, is ever inexcusable. If from
God, who for his own just ends has cast clouds over those lights which should
guide us, it is often excusable. For 1 Timothy 1. 13. Paul says, I was
ablasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor, but I was received to mercy,
for I did it ignorantly, through unbelief. So, though we are all bound to
believe, and therefore faults done by unbelief cannot escape the name and
nature of sin, yet since belief is the immediate gift of God, faults done by
unbelief, without malicious concurrences and circumstances, obtain mercy and
pardon from that abundant fountain of grace, Christ Jesus. And therefore it
was a just reason, Forgive them, for they know not. If they knew not, which is
evident, both by this speech from truth it self, and by 2 Cor. 2. 8. Had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory; and Acts 3. 17. I
know that through ignorance ye did it. And though after so many powerful
miracles, this ignorance were vincible, God having revealed enough to convert
them, yet there seems to be enough on their parts, to make it a perplexed
case, and to excuse, though not a malicious persecuting, yet a not consenting
to his Doctrine. For they had a Law, Whosoever shall make himself the son of
God, let him dye: And they spoke out of their Laws, when they said, We have no
other King but Caesar. There were therefore some among them reasonably, and
zealously ignorant. And for those, the Son ever-welcome, and well-heard,
begged of his Father, ever accessible, and exorable, a pardon ever ready and
natural.

We have now passed through all those rooms which we unlockt and opened at
first. And now may that point, Why this prayer is remembered only by one
Evangelist, and why by Luke, be modestly inquired: For we are all admitted and
welcomed into the acquaintance of the Scriptures, upon such conditions as
travelers are into other Countries: if we come as praisers and admirres of
their Commodities and Government, not as spies into the mysteries of their
State, nor searchers, nor calumniators of their weaknesses. For though the
Scriptures, like a strong rectified State, be not endangered by such a curious
malice of any, yet he which brings that, deserves no admittance. When those
great Commissioners which are called the Septuagint, sent from Jerusalem, to
translate the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek, had perfected their work, it was,
and is an argument of Divine assistance, that writing severally, they differed
not. The same may prove even to weak and faithless men, that the holy Ghost
super-intended the four Evangelists, because they differ not; as they which
have written their harmonies, make it evident: But to us, faith teaches the
other way. And we conclude not, because they agree, the holy Ghost directed;
for heathen Writers and Malefactors in examinations do so; but because the holy
Ghost directed, we know they agree, and differ not. For as an honest man, ever
of the same thoughts, differs not from himself, though he do not ever say the
same things, if he say not contraries; so the four Evangelists observe the
uniformity and samenesse of their guide, though all did not say all the same
things, since none contradicts any. And as, when my soul, which enables all my
limbs to their functions, disposes my legs to go, my whole body is truly said
to go, because none stays behind; so when the holy Spirit, which had made
himself as a common soul to their four souls, directed one of them to say
any thing, all are well understood to have said it. And therefore when to that
place in Matthew. 27. 8. where that Evangelist cites the Prophet Jeremy, for
words spoken by Zachary, many medicines are applied by the Fathers; as, That
many copies have no name, That Jeremy might be binominous, and have both names,
a thing frequent in the Bible, That it might be the error of a transcriber,
That there was extant an Apocryph book of Jeremy, in which these words were,
and sometimes things of such books were vouched, as Iannes and Iambres by Paul;
St. Augustine insists upon, and teaches rather this, That it is more
wonderful, that all the Prophets spoke by one Spirit, and so agreed, then if
any one of them had spoken all those things; And therefore he adds, Singula
sunt omnium, and omnia sunt singulorum, All say what any of them say; And in
this sense most congruously is that of St. Hierome applyable, that the four
Evangelists are Quadriga Divina, That as the four Chariot wheels, though they
look to the four corners of the world, yet they move to one end and one way,
so the Evangelists have both one scope, and one way.

Yet not so precisely, but that they differ in words: For as their general
intention, common to them all begat that consent, so a private reason peculiar
to each of them, for the writing of their Histories at that time, made those
diversities which seem to be for Matthew, after he had preached to the Jews,
and was to be transplanted into another vineyard, the Gentiles, left them
written in their own tongue, for permanency, which he had preached
transitorily by word. Mark, when the Gospel fructified in the West, and the
Church enlarged her self, and grew a great body, and therefore required more
food out of Peter's Dictates, and by his approbation published his Evangile. Not
an Epitome of Matthewes, as Saint Jerome (I know why) imagines, but a just and
entire History of our blessed Savior. And as Matthewes reason was to supply a
want in the Eastern Church, Marks in the Western; so on the other side Lukes
was to cut off an excess and superfluity: for then many had undertaken this
Story, and dangerously inserted and mingled uncertainties and obnoxious
improbabilities: and he was more curious and more particular then the rest,
both because he was more learned, and because he was so individual a companion
of the most learned Saint Paul, and did so much write Paul's words, that
Eusebius thereupon mistaketh the words 2 Timothy 2. 1. Christ is raised according
to my Gospel, to prove that Paul was author of this Gospel attributed to
Luke. John the Minion of Christ upon earth, and survivor of the Apostles,
(whose books rather seem fallen from Heaven, and writ with the hand which
ingraved the stone Tables, then a man's work) because the heresies of Ebion and
Cerinthus were rooted, who upon this true ground, then evident and fresh, that
Christ had spoke many things which none of the other three Evangelists had
Recorded, uttered many things as his, which he never spoke: John I say, more
diligently then the rest handles his Divinity, and his Sermons, things
specially brought into question by them. So therefore all writ one thing, yet
all have some things particular. And Luke most, for he writ last of three, and
largeliest for himself, 1 Act. 1. says, I have made the former Treatise of
all that Jesus began to do and teach, until the Day that he was taken up;
which speech, lest the words in the last of John, If all were written which
Jesus did, the world could not contain the Books, should condemn, Ambrose and
Chrysostom interpret well out of the words themselves, Scripsit de omnibus,
non omnia, He writ of all, but not all: for it must have the same limitation,
which Paul gives his words, who says, Acts 20. in one verse, I have kept
nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God; and in another, I
kept back nothing that was profitable. It is another peculiar singularity of
Lukes, that he addresseth his History to one man, Theophilus. For it is but
weakly surmised, that he chose that name, for all lovers of God, because the
interpretation of the word suffers it, since he adds most noble Theophilus.
But the work does not the less belong to the whole Church, for that, no more
then his Masters Epistles do though they be directed to particulars.

It is also a singularity in him to write upon that reason, because diverse
have written. In humane knowledge, to abridge or suck, and then suppress other
Authors, is not ever honest nor profitable: We see after that vast enterprise
of Justinian, who distilled all the Law into one vessel, and made one Book of
2000. suppressing all the rest, Alciate wishes he had let them alone, and
thinks the Doctors of our times, would better have drawn useful things from
those volumes, then his Trebonian and Dorothee did. And Aristotle after, by the
immense liberality of Alexander, he had engrossed all Authors, is said to have
defaced all, that he might be in stead of all: And therefore, since they cannot
rise against him, he imputes to them errors which they held not: vouches only
such objections from them, as he is able to answer; and propounds all good
things in his own name, which he ought to them. But in this History of Lukes,
it is otherwise: He had no authority to suppress them, nor does he reprehend
or calumniate them, but writes the truth simply, and leaves it to outweare
falsehood: and so it has: Moses rod has devoured the Conjurers rods, and Lukes
Story still retains the majesty of the maker, and theirs are not.

Other singularities in Luke, of form or matter, I omit, and end with one like
this in our Text. As in the apprehending of our blessed Savior, all the
Evangelists record, that Peter cut off Malchus ear, but only Luke remembers
the healing of it again: (I think) because that act of curing, was most present
and obvious to his consideration, who was a Physician: so he was therefore most
apt, to remember this Prayer of Christ, which is the Physic and Balsamum of
our Soul, and must be applied to us all, (for we do all Crucify him, and we
know not what we do) And therefore Saint Hierome gave a right Character of him,
in his Epistle to Paulinus, Fuit Medicus, and pariter omnia verba illius,
Animae languentis sunt Medicinae, As he was a Physician, so all his words are
Physic for a languishing soul.

Now let us dispatch the last consideration, of the effect of this Prayer. Did
Christ intend the forgiveness of the Jews, whose utter ruin God (that is,
himself) had foredecreed? And which he foresaw, and bewaild even then hanging
upon the Cross? For those Divines which reverently forbear to interpret the
words Lord, Lord, why have thou forsaken me? of a suffering hell in his soul,
or of a departing of the Father from him; (for Ioh. 16. it is, I am not alone,
for the Father is with me) offer no exposition of those words more convenient,
then that the foresight of the Jews imminent calamities, expressed and drew
those words from him: In their Afflictions, were all kinds, and all degrees of
Misery. So that as one writer of the Roman Story says elegantly, He that
considers the Acts of Rome, considers not the Acts of one People, but of
Mankind: I may truly of the Jews Afflictions, he that knows them, is
ignorant of nothing that this world can threaten. For to that which the present
authority of the Romans inflicted upon them, our Schools have added upon their
posterities; that they are ^laves to Christians, and their goods subject to
spoil, if the Laws of the Princes where they live, did not out of indulgency
defend them. Did he then ask, and was not heard? God forbid. A man is heard,
when that is given which his will desired; and our will is ever understood to
be a will rectified, and concurrent with God. This is Voluntas, a discoursed
and examined will. That which is upon the first sight of the object, is Velleit
as, a willingness, which we resist not, only because we thought not of it.
And such a willingness had Christ, when suddenly he wished that the cup might
pass: but quickly conformed his will to his Fathers. But in this Prayer his
will was present, therefore fulfilled. Briefly then, in this Prayer he
commended not all the Jews, for he knew the chief to sin knowingly, and so out
of the reach of his reason, (for they know not.) Nor any, except they repented
after: for it is not ignorance, but repentance, which deriveth to us the
benefit of Gods pardon. For he that sins of Ignorance, may be pardoned if he
repent; but he that sins against his Conscience, and is thereby impenitible,
cannot be pardoned. And this is all, which I will say of these words, Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

O eternal God, look down from thy Throne to thy footstool: from thy blessed
Company of Angels and Saints, to us, by our own faults made more wretched and
contemptible, then the worms, which shall eat us, or the dust which we were,
and shall be. O Lord, under the weight of thy Justice we cannot stand. Nor had
any other title to thy mercy, but the Name of Father, and that we have
forfeited. That name of Sons of God, thou gave to us, all at once in Adam;
and he gave it away from us all by his sin. And thou have given it again to
every one of us, in our regeneration by Baptism, and we have lost it again by
our transgressions. And yet thou was not weary of being merciful, but did
choose one of us, to be a fit and worthy ransom for us all; and by the death
of thy Christ, our Jesus, gave us again the title and privilege of thy
Sons; but with conditions, which though easy, we have broke, and with a
yoke, which though light, and sweet, we have cast off. How shall we then dare
to call thee Father? Or to beg that thou will make one trial more of us? These
hearts are accustomed to rebellions, and hopeless. But, O God, create in us
new hearts, hearts capable of the love and fear, due to a Father. And then we
shall dare to say, Father, and to say, Father forgive us. Forgive us O Father,
and all which are engaged, and accountable to thee for us: forgive our Parents,
and those which undertook for us in Baptism. Forgive the civil Magistrate,
and the Minister. Forgive them their negligences, and us our stubbornnesses.
And give us the grace that we may ever sincerely say, both this Prayer of
Example and Counsel, Forgive our enemies, and that other of Precept, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

SERMON XXXV.
Preached February 21. 1611.
MATTHEW 21. 44. Whosoever shall fall on this stone, shall be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
ALmighty God made us for his glory, and his glory is not the glory of a
Tyrant, to destroy us, but his glory is in our happiness. He put us in a fair
way toward that happiness in nature, in our creation, that way would have
brought us to heaven, but then we fell, and (if we consider our selves only)
irrecoverably. He put us after into another way, over thorny hedges and
ploughed Lands, through the difficulties and encumbrances of all the
Ceremonial Law; there was no way to heaven then, but that; after that, he
brought us a cross way, by the Cross of Jesus Christ, and the application of
his Gospel, and that is our way now. If we compare the way of nature, and our
way, we went out of the way at the Towns end, as soon as we were in it, we
were out of it. Adam dyed as soon as he lived, and fell as soon as he was set
on foot; If we compare the way of the Law, and ours, the Jews and the
Christians, their Synagogue was but as Gods farm, Verse 33.
our Church is as his dwelling house; to them locavit vineam, he let out his
Vine to husbandmen, and then peregre profectus, he went into a far Country,
he promised a Messiah, but deferred his coming a long time; but to us Dabitur
Regnum, a Kingdom is given; the Vineyard is changed into a Kingdom, here is a
good improvement, and the Lease into an absolute deed of gift, here is a good
enlargement of the Term. He gives, therefore he will not take away again. He
gives a Kingdom, therefore there is a fullness and all sufficiency in the
gift; and he does not go into any far Country, but stays with us, to
govern us, usque ad consummationem, till the end of the world; here therefore
God takes all into his own hands, and he comes to dwell upon us himself, to
which purpose he ploughs up our hearts, 1. C^r. 3. 9.
and he builds upon us; Vos Dei agricultura, and Dei aedificium, Ye are Gods
husbandry, and Gods building: Now of this, this husbandry God speaks familiarly
and parabolicaly many times in Scriptures: of this building particularly and
principally in this place, where having intimated unto us the several benefits
we have received from Christ Jesus in that appellation, as he is a stone; he
tells us also our dangers in mis-behaving our selves toward it, Whosoever
shall fall on this etc.

Christ then is a stone, and we may run into two dangers: first, we may fall
upon this stone, and then this stone may fall upon us; but yet we have a great
deal of comfort presented to us, in that Christ is presented to us as a stone,
for there we shall find him, first, to be the foundation stone, nothing can
stand which is not built upon Christ; Secondly, to be Lapis Angularis, a corner
stone, that unites things most dis-united; and then to be Lapis Jacob, the
stone that Jacob slept upon; fourthly, to be Lapis Davidis, the stone that
David flew Golih withal; And lastly, to be Lapis Petra, such a stone as is a
Rock, and such a Rock as no Waters nor Storms can remove or shake, these are
benefits: Christ Jesus is a stone, no firmness but in him; a fundamental
stone, no building but on him; a corner stone, no piecing nor reconciliation,
but in him; and Jacobs stone, no rest, no tranquillity, but in him; and David's
stone, no anger, no revenge, but in him; and a rocky stone, no defense against
troubles and tribulations, but in him; And upon this stone we fall and are
broken, and this stone may fall on us, and grind us to powder.

First in the metaphor, Lapis.
that Christ is called a stone, the firmness is expressed: Forasmuch as he
loved his own which were in the world, In finem dilexit eos, says St. John,
He loved them to the end; and not to any particular end, Ioh. 13.
for any use of this own, Cyrill.
but to their end; Qui erant in mundo, says Cyrill, ad distinctionem
Angelorum, he loved them in the world, and not Angels; he loved not only them
who were in a confirmed estate of mutual loving him too, but even them who
were themselves conceived in sin, and then conceived all their purposes in
sin too, them who could have no cleansing but in his blood, and when they
were cleansed in his blood, Job 27.
their own clothes would defile them again, them who by nature are not able
to love him at all, and when by grace they are brought to love him, can
express their love no other way, but to be glad that he was betrayed, and
scourged, and scorned, and nailed, and crucified; and to be glad, that if all
this were not already done, it might be done yet, to long, and wish, that if
Christ were not crucified, he might be crucified now, (which is a strange
manner of expressing love) those men he loved, and loved unto the end; Men and
not Angels; and then men, Ad distinctionem mortuorum, says Chrysostom, not
only the Patriarchs, who were departed out of the world, who had loved him so
well, as to take his word for their salvation, and had lived and dyed in the
faithful contemplation of a future promise, which they never saw performed;
but those who were partakers of the performance of all those promises, those
into the midst of whom he came in person, those upon whom he wrought with his
piercing Doctrine, and his powerful miracles, those who for all this loved not
him, he loved: Et in finem, he loved them to the end: It is much that he should
love them in fine, at their end, that he should look graciously on them at
last, that when their sun sets, their eyes faint, his sun of grace should
arise, and his East be brought to their West, that then in the shadow of death,
the Lord of life should quicken and inanimate their hearts: that when their
last bell tolls, and calls them to their first Judgment, (and first and last
Judgment to this purpose is all one) the passing bell, and Angels trump sound
all but one note, Surgite qui dormitis in pulvere, Arise ye that sleep in the
dust, which is the voice of the Angels, and Surgite qui vigilatis in plumis,
Arise ye that cannot sleep in feathers, for the pangs of death, which is the
voice of the bell, is but one voice; for God at the general Judgment, shall
never reverse any particular Judgment, formerly given; that God should then
come to the beds side, ad sibilandum populum suum, as the Prophet Ezekiel
speaks, to hiss softly for his child, to speak comfortably in his ear, to
whisper gently to his departing soul, and to drown and overcome with this
soft Music of his, all the danger of the Angels Trumpets, all the horror of
the ringing Bell, all the cries, and vociferations of a distressed, and
distracted, and scattering family, yea all the accusations of his own
conscience, and all the triumphant acclamations of the Devil himself; that
God should love a man thus in fine, at his end, and return to him then, though
he had suffered him to go astray from him before, it is a great testimony of an
unspeakable love: but his love is not only in fine, at the end, but in finem,
to the end, all the way to the end. He leaves them not uncalled at first, he
leaves them not unaccompanied in the way, he leaves them not unrecompensed at
the last, that God who is Almighty, Alpha and Omega, first and last, that God
is also love it self, and therefore this love is Alpha and Omega, first and
last too; Consider Christ's proceeding with Peter in the ship, Matthew. 14. 14.
in the storm; first he suffered him to be in some danger, but then he visites
him with that strong assurance, Noli timere, Be not afraid, it is I, any
testimony of his presence rectifies all. This puts Peter into that spiritual
knowledge and confidence, Iube me venire, Lord bid me come to thee; he has a
desire to be with Christ, but yet stays his bidding; he puts not himself into
an unnecessary danger, without a commandment; Christ bids him, and Peter comes,
but yet, though Christ were in his sight, and even in the actual exercise of
his love to him, yet as soon as he saw a gust, a storm, timuit, he was
afraid, and Christ lets him fear, and lets him sink, and lets him
cry; But he directs his fear, and his cry to the right end. Domine salvum
me fac, Lord save me, and thereupon he stretches out his hand and saved him:
God does not raise his children to honor, and great estates, and then leave
them, and expose them to be subjects, and exercises of the malice of others,
nor he does not make them mighty, and then leave them, ut glorietur in malo
qui potens est, that he should think it a glory to be able to do harm. He does
not impoverish and dishonor his children, and then leave them; leave them
unsensible of that Doctrine, that patience is as great a blessing as
abundance: God gives not his children health, and then leaves them to a
boldness in surfeiting; nor beauty, and leave them to a confidence of opening
themselves to all solicitations; nor valor, and then leaves them to a spirit
of quarrelsomnesse: God makes no patterns of his works, no modells of his
houses, he makes whole pieces, he makes perfect houses, he puts his
children into good ways, and he directs and protecteth them in those ways:
For this is the constancy and the perseverance of the love of Christ Jesus, as
he is called in this Text a stone. To come to the particular benefits;
Fundamentalis. 1 Cor. 3.
the first is that he is lapis fundamentalis, a foundation stone; for other
foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Christ Jesus. Now
where Saint Augustine says, (as he does in two or three places) that this
place of Saint Paul's to the Corinthians, is one of these places of which Saint
Peter says Quaedam difficilia, There are some things in Saint Paul hard to be
understood: Saint Augustines meaning is, that the difficulty is in the next
words, how any man should build hay or stubble upon so good a foundation as
Christ, how any man that pretends to live in Christ, should live ill, for in
the other there can be no difficulty, how Christ Jesus to a Christian, should
be the only foundation: And therefore to place salvation or damnation in such
an absolute Decree of God, as should have no relation to the fall of man, or
reparation in a Redeemer; this is to remove this stone out of the foundation,
for a Christian may be well content to begin at Christ: If any man therefore
have laid any other foundation to his Faith, or any other foundation to his
Actions, possession of great places, alliance in great Families, strong parties
in Courts, obligation upon dependants, acclamations of people; if he have laid
any other foundations for pleasure, and contentment, care of health, and
complexion, appliablenesse in conversation, delightfulness in discourses,
cheerfulness in disportings, interchanging of secrets, and such other small
wares of Courts and Cities as these are: whosoever has laid such foundations
as these, must proceed as that General did, who when he received a besieged
Town to mercy, upon condition that in sign of subjection they should suffer
him to take off one row of stones from their walls, he took away the lowest
row, the foundation, and so ruined and demolished the whole walls of the City:
So must he that has these false foundations, (that is, these habits) divest
the habit, root out the lowest stone, that is, the general, and radical
inclination to these disorders: For he shall never be able to watch and resist
every particular temptation, if he trust only to his Moral Constancy; No, nor
if he place Christ for the roof to cover all his sins, when he has done
them; his mercy works by way of pardon after, not by way of Non obstante, and
privilege to do a sin before hand; but before hand we must have the
foundation in our eye; when we undertake any particular Action, in the
beginning, we must look how that will suite with the foundation, with Christ;
for there is his first place, to be Lapis fundamentalis.

And then, Angularis.
after we have considered him, first, in the foundation (as we are all
Christians) he grows to be Lapis Angularis, the Corner stone, to unite those
Christians, which seem to be of diverse ways, diverse aspects, diverse professions
together; as we consider him in the foundation, there he is the root of faith,
As we consider him in the Corner, Esaias 28.
there he is the root of charity, In Esaias he is both together, A sure
foundation and a Corner stone, as he was in the place of Esaias, Lapis probatus,
I will lay in Sion a tried stone; 118.
and in the Psalm, Lapis reprobatus, a stone that the builders refused, In this
consideration, he is Lapis approbatus, a stone approved by all sides, that
unites all things together: Consider first, what diverse things he unites in his
own person; That he should be the son of a woman, and yet no son of man,
That the son of a woman should be the son of God, that man's sinful nature,
and innocence should meet together, a man that should not sin, that Gods
nature and mortality should meet together, a God that must die; Briefly, that
he should do and suffer so many things impossible as man, impossible as God.
Thus he was a Corner stone, that brought together natures, naturally
incompatible. Thus he was Lapis Angularis, a Corner stone in his Person,
Consider him in his Offices, as a Redeemer, as a Mediator, and so, he has
united God to man; yea, rebellious man to jealous God: He is such a Corner
stone, as has united heaven, and earth, Jerusalem and Babylon together.

Thus in his Person, and thus in his Offices, Consider him in his power, and
he is such a Corner stone, as that he is the God of Peace, and Love, and
Union, and Concord. Such a Corner stone as is able to unite, and reconcile (as
it did in Abraham's house) a Wife, and a Concubine in one bed, a covetous
Father, and a wastfull Son in one family, a severe Magistrate, and a
licentious people in one City, an absolute Prince, and a jealous People in one
Kingdom, Law, and Conscience in one Government, Scripture, and tradition in
one Church. If we would but make Christ Jesus and his peace, the life and soul
of all our actions, and all our purposes; if we would mingle that sweetness
and supplenesse which he loves, and which he is, in all our undertakings; if in
all controversies, book controversies, and sword controversies, we would fit
them to him, and see how near they would meet in him, that is, how near we
might come to be friends, and yet both sides be good Christians; then we
placed this stone in his second right place, who as he is a Corner stone
reconciling God and man in his own Person, and a Corner stone in reconciling
God and mankind in his Office, so he desires to be a Corner stone in
reconciling man and man, and settling peace among our selves, not for worldly
ends, but for this respect, that we might all meet in him to love one another,
not because we made a stronger party by that love, not because we made a
sweeter conversation by that love, but because we met closer in the bosom of
Christ Jesus; where we must at last either rest altogether eternally, or be
altogether eternally thrown out, or be eternally separated and divorced from
one another.

Having then received Christ for the foundation stone, Lapis Jacob.
(we believe aright) and for the Corner stone (we interpret charitably the
opinions, and actions of other men) The next is, that he be Lapis Jacob, a
stone of rest and security to our selves. When Jacob was in his journey, he
took a stone, and that stone was his pillow, Genesis 28.
upon that he slept all night, etc. resting upon that stone, he saw the
Ladder that reached from heaven to earth; it is much to have this egresse and
regresse to God, to have a sense of being gone from him, and a desire and
means of returning to him; when we do fall into particular sins, it is
well if we can take hold of the first step of this Ladder, with that hand of
David, Psalm. 47. 20.
Domine respice in Testamentum, O Lord, consider thy Covenant, if we can
remember God of his Covenant, to his people, and to their seed, it is well; it
is more, if we can clamber a step higher on this ladder to a Domine labia mea
aperies, if we come to open our lips in a true confession of our wretched
condition and of those sins by which we have forfeited our interest in that
Covenant, it is more; and more then that too, Esaias 16. 9.
if we come to that inebriabo me lacrymis, if we overflow and make our selves
drunk with tears, in a true sense, and sorrow for those sins, still it is
more; And more then all this, if we can expostulate with God in an Vsque quo
Domine, How long, Psalm. 13. 2.
O Lord, shall I take counsel in my self, having weariness in my heart? These
steps, these gradations toward God, do well; war is a degree of peace, as it
is the way of peace; and these colluctations and wrestlings with God, bring a
man to peace with him; But then is a man upon this stone of Jacob, when in a
fair, and even, and constant religious course of life, he enters into his
sheets every night, as though his neighbors next day were to shroud and wind
him in those sheets; he shuts up his eyes every night, as though his Executors
had closed them; and lies down every night, not as though his man were to call
him up next morning, or to the next days sport, or business, but as though
the Angels were to call him to the resurrection; And this is our third benefit,
as Christ is a stone, we have security and peace of conscience in him.

The next is, Lapis David.
That he is Lapis David, the stone with which David slew Goliath, and with which
we may overcome all our enemies; Sicut baculus crucis, ita lapis Christi habuit
typum; David's sling was a type of the Cross, August.
and the stone was a type of Christ, we will choose to insist upon spiritual
enemies, sins; And this is that stone that enables the weakest man to
overthrow the strongest sin, if he proceed as David did: David says to
Goliath, Thou come to me with a spear and a shield, but I come to thee in the
name of the God of the hosts of Israel, whom thou have railed upon,) 1 Samuel 14.
15.
if thou watch the approach of any sin, any giant sin that transports thee
most; if thou apprehend it to rail against the Lord of Hosts, (that is, that
there is a loud and active blasphemy against God, in every sin) if thou
discern it to come with a sword, or a spear, (that is, persuasions of
advancement if thou do it, or threatings of dishonor, if thou do it not,) if
it come with a shield, (that is, with promises to cover and palliate it, though
thou do it,) If then this David, Gregory.
(thy attempted soul) can put his hand into his bag (as David did) (for quid
cor hominis nisi sacculus Dei? a man's heart is that bag in which God lays up
all good directions) if he can but take into his consideration his Jesus, his
Christ, and sling one of his works, his words, his commandments, his merits,
This Goliath, this Giant sin, will fall to the ground, and then, as it is said
of David, that he slew him when he had no sword in his hand, and yet in the
next verse, that he took his sword and slew him with that: so even by the
consideration of what my Lord has done for me, I shall give that sin the
first deaths wound, and then I shall kill him with his own sword, that is, his
own abomination, his own foulness shall make me detest him. If I dare but
look my sin in the face, if I dare tell him, I come in the name of the Lord,
August.
if I consider my sin, I shall triumph over it, Et dabit certan^^ victoriam
qui dedit certandi audaciam, That God that gave me courage to fight, will give
me strength to overcome.

The last benefit which we consider in Christ, Lapis, Petra.
as he is a stone, is, That he is Petra, a Rock; Number. 20.
The Rock gave water to the Israelites in the wilderness; and he gave them
honey out of the stone, Deuteronomy. 32. 13.
and oil out of the hard Rock: Now when Saint Paul says, That our Fathers
drank of the same Rock as we, he adds that the same Rock was Christ; 1. Cor. 10
So that all Temporal, and all Spiritual blessings to us, and to the Fathers,
were all conferred upon us in Christ; but we consider not now any miraculous
production from the Rock, but that which is natural to the Rock; that it is a
firm defense to us in all tempests, in all afflictions, in all tribulations;
and therefore, La^date Dominum habitatores petrae, says the Prophet, You that
are inhabitants of this Rock, you that dwell in Christ, Esaias 42. 11.
and Christ in you, you that dwell in this Rock, Praise ye the Lord, bless
him, and magnify him for ever. If a son should ask bread of his father,
will he give him a stone, was Christ's question? Yes, O blessed Father, we ask
no other answer to our petition, no better satisfaction to our necessity, then
when we say, Da nobis panem, Give us this day our daily bread, that thou give
us this Stone, this Rock, thy self in thy Church, for our direction, thy self
in the Sacrament, for our refection; what hardness soever we find there, what
corrections soever we receive there, all shall be easy of digestion, and good
nourishment to us^ Thy holy spirit of patience shall command, That these stones
be made bread; And we shall find more juice, more marrow in these stones, in
these afflictions, then worldly men shall do in the softness of their oil, in
the sweetness of their honey, in the cheerfulness of their wine; for as
Christ is our foundation, we believe in him, and as he is our cornerstone, we
are at peace with the world in him; as he is Jacobs stone, giving us peace in
our selves and David's stone, giving us victory over our enemies, so he is a
Rock of stone, (no affliction, no tribulation shall shake us.) And so we have
passed through all the benefits proposed to be considered in this first part,
As Christ is a stone.

It is some degree of thankfulness, 2 Part.
to stand long in the contemplation of the benefit which we have received, and
therefore we have insisted thus long upon the first part. But it is a degree of
spiritual wisdom too, to make haste to the consideration of our dangers, and
therefore we come now to them, We may fall upon this stone, and be broken.
This stone may fall upon us, and grind us to powder, and in the first of
these, we may consider, Quid cadere, what the falling upon this stone is: and
secondly, Quid frangi, what it is to broken upon it: and then thirdly, the
latitude of this unusquisque, that whosoever falls so, is so broken; first then,
because Christ loves us to the end, therefore will we never put him to it,
never trouble him till then; as the wiseman said of Manna, Wisd. 16. 24.
that it had abundance of all pleasure in it, and was meat for all tastes, that
is, (as Expositors interpret it) that Manna tasted to every one, like that
which every one liked best: so this stone Christ Jesus, has abundance of all
qualities of stone in it, and is all the way such a stone to every man, as he
desires it should be. Unto you that believe says, Saint Peter, it is a
precious stone, but unto the disobedient, a stone to stumble at: for if a man
walk in a gallery, where windows, and tables, and statues, are all of marble,
yet if he walk in the dark, or blindfold, or carelessly, he may break his
face as dangerously against that rich stone, as if it were but brick; So though
a man walk in the true Church of God, in that Jerusalem which is described in
the Revelation, the foundation, the gates, the walls, all precious stone, yet
if a man bring a mis-belief, a mis-conceipt, that all this religion is but a
part of civil government and order; if a man be scandalized, at that humility,
that patience, that poverty, that lowliness of spirit which the Christian
Religion inclines us unto; if he will say, Si Rex Israel, If Christ will be
King, let him come down from the Cross, and then we will believe in him, let
him deliver his Church from all crosses, first, of doctrine, and then of
persecution, and then we will believe him to be King; if we will say, Nolumus
hunc regnare, we will admit Christ, but we will not admit him to reign over us,
to be King; if he will be content with a Consulship, with a Collegueship, that
he and the world may join in the government, that we may give the week to the
world, and the Sabbath to him, that we may give the day of the Sabbath to him
and the night to our licentiousness, that of the day we may give the forenoon
to him, and the afternoon to our pleasures, if this will serve Christ, we are
content to admit him, but Nolumus regnare, we will none of that absolute power,
that whether we eat or drink, or whatsoever we do, we must be troubled to
think on him, and respect his glory in every thing. If he will say, Praecepit
Angelis, God has given us in charge to his Angels, and therefore we need not
to look to our own ways, He has locked us up safely, and lodged us softly
under an eternal election, and therefore we are sure of salvation, if he will
walk thus blindely, violently, wilfully, negligently in the true Church,
though he walk amongst the Saphires, and Pearls, and Chrysolytes, which are
mentioned there, that is, in the outward communion and fellowship of Gods
Saints, yet he may bruise and break, and batter himself, as much against these
stones, as against the stone Gods of the heathen, or the stone Idols of the
Papists; for first, the place of this falling upon this stone, is the true
Church; Qui jacet in terra, he that is already upon the ground, in no Church,
can fall no lower, till he fall to hell; but he whom God has brought into his
true Church, if he come to a confident security, that he is safe enough in
these outward acts of Religion, he falls, though it be upon this stone, he
erreth, though in the true Church. This is the place then, the true Church; the
falling it self (as far as will fall into our time of consideration now) is
a falling into some particular sin, but not such as quenches our faith; we
fall so, as we may rise again. Saint Hierome expresses it so, Hierome.
Qui cadit, and tamen credit, he that falls, but yet believes, that falls and
has a sense of his fall, reservatur per paenitentiam ad salutem, that man is
reserved by Gods purpose, to come by repentance, to salvation; for this man
that falls there, falls not so desperately, as that he feels nothing between
hell and him, nothing to stop at, nothing to check him by the way, Cadit super,
he falls upon some thing; nor he falls not upon flowers, to wallow and tumble
in his sin, nor upon feathers, to rest and sleep in his sin, nor into a
cooling river, to disport, and refresh, and strengthen himself in his sin;
but he falls upon a stone, where he may receive a bruise, a pain upon his fall,
a remorse of that sin he is fallen into: And in this fall, our infirmity
appears three ways: The first is Impingere in lapidem, To stumble, for though
he be upon the right stone in the true Religion, and have light enough, Esa.
50. 10.
yet Impingimus meredie, as the Prophet says, even at noon we stumble; we have
much more light, by Christ being come, then the Jews had, but we are sorry we
have it: when Christ has said to us for our better understanding of the Law,
He that looks and lusts has committed Adultery, He that coveteth has
stolen, He that is angry has murdered, we stumble at this, and we are
scandalized with it; and we think that other Religions are gentler, and that
Christ has dealt hardly with us, and we had rather Christ had not said so, we
had rather he had left us to our liberty and discretion, to look, and court,
and to give a way to our passions, as we should find it most conduce to our
ease, and to our ends. And this is Impingere, to stumble, not to go on in an
equal and even pace, not to do the will of God cheerfully. And a second
degree is calcitrare, to kick, to spur at this stone; that is, to bring some
particular sin, and some particular Law into comparison: To debate thus, if I
do not this now, I shall never have such a time; if I slip this, I shall never
have the like opportunity; if I will be a fool now, I shall be a beggar all
my life: and for the Law of God that is against it, there is but a little evil
for a great deal of good; and there is a great deal of time to recover and
repent that little evil. Now to remove a stone which was a landmarke, and to
hide and cover that stone, was all one fault in the Law; to hide the will of
God from our own Consciences with excuses and extenuatious, this is,
calcitrare, as much as we can to spurn the stone, the landmarke out of the way;
but the fullness and accomplishment of this is in the third word of the Text,
Cadere, to fall; he falls as a piece of money falls into a river; we hear it
fall, and we see it sink, and by and by we see it deeper, and at last we see it
not at all: So no man falls at first into any sin, but he hears his own
fall. There is a tenderness in every Conscience at the beginning, at the
entrance into a sin, and he discerns a while the degrees of sinking too:
but at last he is out of his own sight, till he meet this stone; (this stone
is Christ) that is, till he meet some hard reprehension, some hard passage of
a Sermon, some hard judgment in a Prophet, some cross in the World, some
thing from the mouth, or some thing from the hand of God, that breaks him: He
falls upon the stone and is broken.

So that to be broken upon this stone, Frangi.
is to come to this sense, that though our integrity be lost, that we be no
more whole and entire vessels, yet there are means of piecing us again:
Though we be not vessels of Innocence, (for who is so?) (and for that enter
not into judgment with thy servants O Lord) yet we may be vessels of
repentance acceptable to God, and useful to his service: for when any thing
falls upon a stone, the harm that it suffers, is not always (or not only)
according to the proportion of the hardness of that which it fell upon, but
according to the height that it falls from, and according to that violence
that it is thrown with: If their fall who fall by sins of infirmity, should
refer only to the stone they fall upon, (the Majesty of God being wounded
and violated in every sin) every sinner would be broken to pieces, and ground
to powder: But if they fall not from too far a distance, if they have lived
within any nearness, any consideration of God, if they have not fallen with
violence, taken heart and force in the way, grown perfect in the practice of
their sin, if they fall upon this stone, that is, sin, and yet stop at
Christ, after the sin, this stone shall break them; that is, break their
force, and confidence, break their presumption, and security, but yet it shall
leave enough in them, for the Holy Ghost to unite to his Service; yea, even the
sin it self, cooperabitur in bonum, Romans 8. 28.
as the Apostle says, the very fall it self shall be an occasion of his
rising: And therefore though Saint Augustine seem to venture far, it is not
too far, when he says, Audeo dicere, it is boldly said, and yet I must say
it, utile est ut caderem in aliquod manifestum peccatum; A sinner falls to
his advantage, that falls into some such sin, as by being manifested to the
World, manifests his own sinful state, to his own sinful Conscience
too: It is well for that man that falls so, as that he may thereby look the
better to his footing ever after; Bernard.
Dicit Domino Susceptor meus es tu, says St. Bernard, That man has a new
Title to God, a new name for God; all creatures (as St. Bernard inlarges this
meditation) can say, Creator meus es tu, Lord thou art my Creator; all living
creatures can say, Pastor meus es tu, Thou art my shepherd, Thou give me
meat in due season; all men can say, Redemptor meus es tu, thou art my
Redeemer; but only he which is fallen, and fallen upon this stone, can say,
Susceptor meus es tu, only he which has been overcome by a temptation, and is
restored, can say, Lord thou have supported me, thou have recollected my
shivers, and reunited me; only to him has this stone expressed, both
abilities of stone; first to break him with a sense of his sin, and then to
give him peace and rest upon it.

Now there is in this part this circumstance, Quicunque Quicunque.
cadit, whosoever falls; where the quicunque is unusquisque, whosoever falls,
that is, whosoever he be, he falls; Quo^odo de coelo cecidisti Luciter? says
the Prophet, Esaias 14. 12.
the Prophet wonders how Lucifer could fall, having nothing to tempt him (for
so many of the Antiens interpret that place of the fall of the Angels, and when
the Angels fell, there were no other creatures made,) but Quid est homo aut
filius hominis? since the Father of man, Adam, could not, how shall the sons
of him, that inherit his weakness, and contract more, and contribute their
temptations to one another, hope to stand? Adam fell, and he fell a long,
far off, for he could see no stone to fall upon, for when he fell, there was
no such Messiah, no such means of reparation proposed, nor promised when he
fell, as now to us; The blessed Virgin, and the forerunner of Christ, John
Baptist, fell too, but they fell prope, nearer hand, they fell but a little
way, for they had this stone (Christ Jesus) in a personal presence, and their
faith was always awake in them; but yet he, and she, and they all fell into
some sin. Quicunque cadit is unusquisque cadit, whosoever falls, is,
whosoever he be, he falls, and whosoever falls, (as we said before) is broken;
If he fall upon something, and fall not to an infinite depth; If he fall not
upon a soft place, to a delight in sin, but upon a stone, and this stone, (no
harder, sharper, ruggedder then this, not into a diffidence, or distrust in
Gods mercy) he that falls so, and is broken so, that comes to a remorsefull, to
a broken, and a contrite heart, he is broken to his advantage, left to a
possibility, yea brought to a neerenesse of being pieced again, by the Word,
by the Sacraments, and other medicinal institutions of Christ in his Church.

We must end only with touching upon the third part, 3 Part.
upon whom this stone falls, it will grind him to powder; where we shall only
tell you first, Quid conteri, what this grinding is; and then, Quid cadere,
what the falling of this stone is; And briefly this grinding to powder, is to
be brought to that desperate and irrecoverable estate in sin, as that no
medicinal correction from God, no breaking, no bowing, no melting, no moulding
can bring him to any good fashion; when God can work no cure, do no good upon
us by breaking us; not by breaking us in our health, for we will attribute that
to weakness of stomach, to surfeit, to indigestion; not by breaking us in our
states, for we will impute that to falsehood in servants, to oppression of great
adversaries, to inquity of Judges; not by breaking us in our honor, for we
will accuse for that, factions, and practices, and supplantation in Court; when
God cannot break us with his corrections, but that we will attribute them to
some natural, to some accidental causes, and never think of Gods judgments,
which are the true cause of these afflictions; when God cannot break us by
breaking our backs, by laying on heavy loads of calamities upon us, nor by
breaking our hearts, by putting us into a sad, and heavy, and fruitless sorrow
and melancholy for these worldly losses, then he comes to break us by breaking
our necks, by casting us into the bottomless pit, and falling upon us there,
in this wrath and indignation, Comminuam eos in pulverem, says he, Psalm. 15.
42.
I will beat them as small as dust before the wind, and tread them as flat as
clay in the streets, Esaias 30. 14.
the breaking thereof shall be like the breaking of a Potters vessel, which is
broken without any pity. (No pity from God, no mercy, neither shall any man
pity them, no compassion, no sorrow:) And in the breaking thereof, says the
Prophet, there is not found a sheard to take fire at the hearth, nor to take
water at the pit: that is, they shall be incapable of any beam of grace in
themselves from heaven, or any spark of zeal in themselves, (not a sheard to
fetch fire at the hearth) and incapable of any drop of Christ's blood from
heaven, or of any tear of contrition in themselves, not a sheard to fetch
water at the pit, Ierem. 19. 11.
I will break them as a Potters vessel, quod non potest instaurari, says God
in Jeremy, There shall be no possible means (of those means which God has
ordained in his Church) to recompact them again, no voice of Gods word to draw
them, no threatenings of Gods judgments shall drive them, no censures of Gods
Church shall fit them, no Sacrament shall cement and glue them to Christ's body
again; In temporal blessings, he shall be unthankful, in temporal
afflictions, he shall be obdurate: And these two shall serve, as the upper and
nether stone of a mill, to grind this reprobate sinner to powder.

Lastly, Cadere.
this is to be done, by Christ's falling upon him, and what is that? I know some
Expositors take this to be but the falling of Gods judgments upon him in this
world; But in this world there is no grinding to powder, all Gods judgments
here, (for any thing that we can know) have the nature of Physic in them, and
may, and are wont to cure; and no man is here so absolutely broken in pieces,
but that he may be reunited: we choose therefore to follow the Ancients in
this, That the falling of this stone upon this Reprobate, is Christ's last and
irrecoverable falling upon him, in his last judgment; that when he shall wish
that the Hills might fall and cover him, this stone shall fall, and grind him
to powder; He shall be broken, and he no more found, says the Prophet, yea, he
shall be broken and no more sought: No man shall consider him what he is now,
Dan. 11. 18.
nor remember him what he was before: For, that stone, which in Daniel, Dan. 2.
was cut out without hands (which was a figure of Christ, who came without
ordinary generation) when that great Image was to be overthrown, broke not an
arm or a leg, but brake the whole Image in pieces, and it wrought not only
upon the weak parts, but it brake all, the clay, the iron, the brass, the
silver, the gold; so when this stone falls thus, when Christ comes to judgment,
he shall not only condemn him for his clay, his earthly and covetous sins,
nor for his iron, his revengefull oppressing, and rustly sins, nor for his
brass, his shining, and glittering sins, which he has filed and polished,
but he shall fall upon his silver and gold, his religious and precious sins,
his hypocritical hearing of Sermons, his singular observing of Sabbaths, his
Pharisaicall giving of alms, and as well his subtle counterfeiting of
Religion, as his Atheistical opposing of religion, this stone, Christ
himself, shall fall upon him, and a shower of other stones shall oppress him
too. Sicut pluit laque^s, Psalm. 1^. 6.
says David, As God rained springs and snares upon them in this world
(abundance of temporal blessings to be occasions of sin unto them:) So plues
grandinem, he shall rain such haile-stones upon them, as shall grind them to
powder; there shall fall upon him the natural Law, which was written in his
heart, and did rebuke him, then when he prepared for a sin; there shall fall
upon him the written Law, which cried out from the mouths of the Prophets in
these places, to avert him from sin; there shall fall upon him those sins
which he has done, and those sins which he has not done, if nothing but want
of means and opportunity hindered him from doing them; there shall fall upon him
those sins which he has done after another dehortation, and those, which
others have done after his provocation; there the stones of Nineveh shall fall
upon him, and of as many Cities as have repented with less proportions of
mercy and grace, then God afforded him; there the rubbage of Sodom and Gomorrah
shall fall upon him, and as many Cities as in their ruin might have been
examples to him. All these stones shall fall upon him, and to add weight to all
these, Christ Jesus himself shall fall upon his conscience, with unanswerable
questions, Rev. 2. 11.
and grind his soul to powder. But he that overcomes, shall not be hurt by
the second death, he that feels his own fall upon this stone, shall never feel
this stone fall upon him, he that comes to a remorse, early, and earnestly
after a sin, and seeks by ordinary means, his reconcileation to God in his
Church, is in the best state that man can be in now; for howsoever we cannot
say that repentance is as happy an estate as Innocence, yet certainly every
particular man feels more comfort and spiritual joy, after a true repentance
for a sin, then he had in that degree of Innocence which he had before he
committed that sin; and therefore in this case also we may safely repeat
those words of Augustine, Audeo dicere, I dare be bold to say, that many a man
has been the better for some sin.

Almighty God, who gives that civil wisdom, to make use of other men's
infirmities, give us also this heavenly wisdom, to make use of our own
particular sins, that thereby our own wretched conditions in our selves, and
our means of reparation in Jesus Christ, may be the more manifested unto us;
To whom with the blessed Spirit, etc.

SERMON XXXVI.
Preached at Saint Paul's upon Christmasse day, 1621.
JOHN 1. 8. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light.
IT is an injury common to all the Evangelists, (as Irenaeus notes) that all
their Gospels were severally refused by one Sect of Heretics or other. But it
was proper to Saint John alone, to be refused by a Sect, that admitted all the
other three Evangelists, (as Epiphanius remembers) and refused only Saint
John. These were the Alogiani, a limme and branch of the Arians, who being
unable to look upon the glorious Splendor, the divine Glory, attributed by
Saint John to this Logos, (which gave them their name of Alogiani) this Word,
this Christ, not comprehending this Mystery, That this Word was so with God, as
that it was God; they took a round way, and often practiced, to condemn all
that they did not understand, and therefore refuse the whole Gospel. Indeed
his whole Gospel is comprehended in the beginning thereof. In this first
Chapter is contracted all that which is extensively spread, and dilated through
the whole Book. For here is first, the Foundation of all, the Divinity of
Christ, to the 15. verse. Secondly, the Execution of all, the Offices of
Christ, to the 35. verse. And then the Effect, the Working, the Application of
all, that is, who were to Preach all this, to the ends of the world, the
calling of his Apostles, to the end of the Chapter: for the first, Christ's
Divinity, there is enough expressed in the very first verse alone: for, there
is his Eternity, intimated in that word, In principio, in the beginning. The
first book of the Bible, Genesis, and the last book, (that is, that which was
last written) this Gospel, begin both with this word, In the beginning. But
the last beginning was the first, if Moses beginning do only denote the
Creation, which was not 6000. years since, and Saint John's, the Eternity of
Christ, which no Millions, multiplied by Millions, can calculate. And then, as
his Eternity, so his distinction of Persons, is also specified in this 1.
verse, when the Word, (that is, Christ) is said to have been apud Deum, with
God. For, therefore, (says Saint Basil) did the Holy Ghost rather choose to
say apud Deum, then in Deo, with God, then in God, ne auferenda Hypostaseos
occasionem daret, lest he should give any occasion of denying the same Nature,
in diverse Persons; for it does more clearly notify a distinction of Persons,
to say, he was with him, then to say, he was in him; for the several
Attributes of God, (Mercy and Justice, and the rest) are in God, and yet they
are not distinct Persons. Lastly, there is also expressed in this 1. verse
Christ's Equality with God, in that it is said, and Verbum erat Deus, and this
Word was God. As it was in the beginning, and therefore Eternal, and as it was
with God, and therefore a distinct Person, so it was God, and thereforre equal
to the Father; which phrase does so vex and anguish the Arians, that being
disfurnished of all other escapes, they corrupted the place, only with a false
interpunction, and broke of the words, where they admitted no such pause; for,
they read it thus, Verbum erat apud Deum; (so far, well) Et Deus erat. There
they made their point; and then followed in another sentence: Verbum hoc erat
in principio, etc.

The first part then of this Chapter, (and indeed of the whole Gospel) is in
that 1. verse the manifestation of his Divine Nature, in his Eternity, in the
distinction of Persons, in the equality with the Father. The second part of
the Chapter lays down the Office of Christ, his Prophetical, his Priestly,
his Royal Office. For the first, the Office of a Prophet consisting in three
several exercises, to manifest things past, to foretell things to come, and to
expound thing present, Christ declared himself to be a Prophet in all these
three: for, for the first, he was not only a Verbal, but an Actual
manifester of former Prophecies, for all the former Prophecies were
accomplished in his Person, and in his deeds, and words, in his actions and
Passion. For the second, his foretelling of future things, he foretold the
state of the Church, to the end of the world. And for the third (declaring of
present things) He told the Samaritan woman, John 4. 19.
so exquisitely, all her own History, that she gave presently that attestation,
Sir, I see that thou art a Prophet: so his Prophetical Office, is plainly laid
down. For his second Office, his Priesthood, that is expressed in the 36.
verse, Behold the Lamb of God; for, in this, he was our Priest, that he was
our Sacrifice; he was our Priest, in that he offered himself for our sins.
Lastly, his Royal Office was the most natural to him of all the rest. The
Office of a Prophet was Natural to none; none was born a Prophet. Those who
are called the children of the Prophets, and the sons of the Prophets, are
but the Prophets Disciples. Though the Office of Priesthood, by being annexed
to one Tribe, may (in some sense) be called Natural, yet in Christ it could
not be so, for he was not of that Tribe of Levi: so that he had no interest in
the legal Priesthood, but was a Priest according to the Order of Melchisedec.
But his Title to be King, was natural, by descent, he was of the blood Royal,
and the nearest in succession; so that he, and only he, had, De Iure, all the
three unctions upon him. David had two; he was both a Prophet, and a King; he
had those two capacities; Melchisedec had two too; he was both a King and a
Priest; he had two: Only Christ had all three, both a Prophet, and Priest, and
King.

In the third part of the Chapter, which is the calling of four of his
Apostles, we may observe that the first was called, was not Peter, but Andrew;
that there might be laid at first some interruption, some stop to their zealous
fury, who will still force, and heap up every action which any way concerns
Saint Peter, to the building up of his imaginary primacy, which primacy, they
cared not though Peter wanted, if they could convey that primacy to his
Successor, by any other Title; for which Successors sake it is, and not for
Saint Peter's own, that they are so over diligent in advancing his prerogative.
But, it was not Peter, that was called, but Andrew. In Andrews present and
earnest application of himself to Christ, we may note, (and only so) diverse
particulars, fit for use and imitation. In his first question, Master, where
dwell thou? there is not only, (as Cyrill observes) a reverent ascribing to
him a power of instructing in that compellation, Master, but a desire to have
more time afforded to hearken to his instructions, Where dwell thou, that I
may dwell with thee? And as soon as ever he had taken in some good portion of
knowledge himself, he conceives presently a desire to communicate his
happiness with others; and he seeks his brother Peter, and tells him,
Invenimus Messiam, we have found the Messiah; which is, (as Saint Chrysostom
notes) vox quaerentis: In this, that he rejoices in the finding of him, he
testifies that he had sought him, and that he had continued in the expectation
of a Messiah before. Invenit Messiam, he had found the Messiah; but, says the
Text, Duxit ad Iesum, he brought his brother the glorious news of having found
a King, the King of the Jews, but he led him to Jesus, to a Savior; that so,
all kinds of happiness, temporal and spiritual, might be intimated in this
discovery of a King, and of a Savior; What may not his servants hope for at
his hands, who is both those, a King and a Savior, and has worldly
preferments, and the Glory of Heaven in his power?

Now, though the words of this Text, (He was not that light, but was sent to
bear witness of that light) are placed in the first part of the Chapter, that
which concerns Christ's Divine nature, yet they belong, and they have a respect
to all three; To his Divine nature, to his Offices, and to his Calling of his
Apostles: For, first, light denotes his Divine nature; secondly, the testimony
that is given of him by John Baptist, (of whom the words of our Text are
spoken) declares him to be the Messiah, and Messiah, (which signifies anointed)
involves all his Offices, are his three Offices, are his three vocations; and
thirdly, the Application of this testimony, given by John Baptist here, by the
Apostles and their Successors after, intimates or brings to our memory this
their first vocation, in this Chapter. So that the Gospel of Saint John
contains all Divinity, this Chapter all the Gospel, and this Text all the
Chapter. Therefore it is too large to go through at this time; at this time we
shall insist upon such branches as arise out of that consideration, what, and
who this light is, (for, we shall find it to be both a personal light, (it is
some body) and, otherwise too, a real light, (it is some thing) therefore we
inquire, what, this light is, (what thing) and who this light is, (what person)
which John Baptist is denied to be. Hereafter we shall consider, the Testimony
which is given of this light; in which part in due time, we shall handle, the
person of the witness John Baptist, in whom we shall find many considerable,
and extraordinary circumstances: and then, his Citation, and calling to this
testimony; and thirdly, the testimony it self that he gave: and lastly, why
any testimony was requisite to so evident a thing as light. But the first part,
who, and what this light is, belongs most properly to this day, and will fill
that portion of the day, which is afforded us for this exercise. Proceed we
therefore to that, John Baptist was not that light, who was, what was?

Though most expositors, 1 Part.
as well ancient, as modern agree with one general, and unanime consent, Quis
lux.
that light in this verse is intended and meant of Christ, Christ is this
light, yet in some precedent and subsequent passages in this Chapter, I see
other senses have been admitted of this word, light, then perchance those
places will bear; certainly other then those places need: particularly, in the
fourth verse (In it was life, and that life was the light of men) there they
understand life, to be nothing but this natural life which we breath, and
light to be only that natural life, natural reason, which distinguishes us
men, from other creatures. Now, it is true that they may have a pretense for
some ground of this interpretation in antiquity it self, for, so says Saint
Cyrill, Filius Dei Creative illuminat, Christ does enlighten us, in creating
us. And so some others of the Fathers, and some of the Schools, understand by
that light natural Reason, and that life, conservation in life. But this
interpretation seems to me subject to both these dangers, that it goes so
far, and yet reaches not home. So far, in wresting in diverse senses into a
word, which needs but one, and is of it self clear enough, that is light, and
yet reaches not home, for it reaches not to the essential light, which is
Christ Jesus, nor to the supernatural light, which is Faith and Grace, which
seems to have been the Evangelists principal scope, to declare the coming of
Christ, (who is the essential light) and his purpose in coming, to raise and
establish a Church, by Faith and Grace, which is the supernatural light: For,
as the holy Ghost himself interprets life to be meant of Christ, 1 Ioh. 5. 12.
(He that has the Son has life) so we may justly do of light too, he that
sees the Son, the Son of God has light. For, light is never, (to my
remembrance) found in any place of the Scripture, where it must necessarily
signify the light of nature, natural reason; but wheresoever it is
transferred from the natural to a figurative sense, it takes a higher
signification then that; either it signifies Essential light, Christ Jesus,
(which answers our first question, Quis lux, who is this light, it is Christ,
personally) or it signifies the supernatural light of Faith and Grace, (which
answers our second question, Quid lux, what is this light, for it is the
working of Christ, by his Spirit, in his Church, in the infusion of Faith and
Grace, for belief, and manners) And therefore though it be ever lawful, and
often times very useful, for the raising and exaltation of our devotion, and
to present the plenty, and abundance of the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, who
satisfies us as with marrow, and with fatness, to induce the diverse senses
that the Scriptures do admit, yet this may not be admitted, if there may be
danger thereby, to neglect or weaken the literal sense it self. For there is
no necessity of that spiritual wantonness of finding more then necessary
senses; for, the more lights there are, the more shadows are also cast by those
many lights. And, as it is true in religious duties, so is it in interpretation
of matters of Religion, Necessarium and Satis convertuntur; when you have done
that you ought to do in your calling, you have done enough; there are no such
Evangelicall counsels, as should raise works of supererogation, more then
you are bound to do, so when you have the necessary sense, that is the meaning
of the holy Ghost in that place, you have senses enough, and not till then,
though you have never so many, and never so delightful.

Light therefore, Illa lux.
is in all this Chapter fitliest understood of Christ; who is noted here, with
that distinctive article, Illa lux, that light. For, non sic dicitur lux, sicut
lapis; Christ is not so called Light, Augustine.
as he is called a Rock, or a Cornerstone; not by a metaphore, but truly, and
properly. It is true that the Apostles are said to be light, and that with an
article, the light; but yet with a limitation and restriction, Mat. 5.
the light of the world, that is, set up to convey light to the world. It is
true that John Baptist himself was called light, and with large additions,
Lucerna ardens, a burning, Ioh. 5.
and a shining lamp, to denote both his own burning zeal, and the
communicating of this his light to others. It is true, Ephe. 5.
that all the faithful are said to be light in the Lord; but all this is but
to signify that they had been in darkness before; they had been beclouded,
but were now illustrated; they were light, but light by reflection, by
illustration of a greater light. And as in the first creation, vesper and mane
dies unus, The evening and the morning made the day, evening before morning,
darkness before light, so in our regeneration, when we are made new
Creatures, the Spirit of God finds us in natural darkness, and by him we are
made light in the Lord. But Christ himself, and he only, is Illa lux, vera
lux; that light, the true light. Not so opposed to those other lights, as
though the Apostles, or John Baptist, or the faithful, who are called lights,
were false lights; but that they were weak lights. But Christ was fons lucis,
the fountain of all their light; light so, as no body else was so; so, as that
he was nothing but light. Now, neither the Apostles, nor John Baptist, nor the
Elect, no nor the virgin Mary (though we should allow all that the Roman
Church ask in her behalf) for the Roman Church is not yet come to that
searednesse, that obdurateness, that impudency, as to pronounce that the
virgin Mary was without original sin, (though they have done many shrewd
acts toward it, to the prejudice of the contrary opinion) yet none of these
were so light, as they were nothing but light. Moses himself who received and
delivered the law, was not so; and to intimate so much, there was an
illustration, and irradiation upon his face, but not so of all his body. Nay,
Christ Jesus himself, who fulfilled the law, as man, was not so; which he also
intimated in the greatest degree of glorification which he accepted upon earth,
which was his transfiguration, for, though it be said in that, That the fashion
of his Countenance was changed, and his garment was white, and glistered, Luke
^. 27.
yet, lineamenta Petro agnoscibilia servavit, Tertull.
he kept that former proportion of body, that Peter could know him by it. So
that this was not a glorifying of the body, and making it thorough light; but
he suffered his Divine nature to appear and shine thorough his flesh, and not
to swallow, or annihilate that flesh. All other men, by occasion of this flesh,
have dark clouds, yea nights, yea long and frozen winter nights of sin, and
of the works of darkness. Christ was incapable of any such nights, or any such
clouds, any approaches toward sin; but yet Christ admitted some shadows,
some such degrees of humane infirmity, as by them, he was willing to show, that
the nature of man, in the best perfection thereof, is not vera lux, tota lux,
true light, all light, which he declared in that Si possible, and that Transeat
calix, If it he possible, let this cup pass; words, Mat. 26. 39.
to which himself was pleased to allow so much of a retractation, and a
correction, Veruntamen, yet Father, whatsoever the sadness of my soul have
made me say, yet, not my will but thine be done; not mine, but thine; so that
they were not altogether, all one; humane infirmity made some difference. So
that no one man, not Christ, (considered but so as man) was tota lux, all
light, no cloud. No not mankind, consider it collectively, can be light so,
as that there shall be no darkness. It was not so, when all mankind was in
one person, in Adam. It is said sometimes in School, that no man can keep the
commandments, yet man, collectively, may keep them. They intend no more
herein, but that some one man may abstain from doing any act against
worshipping of Images, another from stealing, another from adultery, and others
from others. But if it were possible to compose a man of such elements, as that
the principallest virtues, and eminencies of all other men, should enter into
his composition, and if there could be found a man, as perfect in all
particular virtues, as Moses was in meekness, Numb.12.
(who was a meek man, above all the men that were upon the earth) yet this man
would not be vera lux, tota lux, true light, all light. Moses was not so
meek, but that he slew the Egyptian, nor so meek, but that he disputed and
expostulated with God many times, passionately. Every man is so far from being
tota lux, all light, as that he has still within him, a dark vapor of
orginall sin, and the cloud of humane flesh without him.

Nay not only no man, (for so we may consider him in the whole course of his
life) but noone act, of the most perfect, and religious man in the world,
though that act employ but half a minute in the doing thereof, can be vera
lux, true light, all light, so perfect light, as that it may serve another, or
thy self, for a lantern to his, or thy feet, or a light to his, or thy
steps, so that he or thou may think it enough to do so still. For, another
man may do so good works, as it may justly work to thy shame, and confusion,
and to the aggravating of thy condemnation, that thou live not as well as
he, yet, it would not perchance serve thy turn, to live but so well; for, to
whom God gives more, of him he requires more. No man has veram lucem, true
light, thorough light; no man has meridiem, Augem, that high point that casts
no shadow, because, besides original sin, that ever smoakes up, and creates
a foot in the soul, and besides natural infirmities, which become sins,
when we consider Grace, no man does carry his good actions to that height as,
by that grace, which God affords him, he might do. Slacker men have a
declination even in their mornings; a West even in their East; coolings, and
faintnesses and after-noones, as soon as they have any dawnings, any break of
day, any inchoation of any spiritual action or purpose. Others have some
farther growth, and increasing, and are more diligent in the observation of
spiritual duties; but yet they have not their meridiem, their Augem, their
noon, their south point, no such height, as that they might not have a higher,
by that grace which they have received. In the best degree of our best actions,
particularly in this service, which we do to God at this hour, if we brought
with us hither a religious purpose to sanctify this festival, if we answer
to the callings of his most blessed Spirit, whilst we are here, if we carry
away a detestation of our sins, and a holy purpose of amendment of life, this
is a good degree of proficiency, and God be blessed, if any of us all arrive
to that degree; but yet, this is not vera lux, true light, all light; for, who
amongst us can avoid the testimony of his conscience, that since he begun this
present service to God, his thoughts have not strayed upon pleasures and
vanities or profit, and leapt the walls of this Church, yea, perchance within
the walls of this flesh, which should be the Temple of the holy Ghost?
Besides, to become vera lux, tota lux, true light, thorough light, requires
persebrrance to the end. So that till our natural light go out, we cannot
say that we have this light; for, as the darkness of hell fire is, so this
light of this heavenly fire, must be everlasting. If ever it go clean out, it
was never thoroughly kindled, but kindled to our farther damnation; it was never
vera lux, true light, for, as one office of the law is, but to show sin, so
all the light of grace may end in this, to show me my desperate estate, from
the abuse of grace. In all Philosophy there is not so dark a thing as light;
As the sun, which is fons lucis naturalis, the beginning of natural light,
is the most evident thing to be seen, and yet the hardest to be looked upon,
so is natural light to our reason and understanding. Nothing clearer, for it
is clearness it self, nothing darker, it is enwrapped in so many scruples.
Nothing nearer, for it is round about us, nothing more remote, for we know
neither entrance, nor limits of it. Nothing more easy, for a child discerns
it, nothing more hard, for no man understands it. It is apprehensible by sense,
and not comprehensible by reason. If we wink, we cannot choose but see it, if
we stare, we know it never the better. No man is yet got so near to the
knowledge of the qualities of light, as to know whether light it self be a
quality, or a substance. If then this natural light be so dark to our
natural reason, if we shall offer to pierce so far, into the light of this
text, the Essential light Christ Jesus, (in his nature, or but in his offices)
or the supernatural light of faith and grace, (how far faith may be had, and
yet lost, and how far the freewill of man may concur and cooperate with grace,
and yet still remain nothing in it self) if we search farther into these
points, then the Scripture has opened us a way, how shall we hope to
unentangle, or extricate our selves? They had a precious composition for lamps,
amongst the ancients, reserved especially for Tombs, which kept light for many
hundreds of years; we have had in our age experience, in some casual openings
of ancient vaults, of finding such lights, as were kindled, (as appeared by
their inscriptions) fifteen or sixteen hundred years before; but, as soon as
that light comes to our light, it vanishes. So this eternal, and this
supernatural light, Christ and faith, enlightens, warmes, purges, and does all
the profitable offices of fire, and light, if we keep it in the right sphere,
in the proper place, (that is, if we consist in points necessary to salvation,
and revealed in the Scripture) but when we bring this light to the common
light of reason, to our inferences, and consequencies, it may be in danger to
vanish it self, and perchance extinguish our reason too; we may search so far,
and reason so long of faith and grace, as that we may lose not only them, but
even our reason too, and sooner become mad then good. Not that we are bound to
believe any thing against reason, that is, to believe, we know not why. It is
but a slack opinion, it is not Belief, that is not grounded upon reason. He
that should come to a Heathen man, a mere natural man, uncatechized,
uninstructed in the rudiments of the Christian Religion, and should at first,
without any preparation, present him first with this necessity; Thou shall
burn in fire and brimstone eternally, except thou believe a Trinity of
Persons, in an unity of one God, Except thou believe the Incarnation of the
second Person of the Trinity, the Son of God, Except thou believe that a
Virgin had a Soon, and the same Son that God had, and that God was Man too,
and being the immortal God, yet died, he should be so far from working any
spiritual cure upon this poor soul, as that he should rather bring Christian
Mysteries into scorn, then him to a belief. For, that man, if you proceed so,
Believe all, or you burn in Hell, would find an easy, an obvious way to
escape all; that is, first not to believe Hell it self, and then nothing could
bind him to believe the rest.

The reason therefore of Man, must first be satisfied; but the way of such
satisfaction must be this, to make him see, That this World, a frame of so much
harmony, so much concinnitie and conveniencie, and such a correspondence, and
subordination in the parts thereof, must necessarily have had a workman, for
nothing can make it self: That no such workman would deliver over a frame,
and work, of so much Majesty, to be governed by Fortune, casually, but would
still retain the Administration thereof in his own hands: That if he do so,
if he made the World, and sustain it still by his watchful Providence, there
belongs a worship and service to him, for doing so: That therefore he has
certainly revealed to man, what kind of worship, and service, shall be
acceptable to him: That this manifestation of his Will, must be permanent, it
must be written, there must be a Scripture, which is his Word and his Will: And
that therefore, from that Scripture, from that Word of God, all Articles of our
Belief are to be drawn.

If then his Reason confessing all this, ask farther proof, how he shall know
that these Scriptures accepted by the Christian Church, are the true
Scriptures, let him bring any other Book which pretends to be the Word of
God, into comparison with these; It is true, we have not a Demonstration; not
such an Evidence as that one and two, are three, to prove these to be
Scriptures of God; God has not proceeded in that manner, to drive our Reason
into a pound, and to force it by a peremptory necessity to accept these for
Scriptures, for then, here had been no exercise of our Will, and our assent, if
we could not have resisted. But yet these Scriptures have so orderly, so sweet,
and so powerful a working upon the reason, and the understanding, as if any
third man, who were utterly discharged of all preconceptions and anticipations
in matter of Religion, one who were altogether neutrall, disinteressed,
unconcerned in either party, nothing toward a Turk, and as little toward a
Christian, should hear a Christian plead for his Bible, and a Turk for his
Alcoran, and should weigh the evidence of both; the Majesty of the Style, the
punctual accomplishment of the Prophecies, the harmony and concurrence of the
four Evangelists, the consent and unanimity of the Christian Church ever
since, and many other such reasons, he would be drawn to such an Historical,
such a Grammatical, such a Logical belief of our Bible, as to prefer it
before any other, that could be pretended to be the Word of God. He would
believe it, and he would know why he did so. For let no man think that God
has given him so much ease here, as to save him by believing he knows not
what, or why. Knowledge cannot save us, but we cannot be saved without
Knowledge; Faith is not on this side Knowledge, but beyond it; we must
necessarily come to Knowledge first, though we must not stay at it, when we are
come thither. For, a regenerate Christian, being now a new Creature, has also
a new faculty of Reason: and so believes the Mysteries of Religion, out of
another Reason, then as a mere natural Man, he believed natural and moral
things. He believes them for their own sake, by Faith though he take Knowledge
of them before, by that common Reason, and by those humane Arguments, which
work upon other men, in natural or moral things. Diverse men may walk by the
Sea side, and the same beams of the Sun giving light to them all, one
gathers by the benefit of that light pebles, or speckled shells, for curious
vanity, and another gathers precious Pearl, or medicinal Ambar, by the same
light. So the common light of reason illumins us all; but one imployes this
light upon the searching of impertinent vanities, another by a better use of
the same light, finds out the Mysteries of Religion; and when he has found
them, loves them, not for the lights sake, but for the natural and true worth
of the thing it self. Some men by the benefit of this light of Reason, have
found out things profitable and useful to the whole world; As in particular,
Printing, by which the learning of the whole world is communicacable to one
another, and our minds and our inventions, our wits and compositions may trade
and have commerce together, and we may participate of one another
understandings, as well as of our Clothes, and Wines, and Oils, and other
Merchandise: So by the benefit of this light of reason, they have found out
Artillery, by which wars come to quicker ends then heretofore, and the great
expense of blood is avoided: for the numbers of men slain now, since the
invention of Artillery, are much less then before, when the sword was the
executioner. Others, by the benefit of this light have searched and found the
secret corners of gain, and profit, wheresoever they lie. They have found
wherein the weakness of another man consists, and made their profit of
that, by circumventing him in a bargain: They have found his riotous, and
wastefull inclination, and they have fed and fomented that disorder, and kept
open that leake, to their advantage, and the others ruin. They have found
where was the easiest, and most accessible way, to solicit the Chastity of a
woman, whether Discourse, Music, or Presents, and according to that
discovery, they have pursued hers, and their own eternal destruction. By the
benefit of this light, men see through the darkest, and most impervious places,
that are, that is, Courts of Princes, and the greatest Officers in Courts; and
can submit themselves to second, and to advance the humors of men in great
place, and so make their profit of the weaknesses which they have discovered
in these great men. All the ways, both of Wisdom, and of Craft lie open to
this light, this light of natural reason: But when they have gone all these
ways by the benefit of this light, they have got no further, then to have
walked by a tempestuous Sea, and to have gathered pebles, and speckled cockle
shells. Their light seems to be great out of the same reason, that a Torch in a
misty night, seems greater then in a clear, because it has kindled and
inflamed much thick and gross Air round about it. So the light and wisdom
of worldly men, seems great, because he has kindled an admiration, or an
applause in Aerie flatterers, not because it is so in deed.

But, if thou can take this light of reason that is in thee, this poor
snuff, that is almost out in thee, thy saint and dim knowledge of God, that
rises out of this light of nature, if thou can in those embers, those cold
ashes, find out one small coal, and wilt take the pains to kneell down, and
blow that coal with thy devout Prayers, and light thee a little candle, (a
desire to read that Book, which they call the Scriptures, and the Gospel, and
the Word of God;) If with that little candle thou can creep humbly into low
and poor places, if thou can find thy Savior in a Manger, and in his
swathing clouts, in his humiliation, and bless God for that beginning, if thou
can find him flying into Egypt, and find in thy self a disposition to
accompany him in a persecution, in a banishment, if not a bodily banishment, a
local banishment, yet a real, a spiritual banishment, a banishment from
those sins, and that sinful conversation, which thou have loved more then
thy Parents, or Country, or thine own body, which perchance thou have
consumed, and destroyed with that sin; if thou can find him contenting and
containing himself at home in his fathers house, and not breaking out, no not
about the work of our salvation, till the due time was come, when it was to be
done. And if according to that example, thou can contain thy self in that
station and vocation in which God has planted thee, and not, through a hasty
and precipitate zeal, break out to an imaginary, and intempestive, and
unseasonable Reformation, either in Civil or Ecclesiastical business, which
belong not to thee; if with this little poor light, these first degrees of
Knowledge and Faith, thou can follow him into the Garden, and gather up some
of the drops of his precious Blood and sweat, which he shed for thy soul, if
thou can follow him to Jerusalem, and pick up some of those tears, which he
shed upon that City, and upon thy soul; if thou can follow him to the place
of his scourging, and to his crucifying, and provide thee some of that balm,
which must cure thy soul; if after all this, thou can turn this little
light inward, and can thereby discern where thy diseases, and thy wounds,
and thy corruptions are, and can apply those tears, and blood and balm to
them, (all this is, That if thou attend the light of natural reason, and
cherish that, and exalt that, so that that bring thee to a love of the
Scriptures, and that love to a belief of the truth thereof, and that
historical faith to a faith of application, of appropriation, that as all
those things were certainly done, so they were certainly done for thee) thou
shall never envy the luster and glory of the great lights of worldly men, which
are great by the infirmity of others, or by their own opinion, great because
others think them great, or because they think themselves so, but thou shall
find, that howsoever they magnify their lights, their wit, their learning,
Habak 1.
their industry, their fortune, their favor, and sacrifice to their own nets,
yet thou shall see, that thou by thy small light have gathered Pearl and
Amber, and they by their great lights nothing but shells and pebles; they have
determined the light of nature, upon the book of nature, this world, and thou
have carried the light of nature higher, thy natural reason, and even humane
arguments, have brought thee to read the Scriptures, and to that love, God
has set to the seal of faith. Their light shall set at noone; even in their
height, some heavy cross shall cast a damp upon their soul, and cut off all
their succors, and divest them of all comforts, and thy light shall grow up,
from a fair hope, to a modest assurance and infallibility, that that light
shall never go out, nor the works of darkness, nor the Prince of darkness
ever prevail upon thee, but as thy light of reason is exalted by faith here,
so thy light of faith shall be exalted into the light of glory, and fruition in
the Kingdom of heaven. Before the sun was made, there was a light which did
that office of distinguishing night and day; but when the sun was created,
that did all the offices of the former light, and more^ Reason is that first,
and primogeniall light, and goes no farther in a natural man; but in a man
regenerate by faith, that light does all that reason did, and more; and all his
Moral, and Civil, and Domestique, and indifferent actions, (though they be
never done without Reason) yet their principal scope, and mark is the glory
of God, and though they seem but Moral, or Civil, or domestique, yet they
have a deeper tincture, a heavenly nature, a relation to God, in them.

The light in our Text then, is essentially and personally Christ himself, from
him flows the supernatural light of faith and grace, here also intended; and
because this light of faith, and grace flowing from that fountain of light
Christ Jesus, works upon the light of nature, and reason, it may conduce to the
raising of your devotions, if we do (without any long insisting upon the
several parts thereof) present to you some of those many and diverse lights,
which are in this world, and admit an application to this light in our Text,
the essential light, Christ Jesus; and the supernatural light, faith and
grace.

Of these lights we shall consider some few couples; and the first pair, Lux
Essentiae, Lux Essentiae.
and Lux Gloriae, the light of the Essence of God, and the light of the glory
of his Saints. And though the first of these, be that essential light, by
which we shall see God face to face, as he is, and the effluence and emanation
of beams, from the face of God, which make that place Heaven, of which light it
is said, That God who only has Immortality, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
dwells in luce inaccessibili, in the light that none can attain to, yet by the
light of faith, and grace in sanctification, we may come to such a
participation of that light of Essence, or such a reflection of it in this
world, that it shall be true of us, which was said of those Ephesians, 5. 8.
You were once darkness, but now are light in the Lord; he does not say
enlightened, Phil. 2. 20.
nor lightsome, but light it self, light essentially, for our conversation is
in heaven; Ezekiel 16. 10.
And as God says of Jerusalem, and his blessings here in this world, Calceavit
Ianthino, I have shod thee, with Badgers skin, (some translate it) (which the
Ancients take for some precious stuff) that is, I have enabled thee to tread
upon all the most estimable things of this world, (for as the Church it self is
presented, so every true member of the Church is endowed, Apo 12. 1.
Luna sub pedibus, the Moon, and all under the Moon is under our feet, we
tread upon this world, even when we are trodden upon in it) so the precieus
promises of Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
make us partakers of the Divine Nature, and the light of faith, 1 Cor. 6. 17.
makes us the same Spirit with the Lord; And this is our participation of the
light of essence, in this life. The next is the light of glory.

This is that Glorification Lux Gloriae.
which we shall have at the last day, of which glory, we consider a great part
to be in that Denudation, that manifestation of all to all; as, in this world,
a great part of our inglorious servitude is in those disguises, and
palliations, those colors, and pretenses of public good, with which men of
power and authority apparel their oppressions of the poor; In this are we the
more miserable, that we cannot see their ends, that there is none of this
denudation, this laying open of ourselves to one another, which shall accompany
that state of glory, where we shall see one another bodies, and souls,
actions and thoughts. And therefore, as if this place were now that Tribunal
of Christ Jesus, and this that day of Judgment, and denudation, we must be
here, as we shall be there, content to stand naked before him; content that
there be a discovery, a revealing, a manifestation of all our sins, wrought
upon us, at least to our own consciences, though not to the congregation; If
we will have glory, we must have this denudation. We must not be glad, when our
sins escape the Preacher. We must not say, (as though there were a comfort in
that) though he have hit such a man's Adultery, and another Ambition, and
another extortion, yet, for all his diligence, he has missed my sin; for,
if thou would feign have it mist, thou would feign hold it still. And
then, why came thou hither? What came thou for to Church, or to the
Sacrament? Why do thou delude God, with this complementall visit, to come to
his house, if thou bring not with thee, a disposition to his honor, and his
service? Came thou only to try whether God knew thy sin, and could tell
thee of it, by the Preacher? Alas, he knows it infallibly; And, if he take no
knowledge of his knowing it, to thy conscience, by the words of the Preacher,
thy state is the more desperate. God sends us to preach forgiveness of sins;
where we find no sin, we have no Commission to execute; How shall we find
your sins? In the old sacrifices of the law, the Priest did not fetch the
sacrifice from the herd, but he received it from him that brought it, and so
sacrificed it for him. Do thou therefore prevent the Preacher; Accuse thyselfe
before he accuse thee; offer up thy sin thy self; Bring it to the top of thy
memory, and thy conscience, that he finding it there, may sacrifice it for
thee; Tune the instrument, and it is the fitter for his hand. Remember thou
thine own sins, first and then every word that falls from the preachers
lipsshall be a drop of the dew of heaven, a dram of the balm of Gilead, a
portion of the blood of thy Savior, to wash away that sin, so presented by
thee to be so sacrificed by him; for, if thou only of all the congregation
find that the preacher has not touched thee, nor hit thy sins, know then,
that thou wast not in his Commission for the Remission of sins, and be
afraid, that thy conscience is either gangrend, and unsensible of all
incisions, and cauterizations, that can be made by denouncing the Judgments of
God, (which is as far as the preacher can go) or that thy whole constitution,
thy complexion, thy composition is sin; the preacher cannot hit thy
particular sin, because thy whole life, and the whole body of thy actions is
one continual sin. As long as a man is alive, if there appear any offense in
his breath, the physician will assign it to some one corrupt place, his lungs,
or teeth, or stomach, and thereupon apply convenient remedy thereunto. But if
he be dead, and putrefied, no man asks from whence that ill air and offense
comes, because it proceeds from thy whole carcass. So, as long as there is in
you a sense of your sins, as long as we can touch the offended and wounded
part, and be felt by you, you are not desperate, though you be froward, and
impatient of our increpations. But when you feel nothing, whatsoever we say,
your soul is in an Hectique fever, where the distemper is not in any one
humor, but in the whole substance; nay, your soul it self is become a
carcass. This then is our first couple of these lights, by our Conversation in
heaven here, (that is, a watchfulness, that we fall not into sin) we have
lucem essentiae, possession and fruition of heaven, and of the light of Gods
presence; and then, if we do, by infirmity, fall into sin, yet, by this
denudation of our souls, this manifestation of our sins to God by
confession, and to that purpose, a gladness when we hear our sin spoken of
by the preacher, we have lumen gloriae, an inchoation of our glorified estate;
and then, an other couple of these lights, which we propose to be considered,
is lumen fidei, and lumen naturae, the light of faith, and the light of nature.

Of these two lights, Lux fidei.
Faith and Grace, first, and then Nature and Reason, we said something before,
but never too much, be cause contentious spirits have cast such clouds upon
both these lights, that some have said, Nature does all alone, and others, that
Nature has nothing to do at all, but all is Grace: we decline wranglings, that
tend not to edification, we say only to our present purpose, (which is the
operation of these several couples of lights) that by this light of Faith, to
him which has it, all that is involved in Prophecies, is clear, and evident,
as in a History already done; and all that is wrapped up in promises, is his
own already in performance. That man needs not go so high, Genesis 3. 15.
for his assurance of a Messiah and Redeemer, as to the first promise made to
him in Adam, 12 3.
nor for the limitation of the stock and race from whence this Messiah should
come: so far as to the renewing of this promise in Abraham: nor for the
description of this Messiah who he should be, Esaias ^. 14.
and of whom he should be born, as to Esaias; nor to Micheas, for the place;
Mich. 5. 2.
nor for the time when he should accomplish all this, so far as to Daniel; no,
Dan. 9. 24.
nor so far, as to the Evangelists themselves, for the History and the
evidence, that all this that was to be done in his behalf by the Messiah, was
done 1600. years since. But he has a whole Bible, and an abundant Library in
his own heart, and there by this light of Faith, (which is not only a knowing,
but an applying, an appropriating of all to thy benefit) he has a better
knowledge then all this, then either Prophetical, or Evangelicall; for though
both these be irrefragable, and infallible proofs of a Messiah, (the
Prophetical, that he should, the Evangelicall, that he is come) yet both these
might but concern others: this light of Faith brings him home to thee. How sure
so ever I be, that the world shall never perish by water, yet I may be drowned;
and how sure so ever that the Lamb of God has taken away the sins of the
world, I may perish, without I have this applicatory Faith. And as he needs not
look back to Esaias, nor Abraham, nor Adam, for the Messiah, so neither needs he
to look forward. He needs not stay in expectation of the Angels Trumpets, to
awaken the dead; he is not put to his usquequo Domine, How long, Lord, will thou defer our restitution? but he has already died the death of the
righteous; which is, to die to sin; He has already had his burial, by being
buried with Christ in Baptism, he has had his Resurrection from sin, his
Ascension to holy purposes of amendment of life, and his Judgment, that is,
peace of Conscience, sealed unto him, and so by this light of applying Faith,
he has already apprehended an eternal possession of Gods eternal Kingdom.
And the other light in this second couple is Lux naturae, the light of Nature.

This, Lux Naturae.
though a fainter light, directs us to the other, Nature to Faith: and as by
the quantity in the light of the Moon, we know the position and distance of
the Sun, how far, or how near the Sun is to her, so by the working of the
light of Nature in us, we may discern, (by the measure and virtue and heat of
that) how near to the other greater light, the light of Faith, we stand. If we
find our natural faculties rectified, so as that that free will which we have
in Moral and Civil actions, be bent upon the external duties of Religion,
(as every natural man may, out of the use of that free will, come to Church,
hear the Word preached, and believe it to be true) we may be sure, the other
greater light is about us. If we be cold in them, in actuating, in exalting, in
using our natural faculties so far, we shall be deprived of all light; we
shall not see the Invisible God, Romans 1. 20.
in visible things, which Saint Paul makes so inexcusable, so unpardonable a
thing, we shall not see the hand of God in all our worldly crosses, nor the
seal of God in all our worldly blessings; we shall not see the face of God in
his House, his presence here in the Church, nor the mind of God in his Gospel,
that his gracious purposes upon mankind, extend so particularly, or reach so
far, as to include us. I shall hear in the Scripture his Vinite omnes, come
all, and yet I shall think that^ his eye was not upon me, that his eye did not
becken me and I shall hear the Deus vult omnes salves, that God would save
all, and yet I shall find some perverse reason in my self, why it is not
likely that God will save me. I am commanded scrutari Scripturas, to search the
scriptures; now, that is not to be able to repeat any history of the Bible
without book, it is not to ruffle a Bible, and upon any word to turn to the
Chapter, and to the verse; but this is exquisit a scrutatio, the true searching
of the Scriptures, to find all the histories to be examples to me, all the
prophecies to induce a Savior for me, all the Gospel to apply Christ Jesus to
me. Turn over all the folds, and plaits of thine own heart, and find there
the infirmities, and waverings of thine own faith, and an ability to say,
Lord, I believe, help mine unbeleefe, and then, though thou have no Bible in
thy hand, or though thou stand in a dark corner, nay though thou can not
read a letter, thou have searched that Scripture, thou have turned to Mark 9.
ver. 24 Turn thine ear to God, and hear him turning to thee, and saying to
thy soul, I will marry thee to my self for ever; and thou have searched that
Scripture, and turned to Hos. 2. ver. 19. Turn to thine own histery, thine
own life, and if thou can read there, that thou have endeavored to turn
thine ignorance into knowledge, and thy knowledge into Practice, if thou find
thy self to be an example of that rule of Christ's, If you know these things,
blessed are you, if you do them, then thou have searched that Scripture, and
turned to Io. 13. ver. 14. This is Scrutari Scripturas, to Search the
Scriptures, not as though thou would make a concordance, but an application;
as thou would search a wardrobe, not to make an Inventory of it, but to
find in it something fit for thy wearing. John Baptist was not the light, he
was not Christ, but he bore witness of him. The light of faith, in the highest
exaltation that can be had, in the Elect, here, is not that very beatificall
vision, which we shall have in heaven, but it bears witness of that light.
The light of nature, in the highest exaltation is not faith, but it bears
witness of it. The lights of faith, and of nature, are subordinate John
Baptists: faith bears me witness, that I have Christ, and the light of
nature, that is, the exalting of my natural faculties toward religious uses,
bears me witness, that I have faith. Only that man, whose conscience
testifies to himself, and whose actions testify to the world, that he does
what he can, can believe himself, or be believed by others, that he has the
true light of faith.

And therefore, 1 These. 5. 19.
as the Apostle says, Quench not the Spirit, I say too, Quench not the light
of Nature, suffer not that light to go out; study your natural faculties;
husband and improve them, and love the outward acts of Religion, though an
Hypocrite, and though a natural man may do them. Certainly he that loves not
the Militant Church, has but a faint faith in his interest in the Triumphant.
He that cares not though the material Church fall, I am afraid is falling from
the spiritual. For, can a man be sure to have his money, or his plate, if his
house be burnt? or to preserve his faith, if the outward exercises of Religion
fail? He that undervalues outward things, in the religious service of God,
though he begin at ceremonial and rituall things, will come quickly to call
Sacraments but outward things, and Sermons, and public prayers, but outward
things, in contempt. As some Platonique Philosophers, did so over-refine
Religion, and devotion, as to say, that nothing but the first thoughts and
ebullitions of a devout heart, were fit to serve God in. If it came to any
outward action of the body, kneeling, or lifting up of hands, if it came to be
but invested in our words, and so made a Prayer, nay if it passed but a
revolving, a turning in our inward thoughts, and thereby were mingled with our
affections, though pious affections, yet, say they, it is not pure enough for a
service to God; nothing but the first motions of the heart is for him. Beloved,
outward things apparel God; and since God was content to take a body, let not
us leave him naked, nor ragged; but, as you will bestow not only some cost,
but some thoughts, some study, how you will clothe your children, and how you
will clothe your servants, so bestow both cost and thoughts, think seriously,
execute cheerfully in outward declarations, that which becomes the dignity of
him, who evacuated himself for you. The zeal of his house needs not eat you
up, no nor eat you out of house and home; God asks not that at your hands. But,
if you eat one dish the less at your feasts for his house sake, if you spare
somewhat for his relief, and his glory, you will not be the leaner, nor the
weaker, for that abstinence. John Baptist bore witness of the light, outward
things bear witness of your faith, the exalting of our natural faculties
bear witness of the supernatural. We do not compare the master and the
servant, and yet we thank that servant that brings us to his master. We make a
great difference between the treasure in the chest, and the key that opens it,
yet we are glad to have that key in our hands. The bell that calls me to Church,
does not catechize me, nor preach to me, yet I observe the sound of that bell,
because it brings me to him that does those offices to me. The light of nature
is far from being enough; but, as a candle may kindle a torch, so into the
faculties of nature, well employed, God infuses faith. And this is our second
couple of lights, the subordination of the light of nature, and the light of
faith. And a third pair of lights of attestation, that bear witness to the
light of our Text, is Lux aeternorum Corporum, that light which the Sun and
Moon, and those glorious bodies give from heaven, and lux incensionum, that
light, which those things; that are naturally combustible, and apt to take
fire, do give upon earth; both these bear witness of this light, Lux
aeternorum corporu^.
that is, admit an application to it. For, in the first of these, the glorious
lights of heaven, we must take nothing for stars, that are not stars; nor make
Astrological and fixed conclusions out of meteors, that are but transitory;
they may be Comets, and blazing stars, and so portend much mischief, but
they are none of those aeterna corpora, they are not fixed stars, not stars of
heaven. So is it also in the Christian Church, (which is the proper sphere in
which the light of our text, That light the essential light Christ Jesus moves
by that supernatural light of faith and grace, which is truly the Intelligence
of that sphere, the Christian Chruch) As in the heavens the stars were created
at once, with one Fiat, and then being so made, stars do not beget new stars,
so the Christian doctrine necessary to salvation, was delivered at once, that
is, entirely in one sphere, in the body of the Scriptures. And then, as stars
do not beget stars, Articles of faith do not beget Articles of faith; so, as
that the Council of Trent should be brought to bed of a new Creed, not
conceived before by the holy Ghost in the Scriptures, and, (which is a
monstrous birth) the child greater then the Father, as soon as it is borne, the
new Creed of the Council of Trent to contain more Articles, then the old
Creed of the Apostles did. Saint Jude writing of the common salvation (as he
calls it) (for, verse 3.
Saint Jude, it seems, knew no such particular salvation, as that it was
impossible for any man to have, salvation is common salvation) exhorts them to
contend earnestly for that faith, which was once delivered unto the Saints.
Semel, once; that is; at once, semel, simul, once altogether. For this is also
Tertullians Tertull.
note; that the rule of faith is, that it be una, immobilis, irreformabilis; it
must not be deformed, it cannot be Reformed; it must not be mard, it cannot be
mended; whatsoever needs mending, and reformation, cannot be the rule of faith,
says Tertullian. Other foundation can no man lay then Christ; 1 Cor. 3. 11.
not only no better, but no other; what other things soever are added by men,
enter not into the nature and condition of a foundation. The additions, and
traditions, and superedifications of the Roman Church, they are not lux
aeternorum corporum, they are not fixed bodies, they are not stars to direct
us; they may be meteors, and so exercise our discourse, and Argumentation, they
may raise controversies; And they may be Comets, and so exercise our fears,
and our jealousies, they may raise rebellions and Treasons, but they are not
fixed and glorious bodies of heaven, they are not stars. Their non-communions,
(for, communions where there are no communicants, are no communions) when they
admit no bread at all, no wine at all, all is transubstantiated, are no
communions; their semi-communions, when they admit the bread to be given, but
not the wine; their sesqui-communions, Bread and Wine to the taste, and to all
other trialls of bread and wine, and yet that bread and wine, the very body,
and the very blood of Christ; their quotidian miracles, which destroy and
contradict even the nature of the miracle, to make miracles ordinary, and
fixed, constant and certain; (for, as that is not a miracle which nature does,
so that is not a miracle which man can do certainly, constantly, infallibly
every day, and every day, every Priest can miraculously change bread into the
body of Christ, and besides they have certain fixed shops, and Marts of
miracles, in one place a shop of miracles for barrenness, in another, a shop
for the toothache) To contract this, their occasional Divinity, doctrines to
serve present occasions, that in eighty eight, an Heretical Prince must
necessarily be excommunicated, and an Heretical Prince excommunicated must
necessarily be deposed, but at another time it may be otherwise, and
conveniences, and dispensations may be admitted, these, and such as these,
traditionall, occasional, Almanac Divinity, they may be Comets, they may be
Meteors, they may rain blood, and rain fire, and rain hailestones,
hailstones as big as Talents, (as it is in the Revelation) milstones, to grind
the world by their oppressions, but they are not lux aeternorum corporum, the
light of the stars and other heavenly bodies, for, they were made at once, and
diminish not, increase not. Fundamental articles of faith, are always the
same. And that is our application of this lux aeternorum corporum, the light of
those heavenly bodies, to the light of our Text, Christ working in the Church.

Now, Lux incensionum.
for the consideration of the other light in this third couple, which is lux
incensionum, the light of things, which take, and give light here upon earth,
if we reduce it to application and practice, and contract it to one Instance,
it will appear that the devotion and zeal of him, that is best affected, is,
for the most part, in the disposition of a torch, or a knife, ordained to take
fire, and to give light. If it have never been lightened, it does not easily
take light, but it must be bruised, and beaten first; if it have been lighted
and put out; though it cannot take fire of it self, yet it does easily conceive
fire, if it be presented within any convenient distance. Such also is the soul
of man toward the fires of the zeal of Gods glory, and compassion of others
misery. If there be any that never took this fire, that was never affected
with either of these, the glory of God, the miseries of other men, can I hope
to kindle him? It must be Gods work to bruise and beat him, Hierom.
with his rod of affliction, before he will take fire. Paulus revelatione
compulsus ad fidem, St. Paul was compelled to believe; not the light which he
saw, but the power which he felt wrought upon him; not because that light
shined from heaven, but because it struck him to the earth. August.
Agnoscimus Christum in Paulo prius cogentem, deinde docentem; Christ begun not
upon St. Paul, with a catechism, but with a rod. If therefore here be any in
Paul's case, that were never kindled before, Almighty God proceed the same way
with them, and come so near to a friendship toward them, as to be at enmity
with them; to be so merciful to them, as to seem unmercifull; to be so well
pleased, as to seem angry; that so by inflicting his medicinal afflictions,
he may give them comfort by discomfort, and life by death, and make them seek
his face, by turning his face from them; and not to suffer them to continue in
a stupid inconsideration, and lamentable senslesnesse of their miserable
condition, but bruise and break them with his rod, that they may take fire.
But for you, who have taken this fire before, that have been enlightened in both
Sacraments, and in the preaching of the word; in the means, and in some
measure of practice of holiness heretofore, if in not supplying oil to your
Lamps, which God by his ordinance had kindled in you, you have let this light
go out by negligence or inconsideration, or that storms of worldly calamities
have blown it out, do but now at this instant call to mind, what sin of
yesterday, or the other day, or long ago, begun, and practiced, and prevailed
upon you, or what future sin, what purpose of doing a sin to night, or to
morrow, possesses you; do but think seriously what sin, or what cross has
blown out that light, that grace, which was formerly in you, before that sin,
or that cross invaded you, and turn your soul, which has been enlightened
before, toward this fire which Gods Spirit blows this minute, and you will
conceive new fire, new zeal, new compassion. As this Lux incensionum, kindles
easily, when it has been kindled before, so the soul accustomed to the
presence of God in holy meditations, though it fall asleep in some dark
corner, in some sin of infirmity, a while, yet, upon every holy occasion, it
takes fire again, and the meanest Preacher in the Church, shall work more
upon him, then the four Doctors of the Church should be able to do, upon a
person who had never been enlightened before, that is, never accustomed to the
presence of God in his private meditations, or in his outward acts of Religion.
And this is our third couple of lights, that bears witness, that is, admit an
application to the light of our Text; and then the fourth and last couple,
which we consider, is Lux Depuratarum Mixtionum, the light and luster of
precious stones, and then Lux Repercussionum, the light of Repercussion, and
Reflection, when one body, though it have no light in it self, casts light upon
other bodies.

In the application of the first of these lights, Lux Depuratarum Mixtionum.
Depuratarum Mixtionum, precious stones, we shall only apply their making and
their value. Precious stones are first drops of the dew of heaven, and then
refined by the sun of heaven. When by long lying they have exhaled, and
evaporated, and breathed out all their gross matter, and received another
concoction from the sun, then they become precious in the eye, and estimation
of men: so those actions of ours, that shall be precious or acceptable in the
eye of God, must at first have been conceived from heaven, from the word of
God, and then receive another concoction, by a holy deliberation, before we
bring those actions to execution, lest we may have mistaken the root thereof.
Actions precious, or acceptable in Gods eye, must be holy purposes in their
beginning, and then done in season; the Dove must lay the egg, and hatch the
bird; the holy Ghost must infuse the purpose, and sit upon it, and overshadow
it, and mature and ripen it, if it shall be precious in Gods eye. The
reformation of abuses in State or Church, is a holy purpose, there is that drop
of the dew of heaven in it; but if it be unseasonably attempted, and have not a
farther concoction, then the first motions of our own zeal, it becomes
ineffectuall. Stones precious in the estimation of men, begin with the dew of
Heaven, and proceed with the sun of Heaven; Actions precious in the
acceptance of God, are purposes conceived by his Spirit, and executed in his
time to his Glory, not conceived out of Ambition, nor executed out of sedition.
And this is the application of this Lux depuratarum mixtionum, of precious
stones, out of their making, we proposed another out of their valuation; which
is this, That whereas a Pearl or Diamond of such a bigness, of so many
Carats, is so much worth, one that is twice as big, is ten times as much worth.
So, though God vouchsafe to value every good work thou do, yet as they grow
greater he shall multiply his estimation of them infinitely, When he has
prized at a high rate, the chastity and continency of thy youth, if thou add
to this, a moderation in thy middle age, from Ambition, and in thy latter age
from covetousness and indevotion, there shall be no price in Gods treasure
(not the last drop of the blood of his Son) too dear for thee, no room, no
state in his Kingdom (not a Iointenancie with his only Son) too glorious
for thee. This is one light in this Couple; The luster of precious stones: the
other the last is Lux Repercussionum, The light of Repercussion, of Reflection.

This is, Lux Repercussionum.
when Gods light cast upon us, reflecteth upon other men too, from us; when God
does not only accept our works for our selves, but imployes those works of
ours upon other men. And here is a true, and a Divine Supererogation; which the
Devil, (as he does all Gods Actions, which fall into his compass) did
mischievously counterfeit in the Roman Church, when he induced their Doctrine
of Supererogation, that a man might do so much more then he was bound to do for
God, as that that superplusage might save whom he would; and that if he did not
direct them in his intention, upon any particular person, the Bishop of Rome,
was general Administrator to all men, and might bestow them where he would.
But here is a true supererogation; not from Man, or his Merit, but from God;
when our good works shall not only profit us, that do them, but others that
see them done; and when we by this light of Repercussion, of Reflection, shall
be made specula divinae gloriae, quae accipiunt and reddunt, such looking
glasses as receive Gods face upon our selves, Tertull.
and cast it upon others by a holy life, and exemplary conversation.

To end all, Conclusio.
we have no warmth in our selves; it is true, but Christ came even in the
winter: we have no light in our selves; it is true, but he came even in the
night. And now, I appeall to your own Consciences, and I ask you all, (not as
a Judge, but as an Assistant to your Consciences, and Amicus Curiae,) whether
any man have made a good use of this light, as he might have done. Is there any
man that in the compassing of his sin, has not met this light by the way,
Thou should not do this? Any man, that has not only as Balaam did, Numb.
2^. 22.
met this light as an Angel, (that is, met Heavenly inspirations to avert
him,) but that has not heard as Balaam did, his own Ass; that is, those
reasons that use to carry him, or those very worldly respects that use to carry
him, dispute against that sin, and tell him, not only that there is more
soul and more heaven, and more salvation, but more body, and more health, more
honor, and more reputation, more cost, and more money, more labor, and more
danger. spent upon such a sin, then would have carried him the right way.

They that sleep, Recapitulatio.
sleep in the night, and they that are drunk, are drunk in the night. But to
you the Day star, the Sun of Righteousness, the Son of God is risen this
day. The day is but a little longer now, 1 These. 5. 7.
then at shortest; but a little it is. Be a little better now, then when you
came, and mend a little at every coming, and in less then seven years
app^entissage, which your occupations cost you, you shall learn, not the
Mysteries of your twelve companies, but the Mysteries of the twelve Tribes, of
the twelve Apostles, of their twelve Articles, whatsoever belongs to the
promise, to the performance, to the Imitation of Christ Jesus. He, who is Lu^
una, light and light alone, and Lux tota, light and all light, shall also, by
that light, which he sheddeth from himself upon all his, the light of Grace,
give you all these Attestations, all these witnesses of that his light; he
shall give you Lucem essentiae, (really, and essentially to be incorporated
into him, Essentiae.
to be made partakers of the Divine Nature, and the same Spirit with the Lord,
by a Conversation in Heaven, here) and lucem gloriae, (a gladness to give him
glory in a donudation of your souls, and your sins, Gloriae.
by humble confession to him, and a gladness to receive a denudation and
manifestation of your selves to your selves, by his messenger, in his
medicinal and musical increpations, and a gladness to receive an inchoation
of future glory, in the remission of those sins.) He shall give you lucem
fidei, Fidei.
) (faithful and unremovable possession of future things, in the present, and
make your hereafter, now, in the fruition of God.) And Lucem naturae (a love of
the outward beauty of his house, Naturae.
and outward testimonies of this love, in inclining your natural faculties to
religious duties.) He shall give you Lucem aeternorum Corporum, Aeternorum
Corporum.
(a love to walk in the light of the stars of heaven, that never change, a love
so perfect in the fundamental articles of Religion, without impertinent
additions.) And Lucem incensionum, Incensionum.
)(an aptness to take holy fire, by what hand, or tongue, or pen soever it be
presented unto you, according to Gods Ordinance, though that light have
formerly been suffered to go out in you.) He shall give you Lucem depuratarum
Mixtionum, Depuratarum Mixitionum.
(the luster of precious stones, made of the dew of heaven, and by the heat of
heaven, that is, actions intended at first, and produced at last, for his
glory; and every day multiply their value, in the sight of God, because thou
shall every day grow up from grace to grace.) And Lucem Repercussionum,
Repercussionum.
(he shall make you able to reflect and cast this light upon others, to his
glory, and their establishment.)

Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, with all these lights; that in
thy light we may see light; that in this Essential light, which is Christ, and
in this Supernatural light, which is grace, we may see all these, and all
other beams of light, which may bring ut to thee, and him, and that blessed
Spirit which proceeds from both. Amen.

SERMON XXXVII.
Preached at St. Paul's on Midsommer day. 1622.
JOHN 1. 8. He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that
light.
OF him, who was this light, which John Baptist is here denied to be, I spoke
out of these words, and out of this place, the first time that I ascended to
it, upon the great Epiphany, (as the first Church used to call it) the
manifestation of Christ Jesus in the flesh, Christmas day; I reserved the rest
of the Text, which concerns John Baptist himself, and his office, for this
day, in which the Church celebrates his memory, who, though he were not that
light, was sent to bear witness of that light.

We shall make our parts but two, Testem, and Testimonium, the person, and the
Office; first, who the witness is, and then what he witnesses. In the first,
we shall consider first, the dignity, the fitness of the person, employed in
the first word of this part of our Text, but; he was not that light; that is
true, but yet he was something toward it; he was nothing considered with
Christ, but he was much considered with any other man. And then we shall see
his title to his office, Missus est, as he was fit in himself, so he was sent
by him that had power to give Commission; and from these two, in which we shall
determine our first part, the consideration of his person, we shall descend to
the other, his office; and therein stop but upon two steps neither; first, why
any testimony was required to so clear a thing as light, and such a light,
that light; and then, what kind of testimony John Baptist did give to that
light. So have you the design, and frame of our building, and the several
partitions, the rooms; pass we now to a more particular survey, and
furnishing of them.

The first branch of the first part, is the Idoneus, 1 Part. Idoneus.
that he was fit to be a witness. If we should insist upon the nobility of his
race, his father and mother, (his father a Priest, and his mother also
descended of Aaron) (and, as all Nations have some notes and marks of nobility,
Philo Iud.
( Merchandise, or Arms, or Letters, amongst the Jews Priesthood was that, the
Priesthood enobled men) in all well policed States, caeteris paribus, if they
were not otherwise defective, they have ever thought it fittest to employ
persons of good families, and of noble extraction, as well because, in
likelihood they had had the best education, from their parents, and the best
knowledge of things that concern the public, by having had their
conversation with the best, and most intelligent persons; as also, because they
have for the most part, more to lose them inferior persons have, and therefore
are likelier to be careful and vigilant in their employment; And again,
because they draw a better respect from those to whom they are employed, (which
is of great importance in such negotiations, to send persons acceptable to them
to whom they are sent) and yet, do not lie so open to the tentations and
corruptions of their Ministers, as men of needy fortunes, and obscure
extractions do.

This fitness John Baptist had, he was of a good family and extraction. It
adds to him, that as he had a noble, he had a miraculous birth ^ for, to be
born of a Virgin, is but a degree more, then to be borne of a barren woman. A
birth, which only of all others the Church celebrates; for, though we find
the days of the Martyrs still called, Natalitia Martyrum, their birth-dayes,
yet that is always intended of the days of their death; only in John Baptist
it is intended literally of his natural birth; for, his spiritual birth, his
Martyrdom, is remembered by another name, Decollatio Ioannis, John Baptists
beheading. If we should enlarge all concerning him, as infinitely, as infinite
Authors have done, or contract all as summarily, Luke 7. 28.
as Christ has done, (Amongst those that are borne of women, there is not a
greater Prophet then John the Baptist) yet we should find that Saint Augustine
had done all this before, August.
Non est quod illi adjiciat homo, cui Deus contulit totum, What man can add
more, where God said all, and he has said of John Baptist, Spiritu Sa^cto
replebitur, He shall be filled with the holy Ghost.

Two things especially make a man a competent witness: First, that he have in
himself a knowledge of the thing that he testifies; else he is an incompetent
witness: And then, that he have a good estimation in others, that he be
reputed an honest man; else he is an unprofitable witness. If he be ignorant,
he says truth, but by chance; if he be dishonest, and say truth, it is but
upon design, and not for the truths sake; for, if those circumstances did not
lead him, he would not say truth. John Baptist had both, knowledge and
estimation.

He knew, Scientia.
per scientiam infusam, by infused knowledge; as he was a Prophet; for so
Christ testifies that he was. But all Prophets knew not all things; therefore
he was more then a Prophet, Matthew. 11.9.
which is also testified by Christ, in his behalf. More then any former
Prophet. Hierom.
And yet, the Prophet Esaiah was (even in his Prophecy) an Evangelist, his
Prophecy of Christ was so clear, so particular, as that it was rather Gospel,
and History, then Prophecy. John Baptist was more then that; for, he did not
only declare a present Christ, (in that, Esaias may seem to come near him) but
he was Propheta Prophetatus, A Prophet that was prophesied of; even Esaias
himself bore witness of this witness; Esaias 40. 3.
(A voice cried in the wilderness, Prepare the way of the Lord.) And the
Prophet Malachi bore witness of this witness too, Mal. 3. 1.
(Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me.) So
he has the restimony of the first and last of the Prophets; and of him too,
who was the first and the last, the cause and the effect, the moving and
fulfilling of all prophecy, of Christ himself, Matthew. 11. 10.
(This is he, of whom it is written,) and so he cites those words of Malachi
concerning John Baptist. John Baptist then had this competency, by knowledge
infused by God, declared in former Prophecies, he knew the matter, which he was
to testify. Which is so essential, so substantial a circumstance in matter
of testimony, in what way soever we will be witnesses to God, as that no man is
a competent witness for God, not in his preaching, not in his living, not in
his dying, (though he be a witness in the highest sense, that is, a Martyr) if
he do not know, upon what ground, he says, or does, or suffers that, which he
suffers, and does, and says. Howsoever he pretend the honor of God in his
testimony, yet, if the thing be materially false, (false in it self, though
true in his opinion) or formally false, (true in it self, but not known to be
so, to him that testifies it) both ways he is an incompetent witness. And this
takes away the honor of having been witnesses for Christ, and the consolation
and style of Martyrs, both from them, who, upon such evidence, as can give no
assurance (that is, traedi tions of men) have grounded their faith in God, and
from them, who take their light in corners, and conventicles, and not from the
City set upon the top of a hill, the Church of God. Those Roman Priests who
have given their lives, those Separatists which have taken a voluntary
banishment, are not competent witnesses for the glory of God; for a witness
must know; and qui testatur de scientia, testetur de modo scientiae, says the
Law, He that will prove any thing by his knowledge, must prove how he came by
that knowledge; The Papist has not the knowledge of his Doctrine from any
Scripture, the Separatist has not the knowledge of his Discipline from any
precedent, any example in the primitive Church.

How far then is that wretched and sinful man, from giving any testimony or
glory to Christ in his life, who never comes to the knowledge, and
consideration, why he was sent into this life? who is so far from doing his
errand, that he knows not what his errand was; not whether he received any
errand or no. But, as though that God, who for infinite millions of ages,
delighted himself in himself, and was sufficient in himself, and yet at last
did bestow six days labor for the creation, and provision of man, as though
that God, who when man was sowr'd in the lump, poisoned in the fountain,
withered in the root, in the loins of Adam, would then engage his Son, his
beloved Son, his only Son to be man, by a temporary life, and to be no
man, by a violent and a shameful death, as though that God, who when he was
pleased to come to a creation, might have left out thee, amongst privations,
amongst nothings, or might have shut thee up, in the close prison, of a bare
being, and no more, (as he has done earth and stones) or, if he would have
given thee life, might have left thee a Toad, or, if he would have given thee a
humane soul, might have left thee a heathen, without any knowledge of God, or,
if he had afforded thee a Religion, might have left thee a Jew, or, though he
had made thee a Christian, might have left thee a Papist; as though that God
that has done so much more, in breeding thee in his true Church, had done all
this for nothing, thou passest thorough this world, like a flash, like a
lightning, whose beginning or end no body knows, like an Ignis fatuus in the
air, which does not only not give light for any use, but not so much as
portend or signify any thing; and thou passest out of the world, as thy hand
passes out of a basin of water, which may be somewhat the fouler for thy
washing in it, but retains no other impression of thy having been there; and
so does the world for thy life in it. When God placed Adam in the world, he bad
him fill it, and subdue it, and rule it; and when he placed him in paradise, he
bad him dress, and keep paradise; and when he sent his children into the
overflowing Laud of promise, he bad them fight, and destroy the Idolaters; to
every body some task, some errand for his glory; And thou come from him, into
this world, as though he had said nothing unto thee, but Go and do as you see
cause, Go, and do as you see other men do.

Thou know not, that is, considerest not, what thou wast sent to do, what
thou should have done, but thou know much less, what thou have done. The
light of nature has taught thee to hide thy sins from other men, and thou
have been so diligent in that, as that thou have hid them from thy self, and
can not find them in thine own conscience, if at any time the Spirit of God
would burn them up, or the blood of Christ Jesus wash them out; thou can not
find them out so, as that a Sermon or Sacrament can work upon them. Perchance
thou can tell, when was the first time, or where was the first place, that
thou did commit such or such a sin; but as a man can remember when he began
to spell, but not when he began to read perfectly, when he began to join his
letters, but not when he began to write perfectly, so thou remembrest when thou
wentest timorously and bashfully about sin, at first, and now perchance art
ashamed of that shamefastness, and sorry thou beganst no sooner. Poor
bankrupt! that have sinned out thy soul so profusely, so lavishly, that thou
dare not cast up thine accounts, thou dare not ask thy self whether thou
have any soul left; how far art thou, from giving any testimony to Christ,
that dare not testify to thy self, nor hear thy conscience take knowledge
of thy transgressions, but had rather sleep out thy days, or drink out
thy days, then leave one minute for compunction to lay hold on; and do not
sin always for the love of that sin, but for fear of a holy sorrow, if
thou should not fill up thy time, with that sin. God cannot be mocked,
says the Apostle, nor God cannot be blinded. He sees all the way, and at thy
last gasp, he will make thee see too, through the multiplying Glass, the
Spectacle of Desperation. Can thou hope that that God, that sees this dark
Earth through all the vaults and arches of the several spheres of Heaven,
that sees thy body through all thy stone walls, and sees thy soul through
that which is darker then all those, thy corrupt flesh, can thou hope that
that God can be blinded with drawing a curtain between thy sin and him? when
he is all eye, can thou hope to put out that eye, with putting out a candle?
when he has planted legions of Angels about thee, can thou hope that thou
have taken away all Intelligence, if thou have corrupted, or silenced, or sent
away a servant? O bestow as much labor, as thou have done, to find corners
for sin to find out those sins, in those corners where thou have hid them.
As Princes give^ pardons by their own hands, but send Judges to execute
Justice, come to him for mercy in the acknowledgement of thy sins, and stay
not till his Justice come to thee, when he makes inquisition for blood; and do
not think, that if thou feel now at this present^ a little tenderness in thy
heart, a little melting in thy bowels, a little dew in thine eyes, that if thou
be come to know, that thou art a sinner, thou do therefore presently know
thy sins. Thou would have so much tenderness, so much compassion, if thou
knew that he that fits next thee, were in this danger of Gods heavy
indignation; thou would commiserate thy neighbors wretched condition so
much. But proceed with thy self further, bring this dawning and break of day
to a full light, and this little spark to a perfect acknowledgement of thy
sins. Go home, with this spark of Gods Spirit in you, and there look upon
your Rentalls, and know your oppressions, and extorsions; look upon your
shop-bookes, and know your deceits and falsifications; look upon your
ward-robes, and know your excesses; look upon your childrens faces, and know
your fornications. Till then, till you come to this scrutiny, this survey, this
sifting of the Conscience, if we should cry peace, peace, yet there were no
peace. The Orator said, Imposuimus populo, and Oratores visi sumus; we have
cousened the people, and they say we are excellent Orators, powerful, well
spoken men. We might flatter you, and you would say, we were sweet, and smooth,
and comfortable Preachers, and we might perish together. But if you study your
selves, read your own History, if you get to the knowledge of your errand
hither, and the ill discharge of those duties here, the sorrow and compunction
which will grow from thence, is a fair degree of Martyrdom, (for as Saint
Hierome Hierom.
says of Chastity, Habet pudicitia servata, Martyrium suum, Chastity
preserved is a continual Martyrdom, so a true remorse, if that Chastity have
not been preserved, and likewise a true remorse for every sin, is a fair
degree of Martyrdom) for, Martyr is Testis, the very name of Martyr signifies
a Witness; and this Martyrdom, this true remorse and sorrow, and compunction
for your sins, becomes a witness to your selves of your reconciliation to
God in the merits of Christ Jesus. But we may carry this branch no further,
that John Baptist being a competent witness therefore, because he understood
the matter he testified, before we can be competent witnesses to our own
Consciences, of our Reconciliation to God, we must understand, (and therefore
search into our particular sins) not only that we are sinners, but sinners
in such and such kinds, such times, such places, such persons; for that Soul,
that is content to rest in generals, would but deceive it self. John Baptists
other qualification was, That as he knew the matter about which he was sent,
so he had, (and justly) a good estimation amongst them, to whom he was
employed.

If I have a prejudice against a Man, Integritas.
and suspect his honesty, I shall not be much moved with his Testimony. The
Devil testified for Christ; but, if there were no other Testimony but his, I
should demurre upon the Gospel, I should not die for that Faith. John Baptist
was a credible person amongst them. How was this credit acquired? It seems
John Baptist did no Miracles; Whether he did or no, is not a clear Case; for
that which is said, (John Baptist did no miracles) is not said by the
Evangelist himself; Saint John does not say, John 10. 41.
that John Baptist did no miracles; but those that resorted to him at that
place, said that (He does no miracles) for they had seen none. If he did none,
Aquin.
that reason may be good enough, ne aequalis Christo putaretur, it was forborne
in him, that he might appear to be inferior to Christ. And, if he did none,
yet there were miracles done by him. The reformation of manners, and bringing
men to repentance, is a miracle. It is a less miracle to raise a man from a
sick bed, then to hold a man from a wanton bed, a litentious bed; less to
overcome and quench his fever, then to quench his lust. Joseph that refused his
mistress was a greater miracle then Lazarus raised from the dead. Of these
resurrections, we have diverse examples, Joseph's case, (I think) is singular.
There were miracles done so, by John Baptist preaching to others; and there
were miracies done upon himself; and early; for, his springing in his mothers
womb, August.
was a miracle; and a miracle done for others: Significatio rei a majoribus
cognoscende, non a minori cognitae; The child catechized his elders, in that
which himself understood not; that is, the presence of his Savior, in the
virgin then present, Divinitus in infant, non humanitus ab infant, says the
same Father; it was not a joy, and exultation in the child, but an institution,
an instruction to the rest. But miracle or no miracle is not our issue;
witnesses for Christ, require not wonder, but belief; we pretend not miracles,
but propose Gods ordinary means, we look not for Admiration, but Assent. And
therefore forbear you acclamations and expectations of wonderful good
preachers, and admirable good Sermons. It was enough for John Baptist that even
they confessed, that all that he said was true. Content thy self with truths
evident truths, fundamental truths, let matter of wonder and admiration alone.

He was a witness competent to them for his truth, Austeritas.
and integrity, and he was so also for the outward holiness of his life;
which, for the present, we consider only in the strict and austere manner of
living, that he embraced. For, certainly, he that uses no fasting, no
discipline, no mortification, exposes himself to many dangers in himself, and
to a cheap and vulgar estimation amongst others. Caro mea jumentum meum, says
S. Augustine, August.
my body is the horse I ride; iter ago in Jerusalem, my business lies at
Jerusalem; thither I should ride; De via conatur excutere, my horse over
pampered casts me upon the way, or carries me out of the way; non cohibebo
jejunio, says he; must not that be my way, to bring him to a gentler riding,
and more command, by lessening his proportions of provender? 1 Cor. 9. 27.
S. Augustine means the same that S. Paul preached, I beat down my body, says
he, and bring it in subjection; And, (as Paulinus reads that place) Lividum
reddo, I make my body black and blue; white and red were not Saint Paul's
colors. Saint Paul was at this time departed, (in outward profession) from the
sect of the Pharisees, and from their ostentations of doing their disciplines
in the sight and for the praise of man; but yet, being become a Christian he
left not his austerity; And it is possible for us, to leave the leaven of the
Papist, the opinion of merit, and supererogation, and doing more then we are
bound to do in the ways of godliness, and yet nourish our souls, with that
wholesome bread of taming our bodies. Saint Paul had his Disciplines, his
mortifications; he tells us so, but he does not tell us what they were; lest
perchance a reverence to his person, and example, might bind mis-devout men,
to do punctually as Saint Paul did. The same Rule cannot serve all; but the
same Reason may.

The institution of friars under a certain Rule, that all of them, just at this
time, shall do just thus, cannot be a rule of Justice; but the general
doctrine, that every body needs at some times, some helps, some means, is
certainly true. Shall the riotous, the voluptuous man stay till this something
be a surfeit or a fever? It Is true, this surfeit and this fever, will subdue the
body, but then thou do it not. Shall a lascivious wanton stay, till a
consumption or such contagious diseases as shall make him unsociable, and so,
unable to exercise his sin, subdue his body? These can do it, Ambrose.
but this is Perimere, non subjugare, not a subduing of the body alone, but a
destroying of body and soul together. Moderate disciplines subdue the body, as
under the government of a King, a father of his people, that governs them by a
law. But when the body comes to be subdued, by pains, and anguish, and
loathsome diseases, this becomes a tyranny, a conquest; and he that comes in by
conquest, imposes what laws he will; so that these subduings of the body
brought in by sin, may work in us, an obduration; we shall feel them, but
not discern the hand of God in them; or, if his hand, yet not his hand to that
purpose, to relieve us, but to seal our condemnation to us. Beloved, because
our Adversaries of the Roman heresy, have erroneously made a pattern for
their Eremiticall and Monastical life in John Baptist, and colored their
idleness, by his example; some of the Reformation have bent a little too far
the other way, and denied, that there was any such austerity in the life of St.
John, as is ordinarily conceived: They say that his conversation in the Desert,
may well be understood to have been but a withdrawing of himself from public
and civil businesses, home to his fathers house; for, his father dwelt in that
Desert, and thither went Mary to salute Elizabeth. Luc. 1. 4^.
And Ioab had his house in this Desert; 1 Reg. 2. 23.
and in this Desert are reckoned five or fix good Towns; Ios. 1. ^1.
so that indeed it was no such savage solitude as they fancy. But yet, for a
Son of such Parents, an only Son, a Son so miraculously afforded them,
to pass on with that apparell^ and that diet, is certainly remarkable, and an
evidence of an extraordinary austerity, and an argument of an extraordinary
sanctity.

Especially to the Jews it was so; amongst them this austerity of life, and
abstaining from those things which other men embraced, procured ordinarily a
great estimation; We know that amongst them, Joseph.
the Essaei a severe Sect, had a high reverence: They did not marry, they did
not eat flesh, they did not ease themselves by servants, but did all their own
work, they used no propriety, they possessed nothing, called nothing their
own; Vicatim habitant, and urbes fugiunt, Philo. Iud.
they forsake all great Towns, and dwell in Villages; And yet, flying the
world, they drew the world so much after^ them, Pliai.
as that it is noted with wonder, per saeculorum Milia gens aeterna, in qua
nemo nascitur; that there was an eternal Nation, that had lasted many
Generations, and yet never any borne amongst them; I am foecunda illis aliorum
vitae poenitentia, for, every man that was crossed or wearied in his own
course of life, applied himself to their Sect and manner of living, as the
only way to Heaven. And Josephus writing his own life and forwardness, and
pregnancy, (perchance a little too favorably or gloriously in his own
behalf, to be thoroughly believed; for he says, that when he was but fourteen
years old, the greatest Doctors of the Law, came to him to learn penitiorem
sensum juris, the secretest Mysteries of the Law; and their Law, was Divinity)
thought himself unperfect till he had spent some time, in the strictness of
all the three Sects of the Jews; and after he had done all that, he spent
three years more, with one Bannus an Ermit, who lived in the wilderness, upon
herbs and roots, John Baptists austerity of life made him a competent and
credible witness to them, who had such austeritie in estimation.

And truly, he that will any way be a witness for Christ, that is, glorify
him, he must endeavor, even by this outward holiness of life, to be
acceptable to good men. Vox Populi, vox Dei, the general voice is seldom
false; so also Oculi populi, Oculi Dei, In this case God looks upon man, as
man does; Singuli decipi and decipere possunt, One man may deceive another, and
be deceived by another; Nemo omnes, neminem omnes fefellerunt, no man ever
deceived all the world, nor did all the world ever join to deceive one man. The
general opinion, the general voice, is for the most part, good evidence,
with, or against a man. Every one of us is ashamed of the praise and
attestation of one, whom all the world besides, takes to be dishonest; so,
will Christ be ashamed of that witness, that seeks not the good opinion of
good men.

When I see a Jesuit solicit the chastity of a daughter of the house, where he
is harbored, and after knowledge taken by the Parents, upon her complaint,
excuse it with saying, that he did it but to try her, and to be the better
assured of her religious constancy; when I see a Jesuit conceal and foment a
powder Treason, and say he had it but in Confession, and then see these men to
proclaim themselves to be Martyrs, witnesses for Christ in the highest degree;
I say still, the Devil may be a witness, but I ground not my Faith upon that
Testimony: A competent witness must be an honest man. This competency John
Baptist had, the good opinion of good men; And then, he had the seal of all,
Missus est, he had his Commission, He was sent to bear witness of that Light.

Though this word Missus est, Missus.
He was sent, be not literally in the Text here, yet it is necessarily employed,
and therefore providently supplied by the Translatours in this verse, and
before in the sixth verse, it is literally expressed, There was a man sent from
God, whose name was John. The Law says, concerning witnesses, Qui se ingerunt
and offerunt, suspecti habentur, those that offer their testimony before they
be cited, are suspicious witnesses. Therefore they must have a Mission, a
sending. For, by Saint Paul's rule, How can they preach except they be sent?
Romans 10. 15
Preach they may; but how? with what success, what effect, what blessing? So
that the good success of John Bapstists preaching, Luc. 3. 7.
(For, the multitudes, The people came to him; and not light people carried
about with every wind of rumor and noise, Matt. 3. 7.
and noveltie, but Pharisees, and Sadduces, men of learning, of sadness and
gravity; and not only Scholars affected with subtilties, but, Publicans too,
Luc. 3. 12.
men intent upon the world; and other men, whose very profession submits them
to many occasions of departing from the strict rules, which regularly bind
other men, and therefore may be in some things, (which taste of injustice) more
excusable then other men; 14.
The soldiers likewise came to him, and said, What shall we do?) This his
working upon all sorts of men, the blessing that accompanied his labors, was a
subsequent argument of his Mission, that he was sent by God. God himself argues
against them, that were not sent, so, They were not sent, for they have done no
good. I have not sent those Prophets, Ier. 23. 21.
says the Lord, yet they ran, I have not spoken to them, and yet they
prophesied; but, if they had stood in my counsel, then they should have turned
the people from their evil ways, and from the wickedness of their
inventions. This note God lays upon them, to whom he affords this vocation of
his internal Spirit, that though others which come without any calling, may
gather men in corners, and in Conventicles, and work upon their affections and
passions, to singularity, to schism, to sedition: and though others which come
with an outward, and ordinary calling only, may advance their own Fortunes,
and increate their estimation, and draw their Auditory to an outward reverence
of their Persons, and to a delight in hearing them rather then other men, yet,
those only who have a true inward Calling from the Spirit, shall turn the
people from their evil ways, and from the wickedness of their inventions. To
such men's planting and watering God gives an increase; when as others which
come to declame, and not to preach, and to vent their own gifts, or the
purposes of great men for their gifts, have only a proportionable reward,
wind for wind, Acclamation for Declamation, popular praise for popular
eloquence: for, if they do not truly believe themselves, why should they look
that others should believe them? Qui loquitur ad cor, loquatur ex cord; he
that will speak to the heart of another, must find that that he says in his
own heart first.

Whether the Mission of the Church of Rome of Priests and Jesuits hither, be
sufficient to satisfy their consciences who are so sent, and sent (in
intendment of the Law) to inevitable loss of life here, has been laboriously
enough debated, and safely enough concluded, that such a Mission cannot
satisfy a rectified conscience. What are they sent for? Baroni
To defend the Immunities of the Church: that is, to take away the inherent
right of the Crown, the supremacy of the King: What seconds them? what assures
them? Alvarez.
That which is their general Tenent, that into what place so ever the Pope may
send Priests, Azor.
he may send Armies for the security of those Priests; and (as another
expresses it) in all Cases, Maynardus.
where the Pope may injoyne any thing, he may lawfully proceed by way of War
against any that hinder the execution thereof. That these Missions from the
Bishop of Rome are unlawful, vide Pseudo-Mart. f. 154.
is safely enough concluded, A priori, in the very nature of the commandment
and Mission. For, it is to a place, in which he that sends has no power, for
it is into the Dominions of another absolute King; and it is of Persons; in
whom he has no interest, for they are the subjects of another Prince; and my
neighbors setting his mark upon my sheep, does not make my sheep his. Now,
beloved, if that which they cannot make lawful A priori, in the Nature of the
thing, you will make lawful in their behalf, A posteriori, in the effect and
working thereof; that is, if when these men are thus sent hither, you will run
after them to their Masses, though you pretend it be but to meet company, and
to see who comes, and to hear a Church-Comedy; if, though you abstain your
self, you will lend them a wife, or a child, or a servant to be present there,
A posteriori, by this effect, by this their working upon you, you justify
their unjust Mission, and make them think their sending and coming lawful. So
also, (to return to our former consideration) If you depart not from your evil
ways, and from the wickedness of your own inventions: If for all our
preaching you proceed in your sins, you will make us afraid, that our
Mission, our Calling is not warrantable, for thereby you take away that
consolation, which is one seal of our Mission, when we see a good effect of
our preaching in your lives. It lies much in you, to convince them, and to
establish us, by that way, which is Gods own way of arguing, a posteriori, by
the effect, by our working upon you. If you say God is God, we are sent; if you
say Baal is God, you justify their sending. Missus est, John Baptist was sent,
it appeared by the effect of his preaching; but it appears too, by a diverse
and manifold citation, which he had received, upon some of which, there may be
good use to insist a little.

First, 1 Citation.
he was cited, called, before he was at all; and called again before he was
borne; called a third time, out of the desert, into the world; and called
lastly out of this world into the next; and by all these callings, these
citations, these missions, he was a competent witness. His first citation was
before he was any thing, before his conception. Out of the dead embers of
Zacharies aged loins, and Elizabeth's double obstacle, age and barrenness, when
it was almost as great a work as a creation, to produce a child out of the
corners, and inwardest bowels of all possibility, and with so many degrees of
improbability, as that Zachary, who is said to have been just before God, Luke
1. 6.
and to have walked in all his commandments without reproof, and had, without
doubt, often considered the like promise of such a child, made and performed
to Abraham, was yet incredulous of it, and asked, how he should know it. Out of
this nothing, or nothing naturally disposed to be such a thing, a child, did
God excite, and cite this Io. Baptist to bear witness of this light, and so
made the son of him, who, for his incredulity, was struck with dumbness,
all voice. And, beloved, such a citation as this, when thou wast merely
nothing, have thou had too, to bear witness of this light, that is, to do
something for the glory of God. When thy free will is as impotent and as dead
as Zacharies loins, when thou art under Elizabeth's double obstacle of age and
barrenness,(barrenness in good works, age in ill) then when thou think not
of God, then when thou art walking for air, or sitting at a feast, or
slumbring in a bed, God opens these doors, he rings a bell, he shows thee an
example in the concourse of people hither, and here, he sets up a man, to
present the prayer of the Congregation to him, and to deliver his messages to
them; and whether curiosity, or custom, or company, or a loathnesse to incur
the penalties of Laws, or the censures and observations of neighbors, bring
thee hither, though thou had nothing to do with God, in coming hither, God
has something to do with thee, now thou art here, even this is a citation, a
calling, by being personally here at these exercises of Religion, thou art some
kind of witness of this light. For, in how many places of the world has
Christ yet never opened such doors for his ordinary service, in all these 1600.
years? And in how many places has he shut up these doors, of his true worship,
within these three or four years? Quod citaris huc, That thou art brought
hither, within distance of his voice, within reach of his food, intra sphaeram
Activitatis, within the sphere and latitude of his ordinary working, that is,
into his house, into his Church, this is a citation, a calling, answerable to
John Baptists first calling, from his fathers dead loins, and his mothers
barren womb; and his second citation was before he was borne, in his mothers
womb.

When Mary came to visit Elizabeth, 2 Citation.
the child sprang in her belly, as soon as Mary's voice sounded in her ears.
Luke 1. 41.
And though naturally, upon excess of joy in the mother, the child may spring
in her; yet the Evangelist means to tell an extraordinary and supernatural
thing; and whether it were an anticipation of reason in the child, (some of
the Fathers think so, though St. Augustine do not, that the child understood
what he did) or that this were a fulfilling of that prophecy, Verse 15.
That he should be filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb, all agree
that this was an exciting of him to this attestation of his Saviors presence,
August.
whether he had any sense of it, or no. Exultatio significat, says St.
Augustine, This springing declared, that his mother, whose forerunner that
child should be, was come. Origin.
And so both Origin, and St. Cyrill, Cyrill.
refer that commendation, which our Savior gives him, Inter natos Mulierum,
Among those that were born of women, there was not a greater Prophet; that is,
none that prophesied before he was borne, but he. And such a citation, beloved,
thou may have, in this place, and at this time. A man may upon the hearing
of something that strikes him, that affects him, feel this springing, this
exultation, this melting, and colliquation of the inwardest bowels of his
soul; a new affection, a new passion, beyond the joy ordinarily conceived upon
earthly happinesses; which, though no natural Philosopher can call it by a
name, no Anatomist assign the place where it lies, yet I doubt not, through
Christ jesus, but that many of you who are here now, feel it, and understand
it this minute. Citaris huc, thou wast cited to come hither, whether by a
collateral, and oblique, and occasional motion, or otherwise, hither God has
brought thee, and Citaris hic, here thou art cited to come nearer to him. Now
both these citations were before John Baptist was borne; both these affections,
to come to this place, and to be affected with a delight here, may be before
thy regeneration, which is thy spiritual birth; a man is not borne, not borne
again, because he is at Church, nor because he likes the Sermon, John Baptist
had, and thou must have a third citation; which was in him, from the desert
into the public, into the world, from contemplation to practice.

This was that mission, that citation, 3 Citation. Luke 3. 2.
which most properly belongs to this Text, when the word came to the voice,
(The word of God came to John in the wilderness, and he came into all the
Country preaching the Baptism of repentance.) To that we must come, to
practice. For, in this respect, an University is but a wilderness, though we
gather our learning there, our private meditation is but a wilderness, though
we contemplate God there, nay our being here, is but a wilderness, though we
serve God here, if our service end so, if we do not proceed to action, and
glorify God in the public. And therefore Citaris huc, thou art cited hither,
here thou must be, and Citaris hic, thou art cited here, to lay hold upon that
grace which God offers in his Ordinance; and Citaris hinc, thou art cited from
hence, to embrace a calling in the world. He that undertakes no course, no
vocation, he is no part, no member, no limb of the body of this world; no eye,
to give light to others; no ear to receive profit by others. If he think it
enough to be excrementall nails, to scratch and gripe others by his lazy
usury, and extortion, or excrementall hair, made only for ornament, or
delight of others, by his wit, or mirth, or delightful conversation, these men
have not yet felt this third citation, by which they are called to glorify
God, and so to witness for him, in such public actions, as Gods cause for
the present requires, and comports with their calling.

And then John Baptist had a fourth citation 4 Citation.
to bear witness for Christ, by laying down his life for the Truth; and this
was that that made him a witness, in the highest sense, a Martyr. God has not
served this citation upon us, nor does he threaten us, with any approches
toward it, in the fear of persecution for religion. But remember that John
Baptists Martyrdom, was not for the fundamental rock, the body of the
Christian religion, but for a moral truth, for matter of manners. A man may be
bound to suffer much, for a less matter then the utter overthrow, of the whole
frame and body of religion. But leaving this consideration, for what causes a
man is bound to lay down his life, consider we now, but this, that a man lays
down his life for Christ, and bears witness of him, even in death, when he
prefers Christ before this world, when he desires to be dissolved, and be with
him, and obeyes cheerfully that citation, by the hand of death, whenever it
comes; and that citation must certainly be served upon you all; whether this
night in your beds, or this hour, at the door, no man knows. You who were
cited hither, to hear, and cited here, to consider, and cited hence, to work
in a calling in the world, must be cited from thence too, from the face to the
bosom of the earth, from treading upon other men's, to a lying down in your
own graves. And yet that is not your last citation, there is fifth.

In the grave, John Baptist does, and we must attend a fifth citation, 5
Citation.
from the grave to a Judgment. The first citation hither to Church, was served
by Example of other men, you saw them come, and came. The second citation,
here, in the Church, was served by the Preacher, you heard him and believed.
The third, from hence, is served by the law, and by the Magistrate, they bind
you to embrace a profession, and a calling, and you do so. The fourth, which is
from thence, from this, to the next world, is served by nature in death, he
touches you, and you sink. This fifth to Judgment shall be by an Angel, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16.
by an Archangell, by the Lord himself, The Lord himself shall descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangell, and with the Trump of
God, and the dead in Christ shall rise. This citation is not served by a bell,
that tolls to bring you hither; not by a man that speaks to instruct you here;
not by a law, that compells you to live orderly in the world; not by a bell,
that rings out to lay thee in thy grave; but by the great shout of the Lord
descending from heaven, with the voice of the Archangel, 2 Chro. 9. 27.
and with the Trump of God, to raise the dead in Christ. It is not the
Apeperire fores, That the Levites have charge to open these doors every day to
you, that you may come in, (that is your first citation, Psalm. 51.15.
hither) it is not the Domine labia mea aperies, That God opens our mouth, the
mouth of the Preacher, to work upon you, (that is your second citation, here,)
it is not that aperuimus saccos, Genesis 43. 21.
The opening of your sack of Corn, and finding that, and your money too, that
is, your trading in this world, in a calling, Number. 16. 30.
(that is your third citation from hence) nor it is not the Aperuit terra os
situm, That the earth opens her mouth, and swallows all in the grave, (that is
your fourth citation from thence,) it is none of these Apertions, these
openings; but it is the Aperta monumenta, Mat. 27. 52.
The grave it self shall be open again; and Aperti coeli, The heavens shall be
open, Act. 7. 56.
and I shall see the Son of man, the Son of God, and not see him at that
distance, that Stephen saw him there, but see him, and sit down with him. I
shall rise from the dead, from the dark station, from the prostration, from
the prosternation of death, and never miss the sun, which shall then be put
out, for I shall see the Son of God, the Sun of glory, and shine my self,
as that sun shines. I shall rise from the grave, and never miss this City,
which shall be no where, for I shall see the City of God, the new Jerusalem. I
shall look up, and never wonder when it will be day, Apoc. 10. 6.
for, the Angel will tell me that time shall be no more, and I shall see, and
see cheerfully that last day, the day of judgment, which shall have no night,
never end, Dan. 7. 9.
and be united to the Ancient of days, to God himself, who had no morning,
never began. There I shall bear witness for Christ, in ascribing the
salvation of the whole world, to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the
Lamb, and Christ shall bear witness for me, in ascribing his righteousness
unto me, and in delivering me into his Fathers hands, with the same
tenderness, as he delivered up his own soul, and in making me, who am a
greater sinner, then they who crucified him on earth for me, as innocent, and
as righteous as his glorious self, in the Kingdom of heaven. And these
occasions of advancing your devotion, and edification, from these two branches
of this part, first, the fitness of John Baptist to be sent, and then his
actual sending, by so diverse callings, and citations in him, appliable, as you
have seen, to us. More will be ministered, in due time, out of the last part,
and the two branches of that; first, why this light required any witness, and
then, what witness John Baptist gave to this light. But those, because they
lead us not to the celebration of any particular Festival, (as these two
former parts have done, to Christmas and Midsommer) I may have leave to present
to you at any other time. At this time let us only beg of God a blessing upon
this that has been said etc.

SERMON XXXVIII.
Preached at Saint Paul's 13. October. 1622.
JOHN 1. 8. He was not that light, but was sent to bear witness of that
light.
THis is the third time that I have entertained you (in a business of this
nature, intended for Gods service, and your edification, I must not say,
troubled you) with this Text. I begun it at Christmas, and in that dark time
of the year told you who, and what was this light which John Baptist is denied
to be. I pursued it at Midsommer, and upon his own day, insisted upon the
person of John Baptist, who, though he were not this light, was sent to bear
witness of this light. And the third consideration, which (as I told you then)
was not tied nor affected to any particular Festival, you shall (by Gods
grace) have now, the office of John Baptist, his testimony; and in that, these
two parts; first, a problematicall part, why so evident a thing as light,
Divisio.
and such a light, that light, required testimony of man: and then a
dogmaticall part, what testimony this man gives of this light. And in the first
of these we shall make these two steps, first, why any testimony at all, then
why, after so many others, this of John.

First then God made light first, ut innotescerent omnia, that man might
glorify God in seeing the creature, and him in it; 1 Part. Cur testis. Ambrose.
for, frustra fecisset, (says the same Father) it had been to no purpose to
have a world, and no light. But though light discover and manifest every thing
else to us, and it self too, if all be well disposed, yet, in the fifth verse
of this chapter, there is reason enough given, why this light in our text,
requires testimony; that is, the light shines in darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not; and therefore, Propter non intelligentes, propter
incredulos, propter in^rmos, Sol lucernas quaerit; August. Propter non
intelligentes.
for their sakes that are weak in their understanding, and not enlightened in
that faculty, the Gentiles; for their sakes who are weak in their faith, that
come, and hear, and receive light, but believe not; for their sakes that are
perverse in their manners, and course of life, that hear, and believe, but
practice not, sol lucernas quaerit, this light requires testimony. There may be
light then and we not know it, because we are asleep; and asleep so, Mat. 9. 24.
as Iairus daughter was, of whom Christ says, the maid is not dead but asleep.
The maid was absolutely dead; but because he meant forthwith to raise her, he
calls it a sleep. The Gentiles, in their ignorance, are dead; we, in our
corrupt nature, dead, as dead as they, we cannot hear the voice, we cannot see
the light; without Gods subsequent grace, the Christian can no more proceed,
then the Gentile can begin without his preventing grace. But, because,
amongst us, he has established the Gospel, and in the ministry and
dispensation thereof, ordinary means for the conveyance of his farther grace,
we noware but asleep and may wake. A sudden light brought into a room does
awaken some men; but yet a noise does it better, and a shaking, and a pinching.
The exalting of natural faculties, and good moral life, inward inspirations,
and private meditations, conferences, reading, and the life, do awaken some;
but the testimony of the messenger of God, the preacher, crying according to
Gods ordinance, shaking the soul, troubling the conscience, and pinching the
bowels, by denouncing of Gods Judgments, these bear witness of the light,
when otherwise men would sleep it out; and so propter non intelligentes, for
those that lie in the suddes of nature, and cannot, or of negligence, and will
not come to hear, sol lucernas, this light requires testimony.

These testimonies, Propter incredulos.
Gods ordinances, may have wakened a man, yet he may wink, and covet
darkness, and grow weary of instruction, and angry at increpation; And, as the
eye of the adulterer waits for the twilight, Job 24. 15.
so, the ear of this fastidious and impatient man, longs for the end of the
Sermon, or the end of that point in the Sermon, which is a thorn to his
conscience; But as, if a man wink in a clear day, he shall for all that
discern light thorough his eylids, but not light enough to keep him from
stumbling: so the most perverse man that is, either in faith or manners, that
winkes against the light of nature, or light of the law, or light of grace
exhibited in the Christian Church, the most determined Atheist that is,
discernes through all his stubbornness, though not light enough to rectify
him, to save him, yet enough to condemn him, though not enough to enable him,
to read his own name in the book of life, yet so much, as makes him afraid to
read his own story by, and to make up his own Audit and account with God. And
does not this light to this man need testimony, That as he does see, it is a
light, so he might see, that there is warmth and nourishment in this light, and
so, as well see the way to God by that light, as to see by it, that there is a
God; and, this he may, if he do not sleep nor wink; that is, not forbear
coming hither, nor resist the grace of God, always offered here, when he is
here. Propter incredulos, for their sakes, who though they do hear, hear not
to believe, sol lucernas, this light requires testimony; and it does so too,
propter infirmos, for their sakes, who though they do hear, and believe, yet
do not Practice.

If he neither sleep, Propter infirmos.
nor wink, neither forbear, nor resist, yet how often may you surprise and
deprehend a man, whom you think directly to look upon such an object, yet if
you ask him the quality or color of it, he will tell you, he saw it not? That
man sees as little with staring, as the other with winking. His eye has seen,
but it has returned nothing to the common sense. We may pore upon books, stare
upon preachers, yet if we reflect nothing, nothing upon our conversation, we
shall still remain under the increpation and malediction of Saint Paul, Act.
28. 26.
out of Esaias, Seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive; seeing and hearing
shall but aggravate our condemnation, and it shall be easier at the day of
Judgment, for the deaf and the blind that never saw Sacrament, never heard
Sermon, then for us, who have frequented both, propter infirmos, for their
sakes, whose strength though it serve to bring them hither, and to believe
here, does not serve them to proceed to practice, sol lucernas, this light
requires testimony.

Yet, if we be neither dead, nor asleep, nor wink, nor look negligently, but
do come to some degrees of holiness in practice for a time, Propter Relapsos.
yet if at any time, we put our selves in such a position and distance from
this light, as that we suffer dark thick bodies to interpose, and eclipse it,
that is, sadness and dejection of spirit, for worldly losses; nay, if we admit
inordinate sadness for sin it self, to eclipse this light of comfort from
us, or if we suffer such other lights, as by the corrupt estimation of the
world, have a greater splendor to come in; (As the light of Knowledge and
Learning, the light of Honor and Glory, of popular Applause and Acclamation)
so that this light which we speak of, (the light of former Grace) be darkened
by the access of other lights, worldly lights, then also you shall find that
you need more and more Testimony of this light. God is light in the Creature,
in nature; yet the natural Man stumbles and falls, and lies in that ignorance,
Christ bears witness of this light, in establishing a Chrishian Church; yet
many Christians fall into Idolatry and Superstition, and lie and die in it. The
Holy Ghost has born further witness of this light, and, (if we may take so
low a Metaphore in so high a Mystery) has snuffed this candle, mended this
light, in the Reformation of Religion; and yet there is a damp, or a cloud of
uncharitableness, of neglecting, of defaming one another; we deprave even the
fiery, Act. 2. 3.
the claven tongues of the Holy Ghost: Our tongues are fiery only to the
consuming of another, and they are cloven, only in speaking things contrary to
one another. So that still there need more witnesses, more testimonies of this
light. God the Father is Pater Luminum the Father of all Lights; God the Son,
is Lumen de lumine, Light of light, of the Father; God the Holy Ghost is Lumen
de luminibus, Light of lights, proceeding both from the Father, and the Son;
and this light the Holy Ghost kindles more lights in the Church, and drops a
coal from the Altar upon every lamp, he lets fall beams of his Spirit upon
every man, that comes in the name of God, into this place; and he sends you one
man to day, which bears witness of this light ad ignaros, that bends his
preaching to the convincing of the natural man, the ignorant soul, and works
upon him. And another another day, that bears witness ad incredulos, that
fixes the promises of the Gospel, and the merits of Christ Jesus, upon that
startling and timorous soul, upon that jealous and suspicious soul, that cannot
believe that those promises, or those merits appertain to him, and so bends all
the power of his Sermon to the binding up of such broken hearts, and faint
believers. He sends another to bear witness ad infirmos, to them who though
they have shaked off their sickness, yet are too weak, to walk, to them, who
though they do believe, are intercepted by tentations from preaching, and his
Sermon reduces them from their ill manners, who think it enough to come, to
hear, to believe. And then he sends another ad Relapsos, to bear witness of
this light to them who have relapsed into former sins, that the merits of
Christ are inexhaustible, and the mercies of God in him indefatigable: As God
cannot be deceived with a false repentance, so he cannot resist a true, nor be
weary of multiplying his mercies in that case. And therefore think not that
thou have heard witnesses enough of this light, Sermons enough, if thou have heard
all the points preached upon, which concern thy salvation. But because new
Clouds of Ignorance, of Incredulity, of Infirmity, of Relapsing, rise every
day and call this light in question, and may make thee doubt whether thou have
it or no, every day, (that is, as often as thou can) hear more and more
witnesses of this light; and bless that God, who for thy sake, would submit
himself to these Testimonia ab homine, these Testimonies from men, and being
all light himself, and having so many other Testimonies, would yet require the
Testimony of Man, of John; which is our other branch of this first part.

Christ, A seipso.
(who is still the light of our Text, That light, the essential light) had
testimony enough without John. First, he bore witness of himself. And though
he say of himself, (If I bear witness of my self, my witness is not true)
yet that he might say either out of a legal and proverbiall opinion of theirs,
John. 5. 31.
that ordinarily they thought, That a witness testifying for himself, was not
to be believed, whatsoever he said; Or, as Man, (which they then took him to
be) he might speak it of himself out of his own opinion, that, in Judicature
it is a good rule, that a man should not be believed in his own case. But,
after this, and after he had done enough to make them see, that he was more
then man, 8. 13.
by multiplying of miracles, then he said, though I bear witness of my self,
my witness is true. So the only infallibility and unreproachable evidence of
our election, is in the inward word of God, when his Spirit bears witness
with our Spirit, that we are the Sons of God; for, if the Spirit, (the Spirit
of truth) say he is in us, he is in us. But yet the Spirit of God is content to
submit himself to an ordinary trial, to be tried by God and the Country; he
allows us to doubt, and to be afraid of our regeneration, except we have the
testimony of sanctification. Christ bound them not to his own testimony, till
it had the seal of works, of miracles; nor must we build upon any testimony
in our selves, till other men, that see our life, testify for us to the world.

He had also the testimony of his Father, (the Father himself which has sent
me, bears witness of me.) But where should they see the Father, A Patre.
or hear the Father speak? That was all which Philip asked at his hands, John.
5. 37. 14. 8.
(Lord show us the Father, and it suffices us.) He had the testimony of an
Angel, Ab Angelo.
who came to the shepherds so, as no where in all the Scriptures, there is
such an Apparition expressed, (the Angel of the Lord came upon them, Luke 2. 8.
and the glory of the Lord shone round about them) but where might a man talk
with this Angel, and know more of him? As Saint Augustine says of Moses,
Scripsit and abiit, he has written a little of the Creation, and he is gone;
Si hic esset, tenerem and rogarem, if Moses were here, says he, I would hold
him fast, till I had got him to give me an exposition of that which he writ.
For, beloved, we must have such witnesses, as we may consult farther with. A
stella.
I can see no more by an Angel, then by lightning. A star testified of him, at
his birth. But what was that star? was it any of those stars that remain yet?
Gregory Nissen thinks it was, and that it only then changed the natural
course, and motion for that service. But almost all the other Fathers think,
that it was a light but then created, and that it had only the form of a
star, and no more; and some few, that it was the holy Ghost in that form. And,
if it were one of the fixed stars, and remain yet, yet it is not now in that
office, it testifies nothing of Christ now. The wise men of the East testified
of him, A Magis.
too; But what were they, or who, or how many, or from whence, were they; for,
all these circumstances have put Antiquity it self into more distractions, A
Simeone.
and more earnest disputations, then circumstances should do. Simeon testified
of him, Luke 2. 25.
who had a revelation from the holy Ghost, that he should not see death, till
he had seen Christ. Ab Anna.
And so did the Prophetess Anna, who served God, with fasting and prayer,
Ambrose.
day and night. Omnis sexus and aetas, both sexes, and all ages testified of
him; and he gives examples of all, as it was easy for him to do. Now after
all these testimonies, from himself, from the Father, from the Angel, from the
star, from the wise men, from Simeon, from Anna, from all, what needed the
testimony of John? All those witnesses had been thirty years before John was
cited for a witness, to come from the wilderness and preach. And in thirty
years, by reason of his obscure and retired life, in his father Joseph's house,
all those personal testimonies of Christ might be forgotten; and, for the most
part, those witnesses only testified that he was borne, that he was come into
the world, but for all their testimony, he might have been gone out of the
world long. Before this, he might have perished in the general flood, in that
flood of innocent blood, in which Herod drowned all the young children of that
Country. When therefore Christ came forth to preach, when he came to call
Apostles, when he came to settle a Church, to establish means for our ordinary
salvation, (by which he is the light of our text, the Essential light shining
out in his Church, by the supernatural light of faith and grace) then he
admitted, then he required Testimonium ab homine, testimony from man. And so,
for our conformity to him, in using and applying those means, which convay
this light to us, in the Church, we must do so too; we must have the seal of
faith, and of the Spirit, but this must be in the testimony of men; still there
must be that done by us, which must make men testify for us.

Every Christian is a state, a commonwealth to himself, and in him, the
Scripture Scripturas esse.
is his law, and the conscience is his Judge. And though the Scripture be
inspired from God, and the conscience be illumined and rectified by the holy
Ghost immediately, yet, both the Scriptures and the Conscience admit humane
arguments. First, the Scriptures do, in all these three respects; first that
there are certain Scriptures, that are the revealed will of God. Secondly,
that these books which we call Canonical, are those Scriptures. And lastly,
that this and this is the true sense and meaning of such and such a place of
Scripture. First, that there is a manifestation of the will of God in certain
Scriptures, if we who have not power to infuse Faith into men, (for that is the
work of the Holy Ghost only) but must deal upon the reason of men, and
satisfy that, if we might not proceed, per testimonia ab homine, by humane
Arguments, and argue, and infer thus, That if God will save man for worshipping
him, and damn him for not worshipping him, so as he will be worshipped,
certainly God has revealed to man, how he will be worshipped, and that in some
visible, in some permanent manner in writing, and that that writing is
Scripture, if we had not these testimonies, these necessary consequences
derived even from the natural reason of man to convince men, how should we
convince them, since our way is not to create Faith, but to satisfy reason?
And therefore let us rest in this testimony of men, that all Christian men, nay
Jews and Turks too, have ever believed, that there are certain Scriptures,
which are the revealed will of God, and that God has manifested to us, in
those Scriptures, all that he requires at our hands for Faith or Manners. Now,
which are those Scriptures?

As for the whole body entirely together, Hos eos libros esse.
so for the particular limbs and members of this body, the several books of
the Bible, we must accept testimonium ab homine, humane Arguments, and the
testimony of men. At first, the Jews were the Depositaries of Gods Oracles;
and therefore the first Christians were to ask the Jews, which books were
those Scriptures. Since the Church of God is the Master of those Rolls, no
doubt but the Church has Testimonium a Deo, The Spirit of God to direct her,
in declaring what Books make up the Scripture; but yet even the Church, which
is to deal upon men, proceeds also per testimonium ab homine, by humane
Arguments, such as may work upon the reason of man, in declaring the Scriptures
of God. For the New Testament, there is no question made of any Book, but in
Conventicles of Anabaptists; and for the Old, it is testimony enough that we
receive all that the Jews received. This is but the testimony of man, but such
as prevails upon every man. It is somewhat boldly said, (not to permit to our
selves any severer, or more bitter animadversion upon him) by a great man in
the Romam Church, that perchance the book of Enoch, which S. Jude cites in his
Epistle, Melchilanus.
was not an Apocryphal book, but Canonical Scripture in the time of the Jews.
As though the holy Ghost were a time-server, and would sometimes issue some
things, for present satisfaction, which he would not avow nor stand to after;
as though the holy Ghost had but a Lease for certain years, a determinable
estate in the Scriptures, which might expire, and he be put from his evidence;
that that book might become none of his, which was his before. We therefore, in
receiving these books for Canonical, which we do, and in post-posing the
Apochryphall, into an inferior place, have testimonium ab homine, testimony
from the People of God, who were, and are the most competent, and
unreproachable witnesses herein: and we have Testimonium ab inimico, testimony
from our adversary himself, Idem ex Aquin.
Perniciosius est Ecclesiae librum recipere pro sacro, qui non est, quam sacrum
rejicere, It is a more pernicious danger to the Church, to admit a book for
Canonical, which is not so, then to reject one that is so. And therefore, ne
turberis novitie, Cajetan.
(says another great Author of theirs) Let no young student in Divinity be
troubled, si alicubi repererit, libros istos supputari inter Canonicos, if he
find at any time, any of these books reckned amongst the Canonical, nam ad
Hiero. limam, verba Doctorum and Concilio rum reducenda, for says he, Hieroms
file must pass over the Doctors, and over the Councels too, and they must be
understood, and interpreted according to S. Hier. now this is but testimonium
ab homine, S. Hier. testimony, that prevailed upon Cajetan, and it was but
testimonium ab homine, the testimony of the Jews, that prevailed upon S. Hierom
himself.

It is so for the whole body, Sensus locorum.
The bible; it is so for all the limbs of this body, every particular book of
the Bible; and it is so, for the soul of this body, the true sense of every
place, of very book thereof; for, for that, (the sense of the place) we must
have testimonium ab homine, the testimony, that is, the interpretation of other
men. Thou must not rest upon thy self, nor upon any private man. John was a
witness that had witnesses, the Prophets had prophesied of John Baptist. The
men from whom we are to receive testimony of the sense of the Scriptures, must
be men that have witnesses, that is, a visible and outward calling in the
Church of God. That no sense be ever admitted, that derogateth from God, that
makes him a false, or an impotent, or a cruel God, That every contradiction,
and departing from the Analogy of Faith, does derogate from God, and diverse
such grounds, and such inferences, as every man confesses, and acknowledges to
be naturally and necessarily consequent, these are Testimonia ab homine,
Testimonies that pass like current money, from man to man, obvious to every
man, suspicious to none. Thus it is in the general; but then, when it is
deduced to a more particular trial, (what is the sense of such or such a
place) when Christ says, Scrutamini Scripturas, John 5.39.
search the Scriptures, non mittit ad simplicem lectionem, sed ad scrutationem
exquisitam, It is not a bare reading, but a diligent searching, that is
enjoined us. Now they that will search, must have a warrant to search; they
upon whom thou must rely for the sense of the Scriptures, must be sent of God
by his Church. Thou art robbed of all, divested of all, if the Scriptures be
taken from thee; Thou have no where to search; bless God therefore, that has
kept thee in possession of that sacred Treasure, the Scriptures; and then, if
any part of that treasure ly out of thy reach, or ly in the dark, so as that
thou understandest not the place, search, that is, apply thy self to them that
have warrant to search, and thou shall lack no light necessary for thee. Either
thou shall understand that place, or the not understanding of it shall not be
imputed to thee, nor thy salvation hindered by that Ignorance.

It is but to a woman that Saint Hierome says, Hierom.
Ama Scripturas, and amabit te Sapientia, Love the Scriptures, and Wisdom will
love thee: The weakness of her Sex must not avert her from reading the
Scriptures. It is instruction for a Child, and for a Girl, Idem.
that the same Father gives, Septem annorum discat memoriter Psalterium, As
soon as she is seven years old, let her learn all the Psalms without book;
the tenderness of her age, must not avert her from the Scriptures. It is to
the whole Congregation, consisting of all sorts and sexes, that Saint
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
Hortor, and hortari non desinam, I always do, and always will exhort you,
ut cum domi fueritis, assiduae lectioni Scripturarum vacetis, that at home, in
your own houses, you accustom your selves to a daily reading of the
Scriptures. And after, to such men as found, or forced excuses for reading
them, he says with compassion, and indignation too, O homo, non est tuum
Scripturas evolvere, quia innumeris curis distraheris? Busy man, belongs it
not to thee to study the Scriptures, because thou art oppressed with worldly
business? Imomagis tuum est, says he, therefore thou had the more need to
study the Scriptures; Illi non tam egent, etc. They that are not disquieted,
nor disordered in their passions, with the cares of this world, do not so much
need that supply from the Scriptures, Corn. Agrip.
as you that are, do. It is an Author that lived in the obedience of the
Roman Church, that says, the Council of Nice did decree, That every man
should have the Bible in his house. Escalante.
But another Author in that Church says now, Consilium Chrysostomi Ecclesiae
nunc non arridet; The Church does not now like Chrysostomes counsel, for this
general reading of the Scriptures, Quia etsi ille locutus ad plebem, plebs
tunc non erat haeretica; Though Saint Chrysostom spoke that to the people, the
people in his time were not an Heretical people: And are the people in the
Roman Church now an Heretical people? If not, why may not they pursue Saint
Chrystomes counsel, and read the Scriptures? Because they are dark? It is
true, in some places they are dark; August.
purposely left so by the Holy Ghost, ne semel lectas fastidiremus, lest we
should think we had done when we had read them once; so says S. Gregory too,
Gregor.
In plain places, fami occurrit, he presents meat for every stomach; In hard
and dark places, fastidia detergit, Hierom.
he sharpens the appetite: Margarita est, and undique perforari potest; the
Scripture is a Pearl, and might be bored through every where. Not every where
by thy self; there may be many places, which thou of thy self can not
understand; not every where by any other man; no not by them, who have warrant
to search, Commission from God, by their calling, to interpret the Scriptures,
not every where by the whole Church, God has reserved the understanding of
some places of Scripture, till the time come for the fulfilling of those
Prophecies; as many places of the Old Testament were not understood, till
Christ came, in whom they were fulfilled. If therefore thou will needs know,
whether, when Saint Paul took his information of the behavior of the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
from those of Chloe, whether this Chloe, were a woman, or a place, the Fathers
cannot satisfy thee, the latter Writers cannot satisfy thee, there is not
Testimonium ab homine, no such humane Arguments as can determine thee, or give
thee an Acquittance; the greatest pillars whom God has raised in his Church,
cannot give a satisfaction to thy curiosity. But if the Doctrine of the place
will satisfy thee, (which Doctrine is, that S. Paul did not give credit to
light rumors against the Corinthians, nor to clandestine whisperers, but tells
them who accused them, and yet, as well as he loved them, he did not stop his
ears against competent witnesses, (for he tells them, they stood accused, and
by whom) then thou may bore this pearl thorough, and make it fit for thy
use, and wearing, in knowing so much of Saint Paul's purpose therein, as
concerns thy edification, though thou never know, Tertull.
whether Chloe were a Woman, or a Place. Tantum veritati obstrepit adulter
sensus; quam corruptor stylus; a false interpretation may do thee as much
harm, as a false translation, a false Commentary, as a false copy; And
therefore, forbearing to make any interpretation at all, upon dark places of
Scripture, (especially those, whose understanding depends upon the future
fulfilling of prophecies) in places that are clear, and evident thou may be
thine own interpreter; In places that are more obscure, go to those men, whom
God has set over thee, and either they shall give thee that sense of the
place, which shall satisfy thee, by having the sense thereof, or that must
satisfy you, that there is enough for your salvation, though that remain
uninterpreted. And let this Testimonium ab homine, this testimony of man
establish thee for the Scripture, that there is a Scripture, a certain book,
that is the word; and the revealed will of God; That these books which we
receive for Canonical, make up that book; And then, that this and this is the
true sense of every place, which the holy Ghost has opened to the present
understanding of his Church.

We said before, Conscientia.
that a Christian being a Commonwealth to himself, the Scripture was his law,
(and for that law, that Scripture, he was to have Testimonium ab homine, the
testimony of man) And then, his Conscience is his Judge, and for that he is to
have the same testimony too. Thou must not rest upon the testimony and
suggestions of thine own conscience; Hierom.
Nec illud de trivio paratum habere, thou must not rest in that vulgar saying,
sufficit mihi etc. As long as mine own Conscience stands right, I care not
what all the world say. Thou must care what the world says, and study to have
the approbation and testimony of good men. Every man is enough defamed in the
general depravation of our whole nature^: Adam has cast an infamy upon us
all: And when a man is defamed, it is not enough that he purge himself by
oath, but he must have compurgators too: other men must swear, that they
believe he swears a truth. Thine own conscience is not enough, but thou must
^atisfie the world, and have Testimonium ab homine, good men must think thee
good. A conscience that admits no search from others, is cauterizata, burnt
with a hot Iron; not cured, but seared; not at peace, but stupefied. And when
in the verse immediately before our text, it is said, That John came to bear
witness of that light, it is added, that through him, (that is, through that
man, through John, not through it, through that light) that through him all men
believe. For though it be efficiently the operation of the light it self,
(that is, Christ himself) that all men believe yet the holy Ghost directs us
to that that is nearest us, to this testimony of man, that instrumentally,
ministerially works this belief in men. If then for thy faith, thou must have
testimonium ab homine, the testimony of men, and may not believe as no man
but thy self believes, much more for thy manners, and conversation. Think it
not enough to satisfy thy self, but satisfy good men; nay weak men; nay
malicious men: till it come so far, as that for the desire of satisfying man,
thou leave God unsatisfied, endeavor to satisfy all. God must weigh down all;
thy self and others; but as long as thy self only art in one balance, and
other men in the other, let this preponderate; let the opinion of other men,
weigh down thine own opinion of thy self. It Is true, (but many men flatter
themselves too far, with this truth) that it is a sin, to do any thing in
Conscientia dubia, when a man doubts whether he may do it, or no, and in
Conscientia scrupulosa, when the conscience has received any single scruple,
or suspicion to the contrary, and so too in conscientia opinante, in a
conscience that has conceived, but an opinion, (which is far from a debated,
and deliberate determination) yea in conscientia errante, though the conscience
be in an error, yet it is sin to do aright against the conscience; but then, as
it is a sin, to do against the conscience laboring under any of these
infirmities, so is it a greater sin, not to labor to recover the conscience,
and divest it of those scruples, by their advise, whom God has endued with
knowledge, and power, for that purpose. For, (as it is in civil Judicature) God
refers causes to them, and according to their reports, Gods ordinary way is to
decree the cause, to loose where they loose, to bind where they bind. Their
imperfections, or their corruptions God knows how to punish in them; but thou
shall have the recompense of thy humility and thy obedience to his ordinance,
in harkening to them, whom he has set over thee, for the rectifying of thy
conscience. Neither is this to erect a parochial popacy, to make every
minister a Pope in his own parish, or to re-enthrall you to a necessity of
communicating all your sins, or all your doubtful actions to him; God
forbid. God of his goodness has delivered us, from that bondage, and butchery
of the conscience, which our Fathers suffered from Rome, and Anathema, 1 Cor.
16. 22.
and Anathema Maran-atha, cursed be he till the Lord comes, and cursed when the
Lord comes, that should go about to bring us in a relapse, in an eddy, in a
whirlepoole, into that disconsolate estate, or into any of the pestilent errors
of that Church. But since you think it no diminution to you, to consult with a
Physician for the state of your body, or with a Lawyer for your Lands, since
you are not borne, nor grown good Physicians, and good Lawyers, why should you
think your selves born, or grown so good Divines, that you need no counsel, in
doubtful cases, from other men? And therefore, as for the Law that governs us,
that is, the Scripture, we go the way that Christ did, to receive the testimony
of man, both for the body, that Scriptures there are, and for the limbs of that
body, that these books make up those Scriptures, and for the soul of this
body, that this is the sense of the holy Ghost in that place; so, for our
Judge, which is the conscience, let that be directed before hand, by their
advise whom God has set over us, and settled, and quieted in us, by their
testimony, who are the witnesses of our conversation. And so we have done with
our Problematicall part; we have asked and answered both these questions, Why
this light requires any testimony, (and that is because exhalations, and damps,
and vapors arise, first from our ignorance, then from our incredulity, after
from our negligence in practicing, and lastly, from our slipperinesse in
relapsing, and therefore we need more and more attestations, and remembrances
of this light) and the other question, Why after so many other testimonies,
(from himself, from his Father, from the Angel, from the Star, from the Magi,
from Simeon, from Anna, from many, many, very many more) he required this
testimony of John; and that is, because all those other witnesses had testified
long before, and because God in all matters belonging to Religion here, or to
salvation hereafter, refers us to man, but to man sent, and ordained by God,
for our direction, that we may do well; and to the testimony of good men, that
we have done well. And so we pass to our dogmaticall part, what his testimony
was; what John Baptist and his successors in preaching, and preparing the ways
of Christ, are sent to do; he was sent to bear witness of that light.

Princes which send Ambassadors, 2 Part.
use to give them a Commission, containing the general scope of the business
committed to them, and then Instructions, for the fittest way to bring that
business to effect. And upon due contemplation of both these, (his Commission,
and his Instructions) arises the use of the Ambassadors judgment and
discretion, in making his Commission, and his Instructions, (which do not
always agree in all points, but are often various, and perplexed) serve most
advantagiously toward the ends of his negotiation. John Baptist had both;
therefore they minister three considerations unto us; first, his Commission,
what that was; and then his Instructions, what they were; and lastly, the
execution, how he proceeded therein.

His Commission was drawn up, Commissio.
and written in Esa^, and recorded and entered into Gods Rolls by the
Evangelists. Esa. 40. 3.
It was, To prepare the way of the Lord, to make straight his paths, Mark 1. 2.
that therefore every valley should be exalted, every mountain made law; and
all this he was to cry out, to make them inexcusable, who contemn the outward
Ministry, and rely upon private inspirations. This Commission lasts during
Gods pleasure; and Gods pleasure is, that it should last to the end of the
world; Therefore are we also joined in Commission with John, and we cry out
still to you to all those purposes.

First, that you prepare the way of the Lord. Praeparate viam.
But when we bid you do so, we do not mean, that this preparing or
pre-disposing of your selves, is in your selves, that you can prevent Gods
preventing grace, or mellow, or supple, or fit your selves for the entrance of
that grace, by any natural faculty in your selves. When we speak of a
cooperation, a joint working with the grace of God, or of a post-operation, an
after working upon the virtue of a former grace, this cooperation, and this
post-operation must be mollified with a good concurrent cause with that grace.
So there is a good sense of cooperation, and post-operation, but
praeoperation, that we should work, before God work upon us, can admit no good
interpretation. I could as soon believe that I had a being before God was, as
that I had a will to good, before God moved it. But then, God having made his
way into you, by his preventing grace, prepare that way, not your way, but his
way, (says our Commission) that is, that way that he has made in you, prepare
that by forbearing and avoiding to cast new hindrances in that way. In
sadness and dejections of spirit, seek not your comfort in drink, in music,
in comedies, in conversation; for, this is but a preparing a way of your own.
To prepare the Lords way, is to look, and consider, what way the Lord has
taken, in the like cases, in the like distresses with other servants of his,
and to prepare that way in thy self, and to assure thy self, that God has but
practiced upon others, that he might be perfect when he comes to thee, and that
he intends to thee, in these thy tribulations, all that he has promised to
all, all that he has already performed to any one. Prepare his way; apply that
way, in which he has gone to others, to thy self.

And then, Rectas facite semitas Dei. Tertull.
by our Commission we cry out to you, to make straight his paths. In which we
do not require, that you should absolutely rectify all the deformities and
crookedness, which that Tortuositas Serpentis, the winding of the old Serpent
has brought you to; for, now the stream of our corrupt nature, is accustomed
to that crooked channel, and we cannot divert that, we cannot come to an
absolute directnesse, and straightness, and profession in this life; and, in
this place, the holy Ghost speaks but of a way, a path; not of our rest in the
end, but of our labor in the way. Our Commission then is not to those sinlesse
men, that think they have nothing for God to forgive; But, when we bid you make
straight his paths, (as before we directed you, to take knowledge what his
ways toward others had been) so here we intend, that you should observe,
which is the Lords path into you, by what way he comes oftnest into you, who
are his Temple, and do not lock that door, do not pervert, do not cross, do
not deface that path. The ordinary way, even of the holy Ghost, for the
conveying of faith, and supernatural graces, is (as the way of worldly
knowledge is) by the senses: where his way is by the care, by hearing his word
preached; do not thou cross that way of his, by an inordinate delight, in
hearing the eloquence of the preacher; for, so thou hear the man, and not
God, and go thy way, and not his. God has diverse ways into diverse men;
into some he comes at noone, in the sunshine of prosperity; to some in the dark
and heavy clouds of adversity. Some he affects with the music of the Church,
some with some particular Collect or Prayer; some with some passage in a
Sermon, which takes no hold of him, that stands next him. Watch the way of the
Spirit of God, into thee; that way which he makes his path, in which he comes
oftnest to thee, and by which thou find thy self most affected, and best
disposed toward him, and pervert not that path, foul not that way. Make
straight his paths, that is, keep them straight; and when thou observest,
which is his path in thee, (by what means especially he works upon thee) meet
him in that path, embrace him in those means, and always bring a facile, a
fusil, a ductile, a tractable soul, to the offers of his grace, in his way.

Our Commission reaches to the exalting of your valleys, Omnis Vallis exaltetur.
Let every valley be exalted; In which, we bid you not to raise your selves in
this world, to such a spiritual height, as to have no regard to this world,
to your bodies, to your fortunes, to your families. Man is not all soul, but a
body too; and, as God has married them together in thee, so has he commanded
them mutual duties toward one another; and God allows us large uses of
temporal blessings, and of recreations too. To exalt valleys, is not to draw
up flesh, to the height of spirit; that cannot be, that should not be done.
But it is to draw you so much toward it, as to consider (and consider with an
application) that the very Law, which was but the schoolmaster to the Gospel,
was given upon a mountain; Exo. 24. 29.
That Moses could not so much as see the Land of promise, till he was brought
up into a mountain; D^ut. 32. 43.
That the inchoation of Christ glory, Matthew. 17. 2 14. 23.
which was his transfiguration, was upon a mountain; That his conversation
with God in prayer; That his return to his eternal Kingdom by his ascension,
Acts 1. 10.
was so too, from a mountain; even his exinanition, his evacuation, his lowest
humiliation, his crucifying was upon a mountain; and he calls, John 12. 32^
even that humiliation, an exaltation, Si exaltatus, If I be exalted, lifted
up, says Christ signifying what death he should die. Now, if our depressions,
our afflictions be exaltations, (so they were to Christ, so they are to every
good Christian) how far does God allow us, an exalting of our valleys, in a
considering with a spiritual boldness, the height and dignity of mankind,
and to what glory God has created us. Certainly man may avoid as many sins,
by this exalting his valleys, this considering the height and dignity of his
nature, as by the humblest meditations in the world. For, 20. 8. Greg.
upon those words of Job, Manus tuae fecerunt me, Saint Gregory says,
Misericordiae judicis, dignitatem suae conditionis opponit; Job presents the
dignity of his creation, by the hand of God, as an inducement why God should
regard him; It is not his valley, but his mountains, that he brings into Gods
sight; not that dust which God took into his hands, when he made him, but that
person which the hands of God had made of that dust. Man is an abridgement of
all the world; and as some Abridgements are greater, then some other authors,
so is one man of more dignity, then all the earth. And therefore exalt thy
valleys, raise thy self above the pleasures that this earth can promise. And
above the sorrows, it can threaten too. A painter can hardly diminish or
contract an Elephant into so little a form, but that that Elephant, when it is
at the least, will still be greater then an Ant at the life, and the greatest.
Sin has diminished man shrowdly, and brought him into a narrower compass;
but yet, his natural immortality, (his soul cannot dye) and his spiritual
possibility, even to the last gasp, of spending that immortality in the
kingdom of glory, and living for ever with God, (for otherwise, our
immortality were the heaviest part of our curse) exalt this valley, this cold
of earth, to a noble height. How ill husbands then of this dignity are we by
sin, to forfeit it by submitting our selves to inferior things? either to
gold, then which every worm, (because a worm has life, and gold has none)
is in nature, more estimable, and more precious; Or, to that which is less
then gold, to Beauty; for there went neither labor, nor study, nor cost to the
making of that; (the Father cannot diet himself so, nor the mother so, as to
be sure of a fair child) but it is a thing that happened by chance, wheresoever
it is; and, as there are Diamonds of diverse waters, so men enthrall themselves
in one clime to a black, in another to a white beauty. To that which is less
then gold or Beauty, voice, opinion, fame, honor, we sell our selves. And
though the good opinion of good men, by good ways, be worth our study, yet
popular applause, and the voice of inconsiderate men, is too cheap a price to
set our selves at. And yet, it is hardly got too; for as a ship that lies in
harbor within land, sometimes needs most of the points of the Compass, to
bring her forth: so if a man surrender himself wholly to the opinion of other
men, and have not his Criterium, his touchstone within him, he will need both
North and South, all the points of the Compass, the breath of all men;
because, as there are contrary Elements in every body, so there are contrary
factions in every place, and when one side cries him up, the other will
depresse him, and he shall, (if not shipwreck) lie still. But yet we do
forfeit our dignity, for that which is less then all, then Gold, then Beauty,
then Honor; for sin; sin which is but a privation, (as darkness is but a
privation) and privations are nothing. And therefore exalt every valley,
consider the dignity of man in his nature, and then, in the Son of God his
assuming that nature, which gave it a new dignity, and this will beget in thee
a Pride that God loves, a valuing of thy self above all the tentations of this
world.

But yet exalt this valley temperately, Omnis mons humiliabitur
consider and esteem this dignity modestly, for our Commission goes farther,
not only to the exalting of every valley, but, Omnis mons humiliabitur, every
mountain must be made low: which is not to bring our mountainous, and swelling
affections, and passions, to that flatnesse, as that we become stupid, and
insensible. Mortification is not to kill nature, but to kill sin. Bring
therefore your Ambition to that bent, to covet a place in the kingdom of
heaven, bring your anger, to flow into zeal, bring your love to enamour you of
that face, which is fairer then the children of men, that face, on which the
Angels desire to look, Christ Jesus, and you have brought your mountains to
that lowness, which is intended, and required here.

Now, In Deserto.
this Commission, John Baptist was, and we are, to publish in deserto, in the
Desert, in the wilderness; that is, as Saint Hierome notes, not in Jerusalem,
in a tumult^ary place, a place of distraction, but in the Desert, a place of
solitude, and retiredness. And yet this does not imply an abandoning of
society, and mutual offices, and callings in the world, but only informs us,
that every man is to have a Desert in himself, a retiring into himself,
sometimes of emptying himself of worldly businesses, and that he spend some
hours in such solitudes, and lay aside, (as one would lay aside a garment) the
Lawyer, the Physician, the Merchant, or whatsoever his profession be, and say,
Domine hie sum, Lord, I am here, I, he whom thou made, and such as thou
made him, not such as the world has made me, Hi sum, I am here, not where
the affairs of the world scatter me, but here, in this retiredness, Lord, I am
here, command what thou will; in this retiredness, in this solitude, (but is
not a Court, is not an Army, is not a Fair a solitude, in respect of this
association, when God and a good soul are met?) but in this home solitude, in
this home Desert, are we commanded to publish this Commission, as the fittest
time to make impressions of all the parts thereof, Prepare the way of the Lord,
make straight his path, exalt your valleys, and bring down your mountains. And
this was John Baptists Commission, What to do, And then he had Instructions
with his Commission, how to do it; which is another consideration.

His Commission was long before in Esaias, Instructions.
so he was Legatus natus, born an Ambassador; his Instructions were delivered
to him by God immediately, when The Word of God came unto John, Luc. 3. 2.
in the wilderness. Princes oftentimes vary their Instructions from their
Commissions, and to perplex their Ambassadors, God proceeded with John
Baptist, and does with us directly. Our Commission is to conform you to him,
our Instructions are to do that, that way, By preaching the Baptism of
Repentance, for the remission of sins. It is, in a word, by the Word and
Sacraments. First, he sends us not as Spies, to lie, and learn, nor to learn
and lie; but to deal apertly, manifestly, to publish, to preach; which as it
forbids forcible and violent pressing the Conscience by secular or
Ecclesiastical authority, so it forbids clandestin and whispering
Conventicles; It is a Preaching, a working by instructing and informing the
understanding; it is a Preaching a public avowing of Gods Ordinance, in a
right Calling. He gives us not our Instructions to offer Peace and
reconciliation to all, and yet he not mean it to all; He bids us preach unto
all; he bids all hearers repent, and he allows us to set to his seals of
reconciliation, to all that come as penitents. He knows who will, and who will
not repent, we do not; but both he knows, and so do we, that all may, so far
as that, if they do not, they find enough in themselves to condemn
themselves, and to discharge God and us. Our Instructions are to preach, that
is our way, and to preach Repentance; there begin you in your own bosoms: He
that seeks upwards to a River, is sure to find that head; but he that upon
every bubling spring, will think to find a River, by that may err many ways.
If thou repent truly, thou art sure to come up to Gods Decree for thy
salvation; but if thou begin above at the Decree, and say, I am saved,
therefore I shall repent, thou may miss both. Repent, and you shall have
the Seals; the Seals are the Sacraments; John's was Baptism; but to what? He
baptized to the amendment of life. This then is the chain; we preach, you
repent; then we give you the Seals, the Sacraments, and you plead them, that
is, declare them in a holy life; for, till that (Sanctification) come,
Preaching, and Repentance, atd Seals, are ineffectuall. A good life inanimates
all. And so, having done with his Commission, what he was to do, and his
Instructions, how he was to do it, we pass to our last branch, in this last
part, The execution of his Commission, and Instructions, what, and how he did
it, what Testimony he gave of this light.

First, he testified, se non esse, Se non esse.
that he was not this light, this Christ, this Messiah. And secondly, Christum
esse, that this light, this Christ, this Messiah was come into the world, there
was no longer expectation: And lastly, hunc esse, that this particular person
whom he designed and specified in the Ecce Agnus, behold the Lamb of God, was
this Light, this Christ, this Messiah. He was not, One was, Christ was; In
these three consists his Testimony. First, Job. 1. 20.
he testified that himself was not the Messiah, he confessed and denied not,
and said plainly, I am not the Christ. Therefore, lest I. Baptist might be
overvalued, August.
and their devotions fixed and determined in him, S. Augstine enlarges this
consideration, Erat Mons illustratus, non ipse Sol; John Baptist was a hill,
and a hill gloriously illustrated by the Sun, but he was not that Sun; Mirare,
mirare, sed tanquam montem; John Baptist deserves a respect, and a regard; but
regard him, and respect him but as an hill, which though high, lis but the same
earth; and mons ^int ^^ebiis est nisi luce luce vestiatur, A hill has no more
light in it self, then the valley, till the light invest it; Si montem esse
lucem putas, in monte naufragium facies; If you take the hill, because it
shines, to be the light it self, you shipwreck upon the top of a hill. If we
rest in the person, or in the gifts of any man, to what height soever this
hill be raised in opinion, or in the Church, still we mistake; John Baptist,
men of the greatest endowments, and goodness too, are but instruments, they
are not the workman himself. And therefore as they are most inexcusable, that
put an infallibility in the breast of one man, (our adversaries of Rome) so do
they transgress too far that way, that run, and pant, and thrust after
strange preachers, and leave their own Church deserted, and their own Pastor
discouraged; for some one family, by the greatness thereof, or by the
estimation thereof, may induce both those inconveniences. Truly, though it may
seem boldly said, it may be said safely, that we were better hear some
weaknesses from our own Pastor, then some excellencies from another; go
farther, some mistakings from our own, then some truths from another; for, all
truths are not necessary; nor all mistakings pernicious; but obedience to order
is necessary, and all disorder pernicious. Now what a way had John Baptist open
to him, if he had been popularly disposed. Amongst a people, that at that time
expected their Messiah, (for, all the Prophecies preceding his coming were
then fulfilled) and such a Messiah as should be a Temporal King, and had
invested an opinion, that he, John Baptist, was that Christ, what rebellions,
what earthquakes, what inundations of people might he have drawn after him,
if he would have countenanced and cherished their error to his advantage? They
would have lacked no Scriptures, to authorize their actions. They would have
found particular places of the Prophets, to have justified any act of theirs,
in advancing their Messiah, then expected. Therein he is our pattern; not to
preach our selves, but Christ Jesus; not to preach for admiration, but for
edification; not to preach to advance civil ends, without spiritual ends; to
promote all the way the peace of all Christian Kingdoms, but to refer all
principally to the Kingdom of peace, and the King of peace, the God of heaven.
He confessed, and denied not, and said plainly, I am not the Christ; That was
his Testimony; we confess, and deny not, and say plainly, That our own parts,
our own passions, the purpose of great persons, the purpose of any State, is
not Christ; we preach Christ Jesus, and him crucified; and whosoever preaches
any other Gospel, or any other thing for Gospel, let him be accursed.

I am not the man, Esse Natum. John 1. 26.
says John Baptist, for, that man is God too; but yet that man, that God, that
Messiah consisting of both, is come, though I be not he. There is one amongst
you, whom you know not, whose shooe-latchet I am not worthy to loose. In which,
he says all this; There is one among you; you need seek no farther; all the
promises, and Prophecies, (the Semen mulieris, That the seed of the woman
should bruise the Serpents head; the appropriation to Abraham, In semine tuo,
In thy seed shall all Nations be blessed: the fixation upon David, Donec
Shiloh, till Shiloh come; Esay's Virgo concipiet, Behold a Virgin shall
conceive; Micah's and tu Bethlem, that Bethlem should be the place, Daniels
seventy Hebdomades, that that should be the time,) all promises, all
prophecies, all computations are at an end, the Messiah is come.

Is he come, Hunc esse.
and amongst you, and do you not know him? what will make you know him? You
believe you need a Messiah; you cannot restore your self. You believe this
Messiah must come at a certain time, specified by certain marks; were all
these marks upon any other? or lacks there any of these in him? Do you thus
magnify me, and neglect a person, whose shooe-latchet I am not worthy to
loose. John Baptist was a Prophet, more then a Prophet, The greatest of the
sons of women: Who could be so much greater then he, and not the Messiah? we
must necessarily enwrap all these three in one another, and into one another
they do easily and naturally fall: He testifies that he was not the man, (he
preaches not himself) he testifies that that man is come; (future expectations
are frivolous) and he testifies, that the characters and marks of the expected
Messiah, can fall upon none but this man, and therefore he delivers him over to
them with that confidence, Ecce Agnus Dei, Behold the Lamb of God, there you
may see him; and this is his Testimony.

These three, Conclusio.
we, we to whom John Baptists Commission is continued, testify too. First, we
tell you, what is not Christ; austerity of life, and outward sanctity is not
he; John Baptist had them abundantly, but yet permitted not, that they should
have that opinion of him. But yet, much less is chambring and wantonness, and
persevering in sin, that Christ, or the way to him. We tell you, stetit in
medio, he has been amongst you, you have heard him preached in your ears; yea
ye have heard him knock at your hearts, and for all that, we tell you that you
have not known him. Which, though it be the discomfortablest thing in the
world, (not to have known Christ in those approches) yet we tell it you
somewhat to your comfort; and to your excuse, I Cor. 2. 8.
for, had you known^ it, you would not have crucified the Lord of glory, Act.
17. 30.
as we do all, by our daily sins. And though God have winked at these times
of ignorance, (pretermitted your former inconsiderations) now, Luke 19. 42.
he commands all men every where to repent. And therefore, that thou may
know, even thou, (as Christ iterates it) at least in this thy day, the things
which belong to thy Peace, we tell you who he is, and where he is; Ecce agnus
Dei, Behold the lamb of God, Here, here in this his ordinance he supplicates
you, when the Minister, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
how mean soever, prays you, in his stead, be ye reconciled to God. Here he
proclaims, and cries to you, Venite omnes, come all that are weary and heavy
laden. Here he bleeds in the Sacrament, here he takes away the sins of the
world, in deriving a jurisdiction upon us, to bind and loose upon earth, that
which he will bind and loose in heaven. This we testify to you; Do you but
receive this testimony. Till you hear that voice of consummation in heaven,
Venite benedicti, come ye blessed, you shall never hear a more comfortable
Gospel then this, which was preached by Christ himself, the Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, to preach the Gospel to the poor, to heal the broken
hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and the acceptable year of the
Lord: Luke 4. 16. Esaias 61. 1.
for, this was not a deliverance from their brick-making in Egypt, nor from
their scorns and contempts in Babylon, but a deliverance from that
unexpressible, that unconceivable bondage of sin, August.
and death, not by the hand of a Moses, but a Messiah, Opt as dare qui
praecipit petere, he that commands us to ask, would feign give: Cupit largiri,
qui desider at postulari, he that desires us to pray to him, has that ready,
and a readiness to give that, that he bids us pray for. If the King give a
general pardon, will any man be so suspiciously treacherous in his own behalf,
as to say, for all this large extent of his mercy, he meant not me, and
therefore I will sue out no pardon? If the King cast a donative, at his
Coronation, will any man lie still and say, he meant none of that money to me?
Luke 14.
When the master of the feast sent his servants for guests, had it become those
poor, and mai^ed, and halt, and blind, to have stood and disputed with the
steward, and said, Surely sir, you mistook your Master, your Master did not
mean us? Why should any man think that God means not him? When he offers
grace, and salvation to all, why not to him? Should God exclude him as a man?
Why, God made him good, and, as a man and his creature, August.
he is good still. But, non Deus Esan hominem odit, fed odit Esau peccatorem?
God did not hate Esau, as he was a man, but as he was a sinner. Should he
exclude him as a sinner? Mar. 2. 17.
Why then he should receive none, August.
for we are all so; and he came for none but such, but sinners. Perfectiorum
est nihil in peccatore odiisse praeter peccata, To hate nothing in a sinner,
but his sin, is a great degree of perfection; God is that perfection; he
hates nothing in thee but thy sin; and that sin he has taken upon himself,
and sees it not in thee. Should he exclude thee because thou art impenitent,
Chrysoft.
because thou have not repented? Do it now. Peccasti, paenitere, Have thou
sinned? repent. Millies peccasti? millies poenitere? Have thou multiplied thy
sins by thousands? multiply thy penitent tears so too. Should he exclude
thee, because thou art impenitible, thou can not repent; how know thou
thou can not repent? Do thou try, do thon endeavor, do thou strive?
why, this, this holy contention of thine is repentance. Discredit not Gods
evidence; he offers thee Testimonium ab homine, the testimony of man, of the
man of God, the Minister, that the promises of the Gospel belong to thee.
Judge not against that evidence; confess that there is no other name given
under heaven, Act. 4. 12.
to be saved, but the name of Jesus, and that that is. And then, when thou have
thus admitted his witnesses to thee, that his preaching has wrought upon thee,
be thou his witness to others, by thy exemplar life, and holy conversation. In
this chapter, in the calling of the Apostles some such thing is intimated, when
of those two Disciples, which, upon John's testimony, followed Christ, one is
named, (Andrew) and the other is not named. No doubt, verse 40.
but the other is also written in the book of life, and long since enjoyes the
blessed fruit of that his forwardness. But in the testimony of the Gospel,
written for posterity, only Andrew is named, who sought out his brother Simon,
and drew him in, and so propagated the Church, and spread the Glory of God.
They who testify their faith by works, give us the better comfort, and
posterity the better example. It will be but Christ's first question at the last
day, What have thou done for me? If we can answer that, he will ask, What have
thou suffered for me? and if we can answer that, he will ask, at last, Whom
have thou won to me, what soul have thou added to my Kingdom? Our thoughts,
our words, our doings, our sufferings, if they bring but our selves to Heaven,
they are not Witnesses; our example brings others; and that is the purpose, and
the end of all we have said, John Baptist was a witness to us, we are so to
you, be you so to one another.

SERMON XXXIX.
Preached at Saint Paul's.
PHILIP. 3. 2. Beware of the Concision.
THis is one of those places of Scripture, which afford an argument for that,
which I find often occasion to say, That there are not so eloquent books in
the world, as the Scriptures. For there is not only that non refugit, which
Calvin speaks of in this place, (Non refugit in Organis suis Spiritus Sanctus
leporem and facetias, The Holy Ghost in his Instruments, (in those whose
tongues or pens he makes use of) does not forbid, nor decline elegant and
cheerful, and delightful expression; but as God gave his Children a bread of
Manna, that tasted to every man like that that he liked best, so has God given
us Scriptures, in which the plain and simple man may hear God speaking to him
in his own plain and familiar language, and men of larger capacity, and more
curiosity, may hear God in that Music that they love best, in a curious, in
an harmonious style, unparalleled by any. For, that also Calvin adds in that
place, that there is no secular Author, Qui jucundis vocum allusionibus, and
figuris magis abundat, which does more abound with persuasive figures of
Rhetorique, nor with musical cadences and allusions, and assimilations, and
conformity, and correspondency of words to one another, then some of the
Secretaries of the Holy Ghost, some of the authors of some books of the Bible
do. Of this Rule, this Text is an example. These Philippians, amongst whom
Saint Paul had planted the Gospel in all sincerity, and impermixt, had
admitted certain new men, that preached Traditionall, and Additionall
Doctrines, the Law with the Gospel, Moses with Christ, Circumcision with
Baptism. To these new Convertites, these new Doctors inculcated often that
charm, You are the Circumcision, you are they whom God has sealed to himself
by the Seal of Circumcision; They whom God has distinguished from all
Nations, by the mark of Circumcision; They in whom God has imprinted, (and
that in so high a way, as by a Sacrament) an internal Circumcision, in an
external; and will you break this Seal of Circumcision? will you deface this
mark of Circumcision? will you depart from this Sacrament of Circumcision? You
are the Circumcision. Now Saint Paul meets with these men upon their haunt; and
even in the sound of that word which they so often pressed; he says they
press upon you Circumcision, but beware of Concision, of tearing the Church of
God, of Schisms, and separations from the Church of God, of aspersions and
imputations upon the Church of God, Verse 3.
either by imaginary superfluities, or imaginary defectivenesse, in that
Church: for, says the Apostle, We are the Circumcision, we who worship God in
the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.
If therefore they will set up another Circumcision beyond this Circumcision, if
they will continue a significative, a relative, a preparative figure, after the
substance, the body, Christ Jesus is manifested to us, a legal Circumcision in
the flesh, after the spiritual Circumcision in the heart is established by the
Gospel, their end is not Circumcision, but Concision: they pretend
Reformation, but they intend Destruction, a tearing, a renting, a wounding the
body, and frame, and peace of the Church, and by all means, and in all cases
Videte Concisionem, Beware of Concision.

First then, Divisio.
we shall from these words consider, the lothnesse of God to lose us. For,
first, he leaves us not without a Law, he bids and he forbids, and then he does
not surprise us with obsolete laws, he leaves not his laws without
proclamations, he refreshes to our memories, and represents to us our duties,
with such commonefactions as these in our Text, Videte, Cavete, this and this I
have commanded you, Videte, see that ye do it, this and this will hinder you,
Cavete, beware ye do it not, Beware of Concision.

And this, thus derived, and digested into these three branches: first, Gods
lothnesse to lose us; and then his way of drawing us to him, by manifestation
of his will in a law; and lastly his way of holding us with him, by making that
law effectual upon us, by these his frequent commonefactions, Videte, Cavete,
look to it, beware of it, this will be our first part. And then our second
will be the thing it self that falls under this inhibition, and caution, which
is Concision, that is, a tearing, a renting, a shredding in pieces that which
should be entire. In which second part, we shall also have, (as we had in the
former) three branches; for, we shall consider, first, Concisionem corporis,
the shredding of the body of Christ into fragments, by unnecessary wrangling in
Doctrinall points; and then, Concisionem vestis, the shredding of the garment
of Christ into rags, by unnecessary wrangling in matter of Discipline, and
ceremonial points; and lastly, Concisionem spiritus, (which will follow upon
the former two) the concision of thine own spirit, and heart, and mind, and
soul, and conscience, into perplexities, and into sandy, and incoherent
doubts, and scruples, and jealousies, and suspicions of Gods purpose upon thee,
so as that thou shall not be able to recollect thy self, nor reconsolidate thy
self, upon any assurance, and peace with God, which is only to be had in
Christ, and by his Church. Videte Concisionem, beware of tearing the body, the
Doctrine; beware of tearing the Garment, the Discipline; beware of tearing
thine own spirit, and conscience, from her adhaesion, her agglutination, her
cleaving to God, in a holy tranquillity, and acquiescence in his promise, and
mercy, in the merits of his Son, applied by the holy Ghost, in the Ministry
of the Church.

For our first consideration, 1 Part. Vult omnes.
of Gods lothnesse to lose us, this is argument enough^ That we are here now,
now at the participation of that grace, which God always offers to al such
Congregations as these, gathered in his name. For, I pray God there stand any
one amongst us here now, that has not done something since yesterday, that
made him unworthy of being here to day; and who, if he had been left under the
damp, and mist of yesterdayes sin, without the light of new grace, would
never have found way hither of himself. If God be weary of me, and would feign
be rid of me, he needs not repent that he wrapped me up in the Covenant, and
derived me of Christian parents, (though he gave me a great help in that) nor
repent that he bred me in a true Church, (though he afforded me a great
assistance in that) nor repent that he has brought me hither now, to the
participation of his Ordinances, (though thereby also I have a great advantage)
for, if God be weary of me, and would be rid of me, he may find enough in me
now, and here, to let me perish. A present levity in me that speak, a present
formality in you that hear, a present Hypocrisy spread over us all, would
justify God; if now, Luke 18. 8.
and here, he should forsake us. When our blessed Savior says, When the Son
of man comes, shall he find faith upon earth? we need not limit that question
so, if he come to a Westminster, to an Exchange, to an Army, to a Court, shall
he find faith there? but if he come to a Church, if he come hither, shall he
find faith here? If (as Christ speaks in another sense, That Judgment should
begin at his own house,) the great and general judgment should begin now at
this his house, and that the first that should be taken up in the clouds, to
meet the Lord Jesus, should be we, that are met now in this his house, would we
be glad of that acceleration, or would we thank him for that haste? Men of
little faith, Job 1. 6.
I fear we would not. There was a day, when the Sons of God presented
themselves before the Lord, and Satan came also amongst them; one Satan amongst
many Sons of God. Blessed Lord, is not our case far otherwise? do not we,
(we, who, as we are but we, are all the Sons of Satan) present our selves
before thee, and yet, thou Lord art amongst us? Is not the spirit of slumber
and weariness upon one, and the spirit of detraction, and mis-interpretation
upon another; upon one the spirit of impenitence for former sins, and the
spirit of recidivation into old, or of facility and opennesse to admit
tentations into new upon another? We, as we are but we, are all the Sons of
Satan, and thou Lord, the only Son of God, only amongst us. If thou Lord
were weary of me, and would be rid of me, (may many a soul here say) Lord
thou know, and I know many a midnight, when thou might have been rid of
me, Ier. 27. 28.
if thou had left me to my self then. But vigilavit Doninus, the Lord
vouchsafed to watch over me, Prove. 8. 31.
and deliciae ejus, the delight of the Lord was to be with me; And what is
there in me, but his mercy? but then, what is there in his mercy, that that may
not reach to all, as well as to me? The Lord is loath to lose any, the Lord
would not the death of any; not of any sinner; much less if he do not see him,
nor consider him so; the Lord would not lose him, though a sinner, much less
make him a sinner, that he might be lost: Vult omnes, the Lord would have all
men come unto him, and be saved, which was our first consideration, and we have
done with that, and our second is, The way by which he leads us to him, that he
declares and manifests his will unto us, in a Law, he bids, and he forbids.

The laborers in the Vineyard took it ill at the Stewards hand, Lex. Mat. 20.
22.
and at his Masters too, that those which came late to the labor, were made
equal with them, who had borne the heat, and the burden of the day. But if
the Steward, or the Master had never meant, or actually never had given any
thing at all, to them that had borne the heat and the burden of the day, there
had been much more cause of complaint, because there had passed a contract
between them. So has there passed a contract between God, and us, Believe, and
thou shall live, Do this and thou shall live. And in this especially has God
expressed his love to us, and his lothenesse to lose us, that he has passed
such a contract with us, and manifested to us a way, to come to him. We say,
every day, in his own prayer, Fiat voluntas tua, thy will be done; that is,
done by us, as well as done upon us. But this petition presumes another; the
Fiat suposes a Patefiat voluntas, if it must be done, it must be known. If man
were put into this world, and under an obligation of doing the will of God,
upon damnation, and had no means to know that will which he was bound to do,
of all creatures he were the most miserable. That which we read, Psalm. 144. 3.
Lord what is man that thou take knowledge of him? the Vulgat edition; and
the Fathers following the Septuagint, read thus, Quia innotuisti ei, Lord what
is man that he should have any knowledge of thee, that thou should make thy
self known to him? This is the height of the mercy of God, this innotescence,
this manifestation of himself to us. Now what is this innotescence, this
manifestation of God to us? It is, say our old Expositors, the law. That Is
that, which is so often called the face of God, and the light of his
Countenance; August.
for, facies Dei est, qua nobis innotescit, that is Gods face, by which God is
known to us, and that is his law, the declaration of his will to me, and my way
to him. When Christ reproaches those hard-hearted men, that had not fed him,
Mat. 25. 44.
when he was hungry, nor clothed him, when he was naked, and that they say,
Lord when did we see thee naked, or see thee hungry? (inconsiderate men, or men
loath to give, the penurious and narrow soul, shall not see an occasion of
charity, when it is presented, which is a heavy blindness, and obcaecation,
not to see occasions of doing good) yet those men do not say, when did we see
thee at all, as though they had never seen him? The blindest man that is, has
the face of God so turned toward him, as that he may be seen by him; even the
natural man has so; for, therefore does the Apostle make him inexcusable,
Romans 1.12.
if in the visible work, he do not see the invisible God. But all sight of
God, is by the benefit of a law; the natural man sees him by a law written in
his heart, the Jew, by a law given by Moses, the Christian, in a clearer
glass, for, his law is the Gospel. But there is more mercy, that is, more
manifestation in this text, then all this. For, besides the natural man's
seeing God, in a law, in the faculties of his own nature, (which we consider
to be the work of the whole Trinity, in that Faciamus homine^, Let us make man
in our own Image, let us shine out in him, so as that he may be a glass, in
which he may see us, in himself) and besides the Jews seeing of God in the law
written in the stone tables, (which we consider to be the work of the Father)
And besides the Christians seeing of God, in the law written in blood, (in
which we consider especially the Son) there is in this text an operation, a
manifestation of God, proper to the holy Ghost, and wrought by his holy
suggestions and inspirations, That God does not only speak to us, but call
upon us; not only give us a Law, but Proclamations upon that law, that he
refreshes to our memories, general duties, by such particular warnings, and
excitations, and commonefactions, as in this text, Videte, Beware, which is the
last branch of this part, though it be the first word of our text, Videte,
Videte.
Beware.

Nothing exalts Gods goodness toward us, more then this, that he multiplies
the means of his mercy to us, so, as that no man can say, once I remember I
might have been saved, once God called unto me, once he opened me a door, a
passage into heaven, but I neglected that, went not in then, and God never came
more. No doubt, God has come often to that door since, and knocked, and staid
at that door; And if I knew who it were that said this, I should not doubt to
make that suspicious soul see, Psalm. 62. 11.
that God is at that door now. God has spoken once, and twice have I heard
him; for the foundation of all. God has spoken but once, in his Scriptures.
Therefore does Saint Jude call that fidem semel traditam, Verse 3.
the faith once delivered to the Saints; once, that is, at once; not at once
so, all at one time, or in one man's age; the Scriptures were not delivered so;
for, God spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, that have been, since the world
began; But, at once, that is, by one way, by writing, by Scriptures; so, as
that after that was done, after God had declared his whole will, in the Law,
and the Prophets, and the Gospel, there was no more to be added. God has
spoken once, in his Scriptures, and we have heard him twice, at home, in our
own readings, and again and again here, in his Ordinances. This is the
height of Gods goodness, that he gives us his Law, and a Comment upon that
Law, Proclamations, declarations upon that Law. For, without these subsequent
helps, even the law it self might be mistaken; as you see it was, Mat. 5.
when Christ was put to rectify them, with his Audiistis, and Audiistis, this
you have heard, and this has been told you, Ego autem dico, but this I say, ab
initio, from the beginning it was not so, the foundations were not thus laid,
and upon the foundations laid by God in the Scriptures, and not upon the
superedifications of men, in traditionall additions, must we build. In storms
and tempests at sea men come sometimes to cut down Galleries, and tear up
Cabins, and cast them overboard to ease the ship, and sometimes to hew down
the Mast it self, though without that Mast the ship can make no way; but no
soul weather can make them tear out the keele of the ship, upon which the
ship is built. In cases of necessity, the Church may forbear her Galleries,
and Cabinets, means of ease and convenience; yea, and her Mast too, means of
her growth, and propagation, and enlarging of her self, and be content to hull
it out, and consist in her present, or a worse state, during the storm. But to
the keele of the ship, to the fundamental articles of Religion, may no
violence, in any case, be offered.

God multiplies his mercies to us, Psalm. 19. 2.
in his diverse ways of speaking to us. Caeli enarrant, says David, The heavens
declare the glory of God; and not only by showing, but by saying; there is a
language in the heavens; for it is enarrant, a verbal declaration; and, as it
follows literally, Day unto day utters speech. This is the true harmony of
the Spheres, which every man may hear. Though he understand no tongue but his
own, he may hear God in the motions of the same, in the seasons of the year,
in the vicissitudes and revolutions of Church, and State, in the voice of
Thunder, and lightnings, and other declarations of his power. This is Gods
English to thee, and his French, and his Latin, and Greek, and Hebrew to
others. God once confounded languages; that conspiring men might not understand
one another, but never so, as that all men might not understand him. When the
holy Ghost fell upon the Apostles, they spoke so, as that all men understood
them, in their own tongues. When the holy Ghost fell upon the waters, in the
Creation, God spoke so, in his language of Works, as that all men may
understand them. For, in this language, the language of works, the Eye is the
ear, seeing is hearing. How often does the holy Ghost call upon us, in the
Scriptures, Ecce, quia os Domini locutum, Behold, the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it? he calls us to behold, (which is the office of the eye) and that
that we are to behold, is the voice of God, belonging to the ear; seeing is
hearing, in Gods first language, the language of works. But then God translates
himself, in particular works; nationally, he speaks in particular judgments, or
deliverances to one nation; and, domestically, he speaks that language to a
particular family; and so personally too; he speaks to every particular soul.
God will speak unto me, in that voice, and in that way, which I am most
delighted with, and hearken most to. If I be covetous, God will tell me that
heaven is a pearl, a treasure. If cheerful and affected with mirth, that
heaven is all Joy. If ambitious, and hungry of preferment, that it is all
Glory. If sociable, and conversable, that it is a communion of Saints. God will
make a Fever speak to me, and tell me his mind, that there is no health but
in him, God will make the disfavour, and frowns of him I depend upon, speak to
me, and tell me his mind, that there is no safe dependence, no assurance but
in him; God will make a storm at Sea, or a fire by land, speak to me, and
tell me his mind, that there is no perpetuity, no possession but in him; nay,
God will make my sin speak to me, and tell me his mind; even my sin shall
be a Sermon, and a Catechism to me; God shall suffer me me to fall into some
such sin, as that by some circumstances in the sin, or consequences from
the sin, I shall be drawn to hearken unto him; and whether I hear Hosannaes,
acclamations, and commendations, or Crucifiges, exclamations and condemnations
from the world, I shall still find the voice and tongue of God, though in the
mouth of the Devil, and his instruments. God is a declaratory God. The whole
year, is, to his Saints, a continual Epiphany, one day of manifestation. In
every minute that strikes upon the Bell, is a syllable, nay a syllogism from
God. And, and in my last Bell, God shall speak too; that Bell, when it tolls,
shall tell me I am going, and when it rings out, shall tell you I am gone into
the hands of that God, who is the God of the living and not of the dead, for,
they dye not that depart in him. Dives pressed Abraham to send a preacher from
the dead, Luke 16. 27.
to his brethren. This was to put God to a new language, when he had spoken
sufficiently by Moses, and the Prophets. And yet, even in this language, the
tongue of the dead, has God spoken too. Saint Hierome says, that that Prophet
Jonas, Prooemium in Ionam. 1 Reg. 17.
who was sent to Niniveh, was the same man, whom, being then a child, and dead
in his mothers house, the widow of Zarepta's house, Elias the Prophet raised to
life again; and so, God spoke to Niniveh in that language, in the tongue of
the dead. But be that but Problematicall, wrapped up in a Traditionall, and
Historical faith, this is Dogmaticall, and irrefragable, that God has spoken
to the whole world in the tongue of the dead, in his Son Christ Jesus, the
Lord of life, and yet the first borne of the dead. God is loathe to lose us, at
worst, and therefore, did not, surely, reject us, before we were ill, (And that
was our first) God has drawn us to him, by manifesting his will, and our way
in a law, and therefore, will not judge us at last, by any thing never revealed
to us, (And that was our second) God holds us to him by these remembrances,
these common manifestations in our text, Videte, Cavete, and therefore let no
man that does not hear God speaking to him, in this present voice, despair
that he shall never hear him, but hearken still, and in one language or
other, perchance a sickness, perchance a sin, he shall hear him, for these
are several Dialects in Gods language, several instruments in Gods Consort;
And this is our third consideration, and the end of this first part, the
Prohibition, the Commonefaction, Videte, Cavete; And we pass to our second
general part, and the three branches of that, that that falls under this
Prohibition, Videte Concisionem, Beware the Concision.

Saint Paul embraces here, 2. Part. Concision.
that elegancy of language familiar to the holy Ghost, They pretend
Circumcision, they intend Concision; there is a certain elegant and holy
delicacy, a certain holy juvenility in Saint Paul's choosing these words of
this musical cadence and agnomination, Circumcision, and Concision; But then
this delicacy, and juvenility presents matter of gravity and soundness.
Language must wait upon matter, and words upon things. In this case, (which
indeed makes it a strange case) the matter is the form; The matter, that is,
the doctrine that we preach, is the form, that is, the Soul, the Essence; the
language and words we preach in, is but the Body, but the existence.
Therefore, Saint Paul, who would not allow Legal figures, not Typical
figures, not Sacramental figures, not Circumcision it self, after the body,
Christ Jesus, was once exhibited, does not certainly allow Rhetorical
figures, nor Poetical figures, in the preaching, or hearing of Christ
preached, so, as that that should be the principal leader of hearer, or
speaker. But this Saint Paul authoriseth in his own practice, and the holy
Ghost in him, That in elegant language, he incorporates, and invests sound and
important Doctrine; for, though he choose words of musical sound, Circumcision
and Concision, yet it is a matter of weighty consideration that he intends in
this Concision. Saint Chrysostom, and Saint Hierome both agree in this
interpretation, That whereas Circumcision is an orderly, a useful, a
medicinal, a beneficial pruning and paring off, that which is superfluous,
Conciditur quod temere, and inutiliter decerpitur, Concision is a hasty and a
rash plucking up, or cutting down, and an unprofitable tearing, and renting
into shreds and fragments, such, as the Prophet speaks of, Ier. 19. 11.
The breaking of a Potters vessel, that cannot be made up again. Concision is,
at best, Solutio Continui, The severing of that, which should be kept entire.
In the State, the aliening of the head from the body, or of the body from the
head, is Concision; and videte, it is a fearful thing to be guilty of that.
In the Church, (which Church is not a Monarchy, otherwise then as she is united
in her head, Christ Jesus) to constitute a Monarchy, an universal head of the
Church, to the dis-inherison, and to the tearing of the Crowns of Princes, who
are heads of the Churches in their Dominions, this is Concision; and videte, it
is a fearful thing to be guilty of that, to advance a foreign Prelate. In the
family, where God has made man and wife, one, to divide with others, is
Concision; and videte, it is a fearful thing to be guilty of that. Generally,
the tearing of that in pieces, which God intended should be kept entire, is
this Concision, and falls under this Commonefaction, which implies an
increpation, videte, beware. But because thus, Concision would receive a
concision into infinite branches, we determined this consideration, at first,
into these three; first, Concisio Corporis, the concision of the body,
disunion in Doctrinall things; and Concisio vestis, the Concision of the
garment, disunion in Ceremonial things; and then Concisio Spiritus, the
Concision of the Spirit, disunion, irresolution, unsetlednesse, diffidence,
and distrust in thine own mind and conscience.

First, for this Concision of the body, Concisio Corporis.
of the body of Divinity, in Doctrinall things, since still Concision is
Solutio continui, the breaking of that which should be entire, consider we
first, what this Continuum, this that should be kept entire, is; and it is,
says the Apostle, Jesus himself. Omnis spiritus qui solvit Iesum, (so the
Ancients read that place) Every spirit which dissolveth Jesus, 1 John 4. 3.
that breaks Jesus in pieces, that makes Religion serve turns, that admits so
much Gospel as may promove and advance present businesses, every such spirit
is not of God. Not to profess the whole Gospel, Totum Iesum, not to believe
all the Articles of faith, this is Solutio continui, a breaking of that which
should be entire; and this is truly concision. Now with concision in this
kind, our greatest adversaries, they of the Roman heresy, and
mis-perswasion, do not charge us. They do not charge us that we deny any
article of any ancient Creed: nor may they deny, that there is not enough for
salvation in those ancient Creeds. This is Continuitas universalis, a
continuity, an entireness that goes through the whole Church; a skin that
covers the whole body; the whole Church is bound to believe all the articles of
faith. But then, there is Continuitas particularis, Continuitas modi, a
continuity, a harmony, an entireness, that does not go through the whole
Church; the whole Church does not always agree in the manner of explication of
all the articles of faith; but this may be a skin that covers some particular
limb of the body, and not another; one Church may expound an article thus, and
some other some other way, as, in particular, the Lutheran Church expounds the
article of Christ's descent into hell, one way, and the Calvinist another. Now,
in cases, where neither exposition destroys the article, in the substance
thereof, it is Concision, that is, Solutio continui, a breaking of that which
should be kept entire, for any man to break the peace of that Church, in which
he has received his baptism, and has his station, by advancing the
exposition of any other Church, in that. And as this is Concision, Solutio
continui, a breaking of that which is entire, to break the peace of the Church,
where we were baptized, by teaching otherwise then that Church teaches, in
these things De modo, of the manner of expounding such or such articles of
faith, so is there another dangerous Concision too. For, to inoculate a foreign
bud, or to engraffe a foreign bough, is concision, as well as the cutting off an
arm from the tree; to inoculate, cleaves the rind, the bark; and to engraffe,
cleaves the tree: it severs that which should be entire. So, when a particular
Church, in a holy, and discreet modesty, has abstained from declaring her self
in the exposition of some particular Articles, or of some Doctrines, by fair
consequence deducible from those Articles, and contented her self with those
general things which are necessary to salvation, (As the Church of England
has, in the Article of Christ's descent into Hell) it is Concision, it is
solution Continui, a breaking of that which should be entire, to inoculate a
new sense, or engraffe a new exposition, which howsoever it may be true in it
self, it cannot be truly said, to be the sense of that Church; not perchance
because that Church was not of that mind, but because that Church finding the
thing it self to be no fundamental thing, thought it unnecessary to descend to
particular declarations, when as in such declarations she must have departed
from some other Church of the Reformation, that thought otherwise, and in
keeping her self within those general terms that were necessary, and
sufficient, with a good conscience she conserved peace and unity with all.
David, in the person of every member of the Church, submits himself to that
increpation, Let my right hand forget her cunning, and let my tongue cleave to
the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not Jerusalem before my chiefest joy. Psalm.
137. 6.
Our chiefest joy, is, for the most part, our own opinions, especially when
they concur with other learned and good men too. But then, Jerusalem is our
love of the peace of the Church; and in such things as do not violate
foundations, let us prefer Jerusalem before our chiefest Joy, love of peace
before our own opinions, though concurrent with others. For, this is that, that
has misled many men, that the common opinion in the Church is necessarily the
opinion of the Church. It is not so; not so in the Roman Church: There the
common opinion is, That the blessed Virgin Mary was conceived without original
sin: But cannot be said to be the opinion of that Church; nor may it be safely
concluded in any Church: Most Writers in the Church have declared themselves
this way, therefore the Church has declared her self, for the declarations of
the Church are done publicly, and orderly, and at once. And when a Church
has declared her self so, in all things necessary and sufficient, let us
possess our souls in peace, and not say that that Church has, or press that
that Church would proceed to further declarations in less necessary
particulars. When we are sure we have believed and practiced, all that the
Church has reco^mended to us, in these generals, then, and not till then, let
us call for more declarations; but in the mean time prefer Jerusalem before our
chiefest joy, love of peace by a general forbearance on all sides, rather then
victory by wrangling, and uncharitableness. And let our right hand forget her
cunning, (let us never set pen to paper to write) Let our tongue cleave to the
roof of our mouth, (let us never open our mouth to speak of those things) in
which Silence was an Act of Discretion, and Charity before, but now is also an
Act of Obedience, and of Allegiance and Loyalty. But that which David said to
the Lord, ( Psalm 65. 1.) Let us also accommodate to the Lords anointed, Tibi
laus silentium, our best sacrifice to both, is to be silent in those things. So
then, this is Concisio corporis, that Concision of the body, which you are to
beware in Doctrinall things, first, non solvere Iesum, not to dissolve, not to
break Jesus in pieces, not to depart, in any respect, with any fundamental
Article of faith, for that is a skin that covers the whole body, an obligation
that lies upon the whole Church, and then for that particular Church, in which
you have your station, first, to conform your self to all that, in which she
had evidently declared herself, and then not to impute to her, not to call such
articles hers, as she never avowd. And our next consideration is Concisio
vestis, the tearing of the garment, matter of discipline, and government.

To a Circumcision of the garment, Concisio Vestis.
that is, to a pa^ing, and taking away such Ceremonies, as were superstitious,
or superfluous, of an ill use, or of no use, our Church came in the beginning
of the Reformation. To a Circumcision we came; but those Churches that came to
a Concision of the garment, to an absolute taking away of all ceremonies,
neither provided so safely for the Church it self in the substance thereof, nor
for the exaltation of Devotion in the Church. Divide the law of the Jews into 2
halfs, and the Ceremonial will be the greater; we cannot call the Moral law,
the Jews law; that was ours as well as their, peculiar to none; but of that law
which is peculiar to the Jews* judicial and Ceremonial, the Ceremonial is far the
greater part. So great a care had God, of those thing, which though they be not
of the revenue of Religion, yet are of the subsidy of Religion, and, though
they be not the soul of the Church, yet are they those Spirits that unite
soul and body together. H's man did but shave the beards of David's servants, 2 Samuel 10.
he did not cut off their heads; He did not cut their clothes so, as that he
stripped them naked. Yet, for that that he did, (says that story) he stanke in
David's sight, (which is a phrase of high indignation in that language) and so
much, as that it cost him forty thousand of his horsemen in one battle. And
therefore as this Apostle enters this Caveat in another place, If ye bite one
another, cavete, take heed ye be not consumed of one another, so cavete, Gal.
5. 15.
take heed of this concision of the garment, lest if the garment be torn off,
the body wither, and perish. A shadow is nothing, yet, if the rising or falling
Sun shine out, and there be no shadow, I will pronounce there is no body in
that place neither. Ceremonies are nothing; but where there are no Ceremonies,
order, and uniformity, and obedience, and at last, (and quickly) Religion it
self will vanish. And therefore videte concisionem, beware of tearing the
body, or of tearing the garment, which will induce the other, and both will
induce the third, concisionem spiritus, the tearing of thine own spirit, from
that rest which it should receive in God; for, when thou have lost thy hold of
all those handles which God reaches out to thee, in the Ministry of his
Church, and that thou have no means to apply the promises of God in Christ to
thy soul, which are only applied by Gods Ordinances in his Church, when
anything falls upon thee, that overcomes thy moral constancy (which moral
constancy, God knows, is soon spent, if we have lost our recourse to God) thou will soon sink into an irrecoverable desperation, which is the fearfullest
concision of all; and videte, beware of this concision.

When God has made himself one body with me, Concisio Spiritus.
by his assuming this nature, and made me one spirit with himself, and that by
so high a way, as making me partaker of the divine nature, 1 Cor. 6.17.
so that now, in Christ Jesus, he and I are one, this were solutio Jesus, a
tearing in pieces, 2 Pet. 2. 4.
a dissolving of Jesus, in the worst kind that could be imagined, if I should
tear my self from Jesus, or by any jealousy or suspicion of his mercy, or
any horror in my own sins, come to think my self to be none of his, none of
him. Who ever comes into a Church to denounce an excommunication against
himself? And shall any sad soul come hither, to gather arguments, from our
preaching, to excommunicate it self, Numb. 16. 30.
or to pronounce an impossibility upon her own salvation? God did a new thing,
Says Moses, a strange thing, a thing never done before, when the earth opened
her mouth (and Dathan, and Abiram went down quick into the pit. Will thou do
a stranger thing then that? To tear open the jaws of Earth, and Hell, and
cast thy self actually and really into it, out of mis-imagination, that God
has cast thee into it before? Will thou force God to second thy irreligious
melancholy, and to condemn thee at last, because thou had precondemned thy
self, and renounced his mercy? Will thou say with Cain, My sin is greater
then can be pardoned? This is Concisio potestatis, a cutting off the power of
God, and Treason against the Father, whose Attribute is Power. Will thou say,
God never meant to save me? this is Concisio Sapientiae, a cutting off the
Wisdom of God, to think, that God intended himself glory in a kingdom, and
would not have that kingdom peopled, and this is Treason against the Son whose
Attribute is wisdoms? Will thou say, I shall never find comfort in Praying, in
Preaching, in Receiving? This is Concisio consolationis, the cutting off
consolation, and treason against the holy Ghost, whose office is comfort. No
man violates the Power of the Father, the Wisdom of the Son, the Goodness
of the holy Ghost, so much as he, who thinks himself out of their reach, or
the latitude of their working. Rachel wept for her children, Mat. 2. 18.
and would not be comforted; but why? Because they were not. If her children
had been but gone for a time from her, or but sick with her, Rachel would have
been comforted; but, they were not. Is that thy case? Is not thy soul, a soul
still? It may have gone from thee, in sins of inconsideration; it may be sick
within thee, in sins of habit and custom; but is not thy soul, a soul still?
And has God made any species larger then himself? is there more soul, then
there is God, more sin then mercy? Truly Origin was more excusable, more
pardonable, if he did believe, that the Devil might possibly be saved, then
that man, that believes that himself must necessarily be damned. And therefore,
videte concisionem, beware of cutting off thy spirit from this spirit of
comfort, take heed of shreading Gods general promises; into so narrow
propositions, as that they will not reach home to thee, cover thee, invest
thee; beware of such distinctio^s, and such subdivisio^s, as may make the way
to heaven too narrow for thee, or thegate of heaven too strait for thee. It Is
true, one drop of my Saviors blood would save me, if I had but that, one tear
from my Saviors eye, if I had but that; but he has none that has not all; A
drop, a tear, would wash away an Adultery, a murder, but less then the whole
sea of both, will not wash away a wanton look, an angry word. God would have
all, and gives all to all. And for Gods sake, let God be as good as he will; as
merciful, and as large, as liberal, and as general as he will. Christ came
to save sinners; thou are sure thou art one of them; At what time soever a
sinner repents, he shall be heard; be sure to be one of them too. Believe that
God in Christ proposes conditions to thee; endeavor the performing, repent the
not performing of those conditions, and be that the issue between God and thy
soul; And lest thou end in this concision, the concision of the Spirit, beware
of the other two concisions, of the body, and of the garment, by which only,
all heavenly succors are appliable to thee.

SERMON XL.
Preached at Saint Paul's.
2 Cor. 5. 20. We pray ye in Christ's stead, Be ye reconciled to God.
IN bestowing of Benefits, there are some Circumstances, that vitiate and
deprave the nature of the benefit (as when a man gives only in contemplation
of Retribution, for then he is not Dator, but Mercator, this is not a giving,
but a Merchandising, a permutation, or when he is Cyminibilis Dator, (as our
Canons speak) one that gives Mint and Cumin, so small things, and in so small
proportions, as only keeps him alive that receives, and so Ipsum quod dat,
perit, and vitam producit ad miseriam, that that is given is lost, and he that
receives it, is but continued in misery, and so the benefit, has almost the
nature of an injury, because but for that poor benefit, he might have got out
of this life. And then there are circumstances, that do absolutely annihilate
a benefit, amongst which, one is, if the giver take so express, so direct, so
public knowledge of the wants of the receiver, as that he shall be more
ashamed by it, then refreshed with it; for in many courses of life, it does
more deject a man, in his own heart, and in the opinion of others too, and more
retard him in any preferment, to be known to be poor, then to be so indeed;
And he that gives so, does not only make him that receives, his Debtor, but
his Prisoner, for he takes away his liberty of applying himself to others, who
might be more beneficial to him, the he that captivated, and ensnared him,
with that small benefit. And therefore many times in the Scripture, the phrase
is such in doing a courtesy, as though the receiver had done it, in accepting
it; so when Jacob made a present to his brother Esau, I beseech thee, Genesis 33.
says he, to take my blessing that I may find favor in thy sight; so he
compelled him to take it. So when Christ recommends here to his people, the
great, and inestimable benefit in our text, Reconciliation to God, he delivers
that benefit of all those accidents, or circumstances, that might vitiate it;
and amongst those, of this, that we should not be confounded with the notice
taken of our poverty, and indigence; for he proceeds with man, as though man
might be of some use to him, and with whom it were fit for him to hold good
correspondence, he sends to him by Ambassadors, (as it is in the words
immediately before the text) and by those Ambassadors he prays him, that he
would accept the benefit of Reconciliation. To us, who are his Creatures, and
therefore might be turned and wound by his general providence, without
employment of any particular messengers, he sends particular messengers; to us
that are his enemies, and fitter to receive denunciations of a war, by a
Herald, then a Message, by Ambassadors, he sends Ambassadors, to us, who are
indeed Rebels, and not enemies, and therefore rather to be reduced and
reclaimed by Executioners, then by Commissioners, he sends Commissioners, not
to article, not to capitulate, but to pray, and to entreat, and not to entreat
us to accept Gods reconciliation to us, but, as though God needed us, to
entreat us to be reconciled to him; We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God.

In these words, Divisio.
our parts will be three: Our Office toward you; yours toward us; and the
Negotiation it self, Reconciliation to God. In each of these three, there is a
rederivation into three branches: for, in the two first (besides the matter)
there are two kinds of persons, we and you, The Priest and the People (we pray
you.) And in the last there are two kinds of persons too, you and God; Be ye
reconciled to God. But because all these kinds of persons, God, and we, and
you, fall frequently into our consideration, there is the less necessity laid
upon us to handle them, as distinct branches, otherwise then as they fall into
the Negotiation it self. Therefore we shall determine our selves in these
three: First, our office toward you, and our stipulation and contract with
you, We pray you; we come not as Lords or Commanders over you, but in humble,
in submissive manner, We pray you. And then your respect to us, because in what
manner soever we come, we come in Christ's stead, and though dimly, yet
represent him. And lastly, the blessed effect of this our humility to you, and
this your respect to us, Reconciliation to God. Humility in us, because we are
sent to the poorest soul; respect in you, because we are sent to represent the
highest King, work in you this reconciliation to God, and it is a Text well
handled; practice makes any Sermon a good Sermon.

First, 1. Part.
then, for our office toward you, because you may be apt to say, You take too
much upon you, you sons of Levi; We the sons of Levi, open unto you our
Commission, and we pursue but that we profess, that we are sent but to pray,
but to entreat you; and we accompany it with an outward declaration, we stand
bare, and you sit covered. When greater power seems to be given us, of treading
upon Dragons and Scorpions, of binding and loosing, of casting out Devils, and
the like, we confess these are powers over sins, over Devils that do, or
endeavor to possess you, not over you, for to you we are sent to pray and
entreat you. Ier. 1. 10.
Though God sent Jeremy with that large Commission, Behold this day, I have set
thee over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to pluck up, and to rout out, to
destroy and to throw down; and though many of the Prophets had their
Commissions drawn by that precedent, we claim not that, we distinguish between
the extraordinary Commission of the Prophet, and the ordinary Commission of the
Priest, we admit a great difference between them, and are far from taking
upon us, all that the Prophet might have done; which is an error, of which the
Church of Rome, and some other over-zealous Congregations have been equally
guilty, and equally opposed Monarchy and Sovereignty, by assuming to
themselves, in an ordinary power, whatsoever God, upon extraordinary occasions,
was pleased to give for the present, to his extraordinary Instruments the
Prophets; our Commission is to^ pray, and to entreat you. Though upon those
words, Ascendunt salvatores in Montem Sion, there shall arise Saviors in Mount
Sion, Obad. 1. 21.
in the Church of God, Saint Hierom says, That as Christ being the light of
the world, called his Apostles the light of the world too; so, Ipse Salvator
Apostolas voluit esse Salvatores, The Savior of the world communicates to us
the name of Saviors of the world too, yet howsoever instrumentally and
ministerially that glorious name of Savior may be afforded to us, though to a
high hill, though to that Mount Sion, we are led by a low way, by the example
of our blessed Savior himself; and since there was an Oportuit pati, laid upon
him, there may well be an Op^rte^ Obsecrare laid upon us; since his way was to
be dumb, ours may well be to utter no other voice but Prayers; since he bled,
we may well sweat in his service, for the salva^ion of your souls. If therefore
our selves, who are sent, be under contempt, or under persecution, if the sword
of the Tongue, or the sword of the Tyrant be drawn against us, against all
these, Arma nostra, preces and fletus, we defend with no other shield, we
return with no other sword, Ambros.
but Tears and Prayers, and blessing of them that curse us. Yea, if he that
sent us suffer in us, if we see you denounce a war against him, nay, triumph
over him, and provoke him to anger, and because he shows no anger, conclude
our of his patience, an impotency, that because he does not, he cannot, when
you scourge him, and scoff him, and spit in his face, and crucify him, and
practice every day all the Jews did to him once, as though that were your
pattern, and your business were to exceed your pattern, and crucify your
Savior worse then they did, by tearing and mangling his body, now glorified,
by your blasphemous oaths, and execrable imprecations, when we see all this,
Arma nostra preces and fletus, we can defend our selves, nor him, no other way,
we present to you our tears, and our prayers, his tears, and his prayers that
sent us, and if you will not be reduced with these, our Commission is at an
end. I bring not a Starchamber with me up into the Pulpit, to punish a forgery,
if you counterfeit a zeal in coming hither now; nor an Exchequer, to punish
usurious contracts, though made in the Church; nor a high Commission, to punish
incontinencies, if they be promoted by wanton interchange of looks, in this
place. Only by my prayers, which he has promised to accompany and prosper in
his service, I can diffuse his overshadowing Spirit over all the corners of
this Congregation, and pray that Publican, that stands below afar off, and
dares not lift up his eyes to heaven, to receive a cheerful confidence, that
his sins are forgiven him; and pray that Pharisee, that stands above, and
only thanks God, that he is not like other men, to believe himself to be, if
not a rebellious, yet an unprofitable servant. I can only tell them, that
neither of them is in the right way of reconciliation to God, Aug.
Nec qui impugnant gratiam, nec qui superbe gratias agunt, neither he who by a
diffidence hinders the working of Gods grace, nor he that thanks God in such a
fashion, as though all that he had received, were not of mere mercy, but
between a debt and a benefit, and that he had either merited before, or paid
God after, in pious works, for all, and for more then he has received at Gods
hand.

Scarce any where has the Holy Ghost taken a word of larger signification,
then here; for, as though it were hard, even to him, to express the humility
which we are to use, rather then lose any soul for which Christ has dyed, he
has taught us this obsecration, this praying, this entreating in our Text, in
a word, by which the Septuagint, the first Translators into Greek, express
diverse affections, and all within the compass of this Obsecramus, We pray you.
Some of them we shall present to you.

Those Translators use that word for Napal. Napal is Ruere, Postrare, to throw
down, to deject our selves, to admit any undervalue, any exinanition, any
evacuation of our selves, so we may advance this great work. I fell down before
the Lord, says Moses of himself; and Abraham fell upon his face, says Moses of
him, and in no sense is this word oftener used, by them, then in this
humiliation. But yet, as it signifies to need the favor of another, so does it
also to be favorable, and merciful to another; for so also, the same
Translators use this word for Chanan, which is to oblige and bind a man by
benefits, or to have compassion upon him; Job 19. 21.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God
has touched me; there is our word repeated. So that, whether we profess to
you, that as Physicians must consider excrements, so we must consider sin, the
leprosy, the pestilence, the ordure of the soul, there is our dejection of
our selves, or make you see your poverty and indigence, and that that can be no
way supplied, but by those means, which God conveys by us, both ways we are
within our word, Obsecramus, we pray you, we entreat you.

They use this word also for Calah, and Calah is Dolere, to grieve within our
selves, for the affliction of another; But it signifies also vulnerare, to
wound, and afflict another; for so it is said in this word, 1 Samuel 31. 3.
Saul was sore wounded. So that, whether we express our grief, in the behalf
of Christ, that you will not be reconciled to God, or whether we wound your
consciences, with a sense of your sins, and his judgments, we are still what
in the word of our Commission, Obsecramus, we pray, we entreat.

To contract this consideration, they use this word for Cruciare, to vex, and
for Placare too, Mic. 6. 3.
to appease, to restore to rest and quiet. Therefore will I make thee sick in
smiting thee; Zech. 7. 12.
there it is vexation; And then, They sent unto the House of the Lord, Placare
Dominum, to appease the Lord, as we translate it, and well, To pray. And
therefore, if from our words proceed any vexation to your consciences, you must
not say, Transeat calix, let that Cup pass, no more of that matter, for it is
the physic that must first stir the humor, before it can purge it; And if
our words apply to your consciences, the soverain balm of the merits of your
Savior, and that thereupon your troubled consciences find some rest, be not
too soon secure, but proceed in your good beginnings, and continue in hearing,
as we shall continue in all these manners of praying and entreating, which fall
into the word of our Text, Obsecramus, by being beholden to you for your
application, or making you beholden to us, for our ministration, which was the
first use of the words, of grieving for you, or grieving you for your fins,
which was the second, of troubling your consciences, and then of settling them
again, in a calm reposednesse, which was the third signification of the word in
their Translation.

Yet does the Holy Ghost carry our office, (I speak of the manner of the
execution of our office, for, for the office it self, nothing can be more
glorious, then the ministration of the Gospel, Acts 2. 15.
into lower terms then these. He suffered his Apostles to be thought to be
drink; They were full of the Holy Ghost, and they were thought full of new
wine. A dram of zeal more then ordinary, against a Patron, or against a great
Parishioner, makes us presently scandalous Ministers. Truly, beloved, we
confess, one sign of drunkenness is, not to remember what we said. If we do
not in our practice, remember what we preached, and live as we teach, we are
dead all the week, and we are drunk upon the Sunday. But Hannah praid, 1 Samuel
1. 15.
and was thought drunk, and this grieved her heart; so must it us, when you
ascribe our zeal to the glory of God, and the good of your souls, to any
inordinate passion, or sinister purpose in us.

And yet has the Holy Ghost laid us lower then this. To be drunk is an
alienation of the mind, but it is but a short one; but S. Paul was under the
imputation of madness. Nay, Mar. 3. 21.
our blessed Savior himself did some such act of vehement zeal, as that his
very friends thought him mad. S. Paul, because his madness was imputed to a
false cause, to a pride in his much learning, disavowed his madness, I am not
mad, O noble Festus. But when the cause was justifiable, 2 Cor. 5. 13. Theophil.
he thought his madness justifiable too; If we be besides our selves, it is
for God; and so long well enough. Insaniebat amatoriam insaniam Paulus, S. Paul
was mad for love; S. Paul did, and we do take into our contemplation, the
beauty of a Christian soul; Through the ragged apparel of the afflictions of
this life; through the scarres, and wounds, and palenesse, and morphews of sin,
and corruption, we can look upon the soul it self, and there see that
incorruptible beauty, that white and red, which the innocence and the blood of
Christ has given it, and we are mad for love of this soul, and ready to do
any act of danger, in the ways of persecution, any act of diminution of our
selves in the ways of humiliation, to stand at her door, and pray, and beg,
that she would be reconciled to God.

And yet does the Holy Ghost lay us lower then this too. Mad men have some
flashes, some twilights, 1 Cor. 4. 10.
some returns of sense and reason, but the fool has none; And, we are fools
for Christ, says the Apostle; And not only we, the persons, but the
ministration it self, Mat. 5.
the function it self is foolishness; It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. Anger will bear an action, and Racah will
bear an action, but to say Fool, was the heaviest imputation; and we are
fools for Christ, and pretend nothing to work by, but the foolishness of
preaching. Lower then this, we cannot be cast, and higher then this we offer
not to climb; Obsecramus, we have no other Commission but to pray, and to
entreat, and that we do, in his words, in his tears, in his blood, and in his
bowels who sent us, we pray you in Christ's stead, which is that that
constitutes our second Part, with what respect you should receive us.

In mittendariis servanda dignitas mittentis. 2. Part.
To diminish the honor of his Master, is not an humility, but a prevarication
in any Ambassador; and that is our quality, expressed in this verse. God is
the Lord of Hosts, and he is the Prince of peace; He needs neither the Armies
of Princes, nor the wisdom of Council Tables, to come to his ends. He is the
Proprietary and owner of all the treasures in the world; Amos 3. Hag. 2.
Ye have taken my silver and my gold; and, The silver is mine, and the gold is
mine. All that you call yours, all that you can call yours, is his; your selves
are but the furniture of his house, and your great hearts are but little boxes
in his cabinet, and he can fill them with dejection, and sadness, when he
will. And does any Prince govern at home, by an Ambassador? he sends
Pursuivants, and Sergeants; he sends not Ambassadors; God does, and we are
they; and we look to be received by you, but as we perform those two laws which
bind Ambassadors, First, Reisuae ne quis legatus esto, Let no man be received
as an Ambassador, that has that title, only to negotiate for himself, and
do his own business in that Country; And then, Nemini credatur sine
principale mandato, Let no man be received for an Ambassador; without his
Letters of Credence, and his Masters Commission. To these two we submit our
selves.

First, we are not Rei nostrae legati, Rei nostrae. 1 Cor. 9. 16.
we come not to do our own business; what business of ours is it, what is it
to us, that you be reconciled to God? Vae mihi si non, Necessity is laid upon
me, and ^oe unto me, if I preach not the Gospel; but if I do, I have nothing
to glory in; nay, I may be a reprobate my self. I can claim no more at Gods
hand, for this service, then the Sun can, for shining upon the earth, or the
earth for producing flowers, and fruits; and therefore we are not Rei nostrae^
legati, Ambassadors in our own behalfs, and to do our own business.

Indeed where men are sent out, to vent and utter the ware and merchandises of
the Church and Court of Rome, to proclaim, and advance the value, and efficacy
of uncertain relics, and superstitious charms, and incantations, when they
are sent to sell particular sins at a certain price, and to take so much for
an incest, so much for a murder, when they are sent with many sums of
Indulgencies at once, as they are now to the Indies, and were heretofore to us,
when these Indulgencies are accompanied with this Doctrine, that if the
Indulgence require a certain piece of money to be given for it, (as for the
most part they do) if all the spiritual parts of the Indulgence be performed
by the poor sinner, yet if he give not that money, though he be not worth that
money, though that Merchant of those Indulgencies, do out of his charity give
him one of those Indulgencies, yet all this does that man no good, in these
cases, they are indeed Rei suae Legati, Ambassadors to serve their own turns,
and do their own business. When that Bishop sends out his Legatos a latere,
Ambassadors from his own chair and bosom into forain Nations, to exhaust
their treasures, to alien their Subjects, to infect their Religion; these are
Rei suae Legati, Ambassadors that have businesses depending in those places,
and therefore come upon their own errand. Nor can that Church excuse it self,
(though it use to do so) upon the mis-behaviour of those officers) when they
are employed; for, Bern^
they are employed to that purpose: And, Tibi imputae quicquid pateris ab eo,
qui sine te, nihil potest facere: Since he might mend the fault, it is his
fault, that it is done; he cannot excuse himself, if they be guilty, and with
his privity: for, as the same devout man says, to Eugenius, then Pope, Ne te
dixeris sanum dolentem latera; If thy sides ache, (if thy Legates a latere, be
corrupt) call not thy self well, nec bonum malis innitentem, nor call thy self
good, if thou rely upon the counsel of those that are ill; They, those Legates
a latere, are, (as they use to express it) incorporated in the Pope, and
therefore they are Rei sui Legati, Ambassadors that ly to do their own
business. But when we seek to raise no other war in you, but to arm the
spirit against the flesh, when we present to you no other holy water, but the
tears of Christ Jesus, no other relics, but the commemoration of his Passion
in the Sacrament, no other Indulgencies, and acquittances, but the application
of his Merits to your souls, when we offer all this without silver, and without
gold, when we offer you that Seal which he has committed to us, in Absolution,
without extortion or fees, wherein are we Rei nostrae Legati, Ambassadors in
our own behalfs, or advancers of our own ends?

And as we are not so, Sine Mandato.
so neither are we in the second danger, to come sine Principali Mandato,
without Commission from our Master. Christ himself would not come of himself,
John 12. 49.
but acknowledged and testified his Mission, The Father which sent me, he gave
me commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. Those whom he
employed produced their Commissions, Gal. 1. 12.
Neither received I it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the revelation
of Jesus Christ. How should they preach except they be sent? is a question
which Saint Paul intended for a conclusive question, that none could answer,
till in the Roman Church they excepted Cardinals, Quibus sine literis
creditur, propter personarum solennitatem, who for the dignity inherent in
their persons, must be received, though they have no Commission.

When our adversaries do so violently, so impetuously cry out, that we have no
Church, no Sacrament, no Priesthood, because none are sent, that is, none have
a right calling, for Internal calling, who are called by the Spirit of God,
they can be no Judges, and for External calling, we admit them for Judges, and
are content to be tried by their own Canons, and their own evidences, for our
Mission and vocation, or sending and our calling to the Ministry. If they
require a necessity of lawful Ministers to the constitution of a Church, we
require it with as much earnestness as they; Ecclesia non est quae now habet
sacerdotem, we profess with Saint Hierome, It is no Church that has no
Priest. If they require, that this spiritual power be received from them, who
have the same power in themselves, we profess it too, Nemo dat quod non habet,
no man can confer other power upon another, then he has himself. If they
require Imposition of hands, in conferring Orders, we join hands with them. If
they will have it a Sacrament; men may be content to let us be as liberal of
that name of Sacrament, as Calvin is; and he says of it, Institut. l. 4. c. 14.
20. Non invitus patior vocari Sacramentum, it a inter ordinaria Sacramenta non
numero, I am not loath, it should be called a Sacrament, so it be not made an
ordinary, that is, a general Sacrament; and how ill has this been taken at
some of our men's hands, to speak of more such Sacraments, when indeed they have
learnt this manner of speech, and difference of Sacraments, not only from the
ancient Fathers, but from Calvin himself, who always spoke with a holy
wariness, and discretion. Whatsoever their own authors, their own Schools,
their own Canons do require to be essentially and necessarily requisite in
this Mission in this function, we, for our parts, and as much as concerns our
Church of England, admit it too, and profess to have it. And whatsoever they
can say for their Church, that from their first Conversion, they have had an
orderly derivation of power from one to another, we can as justly and truly say
of our Church, that ever since her first being of such a Church, to this day,
she has conserved the same order, and ever has had, and has now, those
Ambassadors sent, with the same Commission, and by the same means, that they
pretend to have in their Church. And being herein convinced, by the evidence of
undeniable Record, which have been therefore showed to some of their Priests,
not being able to deny that such a Succession and Ordination, we have had, from
the hands of such as were made Bishops according to their Canons, now they
pursue their common beaten way, That as in our Doctrine, they confess we
affirm no Heresy, but that we deny some Truths, so in our Ordination, and
sending, and Calling, when they cannot deny, but that from such a person, who
is, by their own Canons, able to confer Orders, we, in taking our Orders,
(after their own manner) receive the Holy Ghost, and the power of binding and
loosing, yet, say they, we receive not the full power of Priests, for, we
receive only a power in Corpus mysticum, upon the mystical body of Christ,
that is, the persons that constitute the visible Church, but we should receive
it in Corpus verum, a power upon the very natural body, a power of
Consecration, by way of Transubstantiation. They may be pleased to pardon,
this, rather Modesty, then Defect, in us, who, so we may work fruitfully, and
effectually upon the mystical body of Christ, can be content that his real,
and true body work upon us. Not that we have no interest to work upon the real
body of Christ, since he has made us Dispensers even of that, to the
faithful, in the Sacrament; but for such a power, as exceeds the Holy Ghost,
who in the incarnation of Christ, when he overshadowed the blessed Virgin, did
but make man of the woman, who was one part disposed by nature thereunto,
whereas these men make man, and God too of bread, naturally wholly indisposed
to any such change, for this power we confess it is not in our Commission; and
their Commission, and ours was all one; and the Commission is manifest in the
Gospel; and, since they can charge us with no rasures, no expunctions, we must
charge them with interlinings, and additions, to the first Commission. But for
that power, which is to work upon you, to whom we are sent, we are defective in
nothing, which they call necessary thereunto.

This I speak of this Church, in which God has planted us, That God has
afforded us all that might serve, even for the stopping of the Adversaries
mouth, and to confound them in their own way: which I speak, only to excite us
to a thankfulness to God, for his abundant grace in affording us so much, and
not to disparage, or draw in question any other of our neighbor Churches, who,
perchance, cannot derive, as we can, their power, and their Mission, by the
ways required, and practiced in the Roman Church, nor have had from the
beginning a continuance of Consecration by Bishops, and such other
concurrences, as those Canons require, and as our Church has enjoyed. They, no
doubt, can justly plead for themselves, that Ecclesiastical positive Laws
admit dispensation in cases of necessity; They may justly challenge a
Dispensation, but we need none; They did what was lawful in a case of
necessity, but Almighty God preserved us from this necessity. As men therefore,
Bern.
Qui nec jussi renuunt, nec non jussi affectant, which neither neglect Gods
calling, when we have it, nor counterfeit it, when we have it not, Qui quod
verecunde excusant, obstinatius non recusant, who though we confess our
selves altogether unworthy, have yet the seals of God, and his Church upon us,
Nec rei nostrae legati, not to promove our own ends, but your reconciliation to
God, Nec sine principali mandate, not without a direct and published
Commission, in the Gospel, we come to you in Christ's stead, and so should be
received by you. As for our Mission, that being in the quality of Ambassadors,
we submitted our selves to those two obligations, which we noted to lie upon
Ambassadors, Receptio.
so here in our Reception, we shall propose to you two things, that are, for
the most part, practiced by Princes, in the reception of Ambassadors. One is,
that before they give audience, they endeavor, by some confident servant of
theirs, to discern and understand the inclination of the Ambassador, and the
general scope, and purpose of his negotiation, and of the behavior that he
purposes to use in delivering his Message; left for want of thus much light,
the Prince might either be unprepared in what manner to express himself, or
be surprised with some such message, as might not well comport with his honor
to hear. But in these Ambassages from God to man, no man is made so equal to
God, as that he may refuse to give Audience, except he know before hand that
the message be agreeable to his mind. Only he that will be more then man,
that Man of sin, who esteems himself to be joined in Commission with God,
only he has a particular Officer to know before hand, what message Gods
Ambassadors brings, and to peruse all Sermons to be preached before him, and
to expunge, correct, alter, all such things as may be disagreeable to him. It
cannot therefore become you to come to these Audiences upon conditions; to
inform your selves from others first, what kind of messages, such or such an
Ambassador uses to deliver; whether he preach Mercy or Judgment; that if he
preach against Usury, you will hear Court-sermons, where there is less
occasion to mention it; If he preach against Incontinency, you will go;
whither? Is there any place that does not extort from us, reprehensions,
exclamations against that sin? But if you believe us to come in Christ's
stead, what ever our message be, you must hear us.

Do that, and for the second thing that Princes practice in the Reception of
Ambassadors, which is, to refer Ambassadors to their Council, we are well
content to admit from you. Whosoever is of your nearest Council, and whose
opinion you best trust in, we are content to submit it to. Let natural reason,
let affections, let the profits or the pleasures of the world be the Council
Table, and can they tell you, that you are able to maintain a war against
God, and subsist so, without being reconciled to him? Deceive not your selves,
no man has so much pleasure in this life, as he that is at peace with God.

What an Organe has that man tuned, how has he brought all things in the
world to a Consort, and what a blessed Anthem does he sing to that Organe, that
is at peace with God? His Rye-bread is Manna, and his Beef is Quails, his
day-labours are thrustings at the narrow gate into Heaven, and his
night^watchings are ecstasies and evocations of his soul into the presence and
communion of Saints, his sweat is Pearls, and his blood is Rubies, it is at
peace with God. No man that is at suite in himself, no man that carries a
Westminster in his bosom, and is Plaintiff and Defendant too, no man that
serves himself with Process out of his own Conscience, for every nights
pleasure that he takes, in the morning, and for every days pound that he
gets, in the evening, has any of the pleasure, or profit, that may be had
in this life; nor any that is not at peace with God. That peace we bring you;
how will you receive us?

That vehemence of zeal which the Apostle found, we hope not for; you received
me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus. And, G^l. 4. 14
if it had been possible, you would have plucked out your own eyes, and have
given them to me. Consider the zeal of any Church to their Pastor, it will
come short of the Pastor to the Church. All that Saint Paul says of the
Galatians toward him, is far short of that which he said to the Romans,
That he could wish himself separated from Christ, for his brethren; or that of
Moses, that he would be blotted out of the Book of Life, rather then his
charge should. When we consider the manner of hearing Sermons, in the Primitive
Church, though we do not wish that manner to be renewed, yet we cannot deny,
but that though it were accompanied with many inconveniences, it testified a
vehement devotion, and sense of that that was said, by the preacher, in the
hearer; for, all that had been formerly used in Theaters, Acclamations and
Plaudites, was brought into the Church, and not only the vulgar people, but
learned hearers were as loud, and as profuse in those declarations, those
vocal acclamations, and those plaudites in the passages, and transitions, in
Sermons, as ever they had been at the Stage, or other recitations of their
Poets, or Orators. S. Hierom charges Vigilantius, that howsoever he differed
from him in opinion after, yet when he had heard him preach of the Resurrection
before, he had received that Doctrine with Acclamation and Plaudites. And as
Saint Hierome says of himself, that he was thus applauded in his Preaching;
he says it also of him whom he called his Master, Gregory Nazianzen, a grave
and yet a facetious man, of him he tells us this Story. That he having
entreated Nazianzen, to tell him the meaning of that place, Luc. 6. 1.
What that second Sabbath after the first was? he played with me, he jested at
me, says he, Eleganter lusit, and he bad me be at Church next time he
preached, and he would preach upon that Text, Et toto acclamante populo,
cogeris invitus scire quod nescis, and when you see all the Congregation
applaued me, and cry out that they are satisfied, you will make your self
believe you understand the place, as they do, though you do not; Et si solus
tacueris, solus ab omnibus stultitiae condemnaberis, And if you do not join
with the Congregation in those Plaudites, the whole Congregation will think
you the only ignorant person in the Congregation; for, as we may see in Saint
Augustine, the manner was, that when the people were satisfied in any point
which the Preacher handled, they would almost tell him so, by an acclamation,
and give him leave to pass to another point; for; so says that Father, Vidi
in voce intelligentes, plures video in silent^o requirentes, I hear many, to
whom, by this acclamation, I see, enough has been said, but I see more that
are silent, and therefore, for their sakes, I will say more of it, Saint
Agustine accepted these acclamations more willingly, at least more patiently,
then some of the Fathers before had done; Audistis, laudastis; Deo gratias; you
have heard that has been said, and you have approved it with your praise; God
be thanked for both; Et lauds vestrae foliae sunt arborum, sed fructus quaero;
Though I look for fruit from you, yet even these acclamations are Leafes, and
Leafes are Evidences that the tree is alive. Saint Chrysostom was more
impatient of them, yet could never overcome them. To him, they came a little
closer; for it was ordinary, that when he began to speak, the people would cry
out, Audiamus tertiumdecimum Apostolum; Let us hearken to the thirteenth
Apostle. And he says, Si placet, hanc nunc legem firmabimus, I pray let us now
establish this for a Law, between you and me, Hom. 30. in Act.
Ne quis auditor plaudat, quamdiu nos loquimur; That whilst I am speaking, I
may speaking, I may hear no Plaudate; yet he says in a Sermon preached after
this, Animo cogitavi Legem ponere, I have often purposed to establish such a
Law, Vt decore, and cum silentio audiatis, Hom. 31.
that you would be pleased to hear with silence, but he could never prevail.

Sidonius Apollinaris, (a Bishop himself, but whether then or no, know not)
says of another Bishop, that hearing even praedicationes repentinas, his
extemporall Sermons raucus plausor audivi, I poured my self out in loud
acclamations, till I was hoarse: And, to contract this consideration, we see
evidently, that this fashion continued in the Church, even to Saint Bernards
time. Neither is it left yet in some places, beyond the Seas, where the people
do yet answer the Preacher, it his questions be applyable to them, and may
induce an answer, with these vocal acclamations, Sir, we will, Sir, we will
not. And truly we come too near re-inducing this vain glorious fashion, in
those often periodicall murmurings, and noises, which you make, when the
Preacher concludes any point; for those impertinent Interjections swallow up
one quarter of his hour, and many that were not within distance of hearing the
Sermon, will give a censure upon it, according to the frequencie, or paucitie
of these acclamations.

These fashions then, howsoever, in those times they might be testimonies of
Zeal, yet because they occasioned vain glory, and many times, faction, (as
those Fathers have noted) we desire not, willingly we admit not. We come in
Christ's stead; Christ at his coming met Hosann' as and Crucifige's; A Preacher
may be aplauded in his Pulpit, and crucified in his Barn: but there is a worse
crucifying then that, a piercing of our hearts, Because we are as a very lovely
song, of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument,
and you hear our words, and do them not. Having therefore said thus much to
you, Ezech. 33. 32.
first of our manner of proceeding with you, Obsecramus, of all those ways of
humiliation, which we insisted upon, and engaged our selves in, we pray, and
entreat you, and the respect which should come from you, because we come in
Christ's stead, if, Act. 8.
as the E^^^ch said to Philip, Here is water, what does hinder me to be
baptized? so you say to us, we acknowledge that you do your duties, and we do
receive you in Christ's stead; what is it that you would have us do? it is but
this, We pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God; which is our third,
and last part, and that to which all that we have said of a good Pastor and a
good people; (which is the blessedest union of this world) bends, and
drives, what, and how blessed a thing it is to be reconciled to God.

Reconciliation is a redintegration, a renewing of a former friendship, that
has been interrupted and broken. So that this implies a present enmity, 3
Part.
and hostility with God; and then a former friendship with God, and also a
possibility of returning to that former friendship; stop a little upon each of
these, and we have done.

Amongst natural Creatures, because howsoever they differ in bigness, yet
they have some proportion to one another, Inimicus.
we consider that some very little creatures, contemptible in themselves, are
yet called enemies to great creatures, as the Mouse is to the Elephant.(For the
greatest Creature is not Infinite, nor the least is not Nothing.) But shall
man, between whom and nothing, there went but a word, Let us make Man, That
Nothing, which is infinitely less then a Mathematical point, then an
imaginary Atome, shall this Man, this yesterdayes Nothing, this to morrow worse
then Nothing, be capable of that honor, that dishonor able honor, that
confounding honor, to be the enemy of God, of God who is not only a multipled
Elephant, millions of Elephants multiplied into one, but a multiplied World, a
multiplied All, All that can be conceived by us, infinite many times over; Nay,
(if we may dare to say so,) a multiplied God, a God that has the Millions of
the Heathens gods in himself alone, shall this man be an enemy to this God?
Man cannot be allowed so high a sin, as enmity with God. The Devil himself
is but a slave to God, and shall Man be called his enemy? It is true, if we
consider the infinite disproportion between them, he cannot; but to many sad
purposes, and in many heavy applications Man is an enemy to God. Job could go
no higher in expressing his misery, 13. 24. 33. 10.
Why hidest thou thy face, and hold me for thine enemy? and again, Behold,
he finds occassions against me, and counts me for his enemy. So man is an
enemy to God; And then to adhere to an enemy, is to become an enemy; for Man to
adhere to Man, to ascribe any thing to the power of his natural faculties, to
think of any beam of clearness in his own understanding, or any line of
rectitude in in his own will, this is to accumulate and multiply enmities
against God, and to assemble and muster up more, and more man, to fight against
God.

A Reconciliation is required, Amici.
therefore there is an enmity; but it is but a reconciliation, therefore was a
friendship; There was a time when God and Man were friends, God did not hate
man from all Eternity, God forbid. And this friendship God meant not to
break; God had no purpose to fall out with man, for then he could never have
admitted him to a friendship. August.
Net hominem amicum quisquam potest fidelitter amare, cui se noverit futurum
inimicum: No man can love another as a friend this year, and mean to be his
enemy next. Gods foreknowledge that man and he should fall out, was not a
foreknowledge of any thing that he meant to do to that purpose, but only that
Man himself would become incapable of the continuation of this friendship. Man
might have persisted in that blessed amity; and, since if he had done so, the
cause of his persisting had been his own will, I speak of the next and
immediate Cause, Polanus syntag. To. 1. fol. 784.
(As the cause why the Angels that did persist, was Bona ipsorum Angelorum
voluntas; the good use of their own free will) much more was the cause of their
defection and breaking this friendship(in their own will; God therefore,
having made man, that is Mankind, in a state of love, and friendship, God
having not by any purpose of his done any thing toward the violation of this
friendship, in man, in any man, God continues his everlasting goodness
toward man, toward mankind still, in inviting him to accept the means of
Reconciliation, and a return to the same state of friendship, which he had at
first, by our Ministry. Be ye reconciled unto God.

You see what you had, and how you lost it. If it might not be recovered, God
would not call you to it. Reconciliamini.
It was piously declared in a late Synod, That in the offer of this
Reconciliation, God means, as the Minister means; and I am sure I mean it,
Chrysostom.
and desire it to you all; so does God. Nec Deus est qui inimicitias gerit, sed
vos, M. c. 6. 3.
it is not God, but you, that oppose this Reconciliation; O my people what have
I done unto thee, or wherein have I grieved thee, testify against me; testify
if I did any thing toward inducing an enmity, ot do any thing toward
hindering this Reconciliation; which reconciliation is, to be restored to as
good an estate in the love of God, as you had in Adam, and our estate is not as
good, if it be not as general, if the merit of Christ be not as large, as the
sin of Adam; and if it be not as possible for you to be saved by him, as it
is impossible for you to be saved without him.

It is therefore but praying you in Christ's stead, that you be reconciled to
God. And, if you consider what God is, The Lord of hosts, and therefore has
means to destroy you, or what he is not, He is not man that he can repent, and
therefore it belongs to you, to repent first, If you consider what the Lord
does, He that dwells in the heavens does laugh them to scorn, and has them in
derision, or what he does not, He does not justify the wicked balance, Mic. 6.
11.
nor the bag of deceitful waights, If you consider what the Lord would do,
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children together, as
the Hen gathers her Chickens, and ye would not, or what he would not do, As
I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, if ye consider
all this, any of this, Ezck. 33. 11.
dare you, or can you if you durst, or would you if you could, stand out in an
irreconciliable war against God? Especially if you consider, that that is more
to you, then what God is, and does, and would do, and can do, for you or
against you, that is, what he has done already; that he who was the party
offended, has not only descended so low, as to be reconciled first, and to
pay so dear for that, as the blood of his own, and only Son, but knowing
thy necessity better then thy self, he has reconciled thee to him, though
thou knew it not; God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, as
it is in the former verse; there the work is done, thy reconciliation is
wrought; God is no longer angry so, as to withhold from thee the means; for,
there it follows, He has committed to us the word of Reconciliation; That
we might tell you the instrument of Reconciliation is drawn between God and
you, Binius. To. 1. so. 320.
and, as it is written in the history of the Council of Nice, that two Bishops
who died before the establishing of the Canons, did yet subscribe and set their
names to those Canons, which to that purpose were left upon their graves all
night, so though you were dead in your sin and enemies to God, and Children
of wrath, (as all by nature are) when this Reconciliation was wrought, yet the
Spirit of God may give you this strength, to dip your pens in the blood of
the Lamb, and so subscribe your names, by acceptance of this offer of
Reconciliation. Do but that, subscribe, accept, and then, Caetera omnia, all
the rest that concerns your holy history, your Justification and
Sanctification, nonne scripta sunt, are they not written in the books of the
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, says the Holy Ghost, in another case; Are
they not written in the books of the Chronicles of the God of Israel? Shall
thou not find an eternal Decree, and a Book of life in thy behalf, if thou
look for it by this light, and reach to it with this Hand, the acceptance of
this Reconciliation? They are written in those reverend and sacred Records, and
Rolls, and Parchments, even the skin and flesh of our Blessed Savior;
written in those his stripes, and those his wounds, with that blood, that can
admit to Index expurgatorius, no expunction, no satisfaction; But the life of
his death lies in thy acceptance, and though he be come to his, thou art not
come to thy Consummatum est, till that be done.

Do that, Mat. 22^
and then thou have put on thy wedding garment. A man might get into that
feast, without his wedding garment; so a man may get into the Church, to be a
visible part of a Christian Congregation, without this acceptance of
reconciliation, that is the particular apprehension, and application of Christ;
but he is still subject to a remove, and to that question of confusion,
Quomodo intrasti, How came you in? That man in the Gospel could have answered
to that question, directly, I came in by the invitation, and conduct of thy
servants, I was called in, I was led in; So they that come hither without this
wedding garment, they may answer to Christ's Quomodo intrasti, How came thou
in? I came in by faithful parents, to whom, and their seed thou have sealed a
Covenant; I was admitted by thy Servants and Ministers in Baptism, and have
been led along by them, by coming to hear them preach thy word, and doing the
other external offices of a Christian. But there is more in this question;
Quomodo intrasti, is not only how did thou come in, but how durst thou come
in? If thou came to my feast, without any purpose to eat, and so to
discredit, to accuse either my meat, or the dressing of it, to quarrel at the
Doctrine, or at the Discipline of my Church, Quomodo intrasti, How did thou,
how durst thou come in? If thou came with a purpose to poison my meat, that
it might infect others, with a determination to go forward in thy sin,
whatsoever the Preacher say, and so to encourage others by thy example, Quomodo
intrasti, How durst thou come in? If thou came in with thine own provision in
thy pocket, and did not rely upon mine, and think that thou can be saved
without Sermons, or Sacraments, Qvmodo intrasti, How durst thou come in? Him
that came in there, without this Wedding garment, the Master of the Feast calls
Friend; but scornfully, Friend how came thou in? But he cast him out. God may
call us Friends, that is, admit, and allow us the estimation and credit of
being of his Church, but at one time or other, he shall minister that
Interrogatory, Friend, how came you in? and for want of that Wedding garment,
and for want of wearing it in the sight of men, (for it is not said that that
man had no such Wedding garment at home, in his Wardrobe, but that he had none
on) for want of Sanctification in a holy life, God shall deliver us over to the
execution of our own consciences, and eternal condemnation.

But be ye reconciled to God, embrace this reconciliation in making your use of
those means, and this reconciliation shall work thus, it shall restore you to
that state, that Adam had in Paradise. What would a soul oppressed with the
sense of sin give, that she were in that state of Innocence, that she had in
Baptism? Be reconciled to God, and you have that, and an elder Innocence then
that, the Innocence of Paradise. Go home, and if you find an over-burden of
children, negligence in servants, crosses in your tradings, narrowness, penury
in your estate, yet this penurious, and this encumbred house shall be your
Paradise. Go forth, into the Country, and if you find unseasonablenesse in the
weather, rots in your sheep, murrains in your cattle, worms in your corn,
backwardness in your rents, oppression in your Landlord, yet this field of
thorns and brambles shall be your Paradise. Lock thy self up in thy self, in
thine own bosom, and though thou find every room covered with the ^oot of
former sins, and shaked with that Devil whose name is Legion, some such sin as
many sins depend upon, and are induced by, yet this prison, this rack, this
hell in thine own conscience shall be thy Paradise. And as in Paradise Adam at
first needed no Savior, so when by this reconciliation, in apprehending thy
Savior, thou art restored to this Paradise, thou shall need no sub-Saviour, no
joint-Saviour, but Caetera adjicientur, no other Angel, but the Angel of the
greas Council, no other Saint, but the Holy One of Israel, he who has wrought
this reconciliation for thee, and brought it to thee, shall establish it in
thee; For, if when we were enemies, Romans 5. 10.
we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, shall we be saved by his life. This is the sum and the end of
all, That when God sends humble and laborious Pastors, to souple and appliable
Congregations; That we pray, and you receive us in Christ's stead, we shall not
only find rest in God, but, (as it is said of No^hs sacrifice) God shall
find the savor of rest in us; God shall find a Sabbath to himself in us, and
rest from his jealousies, and anger toward us, and we shall have a Sabbatary
life here in the rest and peace of conscience, and a life of one everlasting
Sabbath hereafter, where to our Rest there shall be added Joy, and to our Joy
Glory, and this Rest, and Joy, and Glory superinvested with that which crowns
them all, Eternity.

SERMON XLI.
Preached at Saint Paul's Cross. 6 May. 1627.
HOSEA 3. 4. For, the Children of Israel shall abide many days, without a
King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without Teraphim.
SOme Cosmographers have said, That there is no land so placed in the world,
but that from that land, a man may see other land. I dispute it not, I defend
it not; I accept it, and I apply it; there is scarce any mercy expressed in the
Scriptures, but that from that mercy you may see another mercy. Christ sets up
a candle now here, only to lighten that one room, but as he is lumen de
lumine, light of light, so he would have more lights lighted at every light of
his, and make every former mercy an argument, an earnest, a conveyance of more.
Between land and land you may see seas, and seas enraged with tempests; but
still, say they, some other land too. Between mercy, and mercy, you may find
Comminations, and Judgments, but still more mercy. For this discovery let this
text be our Map. First we see land, we see mercy in that gracious
compellation, Children, (the Children of Israel) Then we see sea, then comes a
Commination, ^ Judgment that shall last some time, (many days shall the
Children of Israel suffer) But there they may see land too, another mercy, even
this time of Judgment shall be a day, they shall not be benighted, not left in
darkness in their Judgment; (many days, all the while, it shall be day)
Then the text opens into a deep Ocean, a spreading Sea, (They shall be without
a King, and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and without an Image,
and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim.) But even from this Sea, this vast
Sea, this Sea of devastation, we see land; for, in the next verse follows
another mercy, (The Children of Israel shall return, and shall seek the Lord
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in
the later days.) And beyond this land, there is no more Sea; beyond this
mercy, no more Judgment, for with this mercy the Chapter ends.

Consider our text then, as a whole Globe, as an entire Sphere, and then our
two Hemispheares of this Globe, Divisio:
our two parts of this text, will be, First, that no perverseness of ours, no
rebellion, no disobedience puts God beyond his mercy, nor extinguishes his
love; still he calls Israel, rebellious Israel his Children; nay his own
anger, his own Judgments, then, when he is in the exercise thereof, in the
execution thereof, puts him not beyond his mercy, extinguishes not his love;
he hides not his face from them then, he leaves them not then, in the dark,
he accompanies their calamity with a light, he makes that time, though
cloudy, though overcast, yet a day unto them; (the Children of Israel shall
abide many days in this case.) But then, as no disobedience removes God from
himself, (for he is love, and mercy) so no interest of ours in God, does so
privilege us, but that he will execute his Judgments upon his Children too,
even the Children of Israel shall fall into these Calamities. And from this
first part, we shall pass to the second; from these general considerations,
(That no punishments should make us desperate, that no favors should make us
secure) we shall pass to the particular commination, and judgments upon the
children of Israel in this text, without King, without Prince etc.

In our first part, 1 Part.
we stop first, upon this declaration of his mercy, in this fatherly
appellation, Filii.
Children, (the children of Israel) He does not call them children of Israel,
as though he disavowed them, and put them off to another Father; but
therefore, because they are the Children of Israel, they are his Children, for,
Hose. 2. 9.
he had married Israel; and married her to himself for ever. Many of us are
Fathers; and, from God, here may learn tenderness toward children. All of us
are children of some parents, and therefore should hearken after the name of
Father, Tertull.
which is nomen pietatis and potestatis, a name that argues their power over
us, and our piety toward them; and so, concerns many of us, in a double
capacity, (as we are children, and parents too) but all of us in one capacity,
as we are children derived from other parents. God is the Father of man,
otherwise then he is of other creatures. He is the Father of all Creatures; so
Philo calls all Creatures sor^res suas, his sisters; but then, all those
sisters of man, all those daughters of God are not alike married. God has
placed his Creatures in diverse ranks, and in diverse conditions; neither must
any man think, that he has not done the duty of a Father, if he have not
placed all his Sons, or not matched all his daughters, in a condition equal
to himself, or not equal to one another. God has placed creatures in the
heavens, and creatures in the earth, and creatures in the sea, and yet, all
these creatures are his children, and when he looked upon them all, in their
diverse stations, he saw, omnia valde bora, that all was very well; And that
Father that imploies one Son in learning; another to husbandry, another to
Merchandise, pursues Gods example, in disposing his children, (his creatures)
diversely, and all well. Such creatures as the Rain, (though it may seem but an
imperfect, and ignoble creature, fallen from the womb of a cloud) have God for
their Father; Job 38. 28.
(God is the Father of the Rain.) And such creatures as light, James 1. 17.
have but God for their Father. God is Pater l^minum, the Father of lights.
Whether we take lights there to be the Angels, created with the light, (some
take it so) or to be the several lights set up in the heavens, Sun, and Moon
and Stars, (some take it so) or to be the light of Grace in infusion by the
Spirit, or the light of the Church, in manifestation, by the word, (for, all
these acceptations have convenient. Authors, and worthy to be followed) God is
the Father of lights, of all lights; but so he is of rain, Ephesians. 1. 17.
and clouds too. And God is the Father of glory; (as Saint Paul styles him) of
all glory; 2 Cor. 4. 17.
whether of those beams of glory which he sheds upon us here, in the
blessings, and preferments of this life, or that weight of glory which he
reserves for us, in the life to come. From that inglorious drop of rain, that
falls into the dust, and rises no more, to those glorious Saints who shall rise
from the dust, and fall no more, but, as they arise at once to the fullness of
Essential joy, so arise daily in accidentiall joys, all are the children of
God, and all alike of kin to us. And therefore let us not measure our avowing,
or our countenancing of our kindred, by their measure of honor, or place, or
riches in the world, but let us look how fast they grow in the root, that is,
in the same worship of the same God, who is ours, and their Father too. He is
nearest of kin to me, that is of the same religion with me; as they are
creatures, they are of kin to me by the Father, but, as they are of the same
Church, and religion, by Father and mother too.

Philo calls all creatures his sisters, but all men are his brothers. God is
the Father of man in a stronger and more peculiar, and more masculine sense,
then of other Creatures. Filius particeps and con-dominus cum patre: as the law
calls the Son, the partner of the Father, and fellow-Lord, joint-Lord with
the Father, of all the possession that is to descend, so God has made man his
partner, and fellow-Lord of all his other creatures in Moses his Dominamini,
when he gives man a power to rule over them, and in David's Omnia subjecisti,
Genesis 1. 28. Psalm. 8. 7.
when he imprints there, a natural disposition in the creature to the
obedience of man. So high, so very high a filiation, has God given man, as
that, having another Son, by another filiation, a higher filiation then this,
by an eternal generation, yet he was content, that that Son should become
this Son, that the Son of God should become the Son of Man.

God is the Father of all; Israel.
of man otherwise then of all the rest; but then, of the children of Israel,
Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
otherwise then of all other men. For he bought them; and, is not be thy Father
that has bought thee? says God by Moses. Not to speak of that purchase, which
he made by the death of his Son, (for that belongs to all the world) he
bought the Jews in particular, at such a price, such silver, and such gold,
such temporal, and such spiritual benefits, such a Land, and such a Church,
such a Law, and such a Religion, as, certainly, he might have had all the world
at that price. If God would have manifested himself, poured out himself to
the Nations, as he did to the Jews, all the world would have swarmed to his
obedience, and herded in his pale. God was their father^ Chrysoft.
and, as S. Chrysost^me, (that he might be sure to draw in all degrees of
tender affection) calls him, Their Mother too. For, Matris nutrire, Patris
erudire; It was a Mothers part to give them suck, and to feed them with
temporal blessings; It was a Fathers part to instruct them, and to feed them
with spiritual things; and God did both abundantly. Therefore does God submit
himself to the comparison of a Mother in the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 49. 15.
Can a woman forget her sucking child? But then, he stays not in that
inferior, in that infirmer sex, but returns to a stronger love, then that of a
Mother, (yes, (says he) she may forget, yet will not I forget thee.) And
therefore, when David says, Psalm. 103. 1.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits; David expresses
that, which we translate in a general word, Benefits, in this word, Gamal,
which signifies Ablactationes; forget not that God nursed thee as a Mother, and
then, Ablactavit, we and thee, and provided thee stronger food, out of the care
of a father. In one word, all creatures are Gods children; man is his son;
but then, Israel is his firstborn son; for that is the addition, Exed. 4. 22.
which God gives Israel by Moses to Pharaoh, (Say unto Pharaoh, Israel is my
son, even my firstborn.) Why God adopted Israel into this siliation, into this
primogeniture, before all the people of the world, we can assign no reason, but
his love only. But why he did not before this Text, dis-inherit this adopted
son, is a higher degree, and exercise of his love, then the Adoption it self,
if we consider, (which is a useful consideration) their manifold provocations
to such an exhaeredation, and what God suffered at their hands.

The ordinary causes of Exhaeredation, Exhaeredatio.
for which, a man might dis-inherit his son, are assigned and numbered in the
law, to be fourteen. But diverse of them grow out of one root, (Undutifulness,
Inofficiousnesse toward the father) and as, by that reason, they may be
extended to more, so they may be contracted to sewer, to two. These two,
Ingratitude, and Irreligion. Unthankfulness, and Idolatry were ever just
causes of Exhaeredation, of Dis-inheriting. And with these two, did the Jews
more provoke Almighty God, then any children, any father. Stop we a little our
Consideration upon each of these.

He is not always ungrateful, Ingratitudo.
that does not recompense a benefit, but he only that would not, though he
could make, and though the Benefactor needed a recompense. When Furnius, upon
whom Augustus had multiplied benefits, told him, that in one thing he had
damnified him, in one thing he had undone him, Effecisti at viverem and mo^erer
ingratus, You have done so much for me, (says he) that I must live, and die
unthankful, that is, without showing my thankfulness by equivalent
recompenses: This which he calls unthankfulness, was thankfulness enough.
There are men, (says the Moral man) Qui quo plus debent, magis od^rant, Senec.
that hate those men most, who have laid most obligations upon them. Leve as
alienum debitorem facit, grave inimicum; for a little debt he will be content
to look toward me, but when it is great, more then he can pay, or as much as
he thinks he can get from me, then he would be glad to be rid of me.
Acknowledgement is a good degree of thankfulness. But, ingratitude at the
highest, (and the Jews ingratitude was at the highest) involves even a
concealing, and a denying of benefits, and even a hating, Bern.
and injuring of Benefactors. And so, Res peremptoria ingrati^udo, says Bernard
significantly, Ingratitude is a peremptory sin; it does Perimere, that is,
destroy, not only all virtues, but it destroys, that is, overflows all other
particular Vices; no vice can get a name, where ingratitude is; it swallows
all, devours all, becomes all; Ingratum dicas, omnia dixisti, If you have
called a man unthankful, you have called him by all the ill names that are:
for this complicated, this manifold, this pregnant vice, Ingratitude, the holy
language, the Hebrew, lacks a word. The nearest root that they can draw
Ingratitude into, is Caphar, and Caphar is but Tegere, to hide, to conceal a
benefit; but to deny a benefit, or to hate or injure a Benefactor, they have
not a word. And therefore, as S. Hierome found not the word in the Hebrew, so
in all Saint Hieromes translation of the Old Testament, (or in that which is
reputed his, the vulgat Edition) you have not that Latin word, Ingratus;
Curious sinners, subtle self-damners; they could not name Ingratitude, and in
all the steps of Ingratitude, they exceeded all men, all Nations. From the
Ingratitude of murmuring, upon which, God lays that woe, Isa. 55. 10.
(Woe unto him that says to his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman,
What have thou brought forth? A dog murmures not that he is not a Lion, nor a
blinde-worm without eyes, that he is not a Basilisk to kill with his eyes; Dust
murmures not that it is not Amber, nor a Dunghill that it is not a Mine, nor an
Angel that he is not of the Seraphim; and every man would be something else
then God has made him,) from this murmuring for that which he has not, to
another degree of Ingratitude, The appropriation of that which he has, Bern.
to himself, Vti Datis tanquam Innatis, (as S. Bernard speaks in his music) To
attribute to our selves that which we have received from God, to think our
selves as strong in Nature as in Grace, and as safe in our own free will, as in
the love of God; as God says of Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 16.
(That he had given her her beauty, and then she played the harlot, as if it had
been her own) by these steps of Ingratitude to the highest of all which is,
rather then to confess her self beholden to God, to change her God, and so to
^lide from Ingratitude to Idolatry, Jerusalem came, and over-went all the
Nations upon the earth.

Their Ingratitude induced Idolatry in an instant. Idololatria. Exodus 32. 1.
As soon as they came to that ungrateful murmuring, (As for Moses we cannot
tell what is become of him) they came presently to say to Aaron, (Up and make
us Gods that may go before us) which is an impotency, a leprosy, that derives
it self far, spreads far, that as soon as our sins induce any worldly
cross, any clamity upon us, we come to think of another Church, another
Religion, and conclude, That that cannot be a good Church, in which we have
lived in. Now, against this impious levity, of facility in changing our
Religion, God seems to express the greatest indignation, Deuteronomy. 32. 17.
when he says, They sacrificed unto gods whom they knew not, to new gods. Men,
amongst us, that have been baptized, and catechized in the truth, and in the
knowledge thereof, fall into ignorant falsehood, and embrace a Religion which
they understand not, nor can understand, because it lies in the breast of one
man, and is therefore subject to alterations. They sacrifice to gods whom they
know not, (says God) and those gods new gods too; The more suspicious, for
their newness; and, (as it is added there) unto gods whom their fathers feared
not. Men, that fall from us, (whose fathers were of that Religion) put
themselves into more bondage and slavery to the Court of Rome now, then their
fathers did to the Church of Rome then; They sacrifice to gods, whom they know
not, and whom their fathers feared not, so much as they do. But, they have
corrupted themselves; Ver. 5.
(as God charges them farther) They are fallen from us, whom no example of
their fathers led that way; fathers have left their former superstition, which
they were born and bred in, and the sons, which were born, and bred in the
truth, have embraced those superstitions; Their spot is not the spot of
children, (so it follows in the same place) a weakness that might have that
excuse, that they proceeded out of a reverentiall respect to their fathers, and
followed their example; (for their fathers have stood, and they are fallen.
(Their spot is not the spot of children.) And, because Kings are pictures of
God, when they trun upon new gods, they turn to new pictures of God too, and
with a foreign Religion, invest a foreign Allegiance. Did not I deliver you from
the Egyptians, Iud. 10. 11.
says God, and from the Ammonites. and from the Amorites, and Philistims? from
a succession of enemies, at times, and from a league of enemies at once, Yet
you have forsaken me, and served other gods, says God there; And therefore, (to
that resolution God comes) Therefore, I will deliver you no more. And yet, how
often did God deliver them after this? Ingratitude, Idolatry, are just causes
of Exhaeredation; Israel abounded in both these, and yet, after all these, in
this Text, he calls them Children, The Children of Israel, and therefore his
children.

God is kind even to the unthankful, Dies.
says christ himself, and himself calls Jerusalem, Luc. 6. 35.
The holy City, even when she was de^iled with many and manifold uncleanness,
because she had been holy, Mat. 4. 5.
and had the outward help of holiness remaining in her still. Christ does not
disavow, not disinherit those children which gave most just cause of
exheredation; much less does he justify, by his example, final and total
disinheriting of children, occasioned by single and small faults in the
children, and grounded in the Parents, upon sudden, and passionate, and
intemperate, and imaginary vows, They have vowed to do it, therefore they
will do it; for, so they put a pretext of Religion upon their impiety, and
make God accessory to that which he dislikes, and upon color of a vow, do
that which is far from a service to God, as the performance of every lawful,
and discreet vow is. God calls them his Children, (which is one) and then,
though as a Father he correct them, yet he shows them his face, in that
correction, (which is another beam of his mercy) He calls their calamity, their
affliction, Not a night, but a day, (many days shall the children of Israel
suffer this.)

We find these two words often joined together in the Scriptures, Dies
visitationis, The day of visitation; though as it is a visitation, it be a sad,
a dark contemplation, yet as it is a day, it has always a cheerfulness in
it. If it were called a night, I might be afraid, that this night, They (I am
not told who) would fetch away my soul; but, Luc. 12. 20.
being a day, I have assurance, that the Sun, the Sun of Righteousness
will arise to me. At the light of thine Arrows, they went forward, says the
Prophet Habakkuk. Though they be Arrows, 3. 11.
yet they are Torches too, though they burn, yet they give light too; though
God shoot his Arrows at me, even by them, I shall have light enough to see
that it is God that shoots. As there is a heavy commination in that of Amos, (I
will cause the Sun to go down at noone, and I will darken the earth, in
clear day) so is there a gracious promise, 8. 9.
and a constant practice in God, That he will (as he has done) command light
of darkness, and enable thee to see a clear day, by his presence, in the
darkest night of tribulation. For, truly, such a sense, (I think) belongs to
those words in Hosea, That when God had said, The days of visitation are come,
the days of recompense are come, 9. 12.
God adds that, as an aggravating of the calamity; yea, woe also to them, when
I depart from them; as though the oppression of the affliction, the
peremptorinesse of the affliction, were not in the affliction it self, hut in
Gods departing from them, when he afflicted them; they should be visited, but
see no day in their visitations, afflicted from God, but see no light from him,
receive no consolation in him. In this place we take it, (for the exaltation of
your devotion) as a particular beam of his mercy) That though the Children of
Israel were afflicted many days, yet still he affords them the name of
Children, and still their dark and cloudy days were accompanied with the
light, and presence of God, still they felt the Hand of God under them, the
Face of God upon them, the Heart of God toward them.

Those then, Non securi.
which have this filiation, God does not easily disinherit; because they were
his Children, after unnatural disobediencies, he avowes them, and continues
that name to them. But yet, this must not imprint a security, a presumption;
for, even the children here, are submitted to heavy and dangerous calamities;
when Christ himself says, The children of the kingdom shall be cast into
utter darkness, who can promise himself a perpetual, Matt. 8. 12.
or unconditioned station? we have in the Scriptures two especial Types of the
Church, Paradise, and the Arc. But, in that Type, the Arc, we are principally
instructed, what the Church in general shall do, and in that in Paradise,
what particular men in the Church should do. For, we do not read, that in the
Arc Noah, or his company, did weigh any anchor, hoyst any sail, ship any
oar, steare any rudder; but, the Arc, by the providence of God, who only was
Pilot, rode safe upon the face of the waters. The Church it self, (figured by
the Arc) cannot shipwreck; though men sleep, though the Devil wake, Matt. 16.
18.
The gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church. But in the other Type
of the Church, where every man is instructed in his particular duty therein,
Paradise, Adam himself was commanded to dress Paradise, and to keep Paradise.
And when he did not that which he was enjoined to do in that place, Genesis 2. 15.
he forfeited his interest in it, and his benefit by it. Though we be born and
bred in Gods house, as Children Baptized, and Catechized in the true Church, if
we slacken our holy industry in making fare our salvation, we, though Children
of the Kingdom, may becast out, and all our former helps, and our proceedings
by the benefit of those helps, shall but aggravate our condemnation. Alpha and
Omega make up the Name of Christ; and, between Alpha and Omega, are all the
letters of the Alphabet included. A Christian is made up of Alpha and Omega,
and all between. He must begin well, (embrace the true Church) and live well
according to the profession of that true Church, and die well, according to
that former holy life, and practice. Truth in the beginning, Zeal all the way,
and Constancy in the end make up a Christian. Otherwise for all this
filiation, children may be disinherited, or submitted to such calamities as
these which are interminated upon the children of Israel, which constitute our
second part, They shall be without a King, and without a Prince, and without a
Sacrifice, and without an Ephod, and without a Teraphim.

Disobedient children are not cast off; 2 Part.
but yet disobedience is not left uncorrected. Be merciful, Non exhaeredantur,
Corriguntur tamen. Exodus 23. 22.
but merciful so, as your Father in Heaven is merciful; Be not so merciful
upon any private respect, as to be thereby cruel to the public. And be Just;
but, just, as your Father in Heaven is just; Hate not the vice of a man so, as
thereby to hate the man himself. God has promised to be an enemy to our
enemies, an adversary to our adversaries; but, God is no irreconciliable enemy,
no implacable, no inexorable Adversary. For, Psalm. 139. 22.
that hatred which David calls Odium perfectum, (I have hated them with a
perfect hatred) is not only a vehement hatred, but (as Saint Hilary calls it)
Odium religiosum, a hatred that may consist with religion: That I hate not
another man, for his religion, so as that I lose all religion in my self, by
such a hating of him. And Saint Augustine calls it Odium Charitativum, a hate
that may consist with Charity; that I hate no man for his peremptory
uncharitableness toward my religion, so as to lose mine own Charity; for, I
am come to one point of his religion, if I come to be as uncharitable as he.
God and Kings are at a near distance, All gods; Magistrates, and inferior
persons are at a near distance, all dust. As God proceeds with a King, with
Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 19. 2.
in that temper, that moderation, (Should thou help the ungodly, and love
them that hate the Lord?) So men with men, Magistrates with inferior men,
learned men with ignorant men, should proceed with Saint Paul's moderation, 2
These. 3. 14.
If any man obey not (but be refractary, unconformable) note that man (says
the Apostle) and have no company with him, but yet count him not as an enemy.
The union of the two Natures in Christ, give us a fair example, that Divinity
and Humanity may consist together. No Religion induces Inhumanity; no Piety, no
Zeal destroys nature; and since there is a time to hate, and a time to love,
Eccles. 8. 3.
then is love most seasonable, when other civil contracts, civil alliances,
civil concurrences, have soupled and intenerated the dispositions of persons,
or nations, formerly farther asunder, to a better possibility, to a fairer
probability, to a nearer propinquity of harkening to one another, Ephesians. 2. 16:
That Christ might reconcile both unto God, in one body, by the Cross, having
slain the enmity thereby. Civil Offices may work upon religions too; and
where that may follow, (That our mildness in civil things, may prevail upon
their obduration in religion) there is the time to love. But in cases, where
civil peace and religious foundations are both shaked, that the State and the
Church, as they are both in one bottom, so they are chased by one Pirate, I
hate not with a perfect hatred, not perfect toward God, except I declare, and
urge, and press home, the truth of God, against their errors in my Ministry,
nor perfect toward man, except I advance, in my place, the execution of those
Laws against their practices, without which, they are enabled, nay encouraged,
nay persuaded, nay entreated to go forward in those practices. God himself
proceeds against his own children so far, (and dearer then those children
were to God, can no friends be to us, no allies to any Prince) That they should
be without King, without Prince, without Sacrifice, without Image, without
Ephod, without Teraphim; that is, without Temporal, without Ecclesiastical
Government.

First, then, we presume, we presuppose, (and that necessarily) every piece of
this part of our Text, Comminatio.
to fall under the Commination; they were threatened with the loss of every
particular, and therefore they were the worse for every particular loss. Not
the worse only because they thought themselves the worse, because they had
fixed their love and their delight upon these things, but because they were
really the better for having them, it was really a curse, a Commination, that
they should lose them; as well that they should lose their Ephod, and their
Image, and their Teraphim, as that they should lose their Sacrifices. But
first,(though that other fall also within the Commination, that they should be
without a settled form of Religion, without Sacrifice, and Ephod, and the rest)
the first thing that the Commination falls upon, is, That they should be
without a Civil form of government, without King, and without Prince. For,
though our Religion prepare us to our Been esse, our well-being, our
everlasting happiness, yet it is the State, the civil and peaceable
government, which preserves our very Esse, our very Being; and there cannot be
a Been esse, without an Esse, a well and a happy Being, except there be first a
Being established. It is the State, the Law, that constitutes Families and
Cities, and Propriety, and Magistracy, and Jurisdiction. The State, the Law
preserves and disting^^shes, not only the Meum and Tuum, the Possessions of
men, but the Me and Te, the very persons of men; The Law tells me, not only
whose land I must call every Acre, but whose son I must call every man.
Therefore God made the Body before the Soul; Therefore there is in man a
vegetative, and a sensitive soul, before an immortal, and reasonable soul
enter. Therefore also, in this place, God proposes first the Civil State, the
temporal Government, (what it is, to have a King and a Prince) before he
proposes the happiness of a Church, and a Religion; not but that our Religion
conduces to the greater happiness, but that our Religion cannot be conserved,
except the Civil State, and temporal Government be conserved too.

The first thing then that the Commination falls upon, Sine Rege.
is the loss of their Temporal State. But the Commination does not fall so
fully upon the exclusion of all forms of Government, as upon the exclusion of
Monarchy; It does not so expressly threaten an An^^chy, that they should have no
Government, no Governors; It is not sine Regimine, but sine Rege, If they had
any, they should not have the best, They should be without a King. Now, if with
S. Hierome, and others that accompany him in that interpretation, Hi^rome.
we take the Prophecy of this Text, to be fulfilled in that Dispersion which
has continued upon the Jews, ever since the destruction of Jerusalem, the Jews
have been so far from having had any King, as that they have not had a
Constable of their own, in any part of the world; no interest at all, in any
part of the Magistracy and Jurisdiction of the world, Genesis 4. 12.
any where, but they are a whole Nation of Cains, fugitives, and vagabonds. But
howsoever it be, the heat, and the vehemence of this Commination falls upon this
particular, sine Rege, they shall be without a King. It was long before God
afforded the Jews a King; and he did not easily do it, then when he did it.
Not, that he intended not that form of Government for them, but because they
would extort it from him, before his time, and because they asked it only in
that respect, That they might be like their neighbors, to whom God would not
have had them too like: And also, because God, to keep their thankfulness
still awake, would reserve, and keep back some better thing, then he had given
them yet, to give them at last. For, so he says, (as the Coronation of all his
benefits to Israel, of which there is a glorious Inventary in that Chapter)
Thou did prosper into a Kingdom; Till the Crown of glory be presented, Ezekiel.
16. 13.
in the coming of the Messiah, thou can not be happier. Those therefore that
allow but a conditional Sovereignty in a Kingdom, an arbitrary, a temporary
Sovereignty, that may be transferred at the pleasure of another, they oppose
the Nolumus hoc, we would not have, we would not live under this form of
Government, not under a temporal Monarchy, Nolumus hoc. Those that determine
Allegiance, and civil obedience only by their own religion, and think
themselves bound to obey none, that is of another persuasion, they oppose the
Nolumus hunc, We will not have this man to reign over us; and so, make their
relations, and fix their dependencies upon foreign hopes, Nolumus hunc. Those
that fix a super-Soveraignty in the people, or in a Presbytery, they oppose the
Nolumus sic, we would not have things carried thus; They pretend to know the
happiness of living under that form, A Kingdom, and to acknowledge the person
of the King, but they would be governed every man according to his own mind.
And all these, the Nolumus hoc, (they that desire not the continuance of that
form, of a Kingdom in an Independency, but would have a dependency upon a
foreign power;) And the Nolumus hunc, (they that are disaffected to the person
of him that governs for the present;) And the Nolumus sic, (they that will
prescribe to the King, ends, and ways to those ends:) all these assist this
malediction, this commination, which God interminates here, as the greatest
calamity, sine Rege, They shall be without a King; for this is to Canton out a
Monarchy, to Ravell out a Kingdom, to Crumble out a King.

There is another branch in this Part, which is of Temporal calamities, Sine
Principe.
That they shall be sine Principe, Without a King, and without a Prince. The
word in the original is Sar; and take it, as it sounds most literally in our
Translation, The Prince is the Kings Son; so, this very word is used in Esaias;
Sar Salem; The Son of God, Isa. 9. 9.
is called the Prince of Peace. And so, the commination upon the Jews is thus
far aggravated, That they shall be without a Prince, that is, without a
certain heir; and Successor; which uncertainty, (more then any thing else)
slackens the industry of all men at home, and sharpens the malice of all men
abroad; fears at home, and hopes abroad, discompose and disorder all, where
they are sine Principe, without a certain heir. But the word enlarges it self
farther; for, Sar signifies a Judge; when Moses rebuked a Malefactor, he
replies to Moses, Who made thee a Judge? Exodus 2. 13.
And in many, very many places, Sar signifies a Commander in the Wars. So
that where the Justice of the State, or the Military power of the State fail,
(and they fail, where the men who do, or should execute those places, will
not, or dare not do, what appertains to their places) there this Commination
falls, They are without a Prince, that is, without future assurance, without
present power, or Justice.

But we pass to the spiritual Commination; Damna spiritualia.
that is, They shall be without Sacrifice, without Ephod, without Image,
without Teraphim. It is not that their understanding shall be taken away, no,
nor that the tenderness of their conscience, or their zeal shall be taken
away; It is not that they shall come to any impiety, or ill opinion of God;
They may have religious, and well-disposed hearts, and yet be under a curse, if
they have not a Church, an outward Discipline established amongst them. It is
not enough for a man to believe aright, but he must apply himself to some
Church, to some outward form of worshipping God; It is not enough for a Church,
to hold no error in doctrine, but it must have outward assistances for the
devotion of her children, and outward decency for the glory of her God. Both
these kinds are intended in the particulars of this Text, Sacrifice and Ephod,
Image and Teraphim.

First, Sine Sacrificio.
it is a part of the curse, to be without Sacrifice. Now, if according to S.
Hieromes interpretation, this Text be a Prophecy upon the Jews, after Christ's
time, and that the Malediction consist in this, That they shall not embrace the
Christian Religion, nor the Christian Church entertain them; if the Prophet
drive to this, They shall be without Sacrifices, because they shall not be of
the Christian Church, certainly the Christian Church is not to be without
Sacrifice. It is a miserable impotency, to be afraid of words; That from a
former holy and just detestation of real errors, we should come to an
uncharitable detestation of persons, and to a contentious detestation of words.
We dare not name Merit, nor Penance, nor Sacrifice, nor Altar, because they
have been abused. How should we be disappointed, and disfurnished of many words
in our ordinary conversation, if we should be bound from all words, which
blasphemous men have profaned, or unclean men have defiled with their ill use
of those words? There is Merit, there is Penance, there is Sacrifice, there are
Altars, in that sense, in which those blessed men, who used those words first,
at first used them. The Communion Table is an Altar; and in the Sacrament there
is a Sacrifice. Not only a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, common to all the
Congregation, but a Sacrifice peculiar to the Priest, though for the People.
There he offers up to God the Father, (that is, to the remembrance, to the
contemplation of God the Father) the whole body of the merits of Christ Jesus,
and begges of him, that in contemplation of that Sacrifice so offered, of that
Body of his merits, he would vouchsafe to return, and to apply those merits to
that Congregation. A Sacrifice, as far from their blasphemous over-boldnesse,
who constitute a propitiatory Sacrifice, in the Church of Rome, as from their
over-tendernesse, who startle at the name of Sacrifice. We do not, (as at
Rome) first invest the power of God, and make our selves able to make a Christ,
and then invest the malice of the Jews, and kill that Christ, whom we have
made; for, Sacrifice, Immolation, (taken so properly, and literally as they
take it) is a killing; But the whole body of Christ's actions and passions; we
sacrifice, we represent, we offer to God. Calvin alone, has said enough, Non
possumus, except we be assisted with outward things, we cannot fix our selves
upon God. Therefore is it part of the malediction here, that they shall be sine
Sacrificio, without Sacrifice; so is it also in inferior helps, sine Ephod,
they shall be without an Ephod.

The Ephod amongst the Jews, Sine Ephod.
was a garment, which did not only distinguish times, (for it was worn only
in time of divine Service) but, even in time of divine Service, it
distinguished persons too. For, Exodus 26. 6.
we have a Pontifical Ephod, peculiar only to the high Priest; And we have a
Leviticall Ephod, 1 Samuel 2. 18.
belonging to all the Levites; (Samuel ministered before the Lord, being a
child, girded with a linen Ephod.) And we have a common Ephod, which, any
man, that assisted in the service of God might wear; That linen Ephod, 2 Samuel
6. 14.
which David put on, in that Procession, when he daunced before the Ark. But
all these Ephods were bound under certain Laws, to be worn by such men, and at
such times. Christ's garment was not divided; nay, the Soldiers were not divided
about it, but agreed in one way; And shall we, (the Body of Christ) be
divided about the garment, that is, vary in the garment, by denying a
conformity to that Decency which is prescribed? When Christ divested, or
suppressed the Majesty of his outward appearance, Job. 20. 1^.
at his Resurrection, Mary Magdalen took him but for a Gardener.
Ecclesiastical persons in secular habits, lose their respect. Though the very
habit be but a Ceremony, yet the distinction of habits is rooted in nature,
and in morality; And when the particular habit is enjoined by lawful
Authority, obedience is rooted in nature, and in morality too. In a Watch, the
string moves nothing, but yet, it conserves the regularity of the motion of
all. Rituall, and Ceremonial things move not God, but they exalt that
Devotion, and they conserve that Order, which does move him. Therefore is it
also made a part of the Commination, that they shall be sine Ephod, without
these outward Rituall, and Ceremonial solemnities of a Church; first, without
Sacrifices, which are more substantial and essential parts of Religion, (as
we consider Religion to be the outward worship of God, and then, without
Ephod, without those other assistances, which, though they be not of Gods
Revenue, yet they are of his Subsidies, and though they be not the soul, yet
are the breath of Religion. And so also is it of things of a more inferior
nature then Sacrifice or Ephod, that is of Image and Teraphim, which is our
next, and last Consideration.

Both these words, Image, Teraphim.
(that which is translated, and called Image, and that which is not translated,
but kept in the original word, Teraphim) have sometimes a good, sometimes a
bad sense in the Scriptures. In the First, Image, there is no difficulty; good
and bad significations of that word, are obvious every where. And for the
other, Genesis 31. 19.
though when Rachel stole her fathers Teraphim, (Images) though when the King
of Babylon consulted with Teraphim, (Images) Ezekiel. 21. 21.
the word Teraphim have an ill sense, yet, 1 Samuel 19. 13.
when Michal, David's wife, put an Image into his bed, to elude the fury of
Saul, there the word has no ill sense. Accept the words in an Idolatrous
sense, yet, because they fall under the commination, and that God threatens it,
as a part of their calamity, that they should be without their Idols, it has
been, not inconveniently, argued from this place, that even a Religion mixed
with some Idolatry, and superstition, is better then none, as in Civil
Government a Tyranny is better then an Anarchy. And therefore we must not bring
the same indisposition, the same disaffection toward a person misled, and
soured with some leaven of Idolatry, as toward a person possessed with Atheism.
And yet, how ordinarily we see, zealous men start, and affected, and troubled
at the presence of a Papist, and never moved, never forbear the society and
conversation of an Atheist: Which is an argument too evident, that we consider
our selves more then God, and that peace which the Papist endangers, more then
the Atheist, (which is, the peace of the State, and a quiet enjoying our ease)
above the glory of God, which the Atheist wounds, and violates more then the
Papist; The Papist withdraws some of the glory of God, in ascribing it to the
Saints, to themselves, and their own merits, but the Atheist leaves no God to
be glorified. And this use we have of these words, Images, and Teraphim, if
they should have an ill sense in this place, and signify Idols.

But Saint Hierome, and others with him, take these words, in a good sense; to
be the Cherubim, and Palms, and such other representations, as God himself
had ordained in their Temple; and that the Commination falls upon this, That in
some cases, it may be some want, to be without some Pictures in the Church.
So far as they may conduce to a reverend adoring of the place, so far as
they may conduce to a familiar instructing of unlettered people, it may be a
loss to lack them. For, so much Calvin, out of his religious wisdom,
Institut. 1. 11. 7.
is content to acknowledge, Fateor, ut res se habet hodie, etc. I confess, as
the case stands now, (says he) (speaking of the beginning of the Reformation)
there are many that could not be without those Books, (as he calls those
Pictures) because then they had no other way of Instruction; but, that that
might be supplied, if those things which were delivered in picture, to their
eyes, were delivered in Sermons to their ears. And this is true, that where
there is a frequent preaching, there is no necessity of pictures; but will not
every man add this, That if the true use of Pictures be preached unto them,
there is no danger of an abuse; and so, as Remembrancers of that which has
been taught in the Pulpit, they may be retained; And that was one office of the
Holy Ghost himself, That he should bring to their remembrance those things,
which had been formerly taught them. And since, by being taught the right use
of these pictures, in our preaching, no man amongst us, is any more inclined,
or endangered to worship a picture in a Wall or Window of the Church, then if
he saw it in a Gallery, were it only for a reverent adorning of the place,
they may be retained here, as they are in the greatest part of the Reformed
Church, 1^ Eliz. 1559.
and in all that, that is properly Protestant. And though the Injunctions of
our Church, declare the sense of those times, concerning Images, yet they are
wisely and godly conceived; for the second is, That they shall not extol
Images, (which is not, that they shall not set them up) but, (as it follows)
They shall declare the abuse thereof. And when in the 23 Injunction, it is
said, That they shall utterly extinct, and destroy, (amongst other things)
pictures, yet it is limited to such things, and such pictures, as are monuments
of feigned miracles; and that Injuction reaches as well to pictures in private
houses, as in Churches, and forbids nothing in the Church, that might be
retained in the house. For those pernicious Errors, which the Roman Church
has multiplied in this point, not only to make Images of men, which never
were, but to make those Images of men, very men, to make their Images speak,
and move, and weep, and bleed; to make Images of God who was never seen, and to
make those Images of God, very gods; to make their Images do daily miracles;
to transfer the honor due to God, to the Image, and then to encumber
themselves with such ridiculous riddles, and scornful distinctions, as they
do, for justifying unjustifiable, unexcusable, uncolourable enormities, Va
Idololatris, woe to such advancers of Images, as would throw down Christ,
rather then his Image: But Vae Iconeclastis too, woe to such peremptory
abhorrers of Pictures, and to such uncharitable condemners of all those who
admit any use of them, as had rather throw down a Church, then let a Picture
stand. Laying hold upon S. Hieromes exposition, that falls within the Vae, the
Commination of this Text, to be without those Sacrifices, those Ephods, those
Images, as they are outward helps of devotion. And, laying hold, not upon S.
Hierome, but upon Christ himself, who is the God of love, and peace, and
unity, yet falls under a heavy, and insupportable Vae, to violate the peace of
the Church, for things which concern it not fundamentally. Problematicall
things are our silver, but fundamental, our gold; problematicall out sweat,
but fundamental our blood. If our Adversaries would be bought in, with our
silver, with our sweat, we should not be difficult in meeting them half way,
in things, in their nature, indifferent. But if we must pay our Gold, our
Blood, our fundamental points of Religion, for their friendship, A Fortune, a
Liberty, a Wife, a Child, a Father, a Friend, a Master, a Neighbor, a
Benefactor, a Kingdom, a Church, a World, is not worth a dram of this Gold,
a drop of this Blood. Neither will that man, who is truly rooted in this
foundation, redeem an Empoverishing, an Emprisoning, a Dis-inheriting, a
Confining, an Excommunicating, a Deposing, with a dram of this Gold, with a
drop of this Blood, the fundamental Articles of our Religion. Blessed be that
God, who, as he is without change or color of change, has kept us without
change, or color of change, in all our foundations; And he in his time bring
our Adversaries to such a moderation as becomes them, who do truly desire,
that the Church may be truly Catholic, one stock, in one fold, under one
Shepherd, though not all of one color, of one practice in all outward and
disciplinarian points. Amen.

SERMON XLII.
A Sermon Preached in Saint Paul's in the Evening, November 23. 1628.
PROVE. 14. 31. He that oppresses the poor, reprocheth his Maker, but he that
honors him, has mercy on the poor.
Part of the first Lesson, for that Evening Prayer.
THese are such words, as if we were to consider the words only, might make a
Grammar Lecture, and a Logic Lecture, and a Rhetoric and Ethick, a Philosophy
Lecture too; And of these four Elements might a better Sermon then you are
like to hear now, be well made. Indeed they are words of a large, of an
extensive comprehension. And because all the words of the Word of God, are, in
a great measure, so, that invites me to stop a little, as upon a short first
part before the rest, or as upon a long entry into the rest, to consider, not
only the powerfulness of the matter, but the sweetness and elegancy of the
words of the Word of God in general, before I descend to the particular words
of this Text, He that oppresses the poor, etc.

We may justly accommodate those words of Moses, Deuteronomy. 3. 24.
to God the Father, What God is there in Heaven, or in Earth, that can do
according to thy works? And those words of Jeremy, to God the Son, Behold,
and see, if there be any sorrow, like unto my sorrow; And those to the Holy
Ghost which are in Esaias, Lam. 1. 12.
Loquimini, ad Cor, speak to the heart, speak comfortably to my People, And
those of Saint John too, Apoc. 4. 1. 10. 3.
A voice of Thunder, and after, A voice of seven Thunders talking with me:
for, who can do, like the Father, who can suffer like the Son, who can
speak like the Holy Ghost? Eloquia Domini, eloquia casta, Psalm. 12. 6.
says David, The words of the Lord are chaste words, sincere, pure words, no
dross, no profaneness, no such allay mingled with them; for, as it follows
there, They are as silver tried and purified seven times in the fire. They are
as that silver, that is so tried, and they are as that fire that tries it. It
is Castum, a Pure Word in it self, and then it is powerful upon the Hearer
too; Ignitum Eloquium tuum vehementer, says he, Psalm. 119. 140.
Thy word has the vehement operation of fire; and therefore, thy servant
loves it well, as it follows there; Therefore, because it pierces; But
therefore especially, because it carries a sweetness with it. For, the sting
of the Serpent pierces, and the toothe of the Viper pierces, but they carry
venenosam salivam, a venomous and mischievous liquour with them. 103.
But Dulcia faucibus super Mel, Thy words are sweeter to my mouth, then Honey;
Prove. 16. 24.
then Honey it self. For, verba composita, says Solomon, chosen words,
studied, premeditated words, pleasing words, (so we translate it) are as a
Honycombe. Now, in the Honey comb, the Honey is collected and gathered, and
dispensed, and distributed from the Hony-combe, And of this Hony-combe is wax,
wax apt for sealing, derived too. The distribution of this Honey to the
Congregation, The sealing of this Honey to the Conscience, is in the outward
Ordinance of God, and in the labor of the Minister, and his conscionable
fitting of himself for so great a service. But the Hony-Combe is not the Honey,
The gifts of the man, is not the Holy Ghost. Jacob laid this blessing upon his
son Naphtali, Dabit Eloquia pulchritudinis; Genesis 49. 21.
That he should be a well-spoken, and a persuasive man. For, of a defect in
this kind, Moses complained, and so did Esaias, and Jeremy did so too, when
they were to be employed in Gods service, Moses that he was of uncircumcised;
Esaias that he was of unclean lips, and Jeremy that he was a Child, and could
not speak; and therefore this was a Blessing upon Naphtali, that he should be
a well-spoken, and a persuasive man. For so, Moses, after God had farther
enabled him, Deuteronomy. 32. 1.
says, Give ear, O ye Heavens, and I will speak; Hear O Earth, the words
of my mouth, My mouth, says Moses; The Minister of God, that comes with
convenient gifts, and due preparation, may speak such things, as Earth, and
Heaven it self may be content to hear. For, Ephesians. 3. 10.
when Saint Paul says, That to the Principalities, and Powers in Heavenly
places, the manifold wisdom of God, is made known by the Church, that is, by
the Ministry, and Service of the Church, and by that which is done here, we
may congruously and piously believe, that even those Principalities and Powers
in Heavenly places, The Angels of Heaven do hear our Sermons, and hearken how
the glory of God is communicated, and accepted, and propagated through the
Congregation; and as they rejoice at the conversion of a Sinner, so rejoice
also at the means of their Conversion, the powerful, and the congruous
preaching of the Word of God. And therefore, let no man, though an Angel of
the Church, though an Archangell of the Church, Heb. 13. 2.
Bishop or Archbishop, refuse to hear a man of imeriour place, or inferior
parts to himself; neither let any man be discouraged by the fewness or
meannesse of his Hearers: For, as the Apostle says, with relation to Abraham,
Entertain strangers, for thereby some have entertained Angels unawares, so,
preach to all, and that seat that thou think empty, may have Angels in it:
To them is the manifold Wisdom of God made known by the Church, and Angels
are here; here, for the augmentation of their own Joy, in their fresh
knowledge of the propagation of the Kingdom of God, in this Congregation, and
they are here, for their Accusation that are not here, but frivolously and
causelessely absent, or negligently, absently present, if they be here.
Therefore Moses might say, Give ear O ye Heavens, though it be but I, that
speak; And he might add, as he does there, My Doctrine shall drop as the
rain, and my speech shall distll as the dew. And why? Because I will publish
the Name of the Lord, says Moses there; because I will deliver the Messages of
my God to his People.

What though you do, must this be ascribed unto you? no, Moses claims not
that; for when he had said, Give ear, O ye Heavens, (let no man think
himself too high, or too wise to hear me) and called it his Doctrine, and his
speech, because he published the Name of the Lord, yet he transferreth all upon
God himself, He establishes their attentions with that Ascribe ye Greatness
unto our God. It becomes me to make my self as acceptable a messenger as I
can, and to infuse the Word of God into you, as powerfully as I can, but all
that I can do, is but a small matter, the greatness of the work lies in
your Application, and that must proceed from the Word of God it self, quickened
by his Spirit, and therefore Ascribe all Greatness unto our God, for that is
the Honey, whatsoever, or whosoever be the Honycombe. Truly, when I read a
Sermon of Chrysostom, or of Chrysologus, or of Ambrose, Men, who carry in the
very signification of their Names, and in their Histories, the attributes of
Honey mouthed, and Golden-mouthed Men, I find my self oftentimes, more
affected, with the very Citation, and Application of some sentence of
Scripture, in the midst or end of one of their Sermons, then with any witty,
or forcible passage of their own. And that is it, which Saint Hierome does
especially magnify in Saint Paul. After he had said, Quotiescunque lego, non
verba mihi videor, sed tonitrua audire, wheresoever I open Saint Paul's
Epistles, it is not a word or a sentence, but a clappe of Thunder, that flies
out; he adds moreover, Legatis, do but use your selves to the reading of
Saint Paul's Epistles, Videbitis, in testimoniis quae sumit, ex veteri
Testamento, quam Artifex sit, quam prudens, you will easily see how
artificially, how dexterously, how cunningly, and how discreetly he makes his
use of those places which he cites out of the Old Testament; Videntur verba
Innocontis, and rusticani; you would take them says he, sometimes for words
of some plain Countryman, (as some of the Prophets were no other;) But before
Saint Paul have done with those words, Fulmina sunt, and capiunt omne quod
tangunt, he makes you see, that they are flashes of lightning, and that they
possess, and melt, affect and dissolve every soul they touch. And hence it is,
Beloved, that I return so often at home in my private Meditations, that I
present so often to Gods People in these Exercises, this Consideration, That
there are not so exquisite, so elegant Books in the World, as the Scriptures;
neither is any one place a more pregnant example thereof, for the purity and
elegancy, for the force and power, for the largeness and extention of the
words, then these which the Holy Ghost has taken in this Text, He that
oppresses the poor, reproaches his Master, etc. And so we pass from this
first Consideration, The power and Elegancy of the whole word of God, in
general, to the same consideration in these particular words.

The Matter, Divisio.
which in the general is but this, That the poor must be relieved, being a
Doctrine obvious to all; The Manner will rather be our object, at this time: How
the Holy Ghost, by Solomon's hand, has enwrapped this Doctrine, in these words,
How the Omission of this Duty is aggravated, how the performance thereof is
celebrated in this Text, and in the force and elegancies thereof. Man's
perverseness has changed Gods method; God made man good, but in a possibility
of being ill; Now, God finds man ill, but in a possibility of being good. When
man was good, and enabled to continue so, God began with him, with affirmative
Commandments; Commandments that implied liberty and Sovereignty; such as
that, Subjicite and Dominamini, Subdue the Creature, and rule over the
Creature; and he comes not till after, to Negative, to Prohibitive
Commandments, Commandments that imply infirmity, and servility; such as this,
Of this Tree thou shall not eat, upon thy life; this life, and the next, thou
shall not. But now, because God finds man ill, and prone to be worse, God is
feign to change his method, and to begin, and stop him at first with negative,
and prohibitive Commandments. So he does in the thirty fourth Psalm, ver. 14.
(which is also again repeated) first, 1 Pet. 3. 10.
Depart from evil, and then, Do good. For man brings with him something into
the world now, to forget, and to unlearn, before he can take out any new
lesson: Man is so far from being good of himself, as that he must forget
himself, divest himself, forsake himself, before he can be capable of any
good. And such is the method of our Text; Because God sees a natural
declination in man, to abuse his power, to the oppression of inferiors, he
begins with that Prohibition, Oppress not the poor; And then when he has
brought them to that moderation, and that temper, then he carries them farther
toward perfection, to an honoring of God in showing mercy to the poor.

In which method, so disposed into two parts, the fault first, and then the
duty, we shall proceed by these steps; First, in the first, we shall consider
the fault it self, Oppression; which, in general, is an unjust damnifying of
others. And secondly, the specification of the Persons, the Poor; for others,
our Superiors, we may unjustly damnifie too; but that is a fault of another
nature; I should rather call it envy, or emulation, or ambition, or
supplantation, then oppression; and therefore that second branch will fairly
admit a little disquisition, a short comparison of those two kinds of sins,
Whether emulation of superiors, or oppression of inferiors, be in the
nature, and root thereof, the greater sin. In which latter sin, which is
properly the sin of our Text, that is, oppression of the poor, we shall see,
(in a third branch) the iniquity, and heinousness thereof aggravated in this,
that it is said to be a Reproach, a Contumely; and Contumely, and Reproach,
against whomsoever it be bent; has always a venomous, and a mischievous
Nature. But much more here, where it is bent against God himself; and against
God in that supreme, and primary notion, as a Creator, as a Maker, He
reproaches the Maker; But then whose Maker? If I should say I cannot tell, the
words themselves, and the construction thereof, in the variety of the Hebrew
Grammars, would justify mine ignorance, for they will not admit it to be
easily determined, whether it be Factorem ejus, or Factorem suum, whether he
that oppresses the poor, be said to reproach his Maker that is made poor, or
his own Maker: And therefore we shall make our use of both; for both meet to
aggravate the fault; If I oppress the poor, I reproach him that made that
poor man, and made that man poor, and I reproach him that made me. And in
these circumstances, The fault, Oppression; the specification of the Persons,
the Poor; the Problem, the Comparison of the two sins; the Aggravation, as
it is a Reproach, a reproach against God, and God as a Creator, as his Creator,
as my Creator, we shall determine that first part. And when in our order thus
proposed, we shall come to our second Part, which is the recommendation, and
celebration of the Duty it self, To honor God, by showing mercy to the poor,
we shall first consider the persons, the poor; and then the act, to show
mercy to the poor; and lastly the effect, and benefit thereof; for, as the
omission of the duty was aggravated with that, that it was a reproaching of
God, the performance thereof is exalted by this, That it is an honoring of
God. After all which we shall conclude all, with the consideration of that
which is indeed the poorest of all, the sickest, and forest, and saddest, the
feeblest and faintest, the wretchedest, and miserablest thing in the world,
your own souls; and lead you to see, how you do reproach God in oppressing,
how you might honor God in showing mercy to those poor souls of yours. And
this will be the compass, in which I shall lead your devotions for this hour;
this will be the circle, which from this center, relief of the poor, (which
is the sum, and resultance of the Text) and by these poles, the heinousness
of the fault, the happiness of the duty, I shall design unto you.

We proposed at first, to consider our two parts, 1 Part.
the fault, and the duty, in the elegancy of the words chosen by the holy Ghost
here, according to their origination, and extraction, in the nature of the
words, and their latitude and extension, in their use, in other places of
Scripture. That we shall do; and in that way, our first word is oppression;
Gnashak in the Original; and Gnashak, as it does oftentimes signify vim,
violence, and force, so does it often signify dolum, deceit and fraud also: so
that violence and deceit concur in this oppression. And more then they. For
Solomon does not depart from that which he means, Prove. 17. 5.
when he says here, He that oppresses the poor, reproaches his Maker, when he
says in another place, He that macks the poor, reproaches his Maker. So that
now these three, violence, and deceit, and scorn are the elements, the
ingredients that make up this oppression. There is not a more brutish thing
then violence; amongst beasts all goes by force. There is not a more devilish
thing then deceit; the Serpent destroyed us all by that. But man has raised a
degree of oppression, beyond beasts, and their violence, and beyond the devil,
and his falsehood, that is, scorn. For, though the devil oppress man, and hate
man, he does not scorn man; he finds man a considerable enemy. For when he
has thrown a man into the world, oppressed with original sin, that man is
not therefore his; the Sacrament of Baptism frustrates him of that Title. When
he has oppressed him in the world, by actual and habitual sins, that man
is not therefore his, for a worthy receiving of the body and blood of Christ
Jesus frustrates him of that Title. And how weak soever man be in himself,
yet, in Christo omnia possumus, There is one man (and in that one man are all
men, that is, all mankind, enwrapped) who lie open to the Serpent only in his
heel, and the Serpent to him, in his head; and in him, Omnia possumus, in
Christ, the weakest man can do any thing. The Devil could oppress Job with
violence; fire, and sword, and ruin upon his goods, and cattle, and servants,
and children, and himself too. The Devil could oppress him with deceit,
corrupt the wife of his bosom, to tempt him to desperation; but he never came
to scorn Job; for he saw Job did not serve God for naught; Job had good wages,
and God had hedged him, enclosed him, for himself. Scorn is an affection, that
implies such a height above another, as cannot be justified in any but God
himself. Man can oppress by deceit; The Kings of the earth take counsel
together; they study how to circumvent; Psalm. 2. 2.
and man can oppress with violence; there they break bands asunder, and cast
away cords; they will be bound by no laws. But then, it is only God, who
there laughs them to scorn, and has them in derision. Now here, the oppressor
practices the beasts part, he comes to violence, and the Devils part, he comes
to deceit, and he usurps upon Gods part, he comes to that height, as to think
he may scorn and contemn. And whom? for that is our next consideration; he
oppresses the poor, he treads down the poor; him that was dust before, he
treads into dirt, macerated with his own sweat, his own tears, his own blood.
He oppresses him with deceit; the credulous and confident wretch, who, because
he is harmless in himself, is fearelesse of others, he betrays, he
circumvents. And he oppresses with scorn; him whom poverty has made the
subject of pity and of prayers, he makes the anvile of scorn and of jeasts.
For, so far, our first word, Gnashak, carries his signification and our
meditation, he oppresses by violence, by deceit, by scorn, brutishly,
devillishly, and more, (which is the qualification of the fault, and was our
first consideration) and all this upon the poor, (which is the specification
of the persons, and is our second.)

You see who this oppressor is, and how you may know him; you have his marks;
Violence, deceit, scorn. Pauper.
But who is this poor man, and how shall you know him? How shall you know,
whether he that asks be truly poor or no? Truly, beloved, there is scarce any
one thing, in which our ignorance is more excusable then in this, To know
whether he to whom we give, be truly poor, or no: In no case is our
inconsideration more pardonable, then in this. God will never examine me very
strictly, why I was no stricter in examining that man's condition to whom I gave
mine alms. If I give to one that is poor in my sight, I shall find that alms
upon Gods score, amongst them, who were poor in Gods sight: And my mistaking
the man, shall never make God mistake my meaning. Where I find undeniable,
unresistible evidence to the contrary, when I see a man able in his limbs live
in continual idleness, when I see a man poor in his means, and oppressed
with his charge, spend in continual drunkenness, in this case, I were the
oppressor of the poor, Apoc. 22. 1^.
if I should give to that man, for this were to give the childrens bread to
dogs. And that is not a name too bad for them; for, foris Canes, they are dogs
that are without, that is, without the Church: And how few of these, who make
beggary an occupation from their infancy, were ever within Church, how few of
them ever Christened, or ever married? Foris Canes, they are dogs, that are
without; and the Childrens bread must not be given to Dogs. But to pursue our
first intention, and so to find out these poor in the origination of the words
chosen by the holy Ghost here, we have in this text two words for the poor. One
is Ebion; and Ebion is a beggar. It was the name given to one of those first
heretics who occasioned the writing of St. John's Gospel; he was called
Ebion. So that it may well be imagined, that those first Heretics were
Mendicants: Men that professed begging, and lived upon the labors, and sweat
of other men. For the Ebionit is a beggar; not only he that needs, but he that
declares his need, that asks, that craves, that begs: for, the root of Ebion
is Ahab; which is not only to desire, but to declare that desire, to ask, to
crave, to beg. Now, this poor man must be relieved. The charity that God
required in Israel, was, Deuteronomy. 15. ^. 22. 16.
that no man should be put to this necessity, but provided for otherwise; There
shall be no beggar amongst you; for, there is our very word, no Ebionite; that
is, no poor man shall be put to beg. But yet in the Prophet Jeremy, that man is
well spoken of, that did good even to the Ebionit, to the beggar; he that is
brought to a necessity of asking, must be relieved. Not that we are not bound
to give, till another ask, or never to open our hand, till another open his
mouth; for, as Saint John did, in the beginning of the Revelation, a man may
see a sound, see a voice. A sad aspect, a pale look, a hollow cheek, a
bloudlesse lip, a sonke eye, a trembling hand, speak so loud, as that if I
will not hear them from him, God will hear them against me. In many cases,
and with many persons, it is a greater anguish to ask, then to want; and
easier to starve, then to beg; therefore I must hearken after another voice,
and with another organ; I must hearken with mine eye. Many times I may see need
speak, when the needy man says nothing, and his case may cry aloud, when he is
silent. Therefore I must lay mine ear to the ground, and hearken after them
that lie in the dust, and enquire after the distresses of such men; for this is
an imitation of Gods preventing grace, that grace, then which we can conceive
no higher thing in God himself, (that God should be found of them, that seek
him not) if I relieve that man, that was ashamed to tell me he wanted. The
Ebionit the beggar, but not he only, must be relieved: for our word, in this
part of the text, is not Ebion, but a word derived from Dalal; and Dalal, in
this word, signifies Exhaustum, attenuatum, a man whose former estate is
exhausted, and gone, or whose present labors do not prosper, but that God,
for ends best known to himself, exercises him with continual poverty; the
word signifies also a man enfeebled, and decrepit with age; and more then that,
Esaias 38. 11.
the word signifies sickness too: for this very word we have in Hezekiahs
mouth, The Lord will cut me off with sickness. So that now you have the
specification of the person, who is the poor man, that is most properly the
object of your charity, he whose farmer estate is wasted, and not by his vices,
but by the hand of God, He whose present industry does not prosper, He who is
overtaken with Age, and so the less able to repair his wants, and in his age,
afflicted with sickness, and so the less able to endure his wants. And this
poor man, this laboring man, this decayed man, this aged man, this sickly man,
this oppressor in our text pursues; and pursues with violence, with deceit,
with scorn. And so have you the qualification of the fault, (which was our
first) and the specification of the persons, which was our second consideration.

But before we depart from this branch, Problema.
I remember, I asked leave at first, only to stir this consideration, only
to propound this Problem, only to ask this question, whether Envy, and
Emulation, and supplantation of Superiors, or this oppression, and conculcation
of Inferiors in this kind, were in the nature, and root thereof, the greater
sin; and surely the sentence, and the Judgment will be against this
oppressor of the poor. For, Envy, conceived against a man in place, has
evermore some emulation of those gifts, which enable a man for that place.
Whosoever labors to supplant another, that he may succeed, will in some
measure endeavor to be fit for that succession. So that, though it be but a
squint-eye, and not a direct look, yet some eye, some aspect, the envious man
has upon virtue. Besides, he that envies a higher person, he does not practice
(as the Poet says) sine talione; He deals with a man that can be at full even
with him, and can deal as ill with him. But he that oppresses the poor, digs
in a dunghill for worms; And he departs from that posture, which God, in
nature gave him, that is, erect, to look upward; for his eye is always down,
upon them, that lie in the dust, under his feet. Certainly, he that seares up
himself, and makes himself insensible of the cries, and curses of the poor
here in this world, does but prepare himself for the howlings, and gnashings
of teeth, in the world to come. It is the Serpents taste, the Serpents diet,
Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life; and he feeds but on dust, that
oppresses the poor. And as there is evidently, more inhumanity, more violation
of nature, in this oppression, then in emulation, so may there well seem to be
more impiety, and more violation of God himself, by that word, which the holy
Ghost chooses in the next place, which is Reproach, He that oppresses the poor,
reproaches his Maker.

This word, Reproach.
which we translate to Reproach, Theodotion translates to Blaspheme: And
blasphemy is an odious thing, even toward men. For, men may be blasphemed. The
servant of God, Act. 6. 11. 1 Chronicles. 20.
Moses, is blasphemed, as well as God: And Goliath blasphemed the Israel of God,
as well as the God of Israel; and, for the most part, where we read Reviling,
the word is Blaspheming. Our word here, (that we may still pursue our first
way, a reverent consideration of the elegancy of the Scriptures, in the
origination of the words) is Charak; and this word Job uses, as it is used in
our text, for reproach, My heart shall not reproach me, so long as I live. 27.
6.
And this, this reproaching of the heart, is, in many cases, a Blaspheming, and
a strange one, a self-blaspheming. When I have had, by the goodness of Gods
Spirit, a true sense of my sins, a true remorse, and repentance of those
sins, true Absolution from those sins, true seals of reconciliation after
those sins, true diligence, and preclusion of occasions of relapsing into
those sins, still to suspect my state in Gods favor, and my full
redintegration with him, still to deny my self that peace, which his Spirit,
by these means, offers me, still to call my repentance imperfect, and the
Sacramental seals ineffectuall, still to accuse my self of sins, thus
divested, thus repented, this is to reproach, this is to to blaspheme mine own
soul. If I will say with Job, My heart shall reproach me of nothing, this is
not, that I will accuse my self of no sin, or say, the elect of God cannot
sin, no, nor that God sees not the sins of the elect, nor that God is not
affected, or angry with those sins, and those sinners, as long as they
remain unrepented, but after I have accused my self of those sins, and
brought them into Judgment, by way of Confession, and received my pardon under
seal, in the Sacrament, and pleaded that pardon, to the Church, by a
subsequent amendment of life, then I reproach my self of nothing, for this
were a self-blaspheming, and a reproaching of mine own soul. Now, the word of
our text, in the root thereof, Charak, is manifestare; prostituere; It is to
publish the fault, or to prostitute the fame of any man, extrajudicially, not
in a right form of Judgment, and amongst those men, who are not to be his
Judges. So to fill itching ears with rumors, and whisperings, so to minister
matter and fuel to fiery tongues, so to lay imputations, and aspersions upon
men, though that which we say, of those men, be true, is a libelling, is a
calumny, is a blaspheming and a reproach, in the word of this text: for it is
manifestare, prostituere, to publish a man's faults, and to prostitute a man's
fame, there, where his faults can receive no remedy, if they be true, nor his
fame Reparation, if they be false. It is properly, to speak ill of a man, and
not before a competent Judge. And in such a sense, a man may reproach God
himself.

But is there then a Judge between God and man? Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? is Abraham's question; Deus. Genesis 18. 25.
but there, that Judge of all the earth, is God himself. But is there a Judge
of heaven too? A Judge between God and man, for Gods proceeding there? There
is. The Scripture is a Judge, by which God himself will be tried. As the Law is
our Judge, and the Judge does but declare what is Law, so the Scripture is our
Judge, and God proceeds with us according to those promises and Judgments,
which he has laid down in the Scripture. Esaias 9. 3.
When God says in Esaias, Judge between me and my Vineyard, certainly, God means
that there is something extant, some contract, some covenant, something that
has the nature of a Law, some visible, some legible thing, to judge by. And
Christ tells us what that is; Search the Scriptures. says he; for, by them we
must be tried for our lives. So then, if I come to think that God will call
me in question for my life, for my eternal life, by any way that has not the
Nature of a Law, (And, by the way, it is of the Nature and Essence of a Law,
before it come to bind, that it be published) if I think that God will condemn
me, by any unrevealed will, any reserved purpose in himself, this is to
reproach God, in the word of this Text, for it is prostituere, to prostitute,
to exhibit God, otherwise then he has exhibited himself, and to charge God
with a proceeding upon secret and unrevealed purposes, and not rest in his
Scriptures. God will try us at last, God himself will be tried all the way by
his Scriptures; And to charge God with the damnation of men, otherwise then by
his Tantummodo Creed, I have commanded thee to believe, and thou have not done
that, And by his Fac hoc and vives, I have commanded thee, to live well, and
thou have not done that, which are conditions evidently laid down in the
Scriptures, and not grounded upon any secret purpose, is a reproaching of God,
in the word of this Text.

This, Factorem.
this Oppressor of the poor is said to do here; He reproaches the Maker; God,
in that notion, as he is the Creator. Now this is the clearest notion, and
fastest apprehension, and first handle that God puts out to man, to lay hold
upon him by, as he is The Creator. For though God did elect me, before he
did actually create me, yet God did not mean to elect me, before he meant to
create me; when his purpose was upon me, to elect me, surely his purpose had
passed upon me, to create me; for when he elected me, I was I. So that this is
our first notion of God toward us, as he is The Creator. The School will
receive a pregnant child from his parents, and work upon him; The University
will receive a grounded Scholar from the School, and work upon him; The State,
or the Church, will receive a qualified person from the University, and work
by him. But still the State, and the Church, and the University, and the first
School it self, had something to work upon; But God, in the Creation, had
nothing at all: He called us when we were not, as though we had been. Now, here
is this world, we make our selves; that is, we make one another: Kings make
Judges, and Judges make Officers: Bishops make Parsons, and Parsons make
Curats: But when we consider our Creation, It is he that has made us, and not
we our selves; we did not only not do any thing, but we could not do so much
as wish any thing to be done, toward our Creation, till we were created. In
the Application of that great work, The Redemption of mankind, that is, in
the conversion of a sinner, and the first act of that conversion, though the
grace of God work all, yet there is a faculty in man, a will in man, which is
in no creature but man, for that grace of God to work upon; But in the
Creation there was nothing at all. I honor my Physician, upon the reasons that
the Wise man assigns; Ecclus. 38. 7.
because he assists my health, and my well-beeing; But I honor not my
Physician with the same honor as my Father, who gave me my very Being. I
honor my God in all those notions, in which he has vouchsafed to manifest
himself to me; Every particular blessing of his is a Remembrancer; but my
Creation is a holy wonder, and a mysterious amazement. And therefore, as David,
the Father, wraps up all stubborn ignorance of God, in that, The fool has said
in his heart, there is no God; so Solomon, the Son, Eccles. 12. 1.
wraps up all knowledge of God in that, Remember thy Creator; still contemplate
God in that notion, as he made thee of nothing, for, upon that, all his other
additions depend. And when thou come to any post-Creations, any after-makings
in this world, to be made rich, made wise, made great, Praise thou the Lord,
bless him, and magnify him for ever, for those Additions, and bless him for
having made thee capable of those Additions, by something conferred upon thee
before, That he gave thee a patrimony from thy parents, and thine industry
working upon that, made thee rich; That he raised thee to Riches, and the Eye
of the State looking upon that, made thee Honorable; But still return to thy
first making, thy Creation, as thou wast made of nothing, nothing; so low, as
that not sin it self, not sin against the holy Ghost himself can cast thee so
low again; nothing can make thee nothing; nothing that thou can do here,
nothing that thou can suffer hereafter, can reduce thee to nothing. And in
this notion, this supreme, and Majesticall notion, does this oppressor of the
poor reproach God; He reproaches the Maker. But then, whose Maker? for that is
also another branch, another Disquisition.

Here we accept willingly, Ejus.
and entertain usefully their doubt, that will not resolve, whether our
Gnoshehu in the Text, be Factore^ Ejus, or Factore^ Suum; whether this
oppressor of the poor be said here to reproach his Maker, that is made poor, or
his own Maker. Let them enjoy their doubt; Be it either; Be it both. First, let
it be the poor Man's Maker, And then, does this oppressor consider, that it is
God that has made that poor man, or that has made that man poor, and will he
oppress him then? If a man of those times, had heard a song of Nero's making,
and had been told that it was his, (as that Emperor delighted in compositions
of that kind) he would not, he durst not have said, that it was a harsh, an
untunable song. If a man saw a Clock or a Picture of his Princes making, (as
some Princes have delighted themselves with such manufactures) he would not,
he durst not say, it was a disorderly Clock, or a disproportioned picture. Wise
Fathers have foolish children, and beautiful, deformed; yet we do not
oppress, nor despise those children, if we loved their parents; nor will we
any poor man, if we truly love that God, that made him poor; And, if his
poverty be not of Gods making, but of the Devils, induced by his riot and
wastfulnesse, howsoever the poverty may be the Devils, still the Man is of Gods
making.

Probris afficit factorem ejus, Suum.
He reproaches Him that made that man poor, and Probris afficit factorem suum,
He reproaches that God who made him rich, his own Maker. Now, does he
consider, that the Devil has super-induced a half-lycantropy upon him, The
Devil has made him half a wolf, so much a wolf as that he would tear all
that fall into his power, And half a spider, so much a spider, as that he
would entangle all that come near him, And half a Viper, so much a Viper, as
that he would envenome all that any way provoke him. Does he consider that the
Devil has made him half a wolf, half a spider, half a viper, and does he
not consider that that God that is his Maker, could have made him a whole
Wolf, a whole Spider, a whole Viper, and left him in that rank of ignoble, and
contemptible, and mischievous creatures? Does he not consider, that that God
that made him richer then others, can make him a prey to others, and raise up
enemies, that shall bring him to confusion, though he had no other crimes,
Therefore, because he is so rich? God can make his very riches the occasion of
his ruin here, and the occasion of his everlasting ruin hereafter, by making
those riches snares and occasions of sin. God who has made him, could have
left him unmade; or made him what he would; and he reproaches God, as though
God could have done nothing less for him, then he has done, nor could not
undone him now. But, before we depart from this branch, consider we wherein
this offender, this oppressor, sins so very hainously, as to deserve so high an
increpation, as to be said to Reproach, and to Reproach God, and God in that
supreme Notion, A Maker, His Maker, and his own Maker. If his fault be but
neglecting or oppressing a poor man, why should it deserve all this? In all
these respects.

First, In Orphanis.
The poor are immediately in Gods protection. Rich and poor are in Gods
administration, in his government, in his providence; But the poor are
immediately in his protection. Tibi derelictus est pauper, Ps. 10. 14.
says David, The poor commits himself unto thee. They are Orphans, Wards,
delivered over to his tuition, to his protection. Princes have a care of all
their Allies, but a more especial care of those that are in their protection.
And the poor are such; And therefore God more sensible in their behalf. And
so, he that oppresses the poor, Reproaches God, God in his Orphans.

Again, In Imagine.
rich and poor are Images, Pictures of God; but, (as Clement of Alexandria says
wittily and strongly) The poor is Nuda Imago, a naked picture of God, a picture
without any drapery, any clothes about it. And it is much a harder thing, and
there is much more art showed in making a naked picture, then in all the rich
attire that can be put upon it. And howsoever the rich man, that is invested in
Power, and Greatness, may be a better picture of God, of God considered in
himself, who is all Greatness, all Power, yet, of God considered in Christ,
(which is the contemplation that concerns us most) the poor man is the better
picture, and most resembles Christ who lived in continual poverty. And so, he
that oppresses the poor, reproaches God, God in his Orphans, God in his Picture.

Saint Augustine carries this consideration farther, In Corpore.
then that the poor is more immediately Gods Orphan, and more perfectly his
picture, That he is more properly a member of himself, of his body. For,
contemplating that head, which was not so much crowned as hedged with thorns,
that head, of which, he whose it was, says, The Son of man has not where to
lay his head, Matthew. 8. 19.
Saint Augustine says, Ecce caput Panperum, Behold that head, to which, the
poor make up the body, Ob eam tantum causam venerabiles, says that Father,
Therefore venerable, therefore honorable, because they are members suitable to
that head. And so, all that place, where the Apostle says, That upon those
members of the body, which we think to be less honorable, we bestow most
honor, 1 Cor. 12. 23.
that Father applies to the poor, that therefore most respect and honor
should be given to them, because the poor are more suitable members to their
head Christ Jesus, then the rich are. And so also, he that oppresses the poor
reproaches God, God in his Orphans, God in his Image, God in the Members of his
own body.

Saint Chrysostom carries this consideration farther then this of Saint
Augustine. That whereas every creature has filiationem vestigii, In Haeredibus.
that because God has imparted a being, an essence, from himself, who is the
root, and the fountain of all essence, and all being, therefore every
creature has a filiation from God, and is the Son of God so, as we read in
Job, God is the father of the rain; and whereas every man has filiationem
imaginis, as well Pagan as Christian, has the Image of God imprinted in his
soul, and so has a filiation from God, and is the Son of God, as he is made
in his likeness; and whereas every Christian has filiationem Pacti, by being
taken into the Covenant made by God, with the Elect, and with their seed, he
has a filiation from God, and is the Son of God, as he is incorporated into
his Son Christ Jesus, by the Seals of the Christian Church; besides these
filiations, of being in all creatures, of the Image in all men, of the Covenant
in all Christians, The poor, says that Father, are not only filii, but
Haeredes, and Primogeniti, Sons and eldest Sons, Sons, and Sons and
Heirs. And to that purpose he makes use of those words in St. James, 2. 5.
Hearken, my beloved brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world,
rich in faith, and Heirs of that Kingdom? Heirs, Mat. 5. 3.
for, Ipsorum est, says Christ himself, Theirs is the Kingdom of heaven; And
upon those words of Christ, Saint Chrysostom comments thus, Divites ejus
regnitantum habent, quantum a pauperibus, eleemosynis coemerunt, The rich have
no more of that Kingdom of heaven, then they have purchased of the poor, by
their alms, and other erogations to pious uses. And so he that oppresses the
poor reproaches God, God in his Orphans, God in his Image, God in the Members
of his own Body, God in his Sons, and Heirs of his Kingdom.

But then Christ himself carries his consideration, In Seipso. Mat. 25. 40.
beyond all these resemblances, and conformities, not to a proximity only, but
to an identity, The poor are He. In as much as you did it unto these, you did
it unto me; and, In as much as you did it not unto these, you did it not unto
me. And after his ascension, and establishing in glory, still he avowed them,
not only to be his, but to be He, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? The
poor are He, He is the poor. And so, he that oppresses the poor, reproaches
God, God in his Orphans, God in his Image, God in the Members of his own Body,
God in the Heirs of his Kingdom, God in himself, in his own person. And so we
have done with all those pieces, which constitute our first part, the
heinousness of the fault, in the elegancy of the words chosen by the holy
Ghost, in which you have seen, The fault it self, Oppression, and the
qualification thereof, by the marks, Violence, Deceit, and Scorn. And then the
specification of the persons, The poor, as he is the Eb^onite, the very vocal
beggar, and as the word is Dalal, a decayed, an aged, a sickly man; And in that
branch, you have also had that Problem, Whether aemulation of higher, or
oppression of lower, be the greater sin: And then, the aggravation of this
sin, in those weights, That it is a reproach, a reproach of God, of God as
The Maker, as His Maker whom he oppresses, and as his own Maker; And lastly, in
what respects especially this increpation is laid upon him. And farther we have
no occasion to carry that first part, the fault.

In passing from that first part, the fault, to the duty, and the celebration
thereof, 2 Part.
in those words of choice elegancy, He that has mercy on the poor, honors
God, though we be to look upon the persons, the poor, and the act, showing
mercy to the poor, and the benefit, honoring of God, yet, of the persons,
(who are still the same poor, poor, made poor by God, rather then by
themselves) more needs not be said, then has been said already. And of the
act, showing of mercy to the poor, only thus much more needs be said, that
the word, in which, the holy Ghost expresses this act here, is the very same
word, Exodus 33. 19.
in which, he expresses the free mercy of God himself, Miserebor cujus
miserebor, I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will show mercy
to whom I will show mercy. So that God has made the charitable man partaker
with himself, in his own greatest attribute, his power of showing mercy. And
then, left any man should think, that he had no interest in this great
dignity, that God had given him no means to partake of this attribute of God,
this power of showing mercy to the poor, because he had left him poor too, and
given him nothing to give, the same word, which the holy Ghost uses in this
text, 1 Reg. 8.
and in Exodus, for mercy, which is Canan, he uses in other places,
particularly in the dedication of the Temple, for prayer. So that he, who being
destitute of other means to relieve the poor, prays for the poor, is
thereby made partaker of this great attribute of Gods, this power of showing
mercy. He has showed mercy to the poor, if, having nothing to give, he have
given mild and confortable words, and have prayed to his abundant, and
inexhaustible God, to relieve that poor man, whom he has not made him able to
relieve.

So then, Honorat Detem.
no more being needful to be said, of the persons, the poor, nor of the Act,
showing of mercy to the poor, there remains no more in this last part, but
according to our way, all the way, to consider the origination and latitude of
this last word, Cahad, this honoring of God. The word does properly signify
Augere, ampliare, To enlarge God, to amplify, to dilate God; to make infinite
God, shall I dare to say, more God? certainly, God to more, then he was
before. O who can express this abundant, this superabundant largeness of Gods
goodness to man, that there is a power put into man's hands, to enlarge God, to
dilate, to propagate, to amplify God himself! I will multiply this people,
Ier. 30. 19.
says God, and they shall not be few, I will glorify them, and they shall not
be small; there is the word of our text. God enables me to glorify him, to
amplify him, to increase him, by my mercy, my alms. For this is not only
that increase, that Saint Hierom intends, that he that has pity on the poor,
Foeneratur Domino, he lends upon use to the Lord, Prove. 19. 17.
for, this, though it be an increase, is but an increase to himself; but he
that shows mercy to the poor, increases God, says our text, dilates, enlarges
God. How? Heb. 10. 5.
Corpus aptasti mihi; when Christ comes into the world, (says Saint Paul) he
says to his Father, Thou have prepared and fitted a body for me. That was his
natural body, that body which he assumed in the bowels of the blessed Virgin.
They that pretend to enlarge this body by multiplication, by making millions of
these bodies in the Sacraments, by the way of Transubstantiation, they do not
honor this body, whose honor is to sit in the same dimensions, and
circumscriptions, at the right hand of God. But then, as at his coming into
this world, God had fitted him a body, so in the world, he had fitted himself
another body, a Mystical body, a Church purchased with his blood. Now this
body, this Mystical body I feed, I enlarge, I dilate, and amplify, by my
mercy, Ezekiel. 16. 1.
and my charity. For, as God says to Jerusalem, Thou wast in thy blood, thou
wast not salted, nor swadled, no eye pityed thee, but thou wast cast out into
the open field, and I loved thee, I washed thee, I apparelled and adorned thee,
and prosperataes in regnum, I never gave thee over, till I saw thee an
established kingdom: so may all those Saints of God say to God himself, to
the Son of God invested in this body, this mystical body, the Church, thou
was cast out into the open field, all the world persecuted thee, and then we
gave thee suck with our blood, we clothed thee with our bodies, we built thee
houses and adorned and endowed those houses to thine honor, and prosperatus es
in regnum, we never gave over spending, and doing, and suffering for thy glory,
till thou had an established kingdom, over all the earth. And so thou, thy
body, thy mystical body, the Church, is honored, that is, amplified, dilated,
enlarged, by our mercy. Magnificat Anima mea Dominum, was the exultation of the
blessed Virgin; My soul does magnify the Lord. When the meditations of my
heart, digested into writing, or preaching, or any other declaration of Gods
glory, carry, or advance the knowledge of God, in other men, then My soul does
magnify the Lord, enlarge, dilate, amplify God. But when I relieve any poor
wretch, of the household of the faithful, with mine alms, then my mercy
magnifies the Lord, occasions him that receives, to magnify the Lord by this
thanksgiving, and them that see it to magnify the Lord by their imitation, in
the like works of mercy. And so far, do these two elegant words chosen here by
the holy Ghost, carry our meditation: in the first, Canan, God makes the
charitable man partaker of his own highest power, mercy; and in the other
Cabad, God enables us, by this mercy, to honor him so far, as to dilate, to
enlarge, to amplify him, that is that body, which he in his Son, has
invested by purchase, his Church.

We have done; Conclusic.
If you will but claspe up all this in your own bosoms, if you will but lay
it to your own hearts, you may go. A poorer thing is not in the world, nor a
sicker, (which you may remember to have been one signification of this word
poor) then thine own soul. And therefore the Chalde paraphrase renders this
text thus, He that oppresses the poor reproaches his own soul; for, his own
soul is as poor, as any whom he can oppress. To a beggar, that needs, and
asks but bodily things, thou will say, Alas poor soul; and will thou never
say Alas poor soul to thy self, that need spiritual things? If thy
affections, thy pleasures, thy delights, beg of thee, and importune thee so
far, to bestow upon them, say unto them, I have those that are nearer me then
you, Wife and Children, and I must not empoverith them, to give unto you, I
must not sterve my family, to feed my pleasures. But if this Wife and Children
beg, and importune so far, say unto them too, I have one that is nearer me,
then all you, a soul; and I must not endanger that, to satisfy you; I must
not provide Ioyntures, and Portions with the damnifying, with the damning of
mine own soul. It is a miserable Alchimy and extracting of spirits, that
stills away the spirit, the soul it self; and a poor Philosophers Stone,
that is made with the coals of Hellfire; a lamentable purchase, when the
soul is paid for the land. And therefore show mercy to this soul. Do not
oppress this soul; not by Violence, which was the first signification of this
word Oppression: Do not violate, do not smother, not strangle, not suffocate
the good motions of Gods Spirit in thee^ for, it is but a woeful victory, to
triumph over thine own conscience, and but a servile greatness to be able to
silence that. Oppress not thy soul by Fraud, which was the second
signification of this word Oppression. Defraud not thy soul of the benefit of
Gods Ordinances; frequent these exercises; come hither; And be not here like
Gideons fleece, dry when all about it was wet; parched in a remorselesnesse
when all the Congregation about thee is melted into holy tears; Be not as
Gideons fleece dry, when all else is wet, nor as that fleece, wet when all
about it was dry: Be not jealous of God, stand not here as a person
unconcerned, disinteressed; as though those gracious promises, which God is
pleased to shed down upon the whole Congregation, from this place, appertained
not to thee, but that all those Judgments denounced here, over which, they
that stand by thee, are able, by a faithful and cheerful laying hold of Gods
offers, though they stand guilty of the same sins that thou do, to lift up
their heads, must still necessarily overflow and surround thee. Oppress not
that soul, by violence, by Fraud, nor by Scorn, which was the other
signification of this word Oppression. Hoc nos perdit, Chrysoft.
quod divina quoque eloquia in facetias, in dicteria vertamus. Damnation is a
serious thing, and this aggravates it, that we slight and make jests at that
which should save us, the Scriptures, and the Ordinances of God. For by this
oppression of thy poor soul, by this Violence, this Fraud, this Scorn, thou will come to Reproach thy Maker, to impute that loss of thy soul, which thou
have incurred by often breach of Laws evidently manifested to thee; to his
secret purpose, and un-revealed will; then which, thou can not put a greater
Reproach, a greater Contumely, a greater Blasphemy upon God. For, God cannot
be God, if he be not innocent, nor innocent if he draw blood of me, for
his own Act. But if thou show mercy to this soul, mercy in that signification
of the word, as it denotes an actual performance of those things that are
necessary for the making sure of thy salvation, or, if thou can not yet
attain to those degrees of Sanctification, mercy in that signification of the
word, as the word denotes hearty and earnest Prayer, that thou could, Lord I
believe, Lord help mine unbelief, Lord I stand yet, yet Lord raise me when I
fall, Honorabis Deum, thou shall honor God, in the sense of the word in this
Text, thou shall enlarge God, amplify, dilate God, that is, the Body of God,
the Church, both here, and hereafter. For, thou shall add a figure to the
number of his Saints, and there shall be a Saint the more for thee; Thou shall
add a Theme of Joy, to the Exultation of the Angels; They shall have one
occasion of rejoicing the more from thee: Thou shall add a pause, a stop to
that Vsquequo of the Martyrs, under the Altar, who solicit God for the
Resurrection, for, Thou shall add a step to the Resurrection it self, by
having brought it so much nearer, as to have done thy part for the filling up
of the number of the Saints, upon which fullness the Resurrection shall follow.
And thou shall add a Voice, to that Old, and ever-new Song, that Catholic
Hymn, in which, both Churches, Apoc. 5. 13.
Militant and Triumphant, shall join, Blessing, Honor, Glory, and Power, be
unto him, that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb, for ever, and ever.
Amen.

SERMON XLIII.
A Sermon upon the fist of November. 1622. being the Anniversary celebration of
our Deliverance from the Powder Treason.
Intended for Paul's Cross, but by reason of the weather, Preached in the
Church.
LAMENT. 4. 20. The breath of our nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord, was taken
in their pits.
The Prayer before the Sermon.
O LORD open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise; for thou,
O Lord, did make haste to help us, Thou, O Lord, did make speed to save us.
Thou that sit in heaven, did not only look down, to see what was done
upon the Earth, but what was done in the Earth; and when the bowels of the
Earth, were, with a key of fire, ready to open and swallow us, the bowels of
thy compassion, were, with a key of love, opened to succor us; This is the
day, and these are the hours, wherein that should have been acted: In this our
Day, and in these hours, We praise thee, O God, we acknowledge thee, to be
the Lord; All our Earth does worship thee; The holy Church throughout all this
Land, does knowledge thee, with commemorations of that great mercy, now in
these hours. Now, in these hours, it is thus commemorated, in the Kings
House, where the Head and Members praise thee; Thus, in that place, where it
should have been perpetrated, where the Reverend Judges of the Land do now
praise thee; Thus, in the Universities, where the tender youth of this Land, is
brought up to praise thee, in a detestation of their Doctrines, that plotted
this; Thus it is commemorated in many several Societies, in many several
Parishes, and thus, here, in this Mother Church, in this great Congregation of
thy Children, where, all, of all sorts, from the Lieutenant of thy Lieutenant,
to the meanest son of thy son, in this Assembly, come with hearts, and
lips, full of thankesgiving: Thou Lord, openest their lips, that their
mouth may show forth thy praise, for, Thou, O Lord, did make haste to help
them, Thou did make speed to save them. Accept, O Lord, this Sacrifice, to
which thy Spirit gives fire; This of Praise, for thy great Mercies already
afforded to us, and this of Prayer, for the continuance, and enlargement of
them, upon the Catholic Church, by them, who pretend themselves the only
sons thereof; dishonored this Day; upon these Churches of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, shaked and threatened dangerously this Day; upon thy servant, our
Sovereign, for his Defense of the true Faith, designed to ruin this day; upon
the Prince, and others derived from the same root, some but Infants, some not
yet Infants, enwrapped in dust, and annihilation, this day; upon all the
deliberations of the Counsel, That in all their Consultations, they may have
before their eyes, the Record and Registers of this Day; upon all the Clergy,
That all their Preaching, and their Government, may preclude, in their
several Jurisdictions, all re-entrances of that Religion, which, by the
Confession of the Actours themselves, was the only ground of the Treason of
this day; upon the whole Nobility, and Commons, all involved in one Common
Destruction, this Day; upon both our Universities, which though they lack no
Arguments out of thy Word, against the Enemies of thy Truth, shall never leave
out this Argument out of thy Works, The History of this Day; And upon all
those, who are any ways afflicted, That our afflictions be not multiplied
upon us, by seeing them multiplied amongst us, who would have diminished thee,
and annihilated us, this Day; And lastly, upon this Auditory assembled here,
That till they turn to ashes in the Grave, they may remember, that thou
tookest them, as firebrarnds out of the fire, this Day.

Hear us, O Lord, and hearken to us, Receive our Prayers, and return them
with Effect, for his sake, in whose Name and words, we make them:

Our Father which art, etc.

The SERMON.
OF the Author of this Book, I think there was never doubt made; but yet,
that is scarce safely done, which the Council of Trent does, in that Canon,
which numbers the Books of Canonical Scriptures, to leave out this Book of
Lamentations. For, though I make no doubt, but that they had a purpose to
comprehend, and involve it, in the name of Jeremy, yet that was not enough; for
so they might have comprehended and involved, Genesis, and Deuteronomie, and
all between those two, in one name of Moses; and so they might have
comprehended, and involved, the Apocalypse, and some Epistles in the name of
John, and have left out the Book it self in the number. Castro.
But one of their own Jesuits, though some, (whom in that Canon they seem to
follow) make this Book of Lamentations, but an Appendix to the Prophecy of
Jeremy, determines, for all that Canon, that it is a distinct Book. Indeed, if
it were not, the first Chapter would have been called, the 53 of Jeremy, and
not the first of the Lamentations. But that which gives most assuredness, is,
That in diverse Hebrew Bibles, it is placed otherwise, then we place it, and
not presently, and immediately after the Prophecy of Jeremy, but discontinued
from him, though he were never doubted to be the Author thereof.

The Book is certainly the Prophet Ieremies, and certainly a distinct book,
But whether the Book be a history, or a Prophecy, whether Jeremy lament that
which he had seen, or that which he foresees, calamities past, or future
calamities, things done, or things to be done, is a question which has
exercised, and busied diverse Expositors. But, as we say of the Parable of
Dives, and Lazarus, that it is a Historical parable, and a Parabolicall
history, some such persons there were, and some such things were really done,
but some other things were figuratively, symbolically, parabolically added: So
we say of Ieremies Lamentation, It is a Prophetical history, and a
Historical prophecy; Some of the sad occasions of these Lamentations were
past, when he writ, and some were to come after: for, we may not despise the
testimony of the Chalde Paraphrasts, who were the first that illustrated the
Bible, in that Nation, nor of S. Hierome, who was much conversant with the
Bible, and with that Nation, nor of Josephus, who had justly so much estimation
in that Nation, nor of those later Rabbis, who were the learnedest of that
Nation; who are all of opinion, that Jeremy writ these Lamentations, after he
saw some declinations in that State, in the death of Josiah, and so the Book is
Historical, but when he only foresaw their transportation into Babylon,
before that calamity fell upon them, and so it is Prophetical. Or, if we take
the exposition of the others, That the whole Book was written after their
transportation into Babylon, and to be, in all parts, Historical, yet it is
Prophetical still; for the Prophet laments a greater Desolation then that, in
the utter ruin, and devastation of the City, and Nation, which was to fall
upon them, after the death of Christ Jesus. Neither is any piece of this Book,
the less fit to be our Text, this day, because it is both Historical, and
Prophetical, for, they, from whom, God, in his mercy, gave us a Deliverance,
this day, are our Historical Enemies, and our Prophetical Enemies;
historically we know, they have attempted our ruin heretofore, and
prophetically we may be sure, they will do so again, whenever any new
occasion provokes them, or sufficient power enables them.

The Text then is as the Book presented to Ezckiel; Divisio. Ezck. 2. 20.
In it are written Lamentations, and Mournings, and Woe; and all they are
written within, and without, says the Text there; within, as they concern the
Jews, without, as they are appliable to us: And they concern the Jews,
Historically (attempts upon that State Jeremy had certainly seen,) and they
concern them prophetically, for farther attempts Jeremy did certainly foresee.
They are appliable to us both ways too: Historically, because we have seen,
what they would have done, And Prophetically, because we foresee what they
would do. So that here is but a difference of the Computation; here is stilo
veteri, and stilo nove; here is the Jews Calendar, and the Papists Calendar; In
the Jews Calendar, one Babylon, wrought upon the people of God, and in the
Papists Calendar, another Babylon: Stilo veteri, in the Jews Calendar, 700
year before Christ came, there were pits made, and the breath of their
nostrils, The anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pits: Stilo nove, in the
Papists Calendar, 1600 year after Christ came in all fullness, in all
clearness, There were pits made again, and The breath of our nostrils, The
anointed of the Lord, was almost taken in those pits.

It is then Ieremies, and it is a distinct Book; It concerns the Jews, and it
concerns us too; And it concerns us both, both wages, Historically, and
Prophetically. But whether Jeremy lament here the death of a good King, of
Josiah, (for so Saint Hierome, and many of the Ancients, and many of the Jews
themselves take it, and think that those words in the Chronicles, have
relation to these Lamentations, 2. 35. 25.
And Jeremy lamented for Josiah, and all the people speak of him, in their
Lamentations,) Or whether he lament the transportation and the misery of an ill
King, of Zedekiah, (as is more ordinarily, and more probably held by the
Expositours) we argue not, we dispute now; we embrace that which arises from
both^ That both good Kings, and bad Kings, Josiah, and Zedekiah, are the
anointed of the Lord, and the breath of the nostrills, that is, The life of the
people; and therefore both to be lamented, when they fall into dangers, and
consequently both to be preserved by all means, by Prayer from them who are
private persons, by counsel from them, who have that great honor and that
great charge, to be near them in that kind, and by support and supplly, from
all, of all sorts, from falling into such dangers.

These considerations will, I think, have the better impression in you, if we
proceed in the handling of them thus: First, the main cause of the Lamentation
was the Ruin, or the dangerous declination of the Kingdom of that great and
glorious State, The Kingdom; But then they did not seditiously sever the King,
and the Kingdom, as though the Kingdom could do well, and the King ill, That
safe, and he in danger, for they see cause to lament, because misery was fallen
upon the Person of the King; perchance upon Josiah, a good, a religious King;
perchance but upon Zedekiah, a worse King; yet which soever it be, they
acknowledge him to be Vnctus Domini, The anointed of the Lord, and to be
Spiritus narium, The breath of their nostrills: When this person therefore, was
fallen into the pits of the Enemy, the Subject laments; but this lamenting
because he was fallen, implies a deliverance, a restitution, he was fallen, but
he did not ly there: so the Text, which is as yet but of Lamentation, will grow
an hour hence to be of Congratulation; and then we shall see, That whosoever,
in rectified affections, has lamented a danger, and then congratulated a
deliverance, he will provide against a relapse, a falling again into that or
any other danger, by all means of sustaining the Kingdom and the King, in
safety and in honor.

Our first step then in this Royal progress, 1. Regnum.
is, That the cause of this Lamentation, was, the declination, the diminution
of the Kingdom. If the Center of the world should be moved but one inch out of
the place, it cannot be reckoned, how many miles, this Island, or any building
in it, would be thrown out of their places; A declination in the Kingdom of
the Jews, in the body of the Kingdom, in the soul of the State, in the form
of Government, was such an Earthquake, as could leave nothing standing. Of all
things that are, there was an Idea in God; there was a model, a platform, an
examplar of every thing, which God produced and created in Time, in the mind
and purpose of God before: Of all things God had and Idea, a preconception; but
of Monarchy, of Kingdom, God, who is but one, is the Idea; God himself, in
his Unity, ^s the Model, He is the Type of Monarchy. He made but one World;
for, this, and the next, are not two Worlds; This is but the Morning, and that
the everlasting Noon, of one and the same Day, which shall have no Night: They
are not two Houses; This is the Gallery, and that the Bedchamber of one, and
the same Palace, which shall feel no ruin. He made this one World, but one
Eye, The Sun; The Moon is not another Eye, but a Glass; upon which, the
Sun reflects. He made this one World, but one Ear, The Church; He tells not
us, that he hears by a left Ear, by Saints, but by that right Ear, the
Church he does. There is One God, One Faith, One Baptism, and these lead us to
the love of one Sovereign, of Monarchy, of Kingdom. In that Name, God has
convayed to us the state of Grace, and the state of Glory too; and he has
promised both, in injoining that Petition, Adveniat Regnum, Thy Kingdom come,
Thy Kingdom of Grace here, Thy Kingdom of Glory hereafter. All forms of
Government have one and the same Soul, that is, Sovereignty; That resides
somewhere in every form; and this Sovereignty is in them all, from one and the
same Root, from the Lord of Lords, from God himself, for all Power is of God:
But yet this form of a Monarchy, of a Kingdom, is a more lively, and a more
masculin Organe, and Instrument of this Soul of Soveraigntie, then the other
forms are: We are sure Women have Souls as well as Men, but yet it is not so
expressed, that God breathed a Soul into Woman, as he did into Man; All
forms of Government have this Soul, but yet God infuseth it more manifestly,
and more effectually, in that form, in a Kingdom: All places are alike near
to Heaven, yet Christ would take a Hill, for his Ascension; All governments may
justly represent God to me, who is the God of Order, and fountain of all
government, but yet I am more eased, and more accustomed to the contemplation
of Heaven, in that notion, as Heaven is a kingdom, by having been borne, and
bred in a Monarchy: God is a Type of that, and that is a Type of Heaven.

This form then, Iudaeis promissa.
in nature the noblest, in use the profitablest of all others; God always
intended to his best-beloved people, God always meant that the Jews should have
a King, though he prepared them in other forms before; As he meant them peace
at last, though he exercised them in War, and meant them the land of promise,
though he led them through the Wilderness; so he meant them a King, though he
prepared them by Judges. God intended it in himself, and he declared it to
them, 400 years before he have them a King, Deuteronomy. 17. 14.
he instructed them, what kind of King they should set over them, when they
came to that kind of government: And long before that he made a promise, Genesis
49. 10.
by Jacob to Judah of a Kingdom, and that the Scepter should not depart from
him, till Siloh came. And when God came near the time, in which he intended to
them that government, in the time of Samuel, who was the immediate predecessor
to their first King, Saul, God made way for a Monarchy; for Samuel had a much
more absolute authority, in that State, then any of the Judges had; Samuel
judged them, and in their petition for a King, 1 Samuel 8. 5.
they ask but that, Make us a King to judge us; Samuel was little less then a
King; and Saul's reign, and his, are reckoned both in one number, and made as
the reign of one man; Acts 13. 21.
when it is said in the Acts, that Saul reigned 40 years, Samuels time is
included in that number, for all the years, from the death of Eli,^ to the
beginning of David, are but 40 years. God meant them a Kingdom in himself,
promised them a kingdom in Judah, made Laws for their kingdom in Deuteronomy,
made way for the kingdom in Samuel, and why then was God displeased with their
petition for a Kingdom?

It was a greater fault in them, then it could have been in any other people,
to ask a King; not that it was not the most desirable form of government, but
that God governed them, so immediately, so presentially himself, as that it
was an ungrateful intemperance in them, to turn upon any other means; God had
ever performed that which he promised them, in that which comprehended all, Ye
shall be a peculiar treasure unto me, Exodus 19. 5.
above all people; And therefore Josephus has expressed it well; All other
people are under the form of Democrati^, or Aristocrati^, or such other
forms, composed of men; Sed noster Legislator, Theocratiam instituit, The Jews
were only under a Theocrati^, an immediate government of God, he judged them
himself, and he himself fought their battles: And therefore God says to
Samuel, They have not rejected thee, Thou wast not King, But they have rejected
me, I was. To be weary of God, is it enough to call it a levity? But if they
did only compare form with form, and not God himself with any form, if
they did only think Monarchy best, and believe that God intended a Monarchy
to them, yet yet to limit God his time, and to make God perform his promise
before his day, was a fault, and inexcusable. Daniel saw, that the Messiah
should come within seventy weeks: Daniel did not say, Lord, let it be within
fifty weeks, or let it be this week: The Martyrs under the Altar, cry
Vsqueque Domine, How long Lord, but then, they leave it there, Even as long as
pleases thee: Their petition should have been, Adveniat regnum ^words^, Let us
have that Kingdom, which because thou know it is good for us, thou have
promised to us; But yet Fiat voluntas tua, Let us have it then, when thy
Wisdom sees it best for us: 1 Samuel 12. 12.
You said to me (says Samuel, by way of Reproof and Increpation) You said,
Nay but a King shall reign over us; Now, that was not their fault; but that
which follows, The unseasonablesse and inconsideration of their clamorous
Petition, You said a King shall reign over us, when the Lord your God, was
your King; They would not trust Gods means, there was their first fault: And
then, though they desired a thing good in it self, and a good intended to
them, yet they fixed God his time, and they would not stay his leisure; And
either of these, To ask other things then God would give, or at other times,
then God would give them, is displeasing to him: Use his means, and stay his
leisure.

But yet, Dabat.
though God were displeased with them, he executed his own purpose; he was
angry with their manner of asking a King, but yet he gave them a King:
Howsoever God be displeased with them, who prevaricate in his cause, who should
sustain it, and do not, Gods cause shall be sustained, though they do it
not. We may distinguish the period of the Jewish State well enough, thus, that
they had Infantiam, or pueritiam, their infancy, their minority, in Adam, and
the first Patriarchs till the flood: that they had Adolescentiam, A growing
time, from Noah, through the other Patriarchs, till Moses: and that they had
Iuventu^em, a youth and strength from Moses, through the Judges, to Saul: but
then they had Virilitatom, virilem, atatem, their established vigor, under
their Kings; and after them, they fell in s^nectutem, into a wretched and
miserable decay of old age, and decrepitnesse: their kingdom was their best
State; and so much, Ezekiel. 16. 3.
God in the Prophet, intimates pregnantly, when refreshing to their memories,
in a particular Inventory, and Catalogue, all his former benefits to them, how
he clothed Jerusalem, how he fed, her; how he adorned her, he summed up all, in
this one, and profecisti in regnum, I have advanced thee, to be a kingdom:
there was the Tropique, there was the Solstice, farther then that, in this
world, we know not how God could go; a kingdom was really the best State upon
Earth, and Symbolically, the best figure, and Type of Heaven. And therefore,
when the Prophet Jeremy, historically beheld the declination of this kingdom,
in the death of I^osiah, and prophetically foresaw the ruins thereof, in the
transportition of Zedekiah, or, if he had seen that historically too, yet
prophetically he foresaw the utter devastation, and depopulation, and
extermination, which scattered that nation, soon after Christ, to this day,
(and God and no man knows, for how long,) when they, who were a kingdom, are
now no where a village, and they who had such Kings, have now no where a
Constable of their own, historically, prophetically, Jeremy had just cause of
lamentation for the danger of that kingdom.

We had so also, for this our kingdom, this day; God has given us a kingdom,
not as other kingdoms, made up of diverse Cities, but of diverse kingdoms, and
all those kingdoms were destined to desolation, in one minute. It was not
only the destruction of the persons present, but of the kingdom^ for to submit
the kingdom to the government of a foreign Prelate, was to destroy the
Monarchy, to annihilate the Supremacy, to ruin the very form of a kingdom; a
kingdom under another head, besides the King, is not a kingdom, as ours is.
The oath that the Emperor takes to the Pope, is by their authors called
Iuramentum Sidelitatis, an oath of Allegiance; and if they had brought our
Kings, to take an oath of Allegiance so, this were no kingdom. Pope Nicolas
the second, went about to create two kingdoms, that of Tuscan, and that of
Lombardy; his successors have gone about to destroy more; for to make it depend
upon him, were to destroy our kingdom. That they have attempted historically;
and as long as these Axioms, and Aphorisms remain in their Authors, that one
shall say, that De jurs? by right all Christian kingdoms do hold of the Pope,
and De facto, are forfeited to the Hope, and another shall say, that
Christendom would be better governed if the Pope would take the forfeiture,
and so bring all these Royal farms, into his own demesne, we see also, their
prophetical desire, their prophetical intention, against this kingdom, what
they would do: In their Actions we have their history, in their Axioms we have
their prophecy.

Jeremy lamented the desolation of the kingdom, Regnum in Rege.
but that, expressed in the death, and destruction of the King. He did not
divide the King and the kingdom, as if the kingdom could do well, and the
King in distress: Umnipotentia Dei, Asylum haeresic^rum; it is well said, by
more then one of the ancients, that the Omnipotence of God, is the Sanctuary of
Heretics: when they would establish any heresy, they fly to Gods
Almightinesse. God can do All, therefore he can do this. So, in the Roman
Church, they establish their heresy of Transubstantiation; And so, their
deliverance of souls not from Purgatory only, but from Hell it self. They
think to stop all mouths with that, God can do it, no man dares deny that; when
as, if that were granted, (which, in such things, as naturally imply
contradiction in themselves, or contradiction to Gods word, cannot be granted,
for God cannot do that, God cannot lie,) yet though God can do it, concludes
not that God will do it, or has done it: Omnipotenti^ Dei Asylum haereticorum,
The omnipotency of God, is the Sanctuary of Heretics, and so, Salus Regni, is
Asylum proditorum, Greater Treasons, and Seditions, and Rebellions have never
been set on foot, then upon color, and pretense, of a care of the State, and
of the good of the Kingdom. Every where, the King is Sponsus Regni, the
husband of the Kingdom; and to make love to the Kings wife, and undervalue
him, must necessarily make any King jealous: The King is Anima Regni, The soul
of the Kingdom; and to provide for the health of the body, with the detriment
of the soul, is perverse physic: The King is Caput Regni, The head of the
Kingdom; and to cure a Member, by cutting off the head, is ill surgery: Man
and wife, soul and body, head and members, God has joined, and those whom God
has joined, let no man sever. Salus Regni, Asylum Proditorum, To pretend to
uphold the Kingdom, and overthrow the King, has ever been the tentation
before, and the excuse after, in the greatest Treasons. In that action of the
Jews, which we insisted upon before, 1. Sam. 8.
in their pressing for a King, The Elders of Israel were gathered together, and
so far they were in their way, for this was no popular, no seditious Assembly
of light and turbulent men, but The Elders; And then, they came to Samuel, And
so far they were in their right way too, for they held no counsels apart, but
came to the right place, for redress of grievances, to their then highest
Governor, to Samuel: When they were thus lawfully met, they forbear not to
lay open unto him, the injustice of his greatest Officers, though it concerned
the very Sons of Samuel; and thus far they kept within their convenient
limits; But when they would press Samuel to a new way of remedy, to an
inconvenient way, to a present way, to their own way, and refer nothing to
him, what care soever they pretended of the good of the State, it is evident,
that they had no good opinion of Samuel himself, and even that displeased God,
That they were ill affected to that person, whom he had set over them. To sever
the King, and the Kingdom, and pretend the weal of the one, without the
other, is to shake and discompose Gods building.

Historically this was the Jews case, when Jeremy lamented here, if he
lamented the declination of the State, in the death of the King Josiah, And if
he lamented the transportation of Zedekiah, and that that cross were not yet
come upon them; Or if he lamented the future devastation of that Nation,
occasioned by the death of the King of Kings Christ Jesus, when he came into
the world, this was their case prophetically: Either way, historically, or
prophetically, Jeremy looks upon the Kingdom, but yet through that glass,
through the King.

The duty of the Day, and the order of the Text, invites us to an application
of this branch too. Our adversaries did not come to say to themselves, Nolumus
Regnum hoc, we will not have this Kingdom stand, Luke 14. 14.
the material Kingdom, the plenty of the Land, they would have been content
to have, but the formal Kingdom, that is, This form of Government, by a
Sovereign King, that depends upon none but God, they would not have. So that
they came implicitly (...) Nolumus Regnum hoc, we will not have this Kingdom
governed thus, and they came explicitly to a Nolumus Regem hunc (as the Jews
were resolved of Christ) We will not have this King to govern at all. Non
hunc? Will you not have him? you were at your Nolumus hanc long before; Her,
whom God had set over you, before him, you would not have. Your, not
Anniversary, but Hebdomadary Treasons, cast upon her a necessity of drawing
blood often, and so your Nolumus h^nc, your desire that she were gone, might
have some kind of ground, or color: But for your Nolumus hunc, for this King
who had made no Inquisition for blood, who had forborne your very pecuniary
penalties, who had (as himself witnesses of himself) made you partakers with
his Subjects of his own Religion, in matters of grace, and in real benefits,
Psalm. 2. 1.
and in Titles of Honor, Quare fremuerant, Why did these men rage, and imagine
a vain thing? What they did historically, we know; They made that house, which
is the hive of the Kingdom, from whence all her honey comes; that house where
Justice her self is conceived, in their preparing of Laws, and inanimated, and
quickened and borne by the Royal Assent, there given; they made that whole
house one Murdring piece, and charged that piece with Peers, with People, with
Princes, with the King, and meant to discharge it upward at the face of heaven,
to shoot God at the face of God, Him, of whom God has said, Dii estis, You are
Gods, at the face of God, that had said so, as though they would have
reproached the God of heaven, and not have been beholden to him for such a
King, but shoot him up to him, and bid him take his King again, with a nolumus
hunc regnare, we will not have this King to reign over us. This was our case
Historically, and what it is Prophetically, as long as that remains to be
their doctrine, which he, against whom that attempt was principally made, found
by their examination; to be their doctrine, That they, and no Sect in the
world, but they, did make Treason an article of Religion, That their Religion
bound them to those attempts, so long they are never at an end; Till they
dis-avow those Doctrines, that conduce to that, prophetically they wish,
prophetically they hope for better success in as ill attempts.

It is then the kingdom that Jeremy laments; but his nearest object is the
King; He laments him. First, let it be, (as with S. Hierome, many of the
Ancients, and with them, many of the later Rabbis will have it) for Josiah,
for a good King, in whose death, the honor, and the strength of the kingdom
took that deadly wound, to become tributary to a forain Prince: for, to this
lamentation they refer those words of the Prophet, which describe a great
sorrow, Zech. 12. 11.
In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon; which was the place, where Josiah was
slain; There shall be such a lamentation (says the Prophet, in this
interpretation) as was for the death of Josiah. This then was for him; for a
good King. Wherein have we his goodness expressed? 2 Reg. 22. 2.
Abundantly. He did that which was right in Gods fight; (And whose Eye need he
fear, that is right in the Eye of God?) But how long did he so? To the end;
for, Nero, who had his Quinquennium, and was a good Emperor for his first five
years, was one of the worst of all: He that is ill all the way, is but a
Tyran, He that is good at first, and after ill, an Angels face, and a Serpents
tail make him a Monster; Josiah began well, and persevered so, He turned not
aside to the right ^and, nor to the left. That is, (if we apply it to the
Josiah of our times) neither to the fugitive, that leaves our Church, and goes
to the Roman, nor to the Separatist, that leaves our Church, and goes to none.
In the eighteenth year of his reign, Josiah undertook the reparation of Gods
house; If we apply this to the Josiah of our times, I think, in that year of
his reign, he visited this Church, and these walls, and meditated, and persuaded
the reparation thereof. 2^. 25.
In one word, Like unto Josiah, there was no King before, nor after. And
therefore there was just cause of lamentation for this King, for Josiah;
historically for the very loss of his person, prophetically for the misery of
the State, after his death.

Our errand is to day, to apply all these branches to the day; Those men who
intended us, this cause of lamentation this day, in the destruction of our
Josiah, spared him not, because he was so, because so, because he was a Josiah,
because he was good; no, not because he was good to them, his benefits to them,
had not mollified them, toward him: for that is not their way; Both the French
Henry's were their own, and good to them; but did that rescue either of them,
from the knife? And was not that Emperor, whom they poisoned in the Sacrament,
their own, and good to them? and yet was that, any Antidote against their
poison? To so reprobate a sense has God given them over herein, as that,
though in their Books, they ly heaviest upon Princes of our Religion, yet truly
they have destroyed more of their own, then of ours. Thus it is Historically in
their proceedings past: And Prophetically it can be but thus, since no King is
good, in their sense, if he agree not to all points of Doctrine with them: And
when that is done, not good yet, except he agree in all points of Jurisdiction
too; and that, no King can do, that will not be their Farmer of his Kingdom.
Their Authors have disputed Auferibilitatem Papae, whether the Church of God
might not be without a pope, they have made a problematicall, a disputable
matter, and some of their Authors have diverted toward an affirmation of it;
but Aufleribilitas potestatis, to imagine a King without Kingly Sovereignty,
never came into problem, into disputation. We all lamented, and bitterly, and
justly, the loss of our Deborah, though then we saw a Josiah succeeding: but
if they had removed our Josiah, and his Royal children, and so, this form of
government, where, or who, or what had been an object of Consolation to us?

The cause of lamentation in the loss of a good King, Rex malus.
is certainly great, and so it was, if Jeremy lamented Josiah; but if it were
but for zedekiah, an ill King, (as the greater part of Expositors take it) yet
the lamentation you see, is the same. How ill a King was Zedekiah? 2 Reg. 24.
19.
As ill, as Josiah was good, that is his measure. He did evil in the sight of
the Lord, according to all that Iehoiakim had done; Here is his sin, sin by
precedent; and what had Iehoiakim done? 2 Reg. 25. ult.
He had done evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his Fathers
had done. It is a great, and a dangerous wickedness, which is done upon
pretext of Antiquity; The Religion of our Fathers, the Church of our Fathers,
the Worship of our Fathers, is a pretext that colors a great deal of
Superstition. He did evil, as his Fathers; there was his comparative evil:
And his positive evil, (I mean, his particular sin) was, 2. C^^. 36. 12.
Ver. 13.
That he humbled not himself to Gods Prophets, to Jeremy speaking from the
mouth of the Lord; there was irreligiousnesse; And then, He broke the Oath
which he had sworn by God, there was per^idiousnesse, faithlesnsse; And
lastly, He stiffned his neck, and hardened his heart, from turning to the Lord
of Israel, there was impenitiblenesse: Thus evil was Zedekiah, irreligious to
God, treacherous to man, impenitible to himself, and yet the State, and men
truly religious in the State, the Prophet lamented him; not his spiritual
defections, by sin; for, they did not make themselves Judges of that; but
they lamented the calamities of the Kingdom, in the loss even of an evil
King.

That man must have a large comprehension, that shall adventure to say of any
King, He is an ill King; he must know his Office well, and his actions well,
and the actions of other Princes too, who have correspondence with him, before
he can say so. When Christ says, Mat. ^. 37.
Let your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, for whatsoever is more then
this, (that is, when it comes to swearing) that comes of evil, Saint
Augustine does not understand that, of the evil disposition of that man that
swears, but of them, who will not believe him, without wearing; Many times a
Prince departs from the exact rule of his duty, not out of his own
indisposition to truth, and clearness, but to countermine underminers. Verse.
26.
That which David says in the eighteenth Psalm, David speaks, not of man, but
of God himself; Cum perverso perverieris, With the froward, thou will show thy
self froward; God, who is of no froward neature, may be made froward; with
crafty neighbors, a Prince will be crafty, and perchance false with the false.
Alas, (to look into no other profession but our own) how often do we excuse
Dispensations, and pluralities, and non-residencies, with an Omnes faciunt, I
do, but as other men of my profession, do? Allow a King but that, That he does
but as other Kings do, Nay, but this, He does but as other Kings put him to a
necessity to do, and you will not hastily call a King an ill King. When God
gives his people for old shoes, and sells them for nothing, and, at the same
time, gives his and their enemies abundance, when God commands Abraham, to
sacrifice his own and only Son, and his enemies have Children at their
pleasure, as David speaks, To give your selves the liberty of humane affection,
you would think God an ill God; but yet, for all this, his children are to him,
a Royal Priesthood, and a holy Nation; and all their tears are in his bottles,
and registered in his book, for all this. When Princes pretermit in some
things, the present benefit of their Subjects, and confer favors upon others
give your selves the liberty to judge of Princes actions, with the affections
of private men, and you may think a King an ill King: But yet, we are to him,
as David says, 2 Samuel 19. 12.
His brethren, his bone, his flesh, and so reputed by him. God himself cannot
stand upright in a natural man's interpretation, nor any King in a private
man's. But then, how soon our adversaries come to call Kings, ill Kings, we see
historically, when they boast of having deposed Kings, Quia minus utiles,
Because some other has seemed to them, fitter for the Government; and we see
it prophetically, by their allowing those Indictments, and Attainders of Kings,
which stand in their books De Syndicatu, That that King which neglects the
duties of his place (and they must prescribe the duty, and judge the negligence
too) That King that exercises his Prerogative, without just cause (and they
must prescribe the Prerogative, and judge the cause,) That that King that vexes
his Subjects, That that King that gives himself to intemperate hunting (for in
that very particular they instance) that in such cases, (and they multiply
these cases infinitely) Kings are in their mercy, and subject to their
censures, and corrections. We proceed not so, in censuring the actions of
Kings; we say, with St. Cyrill, Impium est dicere Regi, Inique agis; It is an
impious thing, (in him, who is only a private man, and has no other
obligations upon him) to say to the King, or of the King, He governs not as a
King is bound to do: we remit the judgment of those their actions, which are
secret to God; and when they are evident, and bad, yet we must endeavor to
preserve their persons; for there is a danger in the loss, and a lamentation
due to the loss, even of Zedekiah, for even such are uniti Domini, The
anointed of the Lord, and the breath of our nostrils.

First, (as it lies in our Text) The King is spiritus narium, Spiritus Narium.
the breath of our uostrills. First, Spiritus, is a name, most peculiarly
belonging to that blessed Person of the glorious Trinity, whose Office it is to
convay, to insinuate, to apply to us the Mercies of the Father, and the Merits
of the Son: He is called by this Name, by the word of this Text, Ruach, even
in the beginning of the Creation, God had created Heaven and Earth, and then
The Spirit of God, sus^labat, says Pagnins translation, (and so says the
Chalde Paraphrase too) it breathed upon the waters, and so induced, or deduced
particular forms. So God has made us, a little World of our own, This Island;
He has given us Heaven and Earth, The truth of his Gospel, which is our
earnest of Heaven, and the abundance of the Earth, a fruitful Land; but then
he, who is the Spirit of the Lord, he who is the breath of our nostrills,
Incubat aquis, (as it is said there in the Creation) he moves upon the waters,
by his royal and warlike Navy at Sea, (in which he has expressed a special
and particular care) And by the breath and influence of his providence
throughout the Land, he preserves, he applies, he makes useful those blessings
unto us.

If this breath, that is, this power, be at any time sourd in the passage, and
contract an il savor by the pipes that convay it, so, as that his good
intentions are ill executed by inferior Ministers, this must not be imputed to
him; That breath that comes from the East, the bed and the garden of spices,
when it is breathed out there, is a persume, but by passing over the beds of
Serpents and pu^refied Lakes, it may be a breath of poison in the West: Princes
purpose some things for ease to the people, (and as such, they are sometimes
presented to them) and if they prove grievances, they took their putrefaction
in the way, that is, their corruption, from corrupt executors of good and
wholesome intentions; The thing was good in the root, and the ill cannot be
removed in an instant.

But then, Spiritus sermo.
we carry not this word Ruach, Spirit, so high; though since God has said that
Kings are Gods, the Attribute of the Holy Ghost and his Office, which is, to
apply to man the goodness of God, belongs to Kings also; for, God gives, but
they apply all blessings to us. But here, we take the word literally, as it is
in the Text; Ruach, spirit, is the Breath that we breathe, the Life that we
live; The King is that Breath, that Life, and therefore that belongs to him.
First our Breath, that is, serme, our speech belongs to him; Be faithful unto
him, and speak good of his Name, is commanded by David of God. To Gods
Anointed, we are not faithful, if we do not speak good of his Name. First,
there is an internal, speech in the heart, and God looks to that; the fool
has said in his heart, there is no God; though he say it but in his heart, yet
he is a fool: for, as wise as a Politician would think him, for saying it in
his heart, and coming no further, yet even that is an overt act with God, for
God sees the heart. It is the fool that says in his heart, there is no God,
and it is the fool that says in his heart, I would there were no King. That
enormous, that infamous Tragedy of the Levites Concubins, and her murder, of
which it is said there, Iud. 19. 30.
There was no such thing seen, nor done before, (and many things are done,
which are never seen) with that emphaticall addition, Consider of it, advise,
and say your mind, has this addition too, In those days there was no King in
Israel; If there had been any King, but a Zedekiah, it could not have been so:
Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, not in thy thoughts: for, they are sins that tread upon
the heels of one another, and that induce one another, to conceive ill of Gods
Lieutenant, and of God himself; for so the Prophet joyneth them, They shall
fret themselves, Esaias 8. 21.
and curse their King, and their God: He that begins with the one, will
proceed to the other.

Thus then he is our Breath; our Breath is his; our speech must be contained,
not expressed in his dishonor; not in misinterpretations of his Actions;
jealousies have often made women ill; incredulity, suspiciousnesse, jealousy
in the Subject, has wrought ill effects upon Princes, otherwise not ill. We
must not speak ill; but our duty is not accomplished in that abstinence, we
must speak well: And in those things, which will not admit a good
interpretation, we must be apt to remove the perverseness and obliquity of the
act from him, who is the first mover to those who are inferior instruments. In
these diverse opinions which are ventilated in the School, how God concurreth
to the working of second and subordinate causes, that opinion is I think, the
most ancient, that denies that God works in the second cause, but has only
communicated to it, a power of working, and rest himself. This is not true;
God does work in every Organ, and in every particular action; but yet though he
do work in all, yet he is no cause of the obliquity, of the perverseness of
any action. Now, earthly Princes are not equal to God; They do not so much as
work in particular actions of instruments; many times, they communicate power
to others, and rest wholly themselves; and then, the power is from them, but
the perverseness of the action is not. God does work in ill actions, and yet
is not guilty, but Princes do not so much as work therein, and so may be
excusable; at least, for any cooperation in the evil of the action, though not
for countenancing, and authorizing an evil instrument; but that is another
case.

They are our breath then; Our breath is theirs, in good interpretations of
their actions; 1 Timothy 2. 1.
and it is theirs especially, in our prayers to Almighty God, for them. The
Apostle exhorts us to pray; for whom? first, for all men in general; but in
the first particular, that he descends to, for Kings. And both Theodoret, and
Theophylact, make that the only reason, why the Apostle did not name Kings
first, Vt non videatur adulari, lest he should seem to flatter Kings: Whether
mankind it self, or Kings, by whom mankind is happy here, be to be preferred
in prayer, you see both Theodoret, and Theophylact, make it a problem. And
those prayers, there enjoined, were for Infidel Kings, and for persecuting
Kings; for even such Kings, were the breath of their nostrils; their breath,
their speech, their prayers were due to them. But then, beloved, a man may
convey a Satir into a Prayer; a man may make a prayer a Libell; If the
intention of the prayer be not so much, to incline God to give those graces to
the King, as to tell the world, that the King wants those graces, it is a
Libell. We say sometimes in scorn to a man, God help you, and God send you wit;
and therein, though it have the sound of a prayer, we call him fool. So we
have seen of late, some in obscure Conventicles, institute certain prayers,
That God would keep the King, and the Prince in the true Religion; The prayer
is always good, always useful; but when that prayer is accompanied with
circumstances, as though the King and the Prince were declining from that
Religion, then even the prayer it self is libellous, and seditious; Saint
Paul, in that former place, apparels a Subjects prayer well, when he says,
Let prayers be given with thanks; Let our prayers be for continuance of the
blessings, which we have, and let our acknowledgement of present blessings,
be an inducement for future: pray, and praise together; pray thankfully, pray
not suspiciously: for, beloved in the bowels of Christ Jesus, before whose face
I stand now, and before whose face, I shall not be able to stand amongst the
righteous, at the last day, if I lie now, and make this Pulpit my Shop, to vent
sophisticate Wares, In the presence of you, a holy part, I hope, of the
Militant Church, of which I am, In the presence of the whole Triumphant Church,
of which, by him, by whom I am that I am, I hope to be, In the presence of the
Head of the whole Church, 1. Cor. 7. 44.
who is All in all, I, ( and I think I have the Spirit of God,) (I am sure, I
have not resisted it in this point) I, (and I may be allowed to know something
in Civil affairs) (I am sure I have not been stupefied in this point) do
deliver that, which upon the truth of a Moral man, and a Christian man, and a
Church man, believe to be true, That he, who is the Breath of our nostrils, is
in his heart, as far from submitting us to that Idolatry, and superstition,
which did heretofore oppress us, as his immediate Predecessor, whose memory is
justly precious to you, was: Their ways may be diverse, and yet their end the
same, that is, The glory of God; And to a higher Comparison, then to her, I
know not how to carry it.

As then the Breath of our nostrils, our breath, is his, that is, our speech,
first, in containing it, not to speak in his diminution; then in uttering it
amongst men; to interpret fairly, and loially, his proceedings; and then in
uttering it to God, in such prayers for the continuing thereof, as imply a
thankful acknowledgement of the present blessings, spiritual and temporal,
which we enjoy now by him; So far, Breath is speech; but Breath is life too,
and so our life is his. How willingly his Subjects would give their lives for
him, I make no doubt, but he doubts not. This is argument enough for their
propensenesse and readiness, to give their lives, for his honor, or for the
possessions of his children; That though not contra voluntatem, not against his
will, yet Praeter voluntatem, without any Declaration of his will, or pleasure,
by any Command, they have been as ready voluntarily, as if a Press had
commanded them. But these ways, which his wisdom has chosen for the procuring
of peace, have kept off much occasion of trial, of that, how willingly his
Subjects would have given their lives for him. Yet, their lives are his, who is
the breath of their nostrils: And therefore, though they do not leave them for
him, let them lead them for him; though they be not called to die for him, let
them live so, as that may be for him; to live peaceably, to live honestly, to
live industriously, is to live for him; for, the sins of the people endanger
the Prince, as much as his own. When that shall be required at your hand,
then die for him; In the mean time, live for him; live so, as your living do
not kindle Gods anger against him, and that is a good Confession, and
acknowledgement, That he is the breath of your nostrils, That your life is his.

As then the breath of our nostrils, Animd. Genesis 2. 7.
is expressed by this word in this Text, Ruach, spiritus, speech, and life, so
it is his. When the breath of life was first breathed into man, there is called
by another word, Neshamah, and that is the soul, the immortal soul: And is
the King the breath of that life? Is he the soul of his Subjects so, as that
their souls are his; so, as that they must sin toward men, in doing unjust
actions, or sin toward God, in forsaking, and dishonouring him, if the King
will have them? If I had the honor to ask this question, in his royal
presence, I know he would be the first man, that would say No, No; your souls
are not mine, so. And, as he is a most perfect Text-man, in the Book of God,
(and by the way, I should not easily fear his being a Papist, that is a good
Text-man) I know he would cite Daniel, saying, Though our God do not deliver
us, yet know, O King, that we will not worship thy Gods; Act. 5. 29.
And I know he would cite S. Peter, We ought to obey God, rather then men; And
he would cite Christ himself, Fear not them, (for the soul) that cannot hurt
the soul. He claims not your souls so: It is Ruach here, it is not Neshamah;
your life is his, your soul is not his, in that sense. But yet, beloved, these
two words are promiscuously used in the Scriptures; Ruach is often the soul;
Neshamah; is often the temporal life; And thus far, the one, as well as the
other, is the Kings, That he must answer for your souls; so they are his; for
he is not a King of bodies, but a King of men, bodies and souls; nor a King
of men only, but of Christian men; so your Religion, so your souls are his;
his, that is, appertaining to his care, and his account. And therefore, though
you owe no obedience to any power under heaven, so as to decline you from the
true God, or the true worship of that God, and the fundamental things thereof,
yet in those things, which are, in their nature but circumstantiall, and may
therefore, according to times, and places, and persons, admit alterations, in
those things, though they be things appertaining to Religion, submit your
selves to his directions; for here, the two words meet, Ruach, and Neshamah,
your lives are his, and your souls are his too; His end being to advance Gods
truth, he is to be trusted much, in matters of indifferent nature, by the way.

He is the word of our Text, Spiritus, as Spiritus is the Holy Ghost, so far,
by accommodation, as that he is Gods instrument to convey blessings upon us;
and as spiritus is our breath, of speech, and as it is our life, and as it is
our soul too, so far, as that in those temporal things which concern
spiritual, (as Times of meeting, and much of the manner of proceeding when we
are met) we are to receive directions from him: So he is the breath of our
nostrils, our speech, our lives, our souls, in that limited sense, are his.

But then, did those subjects of his (And I charge none but his subjects, with
this plot, for, I judge not them who are without) from whom God deliverd us
this day, did they think so of him, That he was the breath of our nostrils? If
the breath be sour, if it be tainted and corrupt, (as they would needs
think, in this case) is it good Physic for an ill breath, to cut off the
head, or to suffocate it, to smother, to strangle, to murder that man? He is
the breath of their nostrils; They owe him their speech, their thanks, Job 30.
1.
their prayers, and how have these children of fools made him their song, and
their byword? How have these Drunkards, (men drunk with the Babylonian Cup)
made Libels against him? Act. 17. 18.
How have those Seminatores verborum, word-scatterers, defamed him, even with
contrary defamations. Heretofore, that he persecuted their Religion, when he
did not; now, that he has left his own Religion. He is their breath, they owe
him their tongues, and how foully do they speak; and they owe him their lives,
and how prodigally do they give away their lives to others, that they might
take away His? He is their breath, (as breath is the soul) that is, Accomptant
for their souls, and how have they raised themselves out of his Audit, and
withdrawn themselves from his Allegiance? This they have done historically,
and to say prophetically, what they would do, first, their Extenuation of this
fact, when they call it an enterprise of a few unfortunate Gentlemen. And then
their Exaltation of this fact, when they make the principal person in it, a
Martyr, this is prophecy enough, that since they are not ashamed of the
Original, they will not be afraid to copy it often, and pursue the same
practices, to the same end.

Let it be Josiah then, Vnctus Domini.
let it be Zedekiah, he was the Breath, the life of his Subjects, (and that was
the first attribute) and he was The Anointed of the Lord, which is the other.
Unction it self always separated that which was anointed from profane, and
secular use; unction was a religious distinction. It had that signification in
practice, before any Law was given for it; when Jacob had had that vision upon
the stone, Genesis 28. 18.
which made him see, that that place was the house of God, and the gate of
heaven, then he took up that stone which he had stepped upon, and set it up for
a pillar, and anointed it. This was the practice in nature; and then the
precept in the Law, was, as for the Altar it self, so for many other things.
belonging to the service of God in the Temple, Exodus 29. 36.
Thou shall anoint them, to sanctify them. Thus it was for things; and then,
if we consider persons, we see the dignity that anointing gave; for it was
given but to three sorts of persons, to Kings, to priests, and to Prophets:
Kings, and Priests had it, to testify their ordinary, and permanent, and
indelible jurisdiction, their power is laid on in Oil; And Prophets had it,
because they were extraordinarily raised to denounce, and to execute Gods
Judgments, upon persons that were anointed, upon Priests, and upon Kings too,
in those cases, for which, they were then particularly employed. Thus then it
is, anointed things could not be touched, but by anointed persons, and then
anointed persons could not be touched, but by persons anointed; The Priest not
directed, but by the King; The King, as King, not corrected, but by the
prophet: And this was the State, that they lamented so compassionately, That
their King, thus anointed, thus exempted, was taken prisoner, saw his Sons
slain in his presence, and then had his own eyes pulled out, was bound in
chains, and carried to Babell.

And less then this, in himself, and in his Son, and in all, was not
intended this day, against our, not Zedekiah, but Josiah: for death (speaking
in nature) has all particular miseries in it. An anointed King (and many Kings
anointed there are not) and he that is anointed prae Consortibus suis, above
his fellow Kings, ( for, I think, no other King of his Religion, is anointed)
The anointed of the Lord, who in this Text has both those great names,
Meshiach Iehovah^ Christus Domini, as though he had been but the Bramble
anointed for King of the Trees, Judge. 9. 8.
and so made the fitter fuel for their ^ire, as though (as David's lamentation
is for Saul) He had not been anointed with Oil, 2 Samuel 1. 21.
This eye of God, he by whom God looks upon us, This hand of God, he by whom
God protects us, This foot of God, he by whom, in his due time, (and Vsquequo
Domine, How long, O Lord, before that time come?) God shall tread down, his
own, and our enemies, was swallowed and devoured by them, in their confidence
of their own plot, and their infallible assurance of his perishing. So it was
historically; And how it stands prophetically, that is, What such as they were,
would do for the future; as long as they write, (not in Libels clandestinely
and subreptitiously stolen out, Coquaeus. fo. 18.
but avowed by public Authority) That our Priests are no Priests, but the
Priests of ^aal, for so they write, That the conspiracy of this day, being
against him, fol. 39.
who oppressed Religion, was as just, as that against Caesar, who did but
oppress the State, fol. 43.
And that they write, That those who were the actors herein, are therefore
saved, because at their execution, they submitted all to the Roman Church,
fol. 78.
and were content, if the Church condemned it, then to repent the Fact, for so
they write also, That the Religion of our present King, is no better, then the
Religion of Jeroboam, fol. 65.
or of Num^ Pompilius, for so they write too, that the last Queen, though an
Heretic, yet because she was Anointed, did cure that disease, The Kings
evil, but because, in scorn thereof, the King refused to be anointed at his
Coronation, therefore he cannot cure that disease, and so non dicendus unctus
Domini, he is not to be called the Anointed of the Lord, says that Author, (for
all these are the words of one man, and one, who had no other provocation to
say all this but only the Kings^ Apology for the oath of Allegiance) by
retaining in their avowed books, and by relying upon such Authors, and
Authorities as these, which remain for their future instruction, we see their
dispositions for the future, and judge of them prophetically, as well as
historically.

Now the misery which is here lamented, Captus.
the declination of the kingdom, in the person of the King, is thus expressed,
He was taken in their pits; taken, and taken in pits, and taken in their pits,
are so many stairs, so many descents, so many gradations (rather degradations)
in this calamity. Let it be Josiah, let it be Zedekiah; They were taken;
taken, and never returned; Let it be our Josiah, and will it hold in that
application? Was he taken? He was plotted for, but was he Taken? When he
himself takes public knowledge, that both at home and abroad, those of the
Roman persuasion, assured themselves, of some especial work, for the
advancement of their cause, at that time, when they had taken that assurance,
he was so taken, taken in that their assurance, infallibly taken in their
opinion; so, as this kingdom was taken in their opinion, who thought their
Navy invincible; so this King was taken in their assurance, who thought this
plot infallible.

He was taken, Fovea.
and in fovea, in a pit, says the Text; If our first translation would serve,
the sorrow were the less, for there it is, he was taken in their net; now, a
man that flattereth, spreads a net, and a Prince that discerns not a
flatterer, from a Counselor, is taken in a net; but that is not so desperate,
as in a pit: In Iosiahs case, it was a pit, a Grave; in Zedekiahs case, it was
a pit, a prison: in our Iosiahs case, it was fully, as it is in the Text, not
in fovea, but in foveis, Foveis.
plurally, in their pits, in their diverse pits; death in the mine where they
began, death in the Cellar where they pursued their mischief.

And then it was in foveis Illorum, Illorum.
in their pits, says the Text; but the Text does not tell us, in whose; in the
verse before, it is said, our persecutors did this, and this, then it follows,
He was taken in their pits; In the persecutors pits certainly; but yet, 2 Chronicles. 35. 23.
who are they? If it were Josiah that was taken, the persecutor was Necho, King
of Egypt, for from his army, Josiah received his deaths wound: If it were
Zedekiah, the persecutor was Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, for he carried
Zedekiah into captivity. Certainly the holy Ghost knew well enough, and could
have spoken plain, whose these pits were, but it pleased him to forbear
names. Certainly our Josiah knows well enough, whose, those pits, which were
dug for him, were; but, according to his natural sweetness, to decline the
drawing of more blood, then necessarily he must, or the laying of imputations
and aspersions upon more, then necessarily he must, he has forborne names.
The holy Ghost knows better then all the expositors, in all our Libraries, who
dug those pits, our Josiah knows, better then all we, who come but to
celebrate, and solemnize the deliverance, whose hands, and whose counsails were
in the digging of these pits too. He was taken, says our Text: fuit, he Was.
Fix that in Josiah, who was taken, and never taken back: fix it in Zedekiah,
who was taken, and never taken back; they both perished; in both them, there is
just cause, of perpetual, and permanent lamentation, and no room left, for
the exercise of any other affection. But transfer it to our Josiah, and then,
He was taken, is, He was but taken; God did not suffer his holy one to see
Correction, nor God did not suffer his Anointed, to perish in this taking; And
so the lamentation is become (as we said at first) a Congratulation, so our
Vae is an Euge, our exclamation turned to acclamation; and so our De profundis,
is a Gloria in excelsis, The pit, the vault is become a hill, from whence we
may behold the power of our great God; this Sepher kinoth, the book of
Lamentations, is become Sepher tehillim, the book of Psalms, and
thanksgivings; And David's Bonus es omnibus, Lord thou art good to all, is come
to Moses non taliter, Lord thou have not done so well, with any nation, as with
us; for when we might have feared a dereliquisti, that God had forsaken us, we
had S. August appropinquavi and nesciebam, we came nearer and nearer to God,
and knew it not, we knew not our danger, and therefore knew not his special
Protection. It was one particular degree of his mercy, to proceed so: As it is
an ease to a man, not to hear of his friends sickness, till he hear it, by
hearing of his recovery, so God did not shake us, with the knowledge of the
danger, till he established us, with the deliverance: And by making his
servant, and our Sovereign, the blessed means of that discovery, and that
deliverance, he has directed us, in all apprehensions of dangers, to rely upon
that Wisdom, in civil affairs, affairs of State, and upon that Zeal, in
causes of Religion, which he has imprinted in that soul. Historically, God
has done great things for us, by him; Prophetically, God has great things to
do for us, and all the Christian world, and will make him, his Instrument to
do them.

Now, Auxilia.
we reserved at first, for the last gasp, and for the knot to tie up all, this
Consideration: That he that was truly affected in the sad sense of such a
danger, and the pious sense of such a deliverance, would also use all means in
his power, to secure the future, that that Kingdom, in that King, might
always be safe, from the like dangers. No doubt, our Josiah does that, in
that which appertains unto him; and all, that is, The care of all,
appertains unto him. If God had made him his Rod, to scourge others with
Wars and Armies, we might be afraid, that when God had done his work by
him, he would cast the rod in the fire, God does not always bless those
Instruments, who love blood, though they pretend his Glory. But since God has
made him his Dove, to fly over the world, with the Olive branch, with
indevours of Peace, in all places, as the Dove did, so he shall ever bring his
Olive branch to the Arc, that is, endeavor only such peace, as may advance
the Church of God, and establish peace of Conscience in himself.

That care, Ne peccemus.
on his part, shall preserve him: And for his preservation, and ours in him,
these things are to be done on our part: First, let us return to God, so, as
God may look upon us, clothed in the righteousness of Christ; who will not be
put on, as a fair gown, to cover course clothes; but first put off your
sins, and then put on him; sins of the Time, sins of your Age, sins of
your Sex, sins of your Complexion, sins of your Profession; put off all;
for your Time, your Age, your Sex, your Complexion, your Profession, shall not
be damned; but you, you your selves shall Do not think that your Sundays
zeal once a week, can burn our all your extortions, and oppressions, and
usury, and butchery, and simony, and chambering and wantonness practiced from
Monday to Saturday. Do not think it to be so with the Spiritual man, as
with the Natural: In a Natural body, a great proportion of Choler will
rectify a cold, or old, or ^leginatique man, he is the better, for having so
much choler; but a vehement zeal on Sunday, does not rectify the six days
sinner: To cry out then, I am sterved for want of an afternoon Sermon, and to
fast all the week long, so as never to taste how sweet the Lord is, in thy
cleansing thy heart, and withdrawing thy hand from sin, this is no good diet;
Not only upon you Allegiance to God, but upon your Allegiance to the King, be
good: No Prince can have a better guard, then Subjects truly religious. Quantus
(...) patri^ est vir just^s, is S. Ambrose his holy exclamation, What a wall to
a City, what a Sea, what a Navy to an Island, is a holy man? The sins of former
times, 2 Reg. 23. 26.
the sins and provocations of M^nasseh, lay heavy upon Josiah, as well as God
loved him. The sins of our days, our sins, may open any Prince to Gods anger.
This is the first way of preserving our Josiah, to turn away the wrath of God,
by our abstinence from future sins, after our repentance of former.

A second is, Honor.
to uphold his honor and estimation with other men; especially amongst
strangers that live with us, who for the most part, value Princes so, as they
find their subjects to value them. Ambassadors have ever been sacred persons,
and partakers of great privileges. A Prince, that lives as ours, in the eye of
many Ambassadors, is not as the children of Israel, in the midst of Canaanites,
and Iebusi^es, and Ammonites, who all watched the destruction of Israel; but he
is in the midst of Tu^el^r Angels, National Angels, who study (by Gods grace,
and as it becomes us to hope) the peace and welfare of the Christian State. But
then all strangers in the land, are not noble, and candid, and ingenuous
Ambassadors; and even Ambassadors themselves may be tri^led to an undervalue of
the Prince, by rumors, and by disloyal, and by negligent speeches, from the
Subject; we have not yet felt Solomon's whippes; but our whinings and repinings,
and discontents may bring us to Rehoboams Scorpions. 1 Reg. 12. 11.
This way has a part, in the Kings safety, and in our safety, to hold in our
selves, and to convay to strangers, a good estimation of that happy government,
which is truly good in it self.

And then a third, Subsidia.
and very important way toward his preservation, is, a cheerful disposition,
to supply, and to support, and to assist him, with such things as are necessary
for his outward dignity. When God himself was the immediate King of the
Israelites, and governed them, by himself, he took it ill, that they would
depart from him, who needed nothing of theirs, for there could be no other
King, but must necessarily be supplied by them: And yet, consider, Beloved,
what God, who needed nothing, took: The sacrifices of the Jews, 2 Chronicles. 35.
were such, as would have kept diverse Royal houses: Take a bill of them, but
in one Passover, that Josiah kept, and compare that and other the like, with
the smalness of the land, that they possessed, and you will see, that that they
gave, was a very great proportion. Now, it is the service of God, to contribute
to the King as well as to the Priest: He that gives to a Prophet, shall have a
Prophets reward; he that gives to the King, shall have a Kings reward, a Crown:
in those cases, where to give to your King, is to give to God, that is, where
the peace of the State, and the glory of God in his Gospel depends much, upon
the sustentation of the estimation, and outward honor and splendor of the
King: preserve him so, and he shall the less be subject to these dangers, of
such falling into their pits.

But lastly, Religio.
and especially, let us preserve him, by preserving God amongst us, in the
true, and sincere profession of our Religion. Let not a mis-grounded, and
disloyal imagination of coolness in him, 1 John 4. 3.
cool you, in your own families. Omnis spiritus, qui solvit Iesum, says the
Apostle, in the Vulgat, every spirit that dissolves Jesus, that embraces not
Jesus entirely, All Jesus, and All his, All his Truth, and all that suffer for
that Truth, is not of God. Do not say, I will hold as much of Jesus, as shall
be necessary, so much as shall distinguish me from a Turk, or a Jew, but if I
may be the better, for parting with some of the rest, why should I not? Do not
say, I will hold All, my self, but let my wife, or my son, or one of my sons,
go the other way, as though Protestant, and Papist were two several callings;
and, as you would make one son a Lawyer, another a Merchant, you will make one
son a Papist, another a Protestant. Excuse not your own levity, with so high a
dishonor to the Prince; when have you heard, that ever he thanked any man, for
becoming a Papist? Leave his doors to himself; The doors into his kingdom,
The Ports, and the doors in his kingdom, The prisons; Let him open and shut
his doors, as God shall put into his mind: look thou seriously to thine own
doors, to thine own family, and keep all right there. A Thief that is let out
of Newgate is not therefore let into thy house; A Priest that is let out of
prison, is not therefore let into thy house neither: still it may be felony, to
harbor him, though there were mercy in letting him out. Cities are built of
families, and so are Churches too; Every man keeps his own family, and then
every Pastor shall keep his flock, and so the Church shall be free from
schism, and the State from sedition, and our Josiah preserved, Prophetically
for ever, as he was Historically this day, from them, in whose pits, the breath
of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord, was taken. Amen.

SERMON XLIV.
Preached at St. Paul's Cross, November. 22. 1629.
MAT. 11. 6. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me.
THese are words spoken by our Blessed Savior, to two Disciples, sent by John
Baptist, then a prisoner, to inform themselves of some particulars concerning
Christ. Christ, who read Hearts, better then we do faces, and heard Thoughts
clearer then we do words, saw in the thoughts, and hearts of these men, a
certain perverseness, an obliquity, an irregularity toward him, a jealousy
and suspicion of him, and according to that indisposition of theirs he speaks
to them, and tells them, This, and This only is true Blessedness, not to be
scandalized in me, not to be offended in me; I see you are; but, as you love
Blessedness, (and there is no other object of true love, but Blessedness)
establish your selves in me, maintain in your selves a submission, and an
acquiescence to me, in my Gospel, suspect not me, be not jealous of me, nor
press farther upon me, then I open and declare my self unto you, for, Blessed
is he, whosoever is not scandalized, not offended in me.

The words have in them an Injunction, Divisio.
and a Remuneration; A Precept, and a Promise; The Way, and the End of a
Christian. The Injunction, The Precept, The way is, As you love blessedness, be
not offended in me, Be satisfied with me, and mine Ordinances; It is an
Acquiescence in the Gospel of Christ Jesus: And the Remuneration, the Promise,
the End, is Blessedness; That, which, in it self, has no end, That, in respect
of which, all other things are to no end, Blessedness, everlasting Blessedness,
Blessed is he, whosoever is not scandalized, not offended in me. In the first,
Christ gives them first, if not an Increpation, yet an Intimation of our
facility in falling into the Passive scandal, the mis-interpreting of the
words or actions of other men, which is that which our Savior intends, by
being offended in another; And Blessed are they, in general, who are not apt
to fall into this Passive scandal, not subject to this facility of
mis-interpreting other men. In a second branch in this first part, Christ
appropriates this to himself, Blessed is he, whosoever is not scandalized, not
offended in me; In which branch, we shall see, that the general scandal, and
offense that the world took at Christ, and his Gospel, was, that he induced a
Religion that opposed the Honors, and the Pleasures, and the Profit of this
world: And these three being the Triangle within our circle, the three corners,
into which Satan, that compasses the world, leads us, (all is Honor, or
Pleasure, or Profit) because the Christian Religion seemed to the world to
withdraw men's affections from these, the world was scandalized, offended in
Christ. But then, in a third consideration, we shall see, that Christ
discerned in these two persons, these Disciples of John, a Passive scandal of
another kind; Not that Christ's Gospel, and the Religion that he induced, was
too low, too base, too contemptible, as the world thought, but that it was not
low enough, not humble enough, and therefore John's Disciples would do more
then Christ's Disciples, and bind themselves to a greater strictness and
austerity of life, then Christ in his Gospel required. In which third branch,
we shall take knowledge of some Disciples of John's Disciples, in the world
yet; and, (as for the most part it falls out in Sectaries) of diverse kinds and
ways; for, we shall find some, who in an over-valuation of their own purity,
condemn, and contemn other men, as unpardonable Reprobates; And these are
scandalized, and offended in Christ, that is, not satisfied with his Gospel, in
that they will not see, that it is as well a part of the Gospel of Christ, to
rely upon his Mercy, if I have departed from that purity, which his Gospel
enjoined me, as it is, to have endeavored to have preserved that purity; And a
part of his Gospel, as well to assist with my prayers, and my counsel, and
with all mildeness, that poor soul that has strayed from that purity, as it
is to love the Communion of those Saints, that have in a better measure
preserved it; Not to believe the Mercy of God in Christ, after a sin, to be a
part of the Gospel, as well as the Grace of God for prevention before, not to
give favorable constructions, and conceive charitable hopes of him, who is
fallen into some sin, which I may have escaped, this is to be scandalized, to
be offended in Christ, not to be satisfied with his Gospel; And this is one
Sect of the offspring of John's Disciples. And the other is this, that other
men thinking the Gospel of Christ to be too large a Gospel, a Religion of too
much liberty, will needs undertake to do more, then Christ, or his Disciples
practiced, or his Gospel prescribed: for, this is to be offended in Christ, not
to believe the means of salvation ordained by him, to be sufficient for that
end, which they were ordained to, that is, salvation. And then, after all this,
in a fourth branch we shall see, the way, which our Savior takes to reclaim
them, and to divest them of this Passive scandal, which hindered their
Blessedness, which was, to call them to the contemplation of his good works,
and of good works in the highest kind, his Miracles; for in the verse
immediately before the text, (which verse induces the Text) he says to them,
you see the blind receive their sight, the lame go, the leapers are cleansed,
the deaf hear, the dead are raised to life. Christ does not propose, at
least, he does not put all, upon that external purity, and a^sterity of life,
in which, these Disciples of John pretended to exceed all others, but upon
doing good to others; the blind see, the deaf hear, the lame walk. Which
miracles, and great works of his, our blessed Savior sums up with that,
which therefore seems the greatest of all, Pauperes Evangelizantur, The poor
have the Gospel preached unto them. Beloved, the greatest good that we, (we to
whom the dispensation of the word of reconciliation is committed) can do, is,
to preach the Gospel to the poor, to assist the poor, to apply our selves by
all ways, to them, whether they be poor in estate, and fortune, or poor in
understanding and capacity, or poor in their accounts and dis-estimation of
themselves, poor and dejected in spirit. And all these considerations, which,
as you see, are many, and important, (first our general easiness to fall into
the passive scandal, to be offended in others, to mis-interpret others; And
then the general passive scandal and offense that the world took at Christ,
That he induced a Religion incapable of the honors, or the pleasures, or
profits of this world; And thirdly, the particular passive scandal that
disaffected these Disciples of John toward Christ, which was, That his
Gospel enjoined not enough, and therefore they would do more, in which kind,
we find two sects in the world yet, the offspring, and Disciples of those
Disciples; And then lastly, the way that Christ took to reclaim and satisfy
them, which was, by good works, and the best works that they that did them,
could do, (for in himself it was by doing miracles, for the good of others) and
preferring in his good and great works, the assisting of the poor) All these
considerations, I say, will fall into our first part, As you love blessedness,
be not scandalized, be not offended in me, which is the injunction, the
precept, the way. And, when in our due order, we shall come to our second part,
The remuneration, the promise, the end, Blessedness, everlasting blessedness,
I may be glad, that the time will give me some color, some excuse of saying
little of that, as I can foresee already, by this distribution, that we shall
be forced to thrust that part into a narrow conclusion. For, if I had
Methusalems years, and his years multiplied by the minutes of his years, (which
were a fair term) if I could speak till the Angels Trumpets blew, and you had
the patience of Martyrs, and could be content to hear me, till you heard the
Surgite M^rtui, till you were called to meet the Lord Jesus in the clouds, all
that time would not make up one minute, all those words would not make up one
syllable, toward this Eternity, the period of this blessedness. Reserving our
selves therefore for that, to those few minutes which may be left, or borrowed,
when we come to the handling thereof, pursue we first, those con^iderations
which fall more naturally into our comprehension, the several branches of our
first part; As you love blessedness, Be not scandalized, be not offended in me.

First then our Saviors answer to these Disciples of John, 1. Part.
gives us occasion to consider our inclination, Scandalum Passivum.
our propensenesse to the passive scandal, to be offended in others, to
mis-interpret the words and actions of others, and to lament that our
infirmity, or perverseness, in the words of our Savior, Mat 18. 7.
Vae Mundo a scandalis, Woe to the world by reason of scandals, of offenses:
For, that is both a Vae Dolentis, The voice of our Savior lamenting that
perverseness of ours, and Vae Minantis, his voice threatening punishments for
that perverseness. For, Parum distat scandalizare, and scandalizari, says St.
Hierome excellently; It is almost all one to be scandalized by another, as to
scandalize another; almost as great a sin, to be shaked in our constancy, in
our selves, or in our charity toward others, as to offer a scandal to others.
For, this Vae, this intermination of woe from our Savior, Mat. 24. 32.
is bent upon us, from three batteries; for, it is Vae quia Illusiones fortes,
woe, because scandals are so strong in their nature, as that they shall seduce,
if it be possible, the Elect; And then, Vae quia infirmi vos, Woe because you
are so weak in your nature, as that, Mat. 13. 21.
though you receive the word, and receive it with joy, yet Temporales estis,
you may be but Time servers for all that, for, as soon as persecution comes,
ilico, continuo, scandalizamini, Instantly, presently, you are scandalized,
offended; But especially Vae quia Praevaricatores, Woe be unto you, not because
the scandals are so strong, not because you are so weak, but because you
prevaricate against your own souls, because you betray your selves, and make
your selves weaker than you are, you open your selves too easily to a scandal,
you assist a scandal, create a scandal, by your aptness to mis-interpret
other men's proceedings. Great peace have they that love thy Law, Psalm. 119. 165.
says David: Wherein consists this great peace? In this, Non est illis
scandalum, nothing scandalises, nothing offends them, nothing puts them off
from their Kings, their Constancy in themselves, their Charity toward others.
And therefore upon that prayer of David, Liberet te Deus ab Homine malo, The
Lord deliver thee from the evil man, Saint Augustine retires himself into
himself, he sends every man home into himself, and says, Liberette Deus a te,
ne sis tibi homo malus, the Lord deliver thee from thy self, that thou be not
that evil man to thy self; God bless me from my self, that I lead not my
self into tentation, by a wilful misinterpreting of other men, especially my
superiors; that I cast not aspersions or imputations upon the Church, or the
State, by my mistakings. And thus much being said of this general facility of
falling into the Passive scandal, and being offended in others, (which is a
great interruption of blessedness, for Blessed is he, and he only, that is
not so scandalized, offended so) pass we now to the second branch of this
first part, our Saviors, appropriating of this more particularly to himself,
Blessed is he, whosoever is not scandalized, not offended in me.

Christ Crucified, In me.
that is, the Gospel of Christ, is said by the Apostle, to be scandalum
Iudaeis, 1 cor. 1. 23.
a scandal, a stumbling block to the Jews, but Graecis stultitia, to the
Grecians, to the Gentiles, mere foolishness. So that one scandal and offense
that was taken at Christ, and his Gospel, was by the wisemen, the learned, the
Philosophers of the world; they thought that Christ induced a religion
improbable to Reason, a silly and a foolish religion. But these learned men,
these Philosophers, were sooner convinced and satisfied, then others. For, when
we have considered Justin Martyr, and Minutius Felix, and Arnobius, and Origin,
and Lactantius, and some things of Theodoret, and perchance one or two more, we
have done with those Fathers, 1 Cor. 1. 20.
that did any thing against the Gentiles, and their Philosophers, and may soon
come to that question of the Apostle, Vbi sapiens, where is the wiseman, where
is the Philosopher, where is the disputer of the world? Indeed, all that the
Fathers writ against the^, would not amount to so much, as may be found at one
mart, of papists against Protestants, or of Protestants, Lutherans and
Calvinists, against one another. The reason is, Reason will be satisfied,
Passion will not. And therefore, when it came to that issue between the
Christian and the Natural man, which Religion was most comfortable to Reason,
it soon resolved into these two, whether it were more conformable to Reason to
believe One God, as the Christian does, or many, as the Gentiles; and then,
being brought to the belief of one God, whether it were more conformable to
reason, to believe three Persons in that one God, as we, or but one, as they
do. Now, for the first of these, the Multiplicity of Gods, it involved so
many, so evident, so ridiculous absurdities, as not only those few Fathers
soon disputed them, but some of themselves, such as Lucian, soon laughed them,
out of it; and so reason prevailed soon for the unity of the Godhead, that
there is but one God, and that question was not long in suspense, nor
agitation. And for the other, three persons in this one God, the Trinity,
though we cannot so immediately prove that by Reason, nor so entirely,
altogether, yet, by these steps we can: first, that there is nothing in the
doctrine of the Trinity against Reason; the doctrine of the Trinity implies no
contradiction; It may be so; and then, that it is so, if we have the word of
God, for it, Reason it self will conclude, that we have Reason on our side;
And that we have the word of God for it, we proceed thus, that for this Book,
which we call the Bible, which book delivers us the Doctrine of the Trinity, we
have far better reasons, and stronger arguments to satisfy any natural man,
that this book is the word of God, then the Turk, or any professors of any
other Religion have, that those books which they pretend to be so, are so. So
that positively for the first, that there is but one God, and Comparatively for
the other, that there are three persons, Reason it self, (if we were bound to
submit all Religion to Reason) may receive a satisfaction, a calm, and
peaceable acquiescence. And so, the scandal that the Philosophers took, was,
with no great difficulty, overcome. But then the scandals that worldly and
carnal men took, lasted longer. They were offended in Christ, that he induced
an inglorious, a contemptible Religion, a Religion that opposed the Honors of
this world; and a sooty, and Melancholique Religion, a Religion that opposed
the Pleasures, and delights of this world; and a fordid, and beggarly Religion,
a Religion that opposed the Gain, and the Profit of this world. But were this
enough to condemn the Christian Religion, if it did oppose worldly honor, or
pleasure, or profit? Or does our Religion do that? Be pleased to stop a little
upon both these Problems; whether that were enough to their ends, if it were
so, and then, whether there be any such thing in our Religion; and begin we
with their first offense at Christ, The point of Honor.

The Apostle speaks of an Eternal weight of Glory; Honor.
Glory, A weight of Glory, An eternal weight of Glory; 2 Cor. 1. 17.
But where? In heaven, not in this world. The Honors of this world, are far
from being weights, or fraights, or ballast to carry us steady; they are but
light froths, but leaven, but fermentation, that puffes and swells us up. And
they are as far from being eternal; for, in every family, we know, in which
father, or grandfather the Honor began, and we know not how soon, or how
ignominiously it may end; but such ends of worldly Honors, we see every day.
When a Lord meets a man that honors him, makes him courtesy, and curses him
withal, what has his Lordship got by that Honor? when popular acclamations
cast him into insolent actions, and into the net of the Law, where is the ease,
the benefit, the consolation of his Honor? But especially, if worldly Honor
must be had upon those conditions here, as shall hinder my eternal weight of
Glory hereafter, I should honor any dishonor, glorify any inglorious state,
embrace any Dunghill, call any poverty Treasure, rather then bring the Honors
of this world into the Balance, into competition, into comparison with that
eternal weight of Glory in heaven. So that if the Christian Religion did
oppose worldly Honor, it were not to be opposed for that: But it is far from
that; for, as no Religion imprints more honor, more reverence, more subjection
in the hearts of men, toward their Superiors of all sorts, Natural, or
Civil, or Ecclesiastical, Parents, or Magistrates, or Prelates, then the
Christian Religion does (for, we bind even the conscience it self) so never
was there any form of Religion upon the face of the earth, in which persons
were capable of greater Titles, and styles of dignity, then in the Christian
Church. Never any Moscovite, any Turk, received such titles, as the world has,
and does give to the Bishop of Rome; so great, as that some of the greatest
later Emperors, have had an ambition of that dignity, and endeavored to have
been elected Popes too, being Emperors. If Religion opposed Honor, that should
not diminish it; but it does not that, nor Pleasure neither, which was another
thing, in which, the world was offended in Christ.

As when we compared the Honor of this world, Voluptas.
with the Glory of Heaven, we found it nothing, so should we do the Pleasures
of this world, if we compared them with the Joys of heaven. And therefore if my
religion did enwrap me in a continual cloud, damp me in a continual vapor,
smoke me in a continual soreness, and joylesnesse in this life, yet I have
an abundant recompense in that Reversion, which the Lord, Ps. 36. 28.
the righteous Judge has laid up for me, That I shall drink e torrente
valuptatis, of the Rivers of his pleasures; pleasures, His pleasures, Rivers,
ever-flowing, overflowing Rivers of his pleasures. So that if my Religion
denied me pleasure here, I would not deny my Religion, nor be displeased with
my Religion for that; But it does not that; for what Christian is denied a care
of his health, or of a good habitude of body, or the use of those things, which
may give a cheerfulness to his heart, or a cheerfulness to his co^ntenance?
What Christian is denied such Garments, or such Ornaments, as his own rank, and
condition, in particular requires, or as the National and general custom of
his times has induced and authorized? What Christian is denied Conversation,
or Recreation, or honest Relaxation of Body or Spirit? Excess of these
pleasures, as well in the Heathen, as in the Christian, falls under Solomon's
Vanity, and Vexation of spirit. But with the right use of these pleasures, the
Christian has that, which none but he, has, Psalm. 4. 8.
That the Lord puts gladness into my heart, That the Lord enables me to lay
me down in peace, and sleep, That the Lord assures me that he will keep me
in safety. If Religion excluded worldly pleasure, that were no cause of
scandal or offense; but it does not that; no nor Profit neither, which is a
third consideration.

What is a man profited, Lucrum.
says our Savior, (he saw all the world was carried upon profit, and he goes
along with them, that way) What is a man profited, Mat. 16. 26.
if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? If a man have an answer to
that question, that question of Confusion, Luc. 12. 10.
and Consternation, that Christ asks, Cujue erunt, fool this night they shall
fetch away thy soul, and then, Cuju^ erunt, whose shall all those things be,
that thou have provided? if a man can answer, Haeredis erunt, They shall be
mine heirs, mine heir shall have them; Besides that, though thy bell toll
first, his may ring out first; though thou be old, and crasie, and sickly,
Though they do fetch away thy soul this night, they may fetch away his before
thine, thine heir may die before thee, and there is that assurance disappointed;
If thine heir do enjoy all this, will all that distill one drop of cold water
upon thy tongue in hell? And so is he, (says Christ, in the conclusion of that
parable) that lays up riches for himself, and is not rich toward God. So
that if Riches might not consist with Religion, it would not hurt our cause;
but they may, they do. Godliness has the promise of this life, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
and of the next; of both, but of this first. The seed of the righteous, Ps.
112. 3.
shall be mighty upon earth, and wealth and riches shall be in his house. Many
places of Scripture tell us that the wicked may be rich, and that they are
rich; but in no place does God promise that they shall be rich. So says David's
son, Solomon, too, Prove. 14. 24.
The Crown of the wise is their riches; we all know what men Solomon means by
wise men; Godly men, Religious men; And their Crown is Riches. Beloved, there
is an inward Joy, there is an outward dignity and reverence, that accompanies
Riches, and the Godly, the righteous man is not incapable of these; Nay, they
belong rather to him, then to the ungodly: Prove. 19. 10.
Non decent stultum divitiae, (as the Vulgat reads that place) Riches do not
become a fool. But because, for all that, though Riches do not become a fool,
yet fools do become rich; our Translations read that place thus: joy,
pleasure, delight, is not seemly for a fool; Though the fool, the ungodly man,
may be rich, yet a right joy, a holy delight in riches, belongs only to the
wise, to the righteous. The Patriarchs in the Old Testament, many examples in
the New, are testimonies to us of the compatibility of riches, and
righteousness; that they may, that they have often met in one person. For, is
fraud, and circumvention so sure a way, of attaining Gods blessings, as
industry, and conscientiousnesse is? Or is God so likely to concur with the
fraudulent, the deceitful man, as with the laborious, and religious? Was not
Ananias, with his disguises, more suddenly destroyed, then Job, and more
irrecoverably? And cannot a Star Chamber, or an Exchequer, leave an ungodly man
as poor, as a storm at sea, in a ship-wracke, or a fire at land, in a
lightning, can do the godly? Murmr not, be not scandalized, nor offended in
him, if God, for reasons reserved to himself, keep thee in poverty; but know,
that God has exposed the riches of this world, as well, rather to the godly,
then the wicked. And so have you the second branch of this first part, The
scandals which, for the most part, were taken at Christ, and his Gospel, by the
Philosophers, that it was a Religion contrary to Reason, by worldly, and
carnal men, that it was a Religion contrary to the honors, to the pleasures,
to the profits of this world; which, if it were so, were no impeachment to it,
but it is not: And so we are come to the third branch, The particular passive
scandal, which our Savior deprehended in these two Disciples of John, diverse
from the rest.

That, Discipuli Ioannis.
which mis-affected them toward Christ, was not that he induced a Religion too
low, too sordid, too humble, but not low enough, not humble enough; and
therefore they would out-bid Christ, and undertake more, then his Disciples
practiced, or himself prescribed. Their Master, John Baptist, discerned this
distemper in them, then when they said to him, Io^. 3. 26. 30.
Rabbi, He that was with thee beyond Jordan, baptizes as fast as thou, and all
the world comes to him. John Baptist deals plainly with them, and he tells them,
that they must not be offended in that, for so it must be, He must increase,
and I must decrease. This troubled them; and because it did so, John sends them
personally to Christ, to receive farther satisfaction. When they come at first
to him, they say, Sir, Mat. 9. 14.
we fast, and, even the Pharisees fast, why do not you, and your Disciples
fast too? And then our blessed Savior enlarges himself to them, in that point
of fasting, and they go home satisfied. Now they return again, and they
continue their wonder, that Christ should continue his greatness, and his
estimation in the world, they exceeding him so far in this outward austority of
life, which was so specious, and so winning a thing amongst the Jews. Ambr.
But duo Discipuli fortasse duo populi, These two Disciples of John may have
their Disciples in the world to this day; And therefore forbearing their
persons, we shall consider their offspring; Those men, who in an
over-valuation of their own purity, despise others, as men whom nothing can
save; and those men, who in an over-valuation of their own merits, think to
save themselves and others too, by their supererogations.

Begin we with the first, C^^^ari.
The over-pure despisers of others; Men that will abridge, and contract the
large mercies of God in Christ, and elude, and frustrate, in a great part, the
general promises of God. Men that are loath, that God should speak so loud, as
to say, He would have all men saved, And loath that Christ should spread his
arms, or shed his blood in such a compass, as might fall upon all. Men that
think no sin can hurt them, because they are elect, and that every sin makes
every other man a Reprobate. But with the Lord there is Copiosa redemption Ps.
130. 7.
plentiful redemption, and an overflowing cup of mercy. Aquae quae non
mentiuntur, As the holy Ghost says more then once, more then many times, in
the Prophets, Waters that will not lie, that will not dry, James 3. 17.
not deceive, not disappoint any man. The wisdom that is from above, is first
pure, and then peaceable. Purity, Sincerity, Integrity, Holiness, is a skirt
of Christ's garment; It is the very livery that he puts upon us; we cannot
serve him without it, (we must serve him in holiness and pureness) we cannot
see him without it, without holiness no man shall see God. But then to be
pure, and not peaceable, to determine this purity in our selves, and condemn
others, this is but an imaginary, but an illusory purity Not to have relieved
that poor wretch, that lay wounded, and weltring in his blood in the way to
Jericho, Luc. 10. 30.
was the uncharitableness of the Levite, and the Priest, in that parable. But
that parable presents no man so uncharitable, as would have hindered the
Samaritan, from pouring his ^^yle, and his Wine into the wounds of that
distressed wretch. To hinder the blood of Christ Jesus, not to suffer that
blood to flow as far, as it will, to deny the mercy of God in Christ, to any
sinner, whatsoever, upon any pretense, whatsoever, this is to be offended in
Christ, to be scandalized with his Gospel; for, that is his own precept, Have
sa^^ in your selves, (be it, purity, the best preservative of the soul) And
then, Mar. 9. 50.
Have peace with one another, Deny no man the benefit of Christ; Bless thou
the Lord, praise him, and magnify him, for that which hoe has done for thee,
and believe, that he means as well to others, as to thee. And these are one
Sect of the Disciples of John's Disciples, That think there are men, whom Christ
cannot save, And the other is of men that think they can save other men.

Ignatius, Papiste.
who is so ancient, as that we have letters from him to S. John, and from him
to the Blessed Virgin, and if the copies be true) from her to him, as ancient
as he is, says, Monet quisquam antiquorum, One of the Ancients has given us
this caution, Vt nemo bonus dicatur qui malum bono permiscuerit, That we call
no man good, that is good to ill ends, nor believe any man to speak truth, that
speaks truth at some times, to make his future lies the more credible. And much
this way does the Roman Church proceed with us, in this behalf. They magnify
sanctification, and holiness of life well; well do they propose many good
means, for the advancement, and ex^ltation thereof; fasting, and prayer, and
alms, and other Medicinal Disciplines, and Mortifications. But all this to a
wrong end; Not to make them the more acceptable to God, but to make God the
more beholden to them; To merit, and over-merit; To satisfy, and
super-satisfie the justice of God for their own, and for others sins. Now, God
will be served with all our power; But, say they, we may serve God, with more
then all our power. How? Because I may have more power, more grace, more help,
to day, then I had yesterday? But does not the same Commandment, of serving
God, with all my power, lie upon me, to day, as did yesterday? If yesterday,
when I had less power, less grace, less help, all was but Duty and service
that could be done, is it the less a service and a duty now, because God has
enlarged my capacity with more grace, and more helps then before? Do I owe God
the less, because he has given me more? All that my Savior has taught me,
in this, to pray for, is but this, Dimitte debita, Lord forgive me the
not-endevouring to keep thy Commandments: But for not doing more then thy
Commandments, I ask no forgiveness, by any prayer, or precept recommended to
me by him. Ad Evangelii impletionem conscendat nostra religio, nec
transcendats says the learnedest Nun, and the best Matriarch, and Mother of
that Church, I think, that ever writ, Heloyssa; I pray God, our Order may get
so far, as the Gospel enjoins, and not press beyond that; Nec quid amplius,
quam ut Christianae simus, appetamus, That we desire to be no more, then good
Christians. And farther we extend not this third consideration, The particular
passive scandal, which Christ found in these Disciples of John, and which we
have noted in their progeny, and offspring but go on to the fourth, The way
that Christ took to divest them thereof, by calling them to the contemplation
of his works, Consider what you have seen done, The blind see, The lame go,
The deaf hear, and then you will not endanger your blessedness, by being
offended in me.

The evidence that Christ produces, Opera.
and presses, is good works; for, if a man offer me the root of a tree to
taste, I cannot say this is such a Pear, or Apple, or Plum; but if I see the
fruit, I can. If a man pretend Faith to me, I must say to him, with Saint
James, Can his Faith save him? 2. 14.
such a Faith, as that the Apostle declares himself to mean, A dead Faith, 17.
as all Faith is that is inoperative, and works not. But if I see his works,
I proceed the right way in Judicature, I judge secundum allegata and probata,
according to my evidence: And if any man will say, those works may be
hypocritical, I may say of any witness, He may be perjured; but as long as I
have no particular cause to think so, it is good evidence to me, Hilar.
as to hear that man's Oath, so to see this man's works. Cum in Coelis sedentem
in Crucem agere non possum, Though I cannot crucify Christ, being now set at
the right hand of his Father in Heaven, yet there is Odium impietatis, says
that Father, A crucifying by ungodliness; An ungodly life in them that
profess Christ, is a daily crucifying of Christ. Therefore here Christ refers
to good works; And there is more in this then so: It is not only good works,
but good works in the highest proportion, The best works, that he that does
them, can do: Therefore, in his own case he appeals to Miracles. For if
fasting were all, or wearing of Camells hair, all, or to have done some good
to some men, by Baptizing them, were all, these Disciples and their Master
might have had as much to plead as Christ. Therefore he calls them to the
consideration of works of a higher nature, of Miracles; for, God never
subscribes nor testifies a forged Deed; God never seals a falsehood with a
Miracle. Therefore, when the Jews say of Christ, Io^. 10. 20.
He has a Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him? some of the other Jews said,
These are not the words of one that has a Devil: But though by that it appear,
that some evidence, some argument may be raised in a man's behalf, from his
words, from that he says, from his Preaching, yet Christ's friends who spoke in
his favor, do not rest in that, That those are not the words of one that has
a Devil, but proceed to that, Can the Devil open the eyes of the blind? He
does more then the Devil can do; They appeal to his works, to his good
works, to his great works, to his Miracles. But does he put us to do
miracles? no; Though, in truth those sumptuous and magnificent buildings, and
endowments, which some have given for the sustentation of the poor, are almost
Miracles, half Miracles, in respect of those penurious proportions, that Myut
and Cumin, and those half-ounces of broken bread, which some as rich as they,
have dropped, and crumbled out; Truly, he that does as much as he can, is
almost a Miracle; And when Christ appeals to his Miracles he calls us therein,
to the best works we can do. God will be loved with the whole heart, and God
will have that love declared with our whole substance. I must not think I have
done enough, if I have built an Almes-house; As long as I am able to do more,
I have done nothing. This Christ intimates in producing his greatest works,
Miracles; which Miracles he closes up with that, as with the greatest,
Pauperes evangelizantur, The poor have the Gospel preached unto them.

In this our Blessed Savior does not only give an instruction to John's
Disciples, Paupores.
but therein also derives and conveyes a precept upon us, upon us, who as we
have received mercy, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
have received the Ministry, and indeed, upon all you, whom he has made
Regale Sacerdotium, A royal Priesthood, and Reges and Sacerdotes, Kings and
Priests unto your God, Apoc. 5. 10.
and bound you thereby, as well as us to preach the Gospel to the poor, you,
by an exemplar life, and a Catechizing conversation, as well as us, by our
words and meditations. Now beloved, there are Poor, that are literally poor,
poor in estate and fortune; and poor, that are naturally poor, poor in
capacity, and understanding; and poor, that are spiritually poor, dejected in
spirit, and insensible of the comforts, which the Holy Ghost offers unto them;
and to all these poor, are we all bound to preach the Gospel. First then for
them which are literally poor, poor in estate, how much do they want of this
means of salvation, Preaching, which the rich have? They cannot maintain
Chaplains in their houses; They cannot forbear the necessary labors of their
calling, to hear extraordinary Sermons; They cannot have seats in Churches,
whenever they come; They must stay, they must stand, they must thrust, they
must overcome that difficulty, which Saint Augustine makes an impossibility,
that is, for any man to receive benefit by that Sermon, that he hears with
pain: They must take pains to hear. To these poor therefore, the Lord and his
Spirit has sent me to preach the Gospel; That Gospel, The Lord knows thy
poverty, Rev. 2. 9.
but thou art rich; That Gospel, Be content with such things as thou have,
Hob. 13. 5.
for the Lord has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee; And that
Gospel, God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, heirs of that
Kingdom, which he has promised to them that love him; I. vnes 2. 5.
And this is the Gospel of those poor, literally poor, poor in estate. To
those that are naturally poor, poor in understanding, the Lord and his Spirit
has sent me to preach the Gospel too; That Gospel, If any man lack
wisdom, James 1. 5.
let him ask it of God; Solomon himself had none, till he asked it there.
Apoc. 5. 1.
And that Gospel where John went bitterly, because there was a Book
preseated, but no man could open it, It were a sad consideration, if now, when
the Book of God, the Scripture is afforded to us, we could not open that
Book, not understand those Scriptures. But there is the Gospel of those
poor; That Lamb, which is spoken of there, That Lamb, which in the same
place is called a Lion too, That Lambe-Lion has opened the Book for us. The
humility of the Lamb gathers the strength of the Lion; come humbly to the
reading and hearing of the Scriptures, and thou shall have strength of
understanding. The Scriptures were not written for a few, nor are to be
reserved for a few; All they that were present at this LambLions opening of the
Book, that is, All they that come with modesty and humility, to the search of
the Scriptures, All they, (and they are no small number, for there they are
said to be ten thousand times ten thousand, verse 11.
and thousands of thousands) All they say there, We are all made Kings and
Priests unto our God. Begin a Lamb, and thou will become a Lion; Read the
Scriptures modestly, humbly, and thou shall understand them strongly, Homil. 2.
in Genesis and 3. in 2 Thessalonians.
powerfully; for hence is it that Saint Chrys^stome, more then once, and Saint
Gregory after him, meet in that expression, That the Scriptures are a Sea, in
which a Lamb may wade, and an Elephant may swim. And this is the Gospel of
those poor, poor in understanding. To those that are spiritually poor, wrung
in their souls, stung in their Consciences, fretted, galled, exulcerated
viscerally, even in the bowels of their Spirit, insensible, inapprehensive of
the mercies of God in Christ, the Lord and his Spirit has sent me to preach
the Gospel also, Matt. 5.
That Gospel, Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs it the Kingdom of
Heaven; and to recollect, and redintegrate that broken and scattered heart, by
enabling him to expostulate, and chide his own soul, with those words of
comfort, which the Holy Ghost offers him, once, and again, and again, Why art
thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? Hope thou in
God; Psalm 42. 5. 11.
and, yet praise him for the light of his countenance. Psalm. 43. 5.
Words of inexpresible comfort, yet praise him for the light of his
countenance; Though thou sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, yet
praise him for the light of his Countenance. Whatsoever thy darkness be, put
not out that candle, The light of his Countenance. Maintain that light,
discern that light, and whatsoever thy darkness seemed, it shall prove to be
but an over shadowing of the Holy Ghost. And so beloved, if you have
sufficiently considered, first, our general easiness of falling into the
Passive scandal, of being offended in others, by misinterpreting their
proceedings, and then the general scandals which the world took at Christ,
and his Gospel, The Philosophers, that it was an ignorant religion, (where you
saw, That the learneder the adversary is, the sooner he is satisfied) And the
worldly and carnal man, that it was a dishonorable, an unpleasurable, an
unprofitable Religion, (where you saw, that it were no Diminution to our
Religion, if it were all that, but it is none of it) If you have also
considered the particular passive scandal that Christ deprehended in those two
Disciples of John, That they would do more then Christ practiced or
prescribed, (where you saw also the distemper of those, that are derived from
them, both those that think there are some sinners whom Christ cannot save,
and those who think there are no sinners whom they cannot save, by their
Supererogations) And considered lastly, the way that Christ took, to divest
these men of this offense, and passive scandal, which was to call them to the
consideration of good works, and of the best works, which he that does them,
can do, (where you have also seen, that Christ makes that our best work, To
preach the Gospel to the poor, both because the poor are destitute of other
comforts, and because their very poverty has soupled them, and mellowed them,
and macerated, and matured, and disposed them, by corrections to instructions)
If you have received all this, you have received all that we proposed for the
first part the injunction, the precept, the way, Be not sandalized, be not
offended in me. And now, that which I suspected at first, is fallen upon me, that
is to thrust our other part into a narrow conclusion, though it be blessedness
it self, everlasting blessedness; so we must; so we shall; blessed is he,
(there is the remuneration, the promise, the end) whosoever is not offended in
me. Blessed.

The Heathen, 2. Part, Blessed.
who saw by the light of nature, that they could have no Being, if there were
no God, (for it is from one of themselves, that Saint Paul says, in him we
live, Act. 17. 28.
and move, and have our Being, and Genus cjus su^us, we are the offspring of
God) saw also by the same light of nature, that they could have no well-being,
if there were no Blessedness. And therefore, as the Heathen multiplied Gods to
themselves, so did they also multiply blessedness. They brought their Jupiters
to three hundred, says Varro; And from the same author, from Varro, does Saint
Augustine collect almost three hundred several opinions of Blessedness. But,
In multitudine nullitas, says Tertullian excellently; as where there are many
Gods, there is no God, so where there are many blessednesses imagined, there is
no blessedness possessed. Not but that, as the Sun which moves only in his
own Sphere in heaven, does yet cast down beams and influences into this
world, so that blessedness which is truly, only in heaven, does also cast
down beams and influences hither, and gild, and enamell, yea inanimate the
blessings of God here, with the true name, the true nature of blessedness.
Psalm.144.15.
For, though the vulgat edition do read that place, thus, Beatum dixerant
populum, the world thought that people blessed that were so, that is,
Temporally blessed, as though that were but an imaginary, and not a true
blessedness; and howsoever it have seemed good to our Translators, to insert
into that verse a discretive particle, a particle of difference, Yea, ( Blessed
are the people that are so,) that is, Temporally blessed, Yea, blessed are the
people whose God is the Lord, yet in truth, in the Original, there is no such
discretive particle, no word of difference, no yea, in the text, but both the
clauses of that verse are carried in one and the same tenor, Blessed are the
people that are so, Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord; that is, that
people whom the Lord has blessed so, with Temporal blessings, is bound to
believe those temporal blessings, to be seals and evidences to them that the
Lord is their God. So then there is a Viatory, a preparatory, an initiatory, an
inchoative blessedness in this life. What is that? All agree in this
definition, that blessedness is that in quo quiescit animus, in which the
mind, the heart, the desire of man has settled, and rested, in which it found
a Centricall reposednesse, an acquiescence, a contentment. Not that which might
satisfy any particular man; for, so the object would be infinitely various;
but that, beyond which no man could propose any thing; August.
And is there such ablessednesse in this life? There is. Fecisti nos Domine ad
te, and inquietum est Cor nostrum, donec quiescat in te; Lord thou have made us
for thy self, and our heart cannot rest, till it get to thee. But can we come
to God here? We cannot. Where Is then our viatory, our preparatory, our
initiatory, our in choative blessedness. Beloved, though we cannot come to God
here, here God comes to us; Here, in the prayers of the Congregation God comes
to us; here, in his Ordinance of Preaching, God delivers himself to us; here
in the administration of his Sacraments, he seals, ratifies, confirms all unto
us; And to rest in these his seals and means of reconciliation to him, this is
not to be scandalized, not to be offended in him; and, not to be offended in
him, not to suspect him or these means which he has ordained, this is our
viatory, our preparatory, our initiatory and inchoative Blessedness, beyond
which, nothing can be proposed in this life. And therefore, as the Needle of a
Sea-compasse, though it shake long, yet will rest at last, and though it do not
look directly, exactly to the North Pole, but have some variation, yet, for all
that variation, will rest, so, though thy heart have some variations, some
deviations, some aberrations from that direct point, upon which it should be
bent, which is an absolute conformity of thy will to the will of God, yet,
though thou lack something of that, afford thy soul rest: settle thy soul in
such an infallibility, as this present condition can admit, and believe, that
God receives glory as well in thy Repentance, as in thine Innocence, and that
the mercy of God in Christ, is as good a pillow to rest thy soul upon after a
sin, as the grace of God in Christ is a shield, and protection for thy soul,
before. In a word, this is our viatory, our preparatory, our initiatory, and
inchoative blessedness, beyond which there can be no blessedness proposed
here, first to receive a satisfaction, an acquiescence, that there are certain
and constant means ordained by Christ, for our reconciliation to God in him,
in all cases, in which a Christian soul can be distressed, that such a
treasure there is deposited by him, in the Church, And then, the testimony of a
rectified Conscience, that thou have sincerely applied those general helps to
thy particular soul. Come so far, and then, as the Suburbs touch the City,
and the Porch the Church, and deliver thee into it, so shall this Viatory, this
preparatory, this initiatory and inchoative blessedness deliver thee over to
the everlasting blessedness of the Kingdom of heaven. Of which everlasting
blessedness, I would ask leave, not so much of you; (yet of you too, for with
you, I would not be over-bold) but I would ask leave of the Angels of heaven,
leave of the holy Ghost himself, to venture to say a little, of this
everlasting blessedness: The tongues of Angels cannot, the tongues of the holy
Ghost, the Authors of the books of Scripture have not told us, what this
blessedness is; And what then shall we say, but this?

Blessedness it self, In Caelis.
is God himself; our blessedness is our possession; our union with God. In
what consists this? A great limb of the School with their Thomas, place this
blessedness, this union with God, In visione, in this, That in heaven I shall
see God, see God essentially, God face to face, God as he is. We do not see one
another so, in this world; In this world we see but outsides; In heaven I shall
see God, and God essentially. But then another great branch of the School,
with their Scotus, place this blessedness, this union with God, in Amore, in
this, that in heaven, I shall love God. August.
Now love presumes knowledge; for, Amari nisi nota new possunt, we can love
nothing, but that which we do, or think we do understand. There, in heaven, I
shall know God, so, as that I shall be admitted, not only to an Adoration of
God, to an admiration of God, to a prosternation, and reverence before God, but
to an affection, to an office, of more familiarity toward God, of more
equality with God, I shall love God. But even love it self, as noble a passion
as it is, is but a pain, except we enjoy that we love; and therefore another
branch of the School, with their Aureolus, place this blessedness, this union
of our souls with God, in Gaudio, in our joy, that is, in our enjoying of God.
In this world we enjoy nothing; enjoying presumes perpetuity; and here, all
things are fluid, transitory: There I shall enjoy, and possess for ever, God
himself. But yet, every one of these, to see God, or to love God, or to enjoy
God, have seemed to some too narrow to comprehend this blessedness, beyond
which, nothing can be proposed; and therefore another limb of the School,
with their Bonaventure, place this blessedness in all these together. And
truly, if any of those did exclude any of these, so, as that I might see God,
and not love him, or love God, and not enjoy him, it could not well be called
blessedness; but he that has any one of these, has every one, all: And
therefore the greatest part concur, and safely, In visione, That vision is
beatification, to see God, as he is, is that blessedness.

There then, in heaven, I shall have continuitatem Intuendi; It is not only
vision, but Intuition, not only a seeing, but a beholding, a contemplating of
God, and that in Continuitate, I shall have an un-interrupted, an
un-intermitted, an un-discontinued sight of God, I shall look, and never look
off; not look, and look again, as here, but look, and look still, for that
is, Continuitas intuendi. There my soul shall have Inconcussam qu^etem; we
need owe Plato nothing; but we may thank Plato for this expression, if he meant
so much by this Inconcussa quies, That in heaven my soul shall sleep, not
only without trouble, and startling, but without rocking, without any other
help, then that peace, which is in it self; My soul shall be thoroughly
awake, and thoroughly asleep too; still busy, active, diligent, and yet still
at rest. But the Apostle will exceed the Philosopher, St. Paul will exceed
Plato, as he does when he says, I shall be unus spiritus cum Deo, 1 cor. 6. 17.
I shall be still but the servant of my God, and yet I shall be the same spirit
with that God. When? Dies quem tanquam supremum reformidas, aterni natalis est,
says the Moral man's Oracle, Seneca. Our last day is our first day, our
Saturday is our Sunday, our Eve is our Holyday, our sunsetting is our morning,
the day of our death, is the first day of our eternal life. The next day after
that, which is the day of judgment, Veniet dies, quae me mihi revelabit; comes
that day that shall show me to my self; here I never saw my self, but in
disguises: There, Then, I shall see my self, and see God too. Totam lucem, and
Totus lux aspiciam; I shall see the whole light; Here I see some parts of the
air enlightened by the Sun, but I do not see the whole light of the Sun;
There I shall see God entirely, all God, totam lutem, and totus lax, I my self
shall be al light to see that light by. Here, I have one faculty enlightened, and
another left in darkness: mine uuderstanding sometimes cleared, my will, at
the same time perverted. There, I shall be all light, no shadow upon me; my
soul invested in the light of joy, and my body in the light of glory. How
glorious is God, as he looks down upon us, through the Sun? How glorious in
that glass of his? How glorious is God, as he looks out amongst us through the
king? How glorious in that Image of his? How glorious is God, as he calls up
our eyes to him, in the beauty, and splendour, and service of the Church? How
glorious in that spoufe of his? But how glorious shall I conceive this light to
be, cum sub loco viderim, when I shall see it, in his own place. In that
Sphere, which though a Sphere, is a Center too; In that place, which, though
a place, is all, and every where. I shall see it, in the face of that God, who
is all face, all manifestration, August.
all all Innotescence to me, (for, facies Deiest, qua Deus nobis innotescit,
that is Gods face to us, by which God manifests himself to us) I shall see this
light in his face, who is all face, and yet all hand, all application, and
communication, and delivery of all himself to all his Saints. This is
Beatitudo in Auge, blessedness in the Meridionall height, blessedness in the
South point, in a perpetual Summer solstice, beyond which nothing can be
proposed, to see God so, Then, There. And yet the farmers of heaven and hell,
the merchants of souls, the Roman Church, make this blessedness, but an
under degree, but a kind of apprentiship; after they have beatified, declared
a man to be blessed in the fruition of God in heaven, if that man, in that
inferior state do good service to that Church, that they see much profit will
rise, by the devotion, and concurrence of men, to the worship; of that person,
then they will proceed to a Canonization; and so, he that in his Novitiat, and
years of probation was but blessed Ignatius, and blessed Xavier, is lately
become Saint Xavier, and Saint Ignatius. And so they pervert the right order,
and method, which is first to come to Sanctification, and then to
Beatification, first to holiness, and then to blessedness. And in this
method, our blessed God be pleased to proceed with us, by the operation of his
holy Spirit, to bring us to Sanctification here, and by the merits and
intercession of his glorious Son, to Beatification hereafter. That so not
being offended in him, but resting in those means and seals, of
reconciliation, which thou have instituted in thy Church, we may have life,
and life more abundantly, life of grace here, and life of glory there, in that
kingdom, which thy Son, our Savior Christ Jesus has purchased for us, with
the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood. Amen.

SERMON XLV.
Preached at Saint Dunstans April 11. 1624. The first sermon in that Church,
as Vicar thereof.
DEUTERONOMY. 25. 5. If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no
Child, the Wife of the dead shall not mary without, unto a stranger: her
husbands brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him to wife, and
perform the duty of an husbands brother unto her.
FRom the beginning God intimated a detestation, a dislike of singularity; of
being Alone. The first time that God himself is named in the Bible, in the
first verse of Genesis, he is named plurally, Creavit Dit, Gods, Gods in the
plural, Created Heaven and Earth. God, which is but one, would not appear,
nor be presented so alone, but that he would also manifest more persons. As
the Creator was not Singular, so neither were the creatures; First, he created
heaven and earth; both together; which were to be the general parents, and out
of which were to be produced all other creatures; and then, he made all those
other creatures plurally too; Male, and female created he them; And when he
came to make him, for whose sake (next to his own glory) he made the whole
world, Adam, he left not Adam alone, but joined an Eve to him; Now, when they
were married, we know, but we know not when they were divorced; we hear when
Eve was made, but not when she dyed; The husbands death is recorded at last,
the wives is not at all. So much detestation has God himself, and so little
memory would he have kept of any singularity, of being alone. The union of
Christ to the whole Church is not expressed by any metaphore, by any figure, so
often in the Scripture, as by this of Mariage^ and there is in that union with
Christ to the whole Church, neither husband, nor wife can ever die; Christ is
immortal as he is himself, and immortal, as he is the head of the Church,
the Husband of that wife: for that wife, the Church is immortal too; for as a
Prince is the same Prince, when he fights a battle, and when he triumphs
after the victory: so the militant, and the triumphant Church is the same
Church. There can be no widower, There can be no Dowager, in that case; He
cannot, she cannot die. But then this Metaphore, this spiritual Marriage,
holds not only between Christ and the whole Church, in which case thee can be
no Widow, but in the union between Christ's particular Ministers, and particular
Churches; and there, in that case, the husband of that wife may die; The
present Minister may die, and so that Church be a Widow; And in that case, and
for provision of such Widows, we consider the accommodation of this Law. If
brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of
the dead shall not mary without, unto a stranger, etc.

This law was but a permissive law; rather a dispensation, then a law: as the
permitting of usury to be taken of strangers, and the permitting of divorces
in so many cases, were. At most it was but a Judicial law, and therefore lays
no obligation, upon any other nation, then them, to whom it was given, the
Jews. And therefore we enquire not the reasons of that law, (the reasons were
determined in that people) we examine not the conveniences of the law; (the
conveniences were determined in those times) we lay hold only upon the
Typique signification, and appliablenesse of the law, as that secular Marriage
there spoken of, may be appliable to this spiritual Marriage, the Marriage of
the Minister to the Church: If brethren dwell together, etc.

From these words then, we shall make our approaches, and application, Divisio.
to the present occasion, by these steps; First, there is a marriage, in the
case. The taking, and leaving of a Church, is not an indifferent, an arbitrary
thing; It is a Marriage, and Marriage implies, Honor: It is an honorable
estate, and that implies charge, it is a burdensome state; There is Honos, and
Onus, Honor, and labor, in Marriage; You must be content to afford the
honor, we must be content to endure the labor. And so in that point, as our
Incumbencie upon a Church, is our Marriage to that Church, we shall as far,
as the occasion admits, see what marriage includes, and what it excludes; what
it requires, what it forbids. It is a marriage, and a marriage after the death of
another: If one dye, says the Text; Howsoever the Roman Church in the
exercise of their Tyranny, have forbidden Churchmen to mary, then when they
have orders, and forbidden orders to be given to any, who have formerly been
married, if they married Widows, God is pleased here, to afford us, some
intimation, some adumbration, a Typical and exemplar knowledge of the
lawfulness of such marriages, he mary's after the death of a former husband;
and then farther, a brother mary's the wife of his deceased brother; Now into
the reasons of the law, literally given, and literally accepted, we look not;
It is enough, that God has a care of the preservation of names and families
and inheritances in those distinctions, and in those Tribes; where he laid
them then; but for the accommodation of the law to our present application, it
must be a brother, a spiritual brother, a professor of the same faith, that
succeeds in this marriage, in this possession, and this government of that widow
Church. It must be a brother, and Frater c^habitans, says our Text, a brother
that dwelt together, with the former husband; he must be of the same household
of the faithful, as well as profess the same faith; he must dwell in the
house of God, not separate himself, or encourage others to do so, for matter
of Ceremonies, and discipline; Idolaters must not, Separaists must not be
admitted to these marriages, to these widow churches. And then it is a
surrendering to a brother dead without children: In this spiritual procreation
of children, we all dye without children of our own; Though by our labors,
when God blesses them, you become children, yet you are Gods children, not
ours; we nurse you by his word, but his Spirit begets you by the same word; we
must not challenge to us, that which God only can do. And then being thus
married to this widow, taking the charge of this Church, he must, says our text,
perform the duty of a husbands brother. He must, it is a personal service,
not to be done always by Proxy, and Delegates; He must; and he must perform;
not begin well, and not persist, commence and not consummate, but perform the
work, and perform the work, as it is a duty; It is a mere mercy in God, to
send us to you, but it is a duty in us, to do that which we are sent for, by
his Word, and his Sacraments, to establish you in his holy obedience, and his
rich, and honorable service. And then our duty consists in both these, that we
behave our selves, as your husband, which implies a power, an authority; but a
power and authority rooted in love, and exercised with love; and then that we
do all as brothers to the former husband, that as one intentation of this law
was, that inheritances, and temporal proprieties might be preserved, so our
care might be through predecessor, and successor, and all, that all rights
might be preserved to all men, that nothing not due, or due only in rigor, be
extorted from the people, nothing that is in truth, or in equity due, be
withheld from the Minister; but that the true right of people, and Pastor, and
Patron be preserved, to the preservation of love, and peace, and good opinion
of one another.

First then, that which we take upon us, is a Marriage. Matrimonium.
Amongst the Jews, it was almost an ignominious, an infamous thing, to die
unmaried, at least to die without children, being married. Amongst the gentiles
it was so too all well governed States ever enlarged themselves, in giving
places of command and profit, to married men. Indeed such men are most properly
said to keep this world in reparations, that provide a succession of children;
and for the next world, though all that are borne into this world, do not
enter into the number of Gods Saints, in heaven, yet the Saints of heaven can
be made out of no other materials, but men borne into this world. Every stone
in the quarry is not sure to be employed in the building of the church, but the
Church must be built out of those stones; and therefore they keep this world,
they keep heaven it self in reparation, that mary in the fear of God, and in
the same fear bring up the children of such a marriage. But I press not this
too literally, nor over perswasively, that every man is bound to Mary; God is
no accepter of persons, nor of conditions. But being to use these words in
their figurative application, I say, every man is bound to marry himself to a
profession, to a calling: God has brought him from being nothing, by creating
him, but he resolves himself into nothing again, if he take no calling upon
him. In our Baptism we make our contract with God, that we will believe all
those Articles there recited; there is our contract with hi^; and then, pursuing
this contract, in the other Sacrament, when we take his body and his blood, we
are married to him. So at the same time, at our Baptism, we make a contract in
the presence of God, and his congregation with the world; that we will forsake
the covetous desires of the world, that is, the covetous proprieting of all
things to our selves, the covetous living only for our selves, there is our
contract with the world, that we will mutually assist, and serve our brethren
in the world; and then, when we take particular callings, by which we are
enabled to perform that former contract, then we are married to the world; so
every man is duly contracted to the world, in Baptism, and lawfully married to
the world in accepting a profession. And so this service of ours to the Church
is our marriage.

Now in a Matrioniall state, Onus.
there is onus and Honos, a burden to be born, an Honor to be received. The
burden of the sins of the whole world, was a burden only for Christ's
shoulders; but the sins of this Parish, willly upon my shoulders, if I be
silent, or if I be indulgent, and denounce not Gods Judgment upon those
sins. It will be a burden to us, if we do not, and God knows it is a burden
to us, when be do denounce those Judgments. Esaias felt, and groned under this
burden, when he cried Onus Babylonis Onus Moab, and Onus Damasci, O the burden
of Babylon, and the burden of Damscus, and so the other Prophets groan often
under this burden, in contemplation of other places: It burdened, it troubled,
it grieved the holy Prophets of God, that they must denounce Gods judgments,
though upon Gods enemies. We read of a compassionate General, that looking
upon his great Army, from a hill, fell into a bitter weeping, upon this
consideration, that in fifty or sixty years hence, there will not be a man of
these that fight now, alive upon the earth. What Sea could furnish mine eyes
with tears enough, to pour out, if I should think, that of all this
Congregation, which looks me in the face now, I should not meet one, at the
Resurrection, at the right hand of God! And for so much as concerns me, it is
all one, if none of you be saved, as if none of you be saved by my help, my
means, my assistance, my preaching. If I put you upon miraculous ways, to be
saved without hearing, or upon extraordinary ways to be saved by hearing
others, this shall aggravate my condemnation, though you be saved: How much
more heavy must my burden be, if by my negligence both I and you perish too? So
then this calling, this marriage, is a burden every way. When at any midnight I
hear a bell toll from this steeple, must not I say to my self, what have I
done at any time for the instructing or rectifying of that man's Conscience, who
lies there now ready to deliver up his own account, and my account to Almighty
God? If he be not able to make a good account, he and I are in danger, because
I have not enabled him; and though he be for himself able, that delivers not
me, if I have been no instrument for the doing of it. Many, many burdens lie
upon this calling, upon this marriage; but our recompense is, that marriage is
as well an honorable as a painful calling.

If be a Father, where is mine Honor, Honos. Malac. 1. 6.
faith God: If you can answer God, why, you have it in your Prophets, They have
it, that satisfies him, that discharges you. For, he that receives them,
receives him: But if Christ, who repeats that complaint, in every one of us,
That a Prophet has no honor in his own Country, that a Pastor is least
respected of his own stock, you have not your Quctus est, for the honor due to
God; God never discharges the honor due to him, if it be not paid into their
hands, whom he sends for it, to them upon whom he has directed it. Would the
King believe that man, to honor him, that violateth his Image, or that
calumniateth his Ambassador? Every man is the Image of God; every Creature is
the Ambassador of God; The Heavens, (and as well as the Heavens, the Earth)
declare the glory of God; but the Civil Magistrate, and the Spiritual Paster,
who have married the two Daughters of God, The state and the Church, are the
Images and Ambassadors of God, in a higher and more peculiar sense, and for
that marriage are to be honored. And then Honor implies that, by which
Honor subsisteth, maintenance; and they which withdraw that injuriously, or
withold that contentiously, dishonor God, in the dishonor of his servants,
and so make this marriage, this calling only burdensome and not honorable.

So then the interest of your particular Minister, and the particular Church,
being such as between Man and Wife, a marriage, we consider the uses of
marriage in Gods first intention, and apply them to this marriage. Gods first
intentions in marriage were two. In adjutorium, for mutual helpers, and in
prolem, for procreation, and education of Children. For both these are we made
Husbands of Churches; in prolem, to assist in the regeneration of Children, for
the inheritance of Heaven; and in adjutorium, to be helpers to one another. And
therefore if the husband, the Pastor, put the wife, his flock in a
circumcision, to pare themselves to the quick, to take from their necessary
means to sustain their families, to satisfy him; the wife will say as Zipporah
said to Moses, spon^ sus sanguinum, a bloody husband art thou, that exactest
and extortest more then is due, In that case the Husband is no helper. But if
we be always ready to help your children over the threshold, (as Saint
Augustine calls Baptism, Limen Ecclesiae) always ready to Baptize the
Children; if we be always ready to help you in all your spiritual diseases,
to that Cordial, that Balsamum, the body and blood of Christ Jesus; If we be
always ready to help you in all your bodily distresses, ready even at your
last gasp to open your eyes then, when your best friends are ready to close
them; ready to deliver your souls into the hands of God, when all the rest
about you are ready to receive into their hands, that which you leave behind
you, and then ready to lay up the garments of your souls, your bodies, in the
wardrobe the grave, till you call for them, and put them on again, in the
resurrection, then are we truly helpers, true husbands; and then if the Wife
will say, as Jobs wife to the husband, Curse God and die, be sorry, that thou
have taken this Profession upon thee, and live in penury, and die in poverty.
In a word, if he press too much, if she withdraw too much, this frustrates
Gods purpose in making that a marriage; they are not mutual helpers to one
another. These were Gods two principal intentions in marriage, in adjutorium,
in prolem. But then man's fall induced a third, in remedium, That for a remedy
against burning, and to avoid fornication, every man should have his own wife,
every woman her own husband. And so in remedium, for a remedy against
spiritual fornication, of running after other men in other places, out of
disaffection to their own Pastor, or over affecting another, God has given
every wife, her own husband, Every Church her own Pastor. And to all these
purposes, our function is a marriage.

It is a marriage, Defuncti.
it deserves the honor, it undertakes the burden of that state; and then it is
a marriage of a widow, Levit. 21. 13.
of a Church left in widow-hood by the death of her former husband. In the Law
literally God forbad the High Priest to marry a widow. The Roman Church
continues that literally, and more; they extend it; that which was in figure,
enjoined to the High Priest only, they in fact extend to all Priests; no man
that ever married a widow, may be a priest, though she be dead, when he desires
orders. There is no question but there is a more exemplary sanctity required in
the Priest, then in other persons, and more in those, who are in high places in
the Church, then in those of inferior Jurisdictions, and the name and title of
Virginity, has ever been exhibited as an Emblem, as a Type of especial
Sanctity. And as such the Apostle uses it when he says, 2 Cor. 11. 2.
That he would present the Church of Corinth, as a chaste Virgin to Christ;
That is, as chaste as a Virgin, though married, for so he says in the words
immediately before, That he had espoused them to a husband: As marriage is an
honorable state, though in poverty, so is the bed undefiled with strange lust,
a chaste bed even in marriage. And in the accommodation of the Figure to the
present occasion, our marriage to several Churches, If we might marry no
widows, (no Churches, which had been wives to former husbands) we should find
few Virgins, that is, Churches newly erected for us. But when the wife of a
former husband is left a widow, Nubat in Domino, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.
ult.
In Gods name let her marry.

But the former husband must be dead: The husbands absence makes not the wife a
widow; nor does the necessary, and lawful absence of the Pastor, make the
Church vacant. The sickness of the husband makes not a widow; The bodily
weakness nay the spiritual weakness of the Pastor in case that his parts and
abilities, and faculties, be grown but weak, do not make his Church vacant. If
the Pastor be suspended, or otherwise censured, this is but as a separation, or
as a divorce; and as the wife is not a widow, upon a divorce, so neither is the
Church vacant, upon such censures. And therefore for them that take advantages
upon the weaknesses, or upon the disgrace, or upon the poverty of any such
incumbent, and so insinuate themselves into his Church, this is intrusion, this
is spiritual adultery, for the husband is not dead, though he be sick. Nay if
they would remove him by way of preferment, Genesis 25. 26.
yet that is a supplantation; when Jacob had Esau by the heel, whether he kept
him in, till he might be strong enough to go out before him, or whether he
pushed him out, before he would have gone, Jacob was a supplanter. Some few
cases are put when a wife becomes as a widow, her husband living; but regularly
it is by death. In some few cases, Churches may otherwise be vacant, but
regularly it is by death. And then Esto vidua in Dom^ Patris, says Judah to
Thamar, Remain a widow at thy fathers house: Then the Church remains in the
house, Genesis 38. 11.
in the hands of her Father, the Bishop of that Di^ces, till a new husband be
lawfully tendered unto her: And till that time, as our Savior Christ
recommended his most blessed Mother, to Saint John, but not as a wife, so that
Bishop delivers that Church, to the care and administration of some other
during her widowhood, till by due course she become the wife of another.

Thus our calling is a marriage; It should have honor; It must have labor; and
it is a lawful marriage upon a just and equitable vacancy of the place, Fratris.
without any supplantation; upon death; And then it is upon death of a brother,
If brethren dwell together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife,
etc. As Well Saint Gregory, Gregor.
as Saint Augustine before, interpret this of our elder, our eldest brother
Christ Jesus. Aug.
That he being dead, we mary his wife, the Church, and become husbands to her.
But Christ, in that capacity, as he is head of the Church, cannot die. That to
which, the application of this law, leads us, is, That predecessor, and
successor, be brethren of the same faith, and the same profession of faith.
The Sadduces put a case to Christ of a woman married successively to seven men;
let seven signify infinite; still those seven were brethren. How often soever
any wife change her husband, any Church, her Pastor, God sends us still a
succession of brethren, sincere, and unfeigned Preachers of the same truth,
sons of the same father; Who is that father? God is our Father; Mal. 2. 10.
Have we not all one Father, Job 38. 28.
says the Prophet? Yes, we have, and so a worm, and we, are brethren, by the
same father, and mother, the same God, the same Earth. Has not the rain a
father? The rain has; and the same that we have. More narrowly, and yet very
largely, Christ is our father; One of his names is, The everlasting Father;
Esa. 9. 6.
And then after these, after God, after Christ, the King is our father; 1 Samuel
24. 11.
See, my father, the skirt of thy robe, in my hand, says David to his King
Saul; Now if any husband should be offered to any widow, any Pastor to any
vacant Church, who were not our brother by all these fathers, in a right
belief in God, the Father of all men, in a right profession of Christ Jesus,
the Father of all Christians, in a right affection, and allegiance to the King,
the Father of all Subjects, Bellarmin.
Any that should incline to a forain father, an imaginary universal father, he
of whom his Vice-fathers, his Junior fathers, the Jesuits (for all the Jesuits
are Fathers) says, That the Fathers of the Church are but sons, and not
fathers, to him; They that say to a stock, to the Image of the beast) Thou art
my father, who, (not in a sense of humiliation, as Job speaks the words) but of
pride, say to corruption, Thou art my father, Ier. 2. 27.
that is, that prostrate themselves to all the corruptions of a prostitute
Church: Job 17. 14.
If any so inclined of himself, or so inclinable if occasion should invite him,
or rather tempt him, be offered for husband to any widow, for a Pastor to any
vacant Church, he is not within the accommodation of this law, he is not our
brother, by the whole blood, who has not a brotherhood rooted in the same
religion, and in the allegiance to the same Sovereign.

He must be a brother, Cohabitans.
and Frater Cohabitans, a brother dwelling with the former brother. As he is a
brother, we consider the unity of faith: As he dwells in the same house, we
consider the unity of discipline; That as he believes, and professes the same
articles of faith, so by his own obedience, and by his instructing of others,
he establish the same government; A Schismatique is no more a brother to this
purpose, then an Heretic. If we look well, we shall see, that Christ provided
better for his garments, then for his flesh; he suffered his flesh to be torn,
but not his seamlesse garment. There may be, in many cases, more mischief, in
disobeying the uniformity of the discipline of the Church then in mistaking in
opinion, some doctrine of the Church. We see in Gods institution of his first
Church, whom he called brethren: 1 Chronicles. 5. 27.
Those who were instructed, and cunning in the songs of the Church, they are
called brethren; To oppose the orders of the Church solemnly ordained, or
customarily admitted, for the advancement of Gods glory, and the devotion of
the Congregation, forfeits this brotherhood, or at least discontinues the
purpose and use of it; for, howsoever they may be in a kind, brothers, if
they succeed in the profession of the same faith, yet we see where the
blessedness is settled, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; And we see,
Psalm. 84. (...) 133. 1.
where the goodness, and the pleasantness is settled, Behold, how good, and
how pleasant a thing it is, for brethren to dwell together in unity: So that,
if they be not brothers in the same faith, and brothers in the same household of
the faithful, and brothers in the same allegiance, If they advance not the
truth of the Church, and the peace of the Church, and the head of the Church,
fomentors of Error, and of Schism, and Sedition, are not husbands for these
widows, Pastors for these Churches.

He must be a brother; Sine liberis.
A brother dwelling in the same house of Christ, and then brother to one dead
without children, as Tertullian expresses it in his particular elegancy
Illiberis; that is, content to be his brother, in that sense, in that capacity,
to claim no children, no spiritual children of his own begetting; not to
attribute to himself that holy generation of the Saints of God, as though his
learning, or his wit, or his labor, had saved them; but to content himself to
have been the foster father, and to have nursed those children, Ier. 1. 18.
whom the Spirit of God, by over-shadowing the Church, has begot upon her,
for, though it be with the word of truth, in our preaching, yet of his own will
begot he us, though by the word, says the Apostle. Saint Paul might say to the
Corinthians, 1. 4. 15.
Though you have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many
fathers, for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel; And he
might say of his spiritual son Onesimus, Phil. 10.
That he begot him in his bonds; Those, to whom he first of any presented the
Gospel, That had not heard of a Christ, nor a holy Ghost, before, They, into
whom, he infused a new religion, new to them, might well enough be called his
children, and he their father; But we have no new doctrine to present, no new
opinion to infuse, or miracles to amaze, as in the Roman Church, they are full
of all these: 1 Cor. 1. 13. 3. 6.
we have no children to beget of our own: Paul was not crucified for you, nor
were you baptized in the name of Paul, says Paul himself; as he says again,
who is Paul? but a Minister by whom ye believed, and that also not by him, but
as the Lord gave to every man; Not as Paul preached to every man, for he
preached alike to every man; but as the Lord gave to every man; I have planted,
says he, it is true, but he that planteth is nothing, says he also; Only they
that proceed, as they proceed in the Roman Church Ex opere operato, to tie the
grace of God, to the action of the man, will venture to call Gods children,
their children in that sense. My prayer shall be against that commination, That
God will not give us a miscarrying womb, nor dry breasts; Hose. 9. 14.
that you may always suck pure milk from us, and then not cast it up, but
digest it, to your spiritual growth; And I shall call upon God with a holy
passion, Genesis 30. 1.
as vehement as Rachels to Jacob, Da mihi liberos, give me children, or I die:
That God would give me children, but his children; that he by his Spirit, may
give you an inward regeneration, as I, by his ordinance shall present to you,
the outward means, that so being begot by himself, the father of life, and of
light, you may be nursed, and brought up, in his service by me. That so, not
attributing the work to any man, but to Gods Ordinances, you do not tie the
power of God, nor the breath of life, to any one man's lips, as though there
were no regeneration, no begetting, but by him; but acknowledging the other to
be but an instrument, and the weakest to be that, you may remember also, That
though a man can cut deeper with an Axe, then with a knife, with a heavy, then
with a lighter instrument; yet God can pierce as far into a conscience, by a
plain, as by an exquisite speaker.

Now this widow being thus married, This Church thus undertaken, He must perform
the duty of a husbands brother: Ille.
First, it is a personal office, he must do it himself. When Christ shall
say, at the Judgment, I was naked, and ye clothed me not, sick, and ye
visited me not, Mat. 25. 43.
it shall be no excuse to say, When saw we thee naked, when saw we thee sick?
for we might have seen it, we should have seen it. When we shall come to our
account, and see them, whose salvation was committed to us, perish, because
they were uninstructed, and ignorant, dare we say then, we never saw them, show
their ignorance, we never heard of it? That is the greatest part of our fault,
the heaviest weight upon our condemnation, that we saw so little, heard so
little, conversed so little amongst them, because we were made watchmen, and
bound to see, and bound to hear, and bound to be heard; not by others, but by
our selves; My sheep may be saved by others; but I save them not, that are save
so, nor shall I my self be saved by their labor, where mine was necessarily
required.

The office is personal, I must do it, and it is perpetual, Perpetual.
I must perform it, says the text, go through with it. Lots wife looked
back, and God never gave her leave to look forward again. Luke 9. 62. 3. 3.
That man who has put his hand to the plow, and looks back, Christ disables
him for the kingdom of God. The Galatians who had begun in the spirit, and
then relapsed, before whose eyes Christ Jesus had been evidently set forth, as
the Apostle speaks, fall under that reproach of the Apostle, to be called, and
called again, fools, and men bewitched. If I begin to preach, amongst you,
and proceed not, I shall fall under that heavy increpation from my God, you
began, that you might for your own glory, show that you were in some
measure, able to serve the Church, and when you had done enough for your own
glory, you gave over my glory, and the salvation of their souls, to whom I sent
you. God has set our eyes in our foreheads, to look forward, not backward, not
to be proud of that which we have done, but diligent in that which we are to
do. In the Creation, if God had given over his work, the third, or fifth day,
where had man been? If I give over my prayers, due to the Church of God, as
long as God enables me to do it service, I lose my thanks, nay, I lose the
testimony of mine own conscience for all. My office is personal, and it is
perpetual, and then it is a duty. Duty.
He must perform the duty of a husbands brother unto her.

It is not of courtesy, that we preach, but it is a duty, it is not a bounty
given, but it is a debt paid: for, though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing
to glory of, for a necessity is laid upon me, says Saint Paul himself. It is
true, 1 Cor. 9. 16.
that as there is Vae si non, Woe be unto me, if I do not preach the Gospel,
Mat. 25. 21.
so there is an Euge bone serve, Well done, good and faithful servant, to them
that do. But the Vae, is of Justice, the Euge is of Mercy; If do it not, I
deserve condemnation from God; but if, I do it, I deserve not thanks from him.
Nay, it is a debt, not only to God, but to Gods people, to you: and indeed
there is more due to you, then you can claim, or can take knowledge of. For
the people can claim but according to the laws of that State, and the Canons
of that Church, in which God has placed them; such preaching, as those Laws,
and those Canons enjoin, is a debt which they can call for: but the Pastor
himself has another Court, another Bar in himself, by which he tries
himself, and must condemn himself, if he pay not this debt, perform not
this duty, as often, as himself, knows himself, to be fit, and able to do
it.

It is a duty, and it is the duty of an husbands brother. Now the husband has
power, Mariti.
and authority over the wife. 1 Cor. 11. 3.
The head of the woman is the Man; and when the office of this spiritual
husband is particularly expressed, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
thus, Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort, you see, for one word of familiarity, that is,
Exhort, there are two of authority, Reprove, and Rebuke. But yet, all the
authority of the husband, secular, or ecclesiastical, temporal, or spiritual
husband, is grounded, rooted in love: for, the Apostle seems to delight
himself, in the repeating of that Commandment, to the Ephesians, and to the
Colossians, Husbands love your wives. Moses extends himself no farther, in
expressing all the happinesses, that Isaak and Rebecca enjoyed in one another,
but this, she become his wife, and he loved her. If she had not been his
wife, Moses would never have proposed that love for an example; for so it is
also between Elkanah, and his wife Hannah. 1 Samuel 1. 5. 1 Samuel 1. 5.
Unto Hannah he gave a double portion, for (says the Text) he loved Hannah.
If the Pastor love, there will be a double labor; if the People love, there
will be double respect. But being so, he thought he said all, when he said
they loved one another; For where the Congregation loves the Pastor, he will
forbear bitter reproves, and wounding increpations, and where the Pastor
loves his Congregation, his Rebukes, because they proceed our of love, will be
acceptable, and well interpreted by them.

It is a duty, Fratris
and personal, and perpetual; a duty, of a husband, and lastly, of a husband
that is brother to the former husband; In which last circumstance, we have time
to mark but this one note, that the reason of that law, which drew the brother
to this marriage, was the preservation of the temporal inheritance, in that
family. Even in our spiritual marriages to widow Churches, we must have a care
to preserve the temporal rights of all persons; That the Parish be not
oppressed with heavy extortions, nor the Pastor defrauded with unjust
substraction, nor the Patron damnified by usurpations, nor the Ordinary
neglected by disobediences; but that people, and Pastor, and Patron, and
Ordinary, continuing in possession of their several rights, love being the
root of all, the fruit of all may be peace, love being the soul of all, the
body of all may be unity; which the Lord of unity, and concord, grant to us
all, for his Son Christ Jesus sake, Amen.

SERMON XLVI.
The second Sermon Preached by the Author after he came to St. Dunstanes, 25
Apr. 1624.
PSALM. 34. 11. Come ye children, Hearken unto me, I will teach you the fear of
the Lord.
THE Text does not call children simply, literally, but such men, and women,
Mat. 18. 3.
as are willing to come in the simplicity of children; such children, as Christ
spoke of, Except ye become as little children, ye shall not enter into the
Kingdom of heaven; Come ye children come such children. Nor does the Text call
such as come, and would fain be gone again; it is Come and Hearken; not such as
wish themselves away, nor such as wish another man here; but such as value Gods
ordinance of Preaching, though it be, as the Apostle says, but the foolishness
of Preaching, and such, as consider the office, and not the person, how mean
soever; 1 Cor. 1. 21.
Come ye children; And, when ye are come, Hearken, And, though it be but I,
Hearken unto me; And, I will teach you the fear of the Lord; the most noble,
the most courageous, the most magnanimous, not affection, but virtue, in the
world; Come ye children, Hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord.

To every Minister and Dispenser of the word of God, Divisio.
and to every Congregation belong these words; Divisio. And therefore we will
divide the Text between us; To you one, to us appertains the other part. You
must come, and you must hearken; we must teach, and teach to edification; There
is the Meum and Tuum, your part, and our part. From each Part, these branches
flow out naturally; In yours, first, the capacity, as children; Then the
action, you Come; Then your Disposition here, you hearken; And lastly, your
submission to Gods Ordinance, you hearken even unto me, unto any Minister of
his sending. In our Part, there is first a Teaching; for, else, why should you
come, or hearken unto me, or any? It is a Teaching, it is not only a Praying;
And then, there is a Catholic doctrine, a circular doctrine, that walks the
round, and goes the compass of our whole lives, from our first, to our last
childhood, when age has made us children again, and it is the Art of Arts, the
root, and fruit of all true wisdom, The true fear of the Lord. Come ye
children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

First then, 1 Part.
the word, in which, in the first branch of the first part, your capacity is
expressed, filii, pueri, children, is, from the Original, which is Banim,
often accepted in three notions, and so rendered; Three ways, men are called
children, out of that word Ban^m, in the Scriptures. Either it is servi,
servants; for, they are fili^ familiares; as the Master is Pater familias,
Father of the family, (and that he is, though there be no natural children in
the family) the servants are children of the family, and are very often in
Scriptures called so, Pueri, children; Or it is Alumni, Nurse-children,
foster-children, filii m^mmillares, children of the breasts; whether we
minister to them, temporal or spiritual nourishment, they are children; Or
else it is filii viscerales, children of our bowels, our natural children. And
in all these three capacities, as servants, as sucking children, as sons, are
you called upon in this appellation, in this compellation, children.

First, Serv^.
as you are servants, you are children; for, without distinction of age,
servants are called so, 1 Samuel 21. 5.
frequently, ordinarily, in the Scriptures, Pueri. The Priest asks David,
before he would give him the holy bread, An vasa puerorum sancta, Whether those
children, (speaking of David's followers) were clean from women; 1 King. 20. 15.
Here were children that were able to get children. Nay, David's Soldiers are
often called so, pueri, children. In the first of the Kings, he takes a Muster,
recenset pueros; Here were children that were able to kill men. You are his
children, (of what age soever) as you are his servants; and in that capacity he
calls you. You are unprofitable servants; but it is not an unprofitable service,
to serve God; He can get nothing by you, but you can have nothing without him.
The Centurions servants came, when he said, Come; and was their wages like
yours? Had they their being, their ever-lasting well-beeing for their service?
You will scarce receive a servant, that is come from another man, without
testimony; If you put your selves out of Gods service, whither will ye go? In
his service, and his only, is perfect freedom. And therefore as you love
freedom, and liberty, be his servants; and call the freedom of the Gospel,
the best freedom, and come to the Preaching of that.

He calls you children, Alumni.
as you are servants, ( filii familiares) and he calls you children, as you are
Alumni, nurse-children, filii mammillares, as he requires the humility, and
simplicity of little children in you. Prove. 3. 32.
For, Cum simplicibus sermocinatio ejus, (as the vulgat reads that place) Gods
secret discourse is with the single heart. The first that ever came to Christ,
(so as he came to us, in blood) they that came to him so, before he came so to
us, that died for him, before he died for them, were such sucking children,
those whom Herod slew. Mat. 11. 25.
As Christ thought himself bound to thank his Father, for that way of
proceeding, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have
revealed these things unto babes; 19. 14.
so Christ himself pursues the same way, Suffer little children, and forbid
them not, to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of heaven. Of such; not
only of those who were truly, literally children, (children in age) but of
such as those, ( Talium est regnum coelorum) such as come in such a
disposition, in the humility, in the simplicity, in the singleness of heart,
as children do. An habitual sinner is always in minority, always an Infant; an
Infant to this purpose, All his acts, all the bands of an Infant, are void all
the outward religious actions, even the band and contract of Baptism in an
habitual sinner is void, and ineffectuall. He that is in the house, and favor
of God, though he be a child, (a child to this purpose, simple, supple,
tractable, single-hearted) is, as Adam was in the state of Innocence, a man the
first minute, able to stand upright in the sight of God. And out of one place
of Esaias, Esaias 65. 20.
our Expositors have drawn, conveniently enough, both these conclusions; A
child shall die 100 years old, says the Prophet; that is, (say some) a sinner
though he live 100 years, yet he dies a child, in ignorance; And then, (say
others, and both truly) He that comes willingly, when God calls, though he die a
child in age, he has the wisdom of 100 years upon him. There is not a graver
thing, then to be such a child; to conform his will to the will of God. Whether
you consider temporal or spiritual things, you are Gods children. For, for
temporal, if God should take off his hand, withdraw his hand of sustentation,
all those things, which assist us temporally, would relapse to the first
feeble, and childish estate, and come to their first nothing. Armies would be
but Hospitals, without all strength; Councell-tables but Bedlams, without all
sense; and Schools and Universities, but the wrangling of children, if God, and
his Spirit did not inanimate our Schools, and Armies, and Councels. His
adoption makes us men, therefore, because it makes us his children. But we are
his children in this consideration especially, as we are his spiritual
children, as he has nursed us, fed us with his word. In which sense, the
Apostle speaks of those who had embraced the true Religion, (in the same words
that the Prophet had spoken before) Behold, Heb. 2. 13.
I, and the children that God has given me; Esaias 2. 6.
And in the same sense, the same Prophet, in the same place, says of them who
had fallen away from the true Religion, They please themselves in the children
of strangers, In those men, who have derived their Orders, and their Doctrine
from a foreign Jurisdiction. In that State where Adoptions were so frequent, (in
old Rome) a Plebeian could not adopt a Patrician, a Yeoman could not adopt a
Gentleman, nor a young man could not adopt an old. In the new Rome, that
endeavors to adopt all, in an imaginary filiation, you that have the perfect
freedom of Gods service, be not adopted into the slavery, and bondage of men's
traditions; you that are in possession of the ancient Religion, of Christ, and
his Apostles, be not adopted into a younger Religion. Religio a religando; That
is Religion, that binds; that binds, that is necessary to salvation. That which
we affirm, our adversaries deny not; that which we profess, they confess was
always necessary to salvation. They will not say, that all that they say now,
was always necessary; That a man could not be saved without believing the
Articles of the Council of Trent, a week before that Council shut up. You are
his children, as children are servants; Malach.
and, If he be your Lord, where is his fear? you are his children, as he has
nursed you, with the milk of his word; and if he be your Father so, (your
foster Father) where is his love?

But he is your Father otherwise; you are not only Filii familiares, children
because servants, nor only Filii mammillares, children because noursed by him,
but you are also Filii viscerales, children of his bowels. For, we are
otherwise allied to Christ, then we can be to any of his instruments, Phil. v
12.
though Angels of the Church, Prophets, or Apostles; and yet, his Apostle says,
of one whom he loved, of Onesimus, Receive him, that is mine own bowels; my
Son, says he, whom I have begotten in my hands. How much more art thou bound
to receive and refresh those bowels from which thou art derived, Christ Jesus
himself; Receive him, Refresh him. Carry that, which the wiseman has said,
Miserere animae tuae, be merciful to thine own soul, higher then so; and
Miserere salvatoris tui, Colos. 3. 12.
have mercy upon thine own Savior, put on the bowels of mercy, and put them
on even toward Christ Jesus himself, who needs thy mercy, by being so tome,
and mangled, and embowelled, by blasphemous oaths, and execrations. For,
beloved, it is not so absurd a prayer, as it is conceived, if Luther did say
upon his death bed, Oremus pro Domino nostro Jesus Christo, Let us pray for out
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Had we not need pray for him? If he complain
that Saul persecutes him, had we not need pray for him? It is a seditious
affection in civil things, to divide the King and the kingdom; to pray, to
fight for the one, and leave out the other, is seditiously done. If the
kingdom of Christ need thy prayers, and thy assistance, Christ needs it; If
the Body need it, the Head needs it; If thou must pray for his Gospel, thou
must pray for him; Nay, thou can not pray for thy self, but thou must pray
for him, for, thou art his bowels; when thou in thy forefathers, the first
Christians in the Primitive Church, wast persecuted, Christ cried out, why
persecutest thou me? Christ made thy case his, because thou wast of his
bowels. When Christ is disseised, and dispossessed, his truth profligated, and
thrown out of a nation, that professed it before, when Christ is wounded by the
blasphemies of others, and crucified by thee, in thy relapses to repented
sins, will thou not say to Them, to Thy self, in the behalf of Christ, why
persecute ye me? Will thou not make Christ's case thine, as he made thine his?
Art not thou the bowels of Christ? If not, (and thou art not, if thou have not
this sense of his suffering) thou have no interest in his death, by thy
Baptism, nor in his Resurrection, by thy feeble half repentances. But in the
duty of a child, as thou art a servant, in the simplicity of a child, as thou
have sucked from him, in the interest and inheritance of a child, as thou art
the Son of his bowels, in all these capacities, (and with all these we have
done) God calls thee, come ye children; and that is our next step, the Action,
Come.

Passing thus from the Persons to the action, Venite, Venite.
Come, we must ask first, what this coming is? The whole mystery of our
redemption is expressed by the Apostle in this word, 1 Timothy 1. 15.
venit, that Christ Jesus is come into the world. All that thou have to do, is
to come to, and to meet him. Where is he? At home; in his own house, in the
Church. Which is his house, which is his Church? That to thee, in which he has
given thee thy Baptism, if that do still afford thee, as much as is necessary
for thy salvation. Come thither, to the participation of his ordinances, to the
exercises of Religion there. The gates of heaven shall be opened to you, at
last in that word, Venite benedicti, come ye blessed, the way to those gates is
opened to you now, in the same word, Venite filii, come ye children, come.
Christ can come, and does often, into thy bedchamber, in the visitation of his
private Spirit, but, here, he calls thee out into the congregation, into the
communion of Saints. And then the Church celebrates Christ's coming in the
flesh, a month before he comes, in four Sundays of Advent, before Christmas.
When thou come to meet him in the Congregation, come not occasionally, come
not casually, not indifferently, not collaterally; come not as to an
entertainment, a show, a spectacle, or company, come solemly, with preparation,
with meditation. He shall have the less profit, by the prayer of the
Congregation, that has not been at his private prayer before he came. Much of
the mystery of our Religion lay in the venturus, that Christ was to come, all
that the law and Prophets undertook for, was that venturus, that Christ was to
come; but the consummation of all, the end of the law and the Prophets, is in
the venit, he is come. Do not clogge thy coming with future conditions, and
contingencies, thou will come, if thou can wake, if thou can rise, if thou
can be ready, if thou like the company, the weather, the man. Matt. 9. 2.
We find one man who was brought in his bed to Christ; but it was but one.
Come, come actually, come earnestly, come early, come often; and come to meet
him, Christ Jesus and no body else. Christ is come into the world; and
therefore thou need not go out of the world to meet him; He does not call
thee from thy Calling, but in thy Calling. Genesis 8. 11.
The Dove went up and down, from the Arc, and to the Arc, and yet was not
disappointed of her Oliveleafe, Thou may come to this place at due times,
and may do the businesses of the world, in other places too, and still keep
thy Olive, thy peace of Conscience. If no Heretical recusancy, (thou do like
the Doctrine) no schismatic recusancy, (thou do like the Discipline) no
lasie recusancy, (thou forbearest not because thou can not sit at thine ease)
no proud recusancie, (that the company is not good enough for thee) if none of
these detain thee, thou may be here, even when thou art not here; God may
accept thy desire, as, in many cases, thou may be away, when thou art here;
as, in particular thou art, if being here, thou do not hearken to that which is
said here; for that is added to the coming, and follows in a third
consideration, after the capacity, Children, and the Action, Come, The
disposition, Hearken: Come ye children and hearken.

Upon those words of David, Conturbata sunt ossa mea. Audite.
St. Basil faith well, Psalm. 6. 3.
Habet and anima ossa sua, The soul has bones as well as the body. And in this
Anatomy, and dissection of the soul, as the bones of the soul, are the constant
and strong resolutions thereof, and as the seeing of the soul is understanding
(The eyes of your understanding being opened) so the Hearing of the soul is
harkening in these religious exercises, Ephesians. 1. 18.
we do not htar, except we hearken; for harkening is the hearing of the soul.
Some men draw some reasons, out of some stories of some credit, to imprint a
belief of ecstasy, and raptures; That the body remaining upon the floor, or in
the bed, the soul may be gone out to the contemplation of heavenly things. But
it were a strange and a perverse ecstasy, that the body being here, at a
religious exercise, and in a religious posture, the soul should be gone out to
the contemplation, and pursuit of the pleasures or profits of this world. You
come hither but to your own funerals, if you bring nothing hither but your
bodies; you come but to be enterred, to be laid in the earth, if the ends of
your coming be earthly respects, praise, and opinion, and observation of men,
you come to be Canonized, to grow Saints, if your souls be here, and by grace
here always diffused, grow up to a sanctification. Bonus es Domine animae
quaerenti te, Thou art good, O Lord, to that soul that seeks thee; It is St.
Augustines note, that it is put in the singular, Animae, to that soul: Though
many come, few come to him. A man may thread Sermons by half dozens a day, and
place his merit in the number, a man may have been all day in the perfume and
incense of preaching, and yet have receivd none of the savor of life unto life.
Some things an Ape can do as well as a Man; some things an Hypocrite as well as a
Saint. We cannot see now, whether thy soul be here now, or no; but, to morrow,
hereafter, in the course of thy life, they which are near thee, and know
whether thy former faults be mended, or no, know whether thy soul use to be at
Sermons, as well as thy body uses to go to Sermons. Faith comes by hearing,
says the Apostle; but it is by that hearing of the soul, Harkening,
Considering. And then, as the soul is infused by God, but diffused over the
whole body, and so there is a Man, so Faith is infused from God, but diffused
into our works, and so there is a Saint. Practice is the Incarnation of Faith,
Faith is incorporated and manifested in a body, by works; and the way to both,
is that Hearing, which amounts to this Harkening, to a diligent, to a
considerate, to a profitable Hearing. In which, one essential circumstance is,
that we be not over affectionately transported with an opinion of any one
person, but apply our selves to the Ordinance, Come, and hearken unto me, To
any whom God sends with the Seal and Character of his Minister, which is our
fourth and last branch in your part.

David does not determine this in his own person, Me.
that you should hearken to him, and none but him, but that you should hearken
to him in that capacity and qualification, which is common to him with others,
as we are sent by God upon that Ministry; Me. that you say to all such,
Blessed art thou that come in the Name of the Lord. St. Augustine, and not he
alone, interprets this whole Psalm of Christ, that it is a thankesgiving of
Christ to his Father, upon some deliverance received in some of his Agonies,
some of his persecutions; and that Christ calls us to hearken unto him. To
him, so, as he is present with us, in the Ministry of his Church, He is a
perverse servant, that will receive no commandment, except he have it
immediately from his Masters mouth; so is he too, that pretends to rest so
wholly in the Word of God, the Scriptures, as that he seeks no interpretation,
no exposition, no preaching, All is in the Scriptures, but all the Scriptures
are not always evident to all understandings. He also is a perverse servant,
that will receive no commandment by any Officer of his Masters, except he like
the man, or, if his Master might, in his opinion, have chosen a fitter man, to
serve in that place. And such a perverseness is in those hearers who more
respect the man, then the Ministry, and his manner of delivering it, 1 Co^. 4.
1.
then the message that he delivers. Let a man so account of us, as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. That is our Classis,
our rank, our station, what names soever we brought into the world by our
extraction from this or that family, what name soever we took in our baptism,
and contract between God and us, that name, in which we come to you, is that,
The Ministers of Christ, The Stewards of the Mysteries of God, And so let men
account of us, says the Apostle. Invention, and Disposition, and Art, and
Eloquence, and Expression, and Elocution, and reading, and writing, and
printing, are secondary things, accessory things, auxiliary, subsidiary things;
men may account us, and make account of us, as Orators in the pulpit, and of
Authors, in the shop; but if they account of us as of Ministers and Stewards,
they give us our due; that is our name to you. All the Evangelists mention John
Baptist and his preaching; but two of the four say never a word of his
austerity of life, his Locusts, nor his Camels hair; and those two that do,
Matthew and Mark, they insist, first, upon his calling, and then upon his
actual preaching, how he pursued that Calling, And then upon the Doctrine that
he preached, Repentance, and Sanctification, and after that, they come to these
secondary and subsidiary things, which added to his estimation, and assisted
the passage of his Doctrine, Exodus 6. 12.
His good life. Learning, and other good parts, and an exemplar life fall into
second places; Ier. 1. 6.
They have a first place, in their consideration who are to call them, but in
you, to whom they are sent, but a second; fix you, in the first place, upon
the Calling. Esa. 6. 6.
This Calling circumcised Moses uncircumcised lips; This made Jeremy able to
speak, though he called himself a child; This is Esays coal from the Altar,
which takes away even his sin, and his iniquity. Be therefore content to
pass over some infirmities, and rest your selves upon the Calling. And when
you have thus taken the simplicity of Children, (they are the persons, which
was our first step) and are come to the Congregation, (that is your Action, and
was our second) and have conformed your selves to hearken, (that also is the
Disposition here, which was our third) And all this with a reverence to the
Calling before an affection to the man, (that is your submission to Gods
Ordinance, and was our fourth and last step) you have then built up our first
part in your selves, and laid together all those pieces which constitute your
Duty, Come ye Children, and hearken unto me; And from hence we pass, to our
duty, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

In this second part, 2 Part.
we made two steps; first, The manner, Docebo, I will teach; And then the
Matter, Docebo.
Timorem Domini, I will teach you the fear of the Lord. Upon the first, we
will stay no longer, but to confess, That we are bound to teach, and that this
teaching is to preach; And Vae si non, W^ be unto us, if we do not preach. Woe
to them, who out of ease, or state, silence themselves; And woe to them too,
who by their distemper, and Schismatic and seditious manner of preaching,
occasion and force others to silence them; and think, (and think it out of a
profitable, and manifold experience) That as forbidden books sell best, so
silence Ministers thrive best. It is a Duty, Docendum, we must teach, Preach;
but a duty that excludes not Catechizing; for cateching seems especially to be
intended here, where he calls upon them who are ot be taught, by that name,
Children. It is a duty that excludes not Praying; but Praying excludes not it
neither. Prayer and Preaching may consist, nay they must meet in the Church of
God. Now, he that will teach, must have learnt before, many years before; And
he that eill preach, must have thought of it before, many days before.
Extemporall Ministers, that resolve in day what they will be, Extemporall
Preachers, that resolve in a minute, what they will say, outgo Gods Spirit, and
make too much have. It was Christ's way;He took first Disciples to learn, and
then^ out of them, he took Apostles to teach; an those Apostles made more
Disciples. Though your first consideration be upon the Calling, yet our
consideration must be for our fitness to that Calling. Our Prophet David has
put them both together, well, Psalm. 71. 17.
O God, thou have taught me from my youth; (you see what was his University;
Moses was his Aristotle; he had studied Divinity from his youth) And hitherto
have I declared thy wondrous works, says he there. Hitherto? How long was that?
It follows in the next verse, Now am I old, and gray headed, and yet he gave
not over. Then Gods work goes well forward, when they whom God has taught,
teach others, He that can say with David, Docnistime, O God thou have taught
me, may say with him too, Docebo vos, I will teach you But what? that remains
only, I will teach you the fear of the Lord.

There is a fear, which needs no teaching, a fear that is naturally imprinted
in us. Timor Naturalis.
We need not teach men to be sad, when a mischief is upon them, nor to fear
it is coming toward them; for, fear respects the future, so as sadness does
the present; feal looks upon Danger, and sadness upon Detriment; fear upon a
sick friend, and sadness upon as dead. And as these need not be taught us,
because they are natural, so, because they are natural, they need nor be
untaught us, they need not be forbidden, nor dissuaded. Our Savior Christ had
them both, fear, and sadness; and that man lacks Christian wisdom, who is
without a provident fear of future dangers, and without Christian charity, who
is without a compassionate sadness in present calamities. Now this fear,
thought but imprinted in nature, is Timor Domini, Tha fear of the Lord, because
the Lord is the Lord of Nature, He is the Nature of Narture, Lord of all
endowments and impressions in Nature. And therefore, though for this natural
fear, you go no farther then nature, (for it is born with you, and i^ lives
in you) yet the right use even of this natural fear, is from Grace, though in
the root it be a feare^ of nature, yet in the government thereof, in the
degrees, and practice thereof, it is the fear of the Lord; Not only as he is
Lord of Nature, (for so, you have the fear it self from the Lord) but as this
natural fear produces good or had effects, as it is regulated and ordered, or
as it is deserted, and abandoned, by the Spirit of the Lord; And therefore you
ae called hither, Come, that you may learn the fear of the Lord, that is, the
right use of natural fear, and natural affections, from the Law of God; For,
as it is a wretched condition, to be without natural a affections, so is it a
dangerous dereliction, if our natural affections be left to themselves, and
not regulated, not inanimated by the Spirit of God; Sap. 17. 12.
for then my sadness will sink into Desperation, and my fear will betray the
succors which reason offers. This I gain by letting in the fear of the Lord,
into my natural fear; that whereas the natural object of my natural fear is
malum, something that I apprehend sub ratione mali, as it is ill for me, (for,
if I did not conceive it to be ill, I would not fear it) yet when I come to
thaw this Ice, when I come to discuss this cloud, and attenuate this damp, by
the light and heat of Grace, and the illustration of the Spirit of God,
breathing in his word, I change my object, or at least, I look upon it in
another line, in another angle, I look not upon that evil which my natural
fear presented me, of an affliction, or a calamity, but I look upon the glory
that God receives by my Christian constancy in that afflicton, but I look upon
that everlasting blessedness, which I should have lost, if God had not laid that
affliction upon me. So that though fear look upon evil, (for affliction is
malum poenae, evil as it has the nature of punishment) yet when the fear of
the Lord is entered into my natural fear, my fear is more conversant, more
exercised upon the contemplation of Good, then Evil, more upon the glory of
God, and the joys of heaven, then upon the afflictions of this life, how
malignant, how manifold soever. And therefore, that this fear, and all your
natural affections, (which seem weakness in man, and are so indeed, if they
be left to themselves, now in our corrupt and depraved estate) may advance
your salvation, (which is the end why God has planted them in you) Come and
learn the fear of the Lord, Learn from the Word of God, explicated by his
minister, in his Ordinance upon occasions leading him thereunto, the limits of
this natural fear, and where if may become sin, if it be not regulated, and
inanimated by a better fear, then it self.

There is a fear, Timor seminaturalis.
which grows out of a second nature, Custom, and so is half-naturall, to those
men that have it. The custom of the palce we live in, or of the times we live
in, or of the company we live in. Topical customs of such a place, Chronical
customs of such an Age, Personal customs of such a company. The time, or the
place, or the persons in power have advanced, and drawn into fashion and
reputation, some vices, and such men as depend upon them, are afraid, not to
concur with them in their vices; for, amongst persons, and in times, and
places, that are vicious, and honest man is a rebel; he goes against that
State, and that Government, which is the kingdom of sin, Amongst drunkards, a
sober man is a spy upon the^; Amongst blasphemers, a prayer is a libell against
them; And amongst dissolute and luxurious persons, a chaste man is a Bridewell,
his person, his presence is a house of Correction. In vicious times and
companies, a good man is unacceptable, and cannot prosper. And, because as
amongst Merchants, men trade half upon stock, and half upon credit, so, in
all other courses, because men rise according to the opinion and estimation
which person in power have of them, as well as by real goodness, therefore to
build up, or to keep up this opinion and estimation in them upon whom they
depend, they are afraid to cross the vices of the Time, so far, as by being
virtuous in their own paticular. They are afraid it will be called a
singularity, and a schismatic and seditious disposition, and taken for a
Reproach, and a Rebuke laid upon their betters, if they be not content to be as
ill, as those their betters are, Now, the fear of the Lord brings the Quo
Warranto against all these privileged sins, and privileged places, and
persons, and overthrows all these Customs, and Prescriptions. The fear of the
Lord is not a Topicall, not a Chronicall, ot a Personal, but a Catholic, a
Canonical, a Circular, an Universal fear; It goes through all, and over all;
and when this halfe-naturall fear, this fear grown out of Custom, suggests
to me, That if I be thus tender-conscienced, if I startle at an oath, if I be
sick at a Health, if I cannot conform my self to the vices of my betters, I
shall lose my Master, my Patron, my Benefactor, This fear of the Lord enters,
and presents the infallible loss of a far greater Master, and Patron, and
Benefactor, if I comply with to other. And therefore as you were called hither,
(that is to the explication of the Word of God) to learn how to regulate the
natural fear, that that fear do not deject you into a diffidence of Gods
mercy, so come hither ot learn the fear of God, against this half-naturall
fear, that is, be guided by the Word of God, how far you are to serve the
turns of those persons, upon whom ye depend, and when to leave their
commandments unperformed.

Well; Frtitudo.
what will this fear of the Lord teach us? Valor, fortitude; fear teach
valor? yes; And nothing but fear; True fear. As Moses his Serpents devoured
the false serpents, so does true fear all false fear. There is nothing so
contrary to God, as false fear; neither in his own nature, nor in his love to
us. Therefore Gods first Name in the Bible, and the Name which he sticks to, in
all the work of the Creation, is his Name of Power, Elohim; El, is fortis
Deus, The God of Power; and it is that Name in the plural, multiplied power,
All Power; And what can he fear? God descends to many other humane affections;
you shall read that God was Angry, and sorry. and weary; But non timuit Deus,
God was never afraid. Neither would God that man should be. So his first
blessing upon man, was to fill the earth, and to subdue the creatures, and to
rule over them, and to eat what he would upon the earth; All Acts of Power,
Genesis 3. 10.
and of Confidence. As soon as he had offended God, the first impotency that
he found in himself, was fear: I heard thy voice, and I was afraid, says he. He
had heard the voice of Lions, and was not afraid. There is not a greater
commination of a curse, Ps. 53. 6.
then that, They shall be in a great fear, where no fear is; Which is more
vehemently expressed in another place, Lev. 26. 17. 36.
I will set my face against you, and you shall fly, when none pursues you; I
will send a faintness into their hearts, and the sound of a shaken leaf,
shall chase them, as a sword. Flase fear is a fearful curfe. To fear that
all favors, and all preferments, will go the wrong way, and that therefore I
must clap on a byasse, and go that way too, this inordinate fear is the curse
of God. David's last counsel to Solomon (but reflecting upon us all) was, 1
Reg. 2. 2.
Be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a man. Gregor.
E Culmine corruens, ad gyrum laboris venit, The Davill fell from his place in
heaven, and now is put to compass the earth. The fearful man that falls from
his moral and his Christian constancy, from the fundamental rules of his
religion, falls into labyrinths, of incertitudes, and impertinencies, and
ambiguities, and anxieties, Job 7. 1.
and irresolutions. Militia, vita; our whole life is a warfare; God would not
choose Cowards; he lad rather we were valiant in the fighting of his battles;
for battles, and exercise of valor, we are sure to have. God sent a Cain into
the world before an Abel; An Enemy, Gregor.
before a Champion. Abel non suspicor qui non habet Cain; Gregor. we never
hear of an Abel, 1 Pet. 4. 12.
but there is a Cain too. And therefore think it not strange, concerning the
fiery trial, as though some strange thing happened unto you; Make account that
this world is your Scene, your Theater, and that god himself sits to see the
combat, the wrestling. Chrysostom.
Vetuit Deus mortem Job; Job was Gods Champion, and God forbad Satan the taking
away of Jobs life; for, if he die, (says God in the mouth of that Father)
Theatrum nobis non amplius plaeudetar, My Theater will ring with no more
Plaudites, I shall be no more glorified in the valor and constancy of my
Saints, my Champions. God delights in the constant and valiant man, and
therefore a various, a timorous man frustrates, disappoints God.

My errand then is to teach you valor; and must my way be to intimidate you,
to teach you fear? yes, still there is no other fortitude, but the fear of the
Lord. We told you before, sadness and fear differ but in the present, and
future. And as for the present, Nihil aliud triste quam Deum offendere,
Chrysostom.
There is no just cause of sadness, but to have sinned against God, (for,
sudden sadness arising in a good Conscience, is a spark of fire in the Sea,
it must go out;) so there is no just cause of fear, but in Gods displeasure.
Men's in timore Domini constituta, Gregor.
non invenit extra quod metuat. God is all; and if I be established in him,
what thing can I fear, when there is nothing without him? nothing simply,
Chrysostom.
at least nothing that can hurt me; Quae sunt in mundo non nocentiis qui extra
mundum sunt, This world cannot hurt him that made it, nor them that are laid up
in him. Jonas did but change his vessel, his ship, when he entered the Whale,
he was not shipwracked, God was his Pilot there, as well as in the ship, and
therefore he as confident there. P^ov. 1. 38.
It is meant of Christ, which is spoken in the person in Wisdom, Who so
hearkneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and be quiet from the fear of evil.
And therefore; when you hear of wars and commotions, Luc. 21. 9.
be not terrified; these things must come to pass, but the end is not by and
by; Imaginations, and tentations, and alienations, and tribulations must come:
But this is not the end; the end that God looks for, is, that by the benefit
of his fear we should stand out all these.

So the^ to teach you the fear of the Lord, Quid operatur.
is to teach you what it does, that you may love it, and what it is, that you
may know it. That which it does, is that it makes you a constant, a confident, a
valiant man, That which God, who is always the same, loves. How does it that?
Thus. As he that is fallen into tha Kings hand for debt to him, is safe from
other creditors, so is he, that fears the Lord, form other fears. He that loves
the Lord, loves him witl all his love; he that fears the Lord, fears him
withal his fear too; God takes no half affections. Romans 11. 02.
Upon those words, Be not high-minded, but fear, Clement of Alexandria, has
another reading; super-time, over-feare; that is, carry thy fear to the highest
place; Eccles. 5. 7.
place thy fear there, where it may be above all other fears. In the multitude
of dreams, there are diverse vanities, but fear thou the Lord. All fearful
things pass away as dreams, as vanities, to him that fears the Lord; They
offer at him, but in vain, if he be established with that fear. In Christ there
was no bone broken; In him that fears the Lord, Job. 1. 1.
no constant purpose is ever shaken. Of Job it is said, that he was perfect and
upright; That is a rare wonder, but the wonder is qualified in the addition, He
feared God. So are they put together in Simeon, Luke 2. 25.
Iustus and timoratus, he was a just man; how should he be otherwise? He feared
God. Consider your enemies, and be not deceived with an imagination of their
power, but see whether they be worthy of your fear, if you fear God. The
World is your enemy; sed vicit mundum, be of good cheer, for I have overcome
the world, John 16. 33. 15. 19.
says Christ. If it were not so, yet we are none of it; ye are not of the
world, for I have chosen you out of the that world. Howsoever, the world would
do us no harm, the world would be good enough of it self, but that the Prince
of the world, the Devil, is anima mundi, the soul of this lower world, he
inanimates, he actuates, he exalts, the malignity of the world against us; and
he is our second enemy. It was not the Apple, but the Serpent that tempted;
Eve. no doubt, had looked upon the fruit before, and yet did not long. But even
this enemy is not so dangerous, as he is conceived. In the life of St. Basil,
we have a story, that the Devil appeared to a penitent sinner at his prayers,
and told him, If you will let me alone, I will let you alone, meddle not with
me, and I will not meddle with you, He found that by this good souls prayers to
God, God had weakened his power, not only upon that man the prayed, but upon
others too; and therefore he was content, to come to a cessation of arms with
him, that he might turn his forces another way. Truly he might say to many of
us, in a worse sense, Let me alone, and I will let you alone; tempt not me, and
I will not tempt you: Our idleness, our high diet, our wanton discourse, our
exposing our selves to occasion of sin, provoke and call in the Devil, when he
seeks not us. The Devil possesses the world, and we possess the Devil. But
then, if the fear of the Lord possess us, our own Concupiscencies, (though
they be indeed our greatest enemies) because the war that they maintain is a
civil war) shall do us no harm, for as the Septuagins in their Translation,
diminish the power of the Devil, in that name ^words^, (a disproportioned
Creature, made up of a Lion and an Ant, because as St. Gregory says upon that
place) formicis ^eoest, volatilibus formica, The Devil is a Lion. to Ants,
dasheth whole hills of them with his paw, that creep under him, but he is but
an Ant to birds; they prey upon him, that fly above him. If we fear the
Lord, our concupiscencies, our carnal affections, our selves, may prove our
best friends, because, as the fire in the furnace did not burn the men, Dan. 3.
but it burnt off those bands, that fettered and manacled them, 2. 25.
(for they were loose, and walked in the furnace) so our concupiscencies, if we
resist them, shall burn off themselves, and file off their own rust, and our
salvation shall be surer by occasion of temptations. August.
We may prevent mortem mortificatione, everlasting death, by a disciplinary
life. Mori, ne moriamur, is his rule too, To die to the fires of lust here,
lest we die in unquenchable fires hereafter; to die daily, (as S. Paul speaks
of himself) lest we die at the last day. To end this, this is the working of
the fear of the Lord, it devours all other fears; God will have no
half-affections, God will have no partners; He that fears God fears nothing
else.

This then is the operation of the fear of the Lord, Quid iste Timor.
this is his working; remains only to consider what this fear of the Lord
is: And, beloved in him, be not afraid of it; for, this fear of God, is the
love of God. And, howsoever there may be some amongst us, whom the height of
birth, or of place, or of spirit has kept from fear, They never feared any
thing, yet, I think, there is none, that never loved any thing. Obligations of
Matrimony, or of friendship, or of blood, or of alliance, or of conversation,
has given every one of us, no doubt, some sense in our selves, what it is to
love, and to enjoy that which we do love; And the fear of God, is the love of
God. The love of the Lord passes all things, Ecclus. 25. 11.
says the Wise man: The love, what is that to fear? It follows, The fear of
the Lord, is the beginning of his love. As they that build Arches, place
centers under the Arch, to bear up the work, till it be dried, and settled,
but, after, all is Arch, and there is no more center, no more support; so to
lie at the Lords feet a while delivers us into his arms, to accustom our
selves to his fear, establishes us in his love. Be content to stop a little,
even at the lowest fear, the fear of hell. When Saul was upon an expedition, 1 Samuel 11. 7.
and did not find himself well followed, he took a yoke of Oxen, and hewed
them in pieces, and proclaimed, that whosoever came not to the supply, all his
Oxen should be so served; and upon this, (says the Text there) The fear of the
Lord fell upon all the people, and they came out, as one man, three hundred and
thirty thousand. If Saul's threatening of their worldly goods, wrought so; let
Gods threatening of thy self, thine inwardest self, thy soul, with hell, make
thee to stop even upon thy fear of the Lord, the fear of Torment. Stop upon the
second fear too, the fear of privation, and loss of the sight of God in
heaven; That when all we have disputed, with a modest boldness, and wondered
with a holy wonder, what kind of sight of God we shall have in heaven, then
when thou should come to an end, and to an answer of all these doubts, in an
experimental trial, how he shall be seen, (seen thus) thou shall see then
that thou shall never see him. After thou have used to hear, all thy life,
blessedness summed up into that one act, We shall see God, thou shall never
come nearer to that knowledge, thou shall never see him; fear the Lord
therefore in this second fear, fear of privation. And fear him in a third fear,
the fear of the loss of his grace here in this world, though thou have it now.
S. Chrysostom serves himself and us, with an ordinary comparison, A Tyler is
upon the top of the house, but he looks to his footing, he is afraid of
falling. A righteous man is in a high place in Gods favor, but he may lose
that place. Who is higher then Adam, higher then the Angels? and whither fell
they. Make not thou then thy assurance of standing, our of their arguments,
that say it is impossible for the righteous to fall, The sins of the righteous
are no sins in the sight of God; but built thy assurance upon the testimony of
a good conscience, that thou usest all diligence, and holy industry, that thou
may continue in Gods favor, and fear to lose it; for, he that has no
fear of losing, has no care of keeping. Accustom thy self to these fears, and
these fears will flow into a love. As love, and jealousy may be the same
thing, so the fear and love of God will be all one; August.
for, jealousy is but a fear of losing. Brevissima differentia Testamentorum,
Timor and Amor; This distinguishes the two Testaments, The Old is a Testament
of fear, the New of love; yet in this they grow all one, That we determine the
Old Testament, in the New, and that we prove the New Testament by the Old; for,
but by the Old, we should not know, that there was to be a New, nor, but for
the New, that there was an Old; so the two testaments grow one Bible; so in
these two Affections, if there were not a jealousy, a fear of losing God, we
could not love him; nor can we fear to lose him, except we do love him. Place
the affection, (by what name soever) upon the right object, God, and I have, in
some measure, done that which this Text directed, ( Taught you the fear of the
Lord) if I send you away in either disposition, Timorous; or amorous, possessed
with either, the fear, or the love of God; for, this fear is inchoative love,
and this love is consummative fear; The love of God begins in fear, and the
fear of God ends in love; and that love can never end, for God is love.

SERMON XLVII.
An Anniversary Sermon preached at St. Dunstans, upon the commemoration of a
Parishioner, a Benefactor to that Parish.
GENESIS 3. 24. And dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.
THis is Gods malediction upon the Serpent in Paradise, There in the Region, in
the Storehouse of all plenty, he must starve; This is the Serpents perpetual
fast, his everlasting Lent, ( Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.)
There is a generation derived from this Serpent, Progenies viperarum, a
generation of Vipers, that will needs in a great, and unnecessary measure, keep
this Serpents Lent, and bind themselves to perform his fact; for, the
Carthusian will eat no flesh, (and yet, I never saw better bodied men, men of
better habitudes and constitution, howsoever they recompense their abstinence
from flesh) and the Fueillans will eat neither flesh nor fish, but roots, and
fallets, (and yet amongst them, amongst men so enfeebled by roots, was bred up
that man, who was both malicious courage, and bodily strength, to kill the last
King, who was killed amongst them) They will be above others in their fasts,
Fish, and Roots will they eat, all the days of their life, but their Master
will be above them in his fast, ( Dust must he eat all the days of his life.)

It is Luthers observation upon this place, That in all Moses his Books, God
never spoke so long, so much together, as here, upon this occasion. Indeed the
occasion was great; It was the arraignment of all the world, and more; of
mankind, and of Angels too; of Adam, and Eve, (and there were no more of them)
and then of the Serpent, and of Satan in that, and of all the fallen Angels in
him. For the sentence which God, as Judge gave upon them, upon all these
Malefactors, of that part which fell upon the woman, all our mothers are
experimental witnesses; they brought forth us in sorrow and in travail. Of
that part of the sentence which fell upon man, every one of us is an
experimental witness, for in every calling, in the sweat of our face, we eat
our bread. And of that part of the Judgment, which was inflicted upon the
Serpent, and Satan in him, this dead brother of ours who lies in this
consecrated earth, is an experimental witness, who being by death reduced to
the state of dust, for so much of him, as is dust, that is, for his dead body,
and then, for so long time, as he is to remain in that state of dust, is in
the portion, and jurisdiction, and possession of the Serpent, that is, in the
state which the Serpent has induced upon man, and dust must he eat all the
days of his life.

In passing thorough these words, Divisio.
we shall make but these two steps; first, What the Serpent lost, by this
judgment inflicted upon him; and secondly, What man gained by it; for these
two considerations embrace much, involve much; first, That Gods anger is so
intensive, and so extensive, so spreading, and so vehement, as that in his
Justice, he would not spare the Serpent, who had no voluntary, no innate, no
natural ill disposition toward man, but was only made the instrument of
Satan, in the overthrow of man. And then, that Gods mercy is so large, so
overflowing, so super-abundant, as that even in his Judgment upon the Serpent,
he would provide mercy for man. For, as it is a great weight of judgment upon
the Serpent, that the Serpent must eat dust, so is it a great degree of mercy
to man, that the Serpent must eat but dust, because man's best part is not
subject to be served in at his table, the soul cannot become dust, (and dust
must he eat all the days of his life. O, in what little sin, though but a
sin of omission, though but a sin of ignorance, in what circumstance of
sin, may I hope to escape Judgment, if God punished the Serpent who was
violently, and involuntarily transported in this action? And in what depth, in
what height, in what heinousness, in what multiplicity of sin can I doubt of
the mercy of my God, who makes judgment it self the instrument, the engine, the
Chariot of his mercy? What room is there left for presumption, if the Serpent,
the passive Serpent were punished? What room for desperation, if in the
punishment, there be a manifestation of mercy? The Serpent must eat dust, that
is his condemnation, but he shall eat no better meat, he shall eat but dust,
there is man's consolation.

First then, 1 Part.
as it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, so is it
an impossible thing to escape it. Heb. 10. 31.
God is not ashamed of being jealous; he does not only pronounce that he is a
jealous God, but he desires to be known by none other name, (The Lord whose
name is jealous is a jealous God) so jealous, Exodus 34. 14.
as that he will not have his name uttered in vain; not only not blasphemed,
not sworn by, but not used indifferently, transitorily, not Proverbially,
occasionally, not in vain. And if it be, what then? Even for this, he will
visit to the third, and fourth generation; and three and four are seven, and
seven is infinite. So jealous, as that in the case of the Angels, not for
looking upon any other Creatures, or trusting in them, (for, when they fell,
(as it is ordinarily received) there were no other creatures made) but for not
looking immedidiately, directly upon God, but reflecting upon themselves, and
trusting in their own natural parts, God threw those Angels into so
irrecoverable, and bottomless a depth, as that the merits of Christ Jesus,
though of infinite, super-infinite value, do not boy them up; so jealous a
God, is God, so jealous, as that in Adams case, for over-loving his own wife,
for his over tender compassion of her, foreating the forbidden fruit, ne
contristaretur delicias suas, (as Saint Hierome lays his fault) left he should
deject her into an inordinate and desperate malancholy, and so make her
incapable of Gods mercy, God threw the first man, and in him, all, out of
Paradise, out of both Paradises, out of that of rest, and plenty here, Numb.
22. 5. 20. 11.
and that of Joy, and Glory hereafter. Consider Balaams sin about cursing Gods
people, or Moses sin about striking the rock, and would not thou be glad to
change sins, with either of them? Are not thy sins greater, heavier sins;
And yet, would thou not be sorry, to undergo their punishments? are not thy
punishments less? Prove. 25. 16.
Have thou found honey, says the holy Ghost in Solomon; and, he says it
promiscuously, and universally, to every body; eat, as much as is sufficient.
Every man may. 1. Sam. 14. 17.
And then, Jonathan found that honey, and knew not that it was forbidden by
Saul's proclamation, and did but taste it, and that in a case of extreme
necessity, and Jonathan must die. Any man might eat enough, He did but taste,
and he must die. If the Angels, if Adam, if Balaam, if Moses, if Jonathan did,
if the Serpent in the text, could consider this, how much cheaper God has made
sin to thee, then to them, might they not have color in the eye of a
natural man, to expostulate with God? Might not Ananias, Act. 5. 8.
and Saphira, who only withheld a little of that, which, but a little before,
was all their own, and now must die for that, have been excusable if they had
said at the last gasp, How many direct Sacrileges has God forborne, in such
and such, and we must die? Mighty not E^, and Onan, after their unclean act
upon themselves only, for which they died, Genesis 38. 2.
have been excusable, if they had said at the last gasp, How many direct
adulteries, how many unnatural incests has God forborne in such and such, and
we must die? How many loads of miserable wretches may thou have seen suffer
at ordinary executions, when thou might have said with David, Lord I have
done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done? What had this Serpent done?

The Serpent was more subtle then any other beast. Quia instrumentum.
It is a dangerous thing to have a capacity to do evil; Genesis 3. 1.
to be fit to be wrought upon, is a dangerous thing. How many men have been
drawn into danger, because they were too rich? How many women into
solicatation, and tentation, because they were too beautiful? Content thy
self with such a mediocrity in these things, as may make thee fit to serve
God, and to assist thy neighbor, in a calling, and be not ambitious of
extraordinary excellency in any kind; It is a dangerous thing, to have a
capacity to do evil. God would do a great work; Number. 28. 22.
and he used the simplicity of the Ass; he made Balaams Ass speak; But the
Devil makes use of the subtilty, of the craft of the Serpent; The Serpent is
his Instrument; no more but so, but so much he is, his instrument. And then,
says S. Chrysostom, Pater noster execuratur gladium, as a natural father
would, so our heavenly father does hate, that which was the instrument of the
ruin of his children. Wherein has he expressed that hate? not to bind our
selves to Josephus his opinion, (though some of the ancients in the Christian
Church have seconded that opinion, too) that at that time the Serpent could go
upright, and speak, and understand, and knew what he did, and so concurred
actually and willingly to the temptation and destruction of man, though he were
but another instrument, he became odious to God. Our bodies, of themselves, if
they had no souls, have no disposition to any evil; yet, these bodies which
are but instruments, must burn in hell. The earth was accursed for man's sin,
though the earth had not been so much as an instrument of his sin; Only
because it was, after, to conduce to the punishment of his children, it was
accursed, God withdrew his love from it. And in the law, Lev. 20. 15.
those beasts with which men committed bestiality, were to be stoned, as well
as the men. How poor a plea will it be, to say, at the last day, I got nothing
by such an extortion, to mine own purse, it was for my master; I made no use of
that woman whom I had corrupted, it was for a friend. Miserable instrument of
sin, that had not the profit, nor the pleasure, and must have the damnation!
As the Prophet calls them, that help us toward heaven, Obad. v. 21.
Saviors, ( Saviors shall come up on Mount Sion) so are all that concur
instrumentally to the damnation of others, Devils. And, at the last day, we
shall see many sinners saved, and their instruments perish. Adam, and Eve both
God interrogated, and, gave them time, to meditate and to deprecate; To Adam,
he says, Where art thou, and, who told thee that thou wast naked? And to Eve,
What is this that thou have done? But to the Serpent no such breathing; The
first words is, Quia fecisti; no calling for evidence whether he had done it or
no, but, Because thou have done it, thou art accursed. Sin is Treason against
God; and in Treason there is no Accessory; The instrument is the Principal.

We pass from that first Part, 2 Part.
the consideration of heavy Judgments upon faults, in appearance but small,
derived from the punishment of the Serpent, though but an Instrument. Let no
man set a low value upon any sin; let no man think it a little matter to sin
some one sin, and no more; or that one sin but once, and no oftener; or that
once but a little way in that sin, and no father; or all this, to do another a
pleasure, though he take none in it himself (as though there were charity in
the society of sin, and that it were an Alms to help a man to the means of
sinning.) The least sin cost the blood of the Son of God, and the least sinner
may lose the benefit of it, if he presume of it. No man may cast himself from a
Pinnacle, because an Angel may support him; no man may kill himself, because
there is a Resurrection of the body; nor wound his soul to death by sin,
because there may be a resurrection of that, by grace. Here is no room for
presumption upon God; but, as little for desperation in God; for, in the
punishment of the Serpent, we shall see, that his Mercy, and Justice are
inseparable; that, as all the Attributes of God, make up but one God
(Goodness, and Wisdom, and Power are but one God) so Mercy and Justice make
up but one act; they do not only duly suceed, and second one another, they
do not only accompany one another, they are not only together, but they are
all one. As Manna, though it tasted to one man like one thing, to another like
another, (for it tasted to every man like that, that that man liked best) yet
still was the same Manna; so, for Gods corrections, they have a different taste
in different persons; and howsoever the Serpent found nothing but Judgment,
yet we find mercy even in that Judgment. The evening and the morning make up
the day, Genesis 1. 5.
says Moses; as soon as he had named evening comes in morning, no interposing
of the mention of a dark, and sad night between. As soon as I hear of a
Judgment, I apprehend Mercy, no interposing of any dark or sad suspicion, or
diffidence, or distrust in God, and his mercy; and to that purpose we consider
the Serpents punishment, and espcially as it is heightened, and aggravated in
this Text, Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

There are three degrees in the Serpents punishment; Super pectus.
First, Super pectus, He must creep upon his belly; And secondly, Inimicitias
ponam, I will put enmity, God will raise him an enemy. And thirdly, Pulverem
comedes, Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life. And, in all these
three, though they aggravate the judgment upon the Serpent, there is mercy to
us; For, for the first, that the Serpent now does but creep upon his belly, S.
Augustine, and S. Gregory understands this belly to be the seat of our
affections, and our concupiscencies; That the Serpent has no power upon our
heart, nor upon our brain, for, if we bring a tentation to consideration, to
deliberation, that we stop at it, think of it, study it, and forsee the
consequences, this frustrates the tentation. Our nobler faculties are always
assisted with the grace of God to resist him, though the belly, the bowels of
sin, in sudden surprisals, and ebullitions, and foamings of our
concupiscencies, be subject to him: for, though it may seem, that if that be
the meaning, (which, from S. Augustine and S. Gregory we have given you) That
the Serpent has this power over our affections, and that is intended by that,
The belly, it should rather have been said, super pectus vestrum, He shall
creep upon your belly, then upon his own, yet, indeed, all that is his own,
which we have submitted and surrendered to him, and he is upon his own, because
we make our selves his; (for, to whom ye yield your servants to obey, his
servants you are. Romans 6. 18.
) So that if he be super pectus nostrum, if he be upon our belly, he is upon
his own. But he does but creep; He does not fly; He is not presently upon you,
in a present possession of you; you may discern the beginning of sin, and the
ways of sin, in the approaches of the Serpent, if you will. The Serpent leaves
a slime that discovers him, where he creeps; At least behind him, after a sin,
you may easily see occasion of remorse, and detestation of that sin, and
thereby prevent relapses, if you have not watched him well enough in his
creeping upon you. When he is a Lion, he does not devour all whom he finds;
1 Pet. 5. 8.
He seeks whom he may devour; He may not devour all, nor any but those, who
cast themselves into his jaws, by exposing themselves to tentations to sin.

He does but creep; An forma mutata.
why, did he any more before? was his form changed in this punishment? Many of
the Ancients think literally that it was; and that before the Serpent did go
upon feet; we are not sure of that; nor is it much probable. That may well be
true, which Luther says, fuit suavissima bestiola, till then it was a creature
more lovely, more sociable, more conversable with man, and, (as Calvin
expresses the same) Minus odiosus, man did less abhor the Serpent before, then
after. Beloved, it is a degree of mercy, if God bring that, which was formerly
a tentation to me, to a less power over me, then formerly it had; If
deformity, if sickness, if age, if opinion, if satiety, if inconstancy, if any
thing have worn out a tentation in that face, that transported me heretofore,
it is a degree of mercy. Though the Serpent be the same Serpent, yet if he be
not so acceptable, so welcome to me, as heretofore, it is a happy, a blessed
change. And so, in that respect, there was mercy.

It was a punishment to the Serpent, Inimicitias ponam.
that, though he were the same still as before, yet he was not able to
insinuate himself as before, because he was not so welcome to us. So, the
having of the same form, which he had, might be a punishment, as nakedness was
to man after his fall; He was naked before, but he saw it not, he felt it not,
he needed no clothes before; Now, nakedness brings shame, and infirmities
with it. So, God was so sparing toward the Serpent, as that he made him not
worse in nature, then before, and so merciful to us, as that he made us more
jealous of him, and thereby more safe against him, then before. Which is also
intimated pregnantly, in the next step of his punishment, Inimicitias ponam,
That God has kindled a war between him and us. Peace is a blessed state, but
it must be the peace of God; for, simeon and Levi are brethren, Genesis 49. 5.
they agree well enough together; but they are instruments of evil; and, in
that case, the better agreement, the worse. So, war is a fearful state; but
not so, if it be the war of God, undertaken for his cause, or by his Word. Many
times, a State suffers by the security of a Peace, and gains by the
watchfulness of a War. Woe be to that man is so at peace, as that the spirit
fights not against the flesh in him; and woe to them too, who would make them
friends, or reconcile them, between whom, God has perpetuated an everlasting
war, The seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, Christ and Beliall,
Truth and Superstition. Till God proclaimed a war between them, the Serpent
did easily overthrow them, but therefore God brought it to a war, that man
might stand upon his guard. And so it was a Mercy.

But the greatest mercy is in the last, Pulverem comedes.
and that which belongs most directly, (though all conduce pertinently and
usefully) to our present occasion;) Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life. He must eat dust, that is, our bodies, and carnal affections; He was at
a richer diet, he was in better pasture before; before, he fed upon souls too;
But for that his head was bruised, in the promise of a Messiah, who delivers
our souls from his tyranny; But the dust, the body, that body, which for all
the precious ransom, and the rich, and large mercy of the Messiah, must die,
that dust is left to the Serpent, to Satan, that is, to that dissolution, and
that putrefaction, which he has induced upon man, in death. He eats but our
dust, in our death, when he has brought us to that; that is a mercy; nay he
eats up our dust before our death, which is a greater mercy; our carnal
affections, our concupiscencies are eaten up, and devoured by him; and so, even
his eating is a sweeping, a deansing, a purging of us. Many times we are the
better for his tentations. My discerning a storm, makes me put on a cloak. My
discerning a tentation, makes me see my weakness, and fly to my strength. Nay,
I am sometimes the safer, and the readier for a victory, by having been overcome
by him. The sense, and the remorse of a sin, after I have fallen into it, puts
me into a better state, and establishes better conditions between God and me
then were before, when I felt no tentations to sin. He shall eat up my dust,
so, as that it shall fly into mine eyes; that is, so work upon my carnal
affections, as that they shall not make me blind, nor unable to discern that
it is he that works. It is said of one kind of Serpent, that because they
know, Stellio
by an instinct they have, that their skin is good for the use of man, (for the
falling sickness) out of Envy, they hide their skin, when they cast it. The
Serpent is loath we should have any benefit by him; but we have; even his
tentations arm us, and the very falling exalts us, when after a sin of
infirmity, we come to a true, and scrutiny of our conscience. So he has
nothing to eat but our dust, and he eats up our dust so, as that he contributes
to our glory, Ion. 1. 17.
by his malice. The Whale was Jonas Pilot; The Crows were Elias caters; The
Lions were Daniels sentinels; 1 Reg. 7. 6.
The Viper was Paul's advocate; it pleaded for him, and brought the beholders in
an instant, Dan. 6. 22.
from extreme to extreme, Act. 28.
from crying out that Paul was a murderer, to cry that he was a god. Though at
any time, the Serpent having brought me to a sin, cry out, Thou art a murderer,
that is, bring me to a desperate sense of having murdered mine own soul, yet in
that darkness I shall see light, and by a present repentance, and effectual
application of the merits of my Savior, I shall make the Serpent see, I am a
God, thus far a God, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
that by my adhering to Christ, I am made partaker of the Divine Nature. For,
that which S. Chrysostom. says of Baptism; is true too in the second Baptism,
Repentance, Deposui terram, and coelum indui; then I may say to the Serpent,
Your meat is dust; 2 Cor. 5. 17.
and I was dust; but Deposui terram, I have shak'd off my dust, by true
repentance, for I have shak'd off my self, and am a new creature, and am not
now meat for your Table. Iam terra non sum, sed sal, says the same Father, I am
not now unsavory dust, but I am salt; And, Sal ex aqua and vento says he; Salt
is made of water and wind; I am made up of the water of Baptism, of the water
of Repentance, of the water that accompanies the blood of Christ Jesus, Ioh. 3.
8.
and of that wind that blows where it list, and has been pleased to blow upon
me, the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost, and I am no longer meat for the Serpent,
for Dust must he eat all the days of his life. I am a branch of that Vine,
(Christ is the Vine, Ioh. 15. 5.
and we are the branches) I am a leaf of that Rose of Sharon, and of that
Lilly of the valleys; Cant. 2. 1. 4. 14. 5. 2.
I am a plant in the Orchard of Pomegranats, and that Orchard of Pomegranats is
the Church; I am a drop of that dew, that dew that lay upon the head of Christ.
And this Vine, and this Rose, and Lilly, and Pomegranats, of Paradise, and this
Dew of heaven, are not Dust, And dust must thou eat all the days of thy life.

So then, Tota vita.
the Prophecy of Esaias Esaias 65. 25.
fulfils it self, That when Christ shall reign powerfully over us, The wolf and
the lamb shall feed together, (Saul and Ananias shall meet in a house, (as S.
Hierome expounds that) and Ananias not be afraid of a Persecutor.) The Lion
shall eat straw like the Bullock, says that Prophet in that place, Tradent se
rusticitati Scripturarum, says the same Father, The strongest understandings
shall content themselves with the homeliness of the Scriptures, and feed upon
plain places, and not study new dishes, by subtilties, and perplexities, and
then, Dust shall be the Serpents meat, says the Prophet there, The power of
Satan shall reach but to the body, and touch a soul wrapped up in Christ. But
then, it is Tota vita, all his life. His diet is impaired, but it is not taken
away; He eats but dust, but he shall not lack that, as long as he lives. And
how long lives the Serpent, this Serpent? The life of this Serpent is to seduce
man, to practice upon man, to prevail upon man, as far, and as long as man
is dust. And therefore we are not only his dust, whilst we live (all which
time we serve in our carnal affections, for him to feed upon) but when we are
dead, we are his dust still. Man was made in that state, as that he should not
resolve to dust, but should have passed from this world to the next, without
corruption, or resolution of the body. Genesis 3. 18.
That which God said to Adam, Dust thou art, belonged to all, from the
beginning, he, and all we were to be of dust, in his best integrity; but that
which God adds there, and in terram reverteris, (dust thou art, and to it thou
shall return) that the Serpent brought in, that was induced upon man by him,
and his tentation. So that when we are living dust here he eats us, and when we
are dead dust too, in the grave, he feeds upon us, because it proceeds from him
both that we die, and that we are detained in the state of exinanition, and
ingloriousnesse, in the dust of the earth, and not translated immediately to
the joys of heaven, as but for him, we should have been. But as, though he do
feed upon our living dust, that is, induce sicknesses, and hunger, and labor,
and cold, and pain upon our bodies here, God raises even that dust out of his
hands, and redeemes it from his jaws, in affording us a deliverance, or a
^^^^itution from those bodily calamities here, as he did abundantly to his
servant, and our example Job, so, though he feed upon our dead dust and detain
our bodies in the disconsolate state of the grave, yet, as the Godhead, the
divine nature did not depart from the body of Christ when it lay dead in the
grave, so neither does the love and power of God, depart from the body of a
Christian, though resolved to dust in the grave, but, in his due time, shall
recollect that dust, and recompact that body, and reunite that soul, in
everlasting joy and glory. And till then, the Serpent lives; till the
Judgment, Satan has power upon that part of man; and that is the Serpents
life, first to practice our death, and then to hold us in the state of the
dead. Till then we attend with hope, and with prayers Gods holy pleasure upon
us, and then begins the unchangeable state in our life, in body and soul
together, then we begin to live, and then ends the Serpents life, that is,
his earnest practice upon us in our life, and his faint triumph in continuing
over our dust. That time, Mat. 8. 28.
(the time of the general Resurrection) being not yet come, the devils
thought themselves wronged, and complained that Christ came before the time to
torment them; and therefore Christ yielded so much to their importunity, as to
give them leave to enter into the swine. And therefore, let not us murmur nor
over-mourne for that, which as we have induced it upon our selves, so God shall
deliver us from, at last, that is, both death, and corruption after death, and
captivity in that comfortless state, but for the resurection. For, so long we
are to be dust, and so long lasts the Serpents life, Satan's power over man;
dust must he eat all the days of his life.

In the mean time, Conclusio.
(for our comfort in the way) when this Serpent becomes a Lion, Apoc. 5. 5.
yet there is a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, that is too strong for him. so, if
he who is Serpens serpens humi, the Serpent condemned to creep upon the ground,
do transform himself into a flying Serpent, and attempt our nobler
faculties, there is Serpens exaltatus, a Serpent lifted up in the wilderness,
Numb. 12. 18.
to recover all them that are stung, and feel that they are stung with this
Serpent, this flying Serpent, that is, these high and continued sins. The
creeping Serpent, the grovelling Serpent, is Craft; the exalted Serpent, the
crucified Serpent, is Wisdom. All you worldly cares, all your crafty bargains
all your subtle matches, all your diggings into other means estates, all your
hedgings, in of debts, all your planting of children in great allyances; all
these diggings, and hedgings and plantings savor of the earth, and of the
craft of that Serpent, that creeps upon the earth: But crucify this craft of
yours, bring all your worldly subtilty under the Cross of Christ Jesus,
husband your farms so, as you may give a good account to him, press your
debts so, as you would be pressed by him, market and bargain so, as that you
would give all, to buy that field, in which his treasure, and his pearl is
hid, and then you have changed the Serpent, from the Serpent of perdition
creeping upon the earth, to the Serpent of salvation exalted in the
wilderness. Creeping wisdom, that still looks downward, is but craft;
Crucified wisdom, that looks upward, is truly wisdom. Between you and that
ground Serpent God has kindled a war; and the nearer you come to a peace with
him, the farther ye go from God, and the more ye exaspetate the Lord of Hosts,
and you whet his sword against your own souls. A truce with that Serpent, is
too near a peace; to condition with your conscience for a time, that you may
continue in such a sin, till you have paid for such a purchase, married such a
daughter, bought such an annuity. undermined and eaten out such an unthrift,
this truce, (though you mean to end it before you die) is too near a peace with
that Serpent, between whom and you, God has kindled an everlasting war. A
cessation of Arms, that is, not to watch all his attempts and tentations, not
to examine all your particular actions, A Treaty of Peace, that is, to dispute
and debate in the behalf and favor of a sin, to palliate, to disguise, to
extenuate that sin, this is too near a peace with this Serpent, this creeping
Serpent. But in the other Serpent, the crucified Serpent, God has reconciled
to himself, all things in heaven, and earth, and hell. You have peace in the
assistance of the Angels of heaven, Peace in the contribution of the powerful
prayers, and of the holy examples of the Saints upon earth, peace in the
victory and triumph over the power of hell, peace from sins toward men, peace
of affections in your selves, peace of conscience toward God. From your
childhood you have been called upon to hold your peace; To be content is to
hold your peace; murmr not at God, in any corrections of his, and you do
hold this peace. That creeping Serpent, Satan, is war, and should be so; The
crucified Serpent Christ Jesus is peace, and shall be so for ever. The creeping
Serpent eats our dust, the strength of our bodies, in sicknesses, and our glory
in the dust of the grave: The crucified Serpent has taken our flesh, 2 Samuel 5.
14.
and our blood, and given us his flesh, and his blood for it; And therefore, as
David, when he was thought base, for his holy freedom in dancing before the
Ark, said he would be more base; so, since we are all made of red earth, let
him that is red, be more red; Let him that is red with the blood of his own
soul, be red again in blushing for that redness, and more red in the Communion
of the blood of Christ Jesus; whom we shall eat all the days of our life, and
be mystically, and mysteriously, and spiritually, and Sacramentally united to
him in this life, and gloriously in the next.

In this state of dust, and so in the territory of the Serpent, the Tyrant of
the dead, lies this dead brother of ours, and has lien some years, who
occasions our meeting now, and yearly upon this day, and whose soul, we doubt
not, is in the hands of God, who is the God of the living. And having gathered
a good Gomer of Manna, a good measure of temporal blessings in this life, and
derived a fair measure thereof, upon them, whom nature and law directed it
upon, (and in whom we beseech God to bless it) has also distributed something
to the poor of this Parish, yearly, this day, and something to a meeting for
the conserving of neighbourly love, and something for this exercise. In which,
no doubt, his intention was not so much to be yearly remembered himself, as that
his posterity, and his neighbors might be yearly remembered to do as he had
done. For, this is truly to glorify God in his Saints, to sanctify our selves
in their examples; To celebrate them, is to imitate them. For, as it is
probably conceived, and agreeably to Gods Justice, that they that write wanton
books, or make wanton pictures, have additions of torment, as often as other
men are corrupted with their books, or their pictures: so may they, who have
left permanent examples of good works, well be believed, to receive additions
of glory and joy, when others are led by that to do the like: And so, they who
are extracted, and derived from him, and they who dwelt about him, may assist
their own happiness, and enlarge his, by following his good example in good
proportions. Amen.

SERMON XLVIII.
Preached at St. Dunstans.
LAMENT. 3. 1. I am the man, that has seen affliction, by the rod of his
wrath.
YOU remember in the history of the Passion of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus, there was an Ecce homo, a showing, an exhibiting of that man, in whom we
are all blessed. Ioh. 19. 5.
Pilat presented him to the Jews so, with that Ecce homo, Behold the man. That
man upon whom the wormwood and the gall of all the ancient Prophecies, and the
venom and malignity of all the cruel instruments thereof, was now poured out;
That man who was left as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground,
without form, or beauty, or comeliness, that we should desire to see him,
Esaias 53. 2.
as the Prophet Esaias exhibits him; That man who upon the brightness of his
eternal generation in the bosom of his Father, had now cast a cloud of a
temporary and earthly generation in the womb of his mother, that man, who, as
he entered into the womb of his first mother, the blessed Virgin, by a
supernatural way, by the overshadowing of the holy Ghost, so he vouchsafed to
enter into the womb of her, whom he had accepted for his second mother, the
earth, by an unnatural way, not by a natural, but by a violent, and bitter
death, that man so torn and mangled, wounded with thorns, oppressed with
scorns and contumelies, Pilite presents and exhibits so, Ecce homo, Behold the
man, But in all this depression of his, in all his exinanition, and evacuation
yet he had a Crown on, yet he had a purple garment on, the emblems, the
Characters of majesty were always upon him. And these two considerations, the
miseries that exhaust, and evacuate, and annihilate man in this life, and yet,
those sparks, and seeds of morality, that lie in the bosom, that still he is
a man, the affilictions that depresse and smother, that suffocate and strangle
their spirits in their bosoms, and yet that unsmotherable, that unquenchable
Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba Father, that still he is a Christian,
these Thorns, and yet these Crowns, these contumelies, and yet this Purple,
are the two parts of this text, I am the man, that has seen affliction by the
rod of his wrath. For, here is an Ecce, behold; Jeremy presents a map, a
manifestation of as great affliction, as the rod of Gods wrath could infflict;
But yet it is Ecce homo, Behold the man, I am the man, he is not demolished, he
is not incinerated so, not so annihilated, but that he is still a man; God
preserves his children from departing from the dignity of men, and from the
sovereign dignity of Christian men, in the deluge, and inundation of all
afflictions.

And these two things, so considerable in that Ecce homo, in the exhibiting of
Christ, that then when he was under those scorns, and Crosses, he had his
Crowns, his purples, ensigns of majesty upon him, may well be parts of this
text; for, when we come to consider who is the person of whom Jeremy says, I am
the man, we find many of the ancient Expositors take these words prophetically
of Christ himself; and that Christ himself who says, 1. 12.
Behold and see if there be any sorrow, like unto my sorrow, says here also, I
am the man, that has seen affliction, by the rod of his wrath. But because
there are some other passages in the Chapter, that are not conveniently
appliable to Christ, (it is not likely that Christ would say of himself; verse
8.
That his Father shut out his prayer, even then when he cried and shouted; 10.
not likely that Christ would say of himself, That his Father was to him, as a
Bear in the way, and as a Lion in secret places; 17.
not likely that Christ would say of himself, That his Father had removed his
soul far from peace) therefore this chapter, and this person cannot be so well
understood of Christ. Others therefore have understood if of Jerusalem it
self; but then it would not be expressed in that Sex, it would not be said of
Jerusalem, I am the man. Others understand if of any particular man, that had
his part, in that calamity, in that captivity; that the affliction was so
universal upon all of that nation of what condition soever, that every man
might justly say, Ego vir, I am the man that have seen affliction. But then all
this chapter must be figurative, and still, where we can, it becomes, it
behooves us to, maintain a literal sense and interpretation of all Scriptures.
And that we shall best do in this place, if we understand these words literally
of Iermy himself, that the Minister of God, the Preacher of God, the Prophet
of God, Jeremy himself, was the man; the Preacher is the text, Ego vir, I am
the man: As the Ministers of God are most exposed to private contumelies, so
should they be most affected with public calamities, and soonest come to say
with the Apostle, Quis infirmatur who is weak, 2 Cor. 11. 29.
and I am not weak too, who is offended, and I am not affected with it? when
the people of God are distressed with sickness, with dearth, with any public
calamity, the Minister is the first man, that should be compassionate, that
should be compassionate, and sensible of it.

In these words then, Divisio.
( I am the man etc.) these are our two parts; first the Burden, and then the
Ease, first the weight, and then the Alleviation, first the Discomfort, and
then the Refreshing, the sea of afflictions that overflow, and surround us all
and then our emergency and lifting up our head above that sea. In the first we
shall consider, first, the Generality of afflictions; and that first in their
own nature, And then secondly in that name of man. upon whom they fall here,
Gheber, Ego vir, I am the man, which is that name of man, by which the
strongest, the powerfullest of men are denoted in the Scriptures; They, the
strongest, the mightiest, they that thought themselves safest, and
sorrow-proofe, are afflicted. And lastly, in the person, upon whom these
afflictions are fastened here, Jeremy the Prophet, of whom literally we
understand this place: The dearliest beloved of God, and those of whose service
God may have use in his Church, they are subject to be retarded in their
service, by these afflictions. Nothing makes a man so great amongst men,
nothing makes a man so necessary to God, as that he can escape afflictions. And
when we shall have thus considered the generality thereof, these three ways,
In the nature of affliction it self, In the signification of that name of
exaltation Gheber, And in the person of Jeremy, we shall pass to the
consideration of the vehemence and intensnesse thereof, in those circumstances
that are laid down in our Text, First, that these afflictions are Ejus, His,
The Lords, And then they are in virga, in his rod, And again, In virga irae, in
the rod of his wrath. And in these two branches, the extent and the weight of
afflictions, and in these few circumstances, that illustrate both, we shall
determine our first part, the burden, the discomfort. When we shall come at
last, to our last part, of comfort, we shall find that also to grow out into 2
branches; for, first, Vidit, he saw his affliction, ( I am the Man that has
seen affliction) Affliction did not blind him, not stupefie him, affliction
did not make him unsensible of affliction, (which is a frequent, but a
desperate condition) vidit, he saw it; that is first; And then, Ego vir, I am
the man that saw it, he maintained the dignity of his station, still he played
the man, still he survived to glorify God, and to be an example to other men,
of patience under Gods corrections, and of thankfulness in Gods deliverance.
In which last part, we shall also see, that all those particular that did
aggravate the affliction, in the former part, (That they were from the Lord,
from his Rod, from the Rod of his wrath) do all exalt our comfort in this,
That it is a particular comfort that our afflictions are from the Lord, Another
that they are from his Rod, and another also, that they are from the Rod of his
wrath.

First then in our first art, 1 Part.
and the first branch thereof, The Generality of affliction, considered in the
nature thereof: Generalitas.
We met all generally, in the first Treason against our selves; without
exception all; In Adams rebellion, who was not in his loins? And in a second
Treason, we met all too; in the Treason against Christ Jesus, we met all; All
our sins were upon his shoulders. In those two Treasons we have had no
exception, no exemption. The penalty for our first Treason, in Adam, in a great
part, we do all undergo; we do all die, though not without a lothnesse and
colluctation at the time, yet without a deliberate desire to live in this world
for ever. How loath soever any man be to die, when death comes, yet I think,
there is no man that ever formed a deliberate Prayer, or wish, that he might
never die. That penalty for our first Treason in Adam, we do bear. And would
any be excepted from bearing any thing deduced from his second Treason, his
conspiracy against Christ, from imitation of his Passion, and fulfilling his
sufferings in his body, in bearing cheerfully the afflictions and tribulations
of this life? Genesis 6. 12.
Omnis caro corruper at; and thou art within that general Indictment, all
flesh had corrupted his way upon Earth. Statutum est omnibus mori; Heb. 9. 27.
and thou art within that general Statute, It is appointed unto all men once
to die. Anima quae peccaverit, ipsa morietur: and thou art within that general
Sentence, and Judgment, Every soul that sins shall die, The death of the
soul. Out of these general Propositions thou can not get; Ezekiel. 18. 4.
And when in the same universality there comes a general pardon, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
Deus vult omnes slavos, God will have all men to be saved, Because that Pardon
has in it that Ita quod, that condition, Omnem filium, He sc^urgeth every
son whom he receives, Heb. 12. 6.
would thou lose the benefit of that Adoption, that Filiation, that Patrimony
and Inheritance, rather then admit patiently his Fatherly chastisements in the
afflictions and tribulations in this life? Col. 2. 14.
Beloved, the death of Christ is given to us, as a Handwriting: for, when
Christ naild that Chirographum, that first handwriting, that had passed
between the Devil and us, to his Cross, he did not leave us out of debt, nor
absolutely discharged, but he laid another Chirographum upon us, another
Obligation arising out of his death. His death is delivered to us, as a
writing, but not a writing only in the nature of a piece of Evidence, to plead
our inheritance by, but a writing in the nature of a Copy, to learn by; It is
not only given us to read, but to write over, and practice; Not only to tell
us what he did, but how we should do so too.

All the evils and mischiefs that light upon us in this world, come (for the
most part) from this, Quia fruimur utendis, August.
because we think to enjoy those things which God has given us only to use.
God has given us a use of things, and we set our hearts upon them. And this
has a proportion, an assimilation, an accommodation in the death of Christ.
God has proposed that for our use, in this world, and we think to enjoy it;
God would have us do it over again, and we think it enough to know that Christ
has done it already; God would have us write it, and we do only read it; God
would have us practice the death of Christ, and we do but understand it. The
fruition, the enjoying of the death of Christ, is reserved for the next life;
To this life belongs the use of it; that use of it, to fulfill his sufferings
in our bodies, by bearing the afflictions and tribulations of this life. Ambros.
For, Prius Trophaeum Crucis erexit, deinde Martyribus tradidit erigendum;
first Christ set up the victorious Trophee of his Cross himself, and then he
delivered it over to his Martyrs to do as he had done. Nor are they only his
Martyrs that have actually died for him, but into the signification of that
name, which signifies a Witness, fall all those, who have glorified him, in a
patient and constant bearing the afflictions and tribulations of this life. All
being guilty of Christ's death, there lies an obligation upon us all, to fulfill
his sufferings. And this is the generality of afflictions, as we consider them
in their own nature.

Now, Gheber. Vir.
this generality is next expressed, in this word of exaltation, Gheber, Ego
vir, I am the man; It was that man, that is denoted and signified in that name,
that has lien under affliction, and therefore no kind of man was likely to
escape. There are in the Original Scriptures, four words, by which man is
called; four names of man; and any of the others, (if we consider the
origination of the words) might better admit afflictions to insult upon him,
then this, Gheber, vir, I am the man. At first, man is called Ishe; a word,
which their Grammarians derive a sonitu, from a sound, from a voice. Whether
man's excellency be in that, that he can speak, which no other creature can do;
or whether man's impotency be in that, that he comes into the world Crying, in
this denomination, in this word, man is but a sound, but a voice, and that is
no great matter. Another name of man is Adam, and Adam is no more but earth,
and red earth, and the word is often used for blushing. When the name of man
imports no more but so, no more but the frailty of the earth, and the bashful
acknowledgement and confession of that frailty, in infinite infirmities, there
is no great hope of scaping afflictions in this name, Adam. Less in his third
name, Enosh: for Enosh signifies aegrum, calamitosum, a person naturally
subject to, and actually possessed with all kinds of infirmities. So that this
name of man, Enosh, is so far from exempting him, as that it involves him, it
overflows him in afflictions: He has a miserable name, as well as a miserable
nature, Put them in fear, Ps^ 9. 20.
O Lord, (says David) that they may know they are but men; but such men, as are
denoted in that name of man, Enosh, (for there that name is expressed) weak and
miserable men. Now, (to collect these) as man is nothing but a frivolous, an
empty, a transitory sound, or but a sad and lamentable voice, (he is no more in
his first name Ishe) As man is nothing but red earth, a moldring clod of
infirmities, and then, blushing, that is, guilty, sensible, and ashamed of his
own miserable condition, (and man is no more, as he is but Adam) As man is
nothing but a receptacle of diseases in his body, of crosses in his estate, of
immoderate griefs for those crosses in his mind, (and man is no more as he
is but Enosh) so there is no wonder, why man in general should be under
affliction, for these names import, these names enforce it: As Adam gave names
to the creatures according to their natures, so God has given names to man,
according to his nature, miserable names, to miserable wretches. But when man
is presented in this Text, in this fourth and great name, Gheber, which denotes
excellency, Excellency in virtue, (his mind rectified) Excellency in wealth,
(his estate enlarged) Excellency in power, (his authority extended) Excellency
in favor, (all seas calm on the top, and foordable at the bottom to him) when
man is expressed in that word, Genesis 27. 29.
which Isaac used to Jacob, in his abundant blessing, Be Lord over thy
brethren, and let thy mothers sons bow down to thee: And then, in this
height, this height of virtue and merit, of wealth and treasure, of command
and power, of favor and acclamation, is thrown down into the pit of misery,
and submitted to all afflictions, what man can hope to be exempted? Man carries
the spawn and seed and eggs of affliction in his own flesh, and his own
thoughts make haste to hatch them, and to bring them up. We make all our worms
snakes, all our snakes vipers, all our vipers dragons, by our murmuring. And so
have you this generality of affliction, considered in this name of Exaltation
Gheber.

Now, Jeremy.
in our third consideration of this extent of affliction, in that this person,
this Prophet Jeremy, (for, of him literally we understand these words, Ego vir,
I am the man) is thus submitted to these extraordinary afflictions, Nemo
necessarius Deo.
we see first, that no man is so necessary to God, as that God cannot come to
his ends without that man; God can lack, and leave out any man in his service.
If Christ had revealed to his Apostles, before he called them to be Apostles,
or qualified them for that service, that he had a purpose to subdue and convert
the whole world, by the labor and the means of twelve men, would it ever have
fallen or entered into their imaginations, that any of them, should have been any
of those twelve? Men of low rank, and estimation, men disfurnished, not only
of all helps of learning, but of all experience in Civil or in Ecclesiastical
affairs? And as Christ infused new abilities into these men that had none, so
can he effect his purposes without them, who think they have all. And
therefore, when he had chosen his twelve Apostles, and had endowed and
qualified them for that service, when in their sight some of his Disciples
forsook him, because he preached Duros sermones, Doctrines hard to flesh and
blood, Job. 6. ^7.
Christ was not afraid to say to the twelve, Numquid and vos vultis abire, Will
ye also go away? He says it to the twelve; and he does not say, Will any of
you, but will you, you twelve, all, go away? I can do my work without you.
And therefore let no man go about to promove or advance his own fancies, his
own singularities, his own Schismatic opinions, because he has done God
service before, because he has possessed himself of the love of that
Congregation, because no man's preaching is so acceptable there, as his, and
that the Church cannot be without him; for, no man has made God beholden to
him, so far, as that he should be afraid to offend him. So also let no man be
disheartened nor discouraged, if he have brought a good conscience, and
faithful labor to the service of God. Let him not think his wages the worse
paid, if God do mingle bodily sickness, temporal losses, personal
disgraces, with his labors; Let him not think that God should not do thus to
them that wear out themselves in his service; for the best part of our wages is
adversity, because that gives us a true fast, and a right value of our
prosperity. Jeremy had it; the best of his rank must.

In his example, Non excusamur a futuris per praeterita. 1 Reg. 19. 4.
we have thus much more, that no man is excused of subsequent afflictions, by
precedent, nor of falling into more, by having born some already. Elias
reckoned too hastily, when he told God, Satis est, now it is enough, Lord take
away my life; God had more to lay upon him. A last years fever prevents not
this, nor a sickness in the fall, another in the Spring. Men are not as such
Copises, as being felled now, stand safe from the Axe for a dozen year after;
But our Afflictions are as beggars, they tell others, and send more after them;
Sickness does but usher in poverty, and poverty contempt, and contempt
dejection of spirit, And a broken spirit who can bear? No man may refuse a
privy seal, because he has lent before. And, though Afflictions be not of Gods
revenue, for, Afflictions are not real services to God) yet they are of his
Subsidies, and he has additionall glory out of our Afflictions; and, the more,
the more. Jeremy had been scornfully and despitefully put in the stocks by
Pashur, Cap. 20. 1. 32. 2. 38. 9.
before; He had been imprisoned in the Kings house, before; He had been put in
the dungeon, and almost starved in the mire, before; And yet he was reserved to
this farther calamity. Affliction is truly a part of our patrimony, of our
portion. If, as the prodigal did, we wast our portion, (that is, make no use
of our former affliction) it is not the least part of Gods bounty and
liberality toward us, if he give us a new stock, a new feeling of new
calamities, that we may be better emproved by them, then by the former;
Ieremies former afflictions were but preparatives for more; no more are ours.

And, Publicavit.
in his example we have this one note more, That when the hand of God had been
upon him, he declared, he published Gods handwriting: not only to his own
conscience, by acknowledging that all these afflictions were for his sins, but
by acknowledging to the world, that God had laid such and such afflictions upon
him. There is not a nearer step to obduration, nor a worse defrauding of God of
his glory, then to be loath to let the world know, what God has laid upon us.
Say to your selves, These afflictions are for my sins, and say to one another,
Ego vir, I am the man whom God has thus, and thus afflicted. For, as
Executions in Criminal justice, are done as much for example of others, as for
punishment of delinquents, so would God feign proceed that cheap way, to make
those afflictions which he lays upon thee, serve another too; as they will, if
thou be content to glorify God, in letting others know, how he has afflicted
thee. Shut we up this first branch of this first part (The extent and
universality of afflictions) which we have considered first in the nature of
the case, (we have all contributed to the afflictions of Christ, and therefore
must all fulfill his sufferings in our flesh) And then secondly, in this name
of Exaltation, Gheber, (man, in the highest consideration of man, is the
subject of affliction) And lastly, in the person of Jeremy, in whom we have
made our use of those three observations; First, That no man is so necessary to
God, as that God cannot be without him, Then, That no man is excused of future
calamities, by former, And lastly, That he whom God has exercised with
afflictions, is bound to glorify God in the declaration thereof; shut we up
this branch, with that story of S. Ambrose, who, in a journey from Milan to
Rome, passing sometime in the evening with his Host, and hearing him brag that
he had never had any cross in his life, S. Ambrose presently removed from
thence to another house, with that protestation, That either that man was very
unthankful to God, that would not take knowledge of his corrections, or that
Gods measure was by this time full, and he would surely, and soundly, and
suddenly pour down all together. And so we pass to our other branch of this
first part, from the extent and generality of afflictions, to the weight and
vehemence of them, expressed in three heavy circumstances, That they are His,
the Lords, That they are from his Rod, That they are from the Rod of his wrath:
I am the man, that have seen afflictions, by the rod of his mouth.

First, Ejus.
they are aggravated in that they are Ejus, His, The Lords. It is ordinary in
the Scriptures, that when the Holy Ghost would express a superlative, or the
highest degree of any thing, to express it, by adding to it, the name of God.
So, in many places, fortitudo Domini, and timor Domini, The power of the Lord,
and the fear of the Lord, do not import that power which is in the Lord, nor
that fear which is to be conceived by us of the Lord, but the power of the
Lord, and the fear of the Lord denote the greatest power, and the greatest fear
that can be conceived. As in particular, when Saul and his company were in such
a dead sleep, as that David could enter in upon them, and take his spear, and
his pot of water from under his head, this is there called sopor Domini, 1 Samuel
26. 22.
the sleep of the Lord was upon him, the heaviest, the deadliest sleep that
could be imagined. so may these Afflictions in our Text be conceived to be
exalted to a superlative height, by this addition, that They, and the Rod, and
the wrath, are said to be His, The Lords. But this cannot well be the sense,
nor the direct proceeding, and purpose of the Holy Ghost, in this place,
because where the addition of the name of God constitutes a superlative, that
name is evidently and literally expressed in that place, as fortitudo Det,
sopor Dei, and the rest; But here, the name of God is only by implication, by
illation, by consequence; All necessary, but yet but illation, but implication,
but consequence. For, there is no name of God in this verse; but, because in
the last verse of the former chapter, the Lord is expressly named, and the Lords
Anger, and then, this which is the first verse of this chapter, and connected
to that, refers these afflictions, and rods, and wrath to Him, (The rod of his
wrath) it must necessarily be to him who was last spoken of, The Lord, They
are Ejus, His, and therefore heavy.

Then is an Affliction properly Gods Affliction, when thou in thy Conscience
can impute it to none but God. When thou disorderest thy body with a surfeit,
nature will submit to sickness; When thou wearest out thy self with
licentiousness, the sin it self will induce infirmities; when thou
transgressest any law of the State, the Justice of the State will lay hold upon
thee. And for the Afflictions that fall upon thee in these cases, thou art able
to say to thy self, that they would have fallen upon thee, though there had
been no God, or though God had had no rod about him, no anger in him; Thou
know in particular, why, and by whose, or by what means, these Afflictions
light upon thee. But when thou shall have thy Conscience clear toward such and
such men, and yet those men shall go about to oppress thee, when thou
labourest uprightly in thy calling, and yet do not prosper, when thou
studiest the Scriptures, hearkenest to Sermons, observest Sabbaths, desire
conferences, and yet receivest not satisfaction, but still remainest under the
torture of scruples and anxieties, when thou art in S. Paul's case, Nihili
conscius, That thou know nothing by thy self, 1 Cor. 4. 4.
and yet can not give thy self peace, Though all Afflictions upon Gods
Children, be from him, yet, take knowledge that this is from him, more
entirely, and more immediately, and that God remembers something in thee, that
thou have forgot; And, as that fit of an Ague, or that pang of the Gout, which
may take thee to day, is not necessarily occasioned by that which thou have
eaten to day, but may be the effect of some former disorder, so the affliction
which lights upon thee in thine age, may be inflicted for the sins of thy
youth. Thy affliction is his, The Lords; And the Lord is infinite, and
comprehends all at once, and ever finds something in thee to correct, something
that thou have done, or something that thou would have done, if the blessing
of that correction had not restrained thee. And therefore, when thou can not
pitch thy affliction upon any particular sin, yet make not thy self so just,
August.
as that thou make God unjust, whose Judgments may be unsearchable, but they
cannot be unjust.

This then is the first weight that is laid upon our afflictions, In Virga.
that they are His, The Lords; and this weight consists in this, That because
they are his, they are inevitable, they cannot be avoided, And because they are
His, they are certainly just, and cannot be pleaded against, nor can we ease
our selves with any imagination of an innocence, as though they were
undeserved. And the next weight that is laid upon them, is that they are, In
virga ejus, in his rod. For, though this Metaphore, the Rod, Prove. 23. 13.
may seem to present but an easy correction, such as that, If thou beat thy
child with a rod, be shall not dye, (It will not kill him) yet there is more
weight then so in this Rod; Exodus 21. 20.
for the word here is Shebet, and Shebet is such a Rod as may kill; If a man
smite his servant with a Rod, so that he dye under his hand, he shall be surely
punished. Beloved, whether Gods Rod, and his correction, shall have the savor
of life unto life, or of death unto death, consists much in the hand, that is
to receive it, and in the stomach that is to digest it. As in Gods Temporal
blessings that he raines down upon us, it is much in our gathering, and
inning, and spending them, whether it shall be frumenti, or laqueorum, whether
this shall prove such a shoure, as shall nourish our soul spiritually, in
thankfulness to God, and in charitable works toward his needy Servants,
Psalm. 11. 6.
or whether it shall prove a shoure of snares, to minister occasions of
tentations; so when he raines afflictions upon us, it is much in our gathering,
whether it shall be Roris, or Grandinis, whether it shall be a shoure of
fatning dew upon us, or a shoure of Fgyptian haile-stones, to batter us in
pieces, as a Potters Vessel, Ierem. 19. 11.
that cannot be renewed. Our murmuring makes a rod a staff, and a staff a
sword, and that which God presented for physic, poison. The double effect and
operation of Gods Rod, and Corrections, is usefully and appliably expressed in
the Prophet Zachary: 11. 7.
where God complains, That he had fed the sheep of slaughter, that he had been
careful for them, who would needs dye, say he what he could. Therefore he was
forced to come to the Rod, to correction. So he does; And I took unto me,
says he there, two Staves, the one I called Beauty, the other Bands; Two ways
of correction, a milder, and a more vehement. When his milder way prevailed
not, Then said I, I will not feed you; I will take no more care of you; That
which dies let it dye, (says he) and that which is to be cut off, let it be
cut off; And I took my staff of Beauty, and cut it asunder, that I might
break my Covenant, which I had made with them. Beloved, God has made no such
Covenant with any State, any Church, any soul, but that, being provoked, he is
at liberty to break it. But then, upon this, when the stubborn, and the
refractory, the stiff-necked and the rebellious were cut off, The poor of the
sheep (says God) that waited upon me, knew that it was the word of the Lord.
It is not every man's case, to mend by Gods corrections; only the poor of the
sheep, the broken hearted, the contrite spirit, the discerner of his own
poverty and infirmity, could make that good use of affliction, as to find Gods
hand, and then Gods purpose in it. For, this Rod of God, this Shebet, can kill;
Affliction can harden, as well as mollify, and entender the heart. And there
is so much the more danger, that it should work that effect, that obduration,
because it is Virga Irae, The rod of his wrath, which is the other weight that
aggravates our afflictions.

In all afflictions that fall upon us from other instruments, Virga Irae.
there is Digitus Dei, The finger of God leads their hand that afflicts us;
Though it be sickness, by our intemperance, though it be poverty, by our
wastfulnesse, though it be oppression, by the malice, or by our exasperation of
potent persons, yet still the finger of God is in all these. But in the
afflictions which we speak of here, such as fall upon us, when we think our
selves at peace with God, and in state of grace, it is not Digitus, but Manus
Dei, the whole work is his, and man has no part in it. Whenever he takes
the Rod in hand, there is a correction toward; but yet, it may be but his Rod
of Beauty, of his Correction, not Destruction. But, if he take his Rod in
anger, the case is more dangerous; for, though there be properly no anger in
God, yet then is God said to do a thing in anger, when he does it so, as an
angry man would do it. Upon those words of David, Psalm. 6. 1.
O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, Saint Augustine observes, that David
knew Gods rebukes and corrections were but for his amendment; but yet, In Ira
corrigi noluit, in Ira emendari noluit, David was loath, that God should go
about to mend him in anger; afraid to have any thing to do with God, till his
anger were over-passed. Beloved, to a true anger, and wrath, and indignation
toward his children, God never comes; but he comes so near it, as that they
cannot discern, whether it be anger, or no. A Father takes a Rod, and looks as
angerly, as though he would kill his child, but means nothing but good to him.
So God brings a soul to a sad sense of an angry countenance in God, to a sad
apprehension of an angry absence, to a sad jealousy and suspicion that God
will never return to it again; And this is a heavy affliction, whilst it
lasts. Our Savior Christ, in that case, came to expostulate it, to dispute it
with his Father, Vt quid dereliquisti, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Do but tell me why. For, if God be pleased to tell us, why he is angry, his
anger is well allayd, and we have a fair overture toward our restitution.
But, in our infirmity, we get not easily so far; we apprehend God to be
angry; we cannot find the cause, and we sink under the burden; we leave the
disease to concoct it self, and we take no Physic. And this is truly the
highest extent, and exaltation of affliction, That in our afflictions we take
God to be angryer then he is. For, then is God said to take his Rod in anger,
when he suffers us to think that he does so, and when he suffers us to
decline, and sink so low toward diffidence, and desperation, that we dare not
look toward him, because we believe him to be so angry. And so have you all
those pieces which constitute both the branches of this first part, The
generality and extent of afflictions, considered in the nature of the thing, in
the nature of the word, this name of man, Gheber, and in the person of Jeremy,
the Prophet of God, And then the intensene^^e, and weight and vehemence of
afflictions, considered in these three particulars, That they are His, The
Lords, That they are from His Rod, And from the Rod of his anger. But to weigh
down all these, we have comforts ministered unto us, in our Text, which
constitute our other part.

Of these the first is Vidi, 2 Part. Vidi.
I have seen these afflictions, for this is an act of particular grace and
mercy, when God enables us to see them: for, naturally this is the infirmity of
our spiritual senses, Ephesians. 1. 18. 4. 18.
that when the eyes of our understanding should be enlightened, our
understanding is so darkened, as that we can neither see prosperity, nor
adversity, for, in prosperity our light is too great, and we are dazeled, in
adversity too little, none at all, and we are benighted, we do not see our
afflictions. There is no doubt, but that the literal sense of this phrase, To
see afflictions, is to feel, to suffer afflictions. Psalm. 89. 48. 16. 10.
As, when David says, What man is he that lives, and shall not see death, and
when Christ says, Thou shall not suffer thine holy one to see corruption, to
see death, and to see corruption, is to suffer them. But then, the literal
sense being thus duly preserved, That the children of God shall certainly see,
that is, certainly suffer afflictions, receive we also that sweet odor and
fragrancy which the word breaths out, That they shall see it, that is,
understand it, consider it: For, as when the wicked come to say, Psalm. 4. 7.
The Lord does not see it, it is presently added, Neither does the God of Jacob
regard it, (It is a seeing that induces a regarding) so when the godly come to
see their afflictions, they come to regard them, to regard Gods purpose in
them. Vidisti Domine, ne sileas, 35. 22.
says David, All this thou have seen, O Lord, Lord do not hold thy peace.
David presumed, that if God saw his afflictions, he would stir in them; when
we come to see them, we stir, we wake, we rise, we look about us, from whence,
and why these afflictions come; and therein lies this comfort, Vidi, I have
seen afflictions, I have been content to look upon them, to consider them.

The Prophets in the Old Testament, do often call those sights, and those
prenotions which they had of the misery and destruction of others, Onus
visionis, Onus verbi Domini, O the burden of this sight, O the burden of this
message of God. It was a burden to them, to see Gods judgments directed upon
others; how much more is it a burden to a man, to see his own affliction, and
that in the cause thereof? But this must be done, we must see our affliction in
the Cause thereof. No man is so blind, so stupid, as that he does not see his
affliction, that is, feel it; but we must see it so, as to see through it, see
it to be such as it is, so qualified, so conditioned, so circumstanced, as he
that sends it, intends it. We must leave out the malice of others in our
oppressions, and forgive that; leave out the severity of the Law in our
punishments, and submit to that; and look entirely upon the certainty of Gods
judgment, who has the whole body of our sins written together before him, and
picks out what sin it pleases him, and punishes now an old, now a yesterdayes
sin, as he finds it most to conduce to his glory, and our amendment, Dan. 5.
51.
and the edification of others, We must see the hand of God upon the wall as
Belshazzar did, (for even that was the hand of God) though we cannot read that
writing, no more then Belshazzar could. We must see the affliction, so as we
must see it to be the hand of God, though we cannot presently see, for what
sin it is, nor what will be the issue of it. And then when we have seen that,
then we must turn to the study of those other particulars, for, till we see the
affliction to come from God, we see nothing; There is no other light in that
darkness, but he. If thou see thy affliction, thy sickness, in that glass,
in the consideration of thine own former licentiousness, thou shall have no
other answer, but that sour remorse, and increpation, you might have lived
honestly. If thou see thy affliction, thy poverty, in that glass, in the
malice and oppression of potent adversaries, thou will get no farther, then to
that froward and churlish answer, Psalm. 55. 23.
The Law is open, mend your self as you can. But Iactate super Dominum, says
David, Lay all thy burden upon the Lord, and he will apply to thee that
Collyrium, that sovereign eye salve, Apos. 3. 18.
whereby thou shall see thy afffiction, (it shall not blind thee) And see from
whence it comes, (from him, who, as he lives, would not the death of a
sinner) And see why it comes, ( that thou might see and taste the
goodness of God thy self, and declare his loving kindness to the Children of
Men.) And this is the comfort deduced from this word Vidi, I have seen
affliction.

And this leads us to our other Comfort, Ego vir.
That though these Afflictions have wrought deep upon thee, yet thou can say
to thy soul, Ego vir, I am that man; Thy Morality, verse. 22.
thy Christianity is not shaked in thee. It is the Mercy of God, that we are
not conumed, says Jeremy here; And it is a great degree of his mercy, to let
us feel that we are not consumed, to give us this sense, that our case is not
desperate, but that Ego vir, I am the man, that there remains still strength
enough to gather more; That still thou remainest a man, a reasonable man, and
so art able to apply to thy self; all those medicines and reliefs, which
Philosophy and natural reason can afford. For, even these helps, deduced from
Philosophy and natural reason, are strong enough against afflictions of this
world, as long as we can use them, as long as these helps of reason and
learning are alive, and awake, and actuated in us, they are able to sustain us
from sinking under the afflictions of this world, for, they have sustained many
a Plato, and Socrates, and Seneca in such cases. But when part of the
affliction shall be, that God works upon the Spirit it self, and damps that,
enfeebles that, that he casts a sooty Cloud upon the understanding, and darkens
that, that he does Exuere hominem, divest, strip the man of the man, Eximere
hominem, take the man out of the man, and withdraw and frustrate his natural
understanding so, as that, to this purpose, he is no man, yet even in this
case, God may mend thee, in marring thee, he may build thee up in dejecring
thee, he may infuse another, Ego vir, another Manhood into thee, and though
thou can not say Ego vir, I am that Moral man, safe in my Natural Reason
and Philosophy, that is spent, yet Ego vir, I am that Christian man, who have
seen this affliction in the Cause thereof, so far off, as in my sin in
Adam, and the remedy of this affliction, so far off, as in the death of
Christ Jesus I am the Man, that cannot repine, nor murmr, since I am the
Cause; I am the man that cannot despair, since Christ is the remedy. I am that
man, which is intended in this Text, Gheber. Not only an Adam, a man amongst
men, able to convince me, though they speak eloquently against me, Job 16. ^^.
and able to prove that God has forsaken me, because he has afflicted me, but
able to prevail with God himself, Genesis 32. 24.
as Jacob did, and to wrestle out a blessing out of him, and, though I do
halt, become infirm with manifold afflictions, yet they shall be so many seals
of my infallibility in him. Now this comfort has three gradations in our text,
three circumstances, which, as they aggravated the discomfort in the former, so
they exalt the comfort in this part, That they are His, The Lords, That they
are from his rod, That they are from the rod of his wrath.

We may compare our afflictions that come immediately from God, Ejus.
with those that come instrumentally from others, by considering the choice and
election which David made, and the choice which Susanna made in her case. The
Prophet G^d offers David his choice of three afflictions, 2 Samuel 24.
War, Famine, or pestilence. It does not appear, it is not expressed, that
David determined himself, or declared his choice of any of the three. 2 Samuel
12. 13.
He might conceive a hope, that God would forbear all three. As, when another
Prophet Nathan had told him, The child shall surely die, yet David said, for
all that determined assurance, Who can tell whether the Lord will be gracious
to me, that the child may live, and he fasted a fast, and mourned and prayed
for the childs life; Beloved, no commination of God, is unconditioned, or
irrevocable. But in this case David intimates some kind of election, Let me
fall into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are exceeding great, and not
into the hands of men. Susanna, when she was surprised, (and in a straight
too, though of another kind) she resolves that it is better for her to fall
into the hands of men, (let men defame her, let men accuse her, condemn her,
execute her) rather then sin in the sight of God, and so fall into his hands.
So that, if we compare offenses, we were better offend all the Princes of the
earth, then offend God, because he is able to cast body and soul into hell
fire. But when the offense is done, for the punishment which follows, God
forgives a treason, sooner then thy neighbor will a trespass; God seals thee
a Quietus est, in the blood of his Son, sooner then a Creditor will renew a
bond, or withdraw an Action; and a Scandalum magnatum, will lie longer upon
thee here, then a blasphem^ against God, in that Court. And therefore, as it is
one degree of good husbandry, in ill husbands, to bring all their debts into
one hand, so do thou husband thy afflictions well, if thou put them all upon
thy debts to God, and leave out the consideration of Instruments; And he shall
deal with thee, 2 Samuel 24. 18.
as he did with David there, that plague, which was threatened for three days,
he will end in one; In that trouble, which, if men had had their will upon
thee, would have consumed thee, thou shall stand unconsumed. For, if a man
wound thee, it is not in his power, though he be never so sorry for it,
whether that wound shall kill thee, or no; but if the Lord wound thee to death,
he is the life, he can redeem thee from death, and if he do not, he is thy
resurrection, and recompenses thee with another, and a better life. And so lies
our first comfort, that it is Ejus, His, The Lords, And a second is, that it is
In virga ejus, In his rod.

Job would fain have come to a cessation of arms, In Virga. 9. 34.
before he came to a treaty with God; Let the Lord take away his rod from me,
says he, and let not his fear terrify me; Them would I speak. As long as his
rod was upon him, and his fears terrified him, it was otherwise; he durst not.
But truly his fears should not terrify us, though his rod be upon us; for
herein lies our comfort, That all Gods rods are bound up with that mercy, which
accompanied that rod that God threatened David, to exercise upon his son
Solemon, 2 Samuel 7. 14.
If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men; (I will let him
fall into the hands of men) This was heavy; Therefore it is eased with that
Cordial, But my mercy shall not depart away from him, as I took it from Saul.
But for this mercy, the oppressions of men were merciless; But all Gods rods
are bound up with this mercy; and therein lies our comfort. And for the rods of
other men, O my people be not afraid of the Assyrian, Esa. 10. 24.
says God. Why, blessed Lord, shall the Assyrian do thy people no harm? yes,
says God there, He shall smite them with a rod, and he shall lift up his staff
against them; Some harm he shall do; (He shall smite them with a rod) And he
shall threaten more, offer at more (he shall lift up his staff) where then is
the peoples relief, V. 26.
and comfort? In this; The Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for him. God
shall appear in that notion of power, The Lord of Hosts, and he shall encounter
his enemies, and the enemies of his friends, with a scourge upon them, against
their rod upon us. Gods own rods are bound up in mercy, (they end in mercy)
And, for the rods of other men, God cuts them in pieces, and their owners, with
his sword. Gods own rods, even toward his own Children, are sometimes, as
that rod which he put into Moses hand was, Exodus 7. 12.
changed into Serpents. Gods own rods have sometimes a sting, and a
bitterness in them; but then, they are changed from their own nature;
Naturally Gods rods toward us, are gentle, and harmless: When Gods rod in
Moses hand, was changed to a Serpent, it did no harm, that did but devour the
other Serpents: when Gods rods are heaviest upon us, if they devour other
rods, that is, enable us to put off the consideration of the malice and
oppression of other Men, and all displeasure toward them, and lay all upon
God, for our sins, these serpentine rods have wrought a good effect: When
Moses his Rod was a Serpent, yet it returned quickly to a Rod again; how
bitter so ever Gods corrections be, they return soon to their natural
sweetness, and though the correction continue, the bitterness does not: with
this Rod Moses tamed the Sea, and divided that; but he drowned none in that
Sea, but the Egyptians. Gods rod will cut, and divide between thy soul, and
spirit, but he will destroy nothing in thee, not thy Morality, not thy
Christianity, but only thine own Egyptians, thy Persecutors, thy
concupiscencies.

But all this while, Quia Virga.
we have but deduced a comfort out of thy Word, Quia Virga, though that be a
rod; but this is a comfort Quia Virga, therefore, because that is a Rod: for,
this word which is here a Rod, is also, in other places of Scriptures, an
Instrument, not of correction, Mich. 7. 14.
but direction: Feed thy sheep with thy Rod, says God; and there it is a
Pastoral Rod, the direction of the Church; Virga rectitudinis virgaregni tui,
Psalm. 45. 7.
says David; The Scepter of thy kingdom is a right Scepter; and there its a
royal rod, the protection of the state: so that all comforts that are derived
upon us, by the direction of the Church, and by the protection of the State,
are recommended to us, and conferred upon us in this His Rod. Nor is it only a
Rod of comfort, by implication, and consequence; Psalm. 23. 4.
but expressly and literally it is so: Though I should walk thorough the valley
of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil; Thy rod, and thy staff, they
comfort me. He had not only a comfort, though he had the rod, but he had not
had so much comfort, except he had had it; we have not so good evidence of the
joys of the next life, except we have the sorrows of this.

The discomfort then lies not in this, Virga Irae.
That the affliction is ejus, his, the Lords, (for we have an ease in that)
nor, that it is In Virga ejus, in his rod, (for we have a benefit by that) but
it is In virga irae, in that it is the rod of his wrath, of his anger. But
truly, beloved, there is a blessed comfort ministered unto us, even in that
word; for that word (...)
Gnabar, which we translate Anger, wrath, has another ordinary signification
in Scripture, which, though that may seem to be an easier, would prove a
heavier sense for us to bear, than this of wrath and anger; this is,
preteritio, conniventia, Gods forbearing to take knowledge of our
transgressions; when God shall say of us, as he does of Israel, Esa. 1. 5.
Why should ye be smitten any more? when God leaves us to our selves, and
studies our recovery no farther, by any more corrections; for, in this case,
there is the less comfort, because there is the less anger showed. And
therefore S. Bernard, who was heartily afraid of this sense of our word,
heartily afraid of this preterition, that God should forget him, leave him out,
affectionately, passionately embraces this sense of the word in our Text,
Anger; and he says, Irascaris mihi Domine, Domine mihi irascaris, Be angry
with me o Lord, O Lord be angry with me, lest I perish! for, till we have a
sense of such an anger in God, toward us, as Children have from their Parents,
that not only they correct them, but deny them some things that they ask, and
keep them some time from their sight and presence, till we be made Partakers of
this blessed anger of God, (for we do not pray, that God would not be angry,
but that he would not be angry with us for ever) till then we come not to see
an affliction, that is, to discern, what, and whence, and why that comes: Nor
we see that not like Men, like such Men, like Christian Men, not with a
faithful and constant assurance, that all will have an end in him who suffered
infinitely more for us, than he has laid upon us.

SERMON XLIX.
A Sermon Preached at Saint Dunstan's upon New-years-day, 1624.
GENESIS 17. 24. Abraham himself was ninety nine years old, when the foreskin of
his flesh was Circumcised.
THis is the place where Circumcision began, and this is the Day, when
Circumcision ended; in this Scripture it was Instituted, in the person of
Abraham; and upon this Day it was perfected and consummated in the person of
Christ Jesus: for, though Circumcision were admitted in a few cases, in the
Apostles time, after Christ, yet that was, as dead berbs are readmitted into
medicines in the winter, when fresh and green herbs cannot be had of that kind:
So Circumcision was sometimes admitted for peace, and to avoid scandal, and
the better to propagate the Church, Divisio.
after the virtue thereof was extinguished in Christ. In the Institution
thereof in this Text, we will consider Abraham's ready, and exact obedience: In
the Consummation thereof, in the person of Christ, we will consider that, to
which, this Circumcision had relation, that is, the spiritual Circumcision of
our hearts. It is a Text well handled, and it is a Day well spent, if the Text
teach us to obey God readily, and immediately, what inconveniences soever
present themselves in the way, and if the celebration of the Day, teach us to
come this Day, to that which is the true Circumcision, the Circumcision of the
Heart. In the first, in Abraham's example, we shall pass by these steps:
First, that though there be allowed to us an Omnia Probate, a Trial of all
things, and a spirit to discern spirits; yet when once it appears to us, to
be a comman dement of God, there is a fine leavied, all Titles concluded, no
more claim to be made by our under standing, our reason, but a present, and an
exact obedience must be given to it. Secondly, that in particular Men, and in
particular cases, there may arise tentations, objections, reasons, why a Man
might forbear altogether, or at least differ the execution of such a
commandment, as there may have done in Abraham's case, as we shall see anon.
Thirdly, that though such tentations do arise in us out of our infirmities,
yet God gives his Children strength to overcome those difficulties, and to
oppose stronger reasons against those reasons, and so to come to a willing
obedience to his will. And then lastly, the triumph that belongs to this
victory; which we shall find, in considering what benefit Abraham received by
this obedience in his Circumcision: And these will be the branches of out first
part, rising out of the Institution of Circumcision, in the person of Abraham
at that great age, First, that Gods manifest will must not be disputed, nor
reasoned upon: Secondly, that Man's corrupt nature will offer reasons against
it: Thirdly, that God will give the issue with the tentation, reason above that
reason: And lastly, he will accompany that victory, with other blessings too.

First then, 1 Part. Obediendum.
for our exact obedience to that which God exacts of us, it is well said by
Luther, Depuerascendum est, cum agitur de obedientia Dei: when the question is,
whether this, or this be commanded by God or no, when traditions and additions
of men, are imposed upon us, as commandments of God, here is no Depuerascendum
in this case, this is no Childs-play; then viriliter agendum, (as the Apostle
speaks) we must quit our selves like men, we must dispute like Men, (like
learned men) preach like Men, ( like Zealous Men) pray like Men (like devout
Men) resist like Men, (like valiant Men) or at least, (in cases where we may
not resist) suffer like Men, (like constant Christian Men.) But when the
question is, De obedientia Dei, that this is agreed to be the will of God, and
all the question is, whether God might not be content to accept an obedience to
some part of it, or to all of that hereafter, but not now, whether God would
not forgive the debt, or at least give day for the payment of it; either when
we are old, or by legacies to pious uses, when we die, when this is the
question, Depuerascendum est, we must grow Children again; we must not only,
not argue, not dispute against it (which are acts of men, of strong and able
understandings) but we must return to the first weakness of Children, to be
speechless, to be thoughtlesse; we must not utter a word, not conceive a
thought against it, Periculosa and pestilens quaestio, Quare; says Luther
also, It is a Dangerous and Infectious Monasillable, How or Why: If I will ask
a reason, why God commands such a thing; first, Periculosum est, It is
Dangerous; for, I have nothing to answer me, but mine own reason, and that
affords not Lead enough, nor Line enough, to sound the depth of Gods
proceedings, nor length enough, nor strength enough to reach so far, and
therefore I may mistake the reason, and go upon false grounds. So, Periculosum
est, It is a Dangerous question, and a lost question, because I can have no
certain answer; and it is an infectious question too, for here is one coal of
the Devils fire, of his pride, kindled in me; as the Devil said, Similis ere
Altissimo, I will be like the Highest, and see whether I may not stand by my
self, without any Influence from God, without any Dependence upon God: so, in
our case, I will be so far equal to God, as that I will measure his actions
by my reason, and nor do his Commandments till I know why he commanded them:
And then, when the infection is got into a House, who can say, it shall end
here in this Person, and kill no more; or it shall end this week, and last no
longer? So if that infectious inquisition, that Quare, ( Why should God command
this or this particular? be entered into me, all my Humility is presently
infected, and I shall look for a reason, why God made a world, or why he made
a world no sooner then 6000. years ago, and why he says some, and why but
some, and I shall examine God upon all the Interrogatories that I can frame,
upon the Creed (why I should believe a Son of a Virgin without a Man, or
believe the Son of God to descend into Hell) Or frame upon the Pater Noster,
(why I should worship such a God, that must be prayed to, not to lead me into
tentation) Or frame upon the Ten Commandments, why after all is done and
heapt, for any sinful action, yet I should be guilty of all, for covering in
my heart another man's horse or house. And therefore Luther pursues it farther,
with words of more vehemence, Odiosa and exitialis vocule, Quare, It is an
Execrable and Damnable Monasillable, Why; it exasperates God, it ruins us:
For, when we come to ask a reason of his actions, either we doubt of the
goodness of God, that he is not so careful of us, as we would be; or of his
power, that he cannot provide for us, so well as we could do; or of his
wisdom, that he has not grounded his Commandments so well as we could have
advised him: whereas Saint Augustine says justly, Qui rationem quaerit
voluntatis Dei, aliquid majus Deo quaerit, He that seeks a reason of the will
of God, seeks for something greater then God. It was the Devil that opened
our eyes in Paradise, it is our parts to shut them so far, as not to gaze
upon Gods secret purposes. God guided his Children as well by a Pillar of
Cloud, as by a Pillar of Fire, and both, Cloud and Fire, were equally Pillars:
There is as much strength in, and as safe relying upon some ignorances, as some
knowledges; for God provided for his people, as well in this, that he did Moses
body from them, as that he revealed other Mysteries to them, by him. All is
well summed and collected by Saint Augustine, Dominus cur jusserit, viderit;
faciendum est a serviente, quod jusserit: Why God commands any thing, God
himself knows; our part is, not to enquire why, by to do what he commands.

This is the Rule: Tamen temamur.
It Is true, there should not be: but yet is there not sometimes, in the minds
and mouths of good and godly men, a Quare, a reasoning, a disputing against
that which God has commanded or done? The murmuring of the Children in the
Desert, had still this Quare, Quare eduxisti, Wherefore have you brought us
hither to die here, Number. 20.
in this miserable place, where there is no Seed, no Figs, no Vines, no
Pomegrantes, no Water? Saul had this Quare, this rebellious inquisition, upon
that Commandment of God against the Amalekites, 1 Sum. 4.
Slay both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Ox and Sheep, Camel and Ass:
And from this Quare, from this disputation of his, arose that conclusion, That
it were better to spare some for Sacrifice, then to destroy all: But though his
pretense had a religious color, that would not justify a slacknesse in
obeying the manifested will of God; for, for this, God repented that he made
him King, and told him that he had more pleasure in Obedience, then in
Sacrifice. But, to come to better men then the Israelites in the Wilderness,
or Saul in his Government, Job, though he, and his Friends held out long, (They
sat upon the ground even days and seven nights, and none spoke a word) yet at
last fell into these Quares, Why did I not die in the birth? or, why sucked I
the breast? Peter himself had this reluctation; and though that were out of
piety, yet he was chidden for it, Quare lavas, says he, Joh. 13.
Lord, do thou wash my feet? thou shall never wash my feet: till Christ was
feign to say, If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me.

Upon this common infirmity; inherent in the best men that may (and not
unlikely) be, that when God commanded Abraham, at that great age to circumcise
himself, there might arise such Quares, such scruples and doubts, as there, in
Abraham's mind, (for, as Saint Paul says of himself, If any man think he
has whereof to trust in the flesh, Phil. 3.
much more I, Circumcised, an Hebrew, an Israelite, a Pharisee, a Zealous
Servant in the persecution, and in righteousness unblameable: So if any man
might have taken this liberty to have disputed with God, upon his precepts,
Abraham might have done it; for, when God called him out to number the Stars,
(which was, even to Art, impossible) and promised him, Genesis 15.
that his seed should equal them, (which was, in Nature, incredible) for all
this Incredibilitie and Impossibility, Abraham believed, and this was
accounted to him for Righteousness: Heb. 11.
And Abraham had declared his easy, and forward, and implicit faith in God,
when God called him, and he went out, not knowing whither he went: And
therefore when God offered him a new seal, Circumcision, Abraham might have
said, Quare sigillum? What needs a seal between thee and me? I have used to
take thy word before, and thou have tried me before: But Abraham knew that
Obedience was better then wit or disputation; for, though Obedience and good
works, do not beget faith, yet they nurse it; Per ea augescit fidei, and
pinguescit, says Luther, Our faith grows into a better state, and into a
better liking, by our good works.

Again, when Abraham considered, that it was, Mandatum in re turpi, That this
Circumcision, in it self, was too frivolous a thing; and, in that part of the
Body, too obscene a thing, to be brought into the fancy of so many Women, so
many young Men, so many Strangers to other Nations, as might bring the Promise
and Covenant it self into scorn, and into suspicion, that should require such
a seal to it as that was, he might have come to this, Quare tam turpe, quare
tam sordidum? why does God command me so base and unclean a thing, so
scornful and mis-interpretable a thing, as Circumcision, and Circumcision in
that part? Again, when he considered, that to Circumcise all his family in one
day, (as by the Commandment he must) which could not be (in likelihood) of
less then 400. (for he went out before, to the rescue of Lot, with 318. borne
and brought up in his House) he must make his House a Spittle of so many
impotent Persons, unable to help one another for many days, (for such was the
effect of Circumcision, Genesis 14.
as we see in their Story, when Simeon and Levi came upon the Sichemites three
days after they had been, by their persuasion, circumcised, the Sichemites
were unable to resist or defend themselves, Genesis 34.
and so were slain: Yea the soreness and incommodity upon Circumcision was so
great, as that the very Commandment it self of Circumcision, was forborne in
the Wilderness, because they were then put to sudden removes, which
presently after a Circumcision, they could not have performed) Might not
Abraham have come to his Quare tam molestum? Why will God command me so
troublesome and incommodious a thing as this? And (to contract this) when he
considered, That one principal reason of the Commandment of Circumcision,
was, that that mark might be always a remembrance to them against
intemperance and incontinency. Might not Abraham have come to his Quare mihi?
What use is there of this, in my Body, which is now dried up and withered by
99. years? What Quares, what reluctations Abraham had, or whether he had any
or no, is not expressed; but very religious and good men, sometimes, out of
humane infirmities, have them: But then, God brings them quickly about to
Christ's Veruntamen, Yet not my will, but thine be done; and he delivers them
from the tentation, and brings them to an entire obedience to his will, which
is that which we proposed for the next Branch in this part.

Tu qui vas figuli, says the Apostle; whenever any disputation against a
commandment of God, Liberat Deus.
arises in Gods children, the Spirit of God smothers that spirit of Rebellion
with that, Tu qui vas figuli, will thou who art but the vessel, dispute with
the potter, that fashioned thee? If Abraham had any such doubts, of a
frivolousnesse in so base a seal, of an obscenity in so foul a seal, of an
incommodiousnesse in so troublesome a seal, of a needlesnesse in so
impertinent a seal; if he had these doubts, no doubt but his forwardness in
obeying God, did quickly oppose these reasons to those, and overcome them: That
that part of the body is the most rebellious part; and that therefore, only
that part Adam covered, out of shame, for all the other parts he could rule: Ad
hominis inobedientiam redarguendam, sua inobedientia quodammodo caro
testimonium perhibet, August.
to reproach Man's rebellion to God, God has left one part of Man's body, to
rebel against him; for though the seeds of this rebellion be dispersed through
all the body, yet, In illa part magis regnat additamentum Leviathan, says
Saint Bernard, the spawns of Leviathan, the seed of sin, the leven of the
Devil, abound and reigns most in that part of the body; it is sentiva peccati,
says the same Father, the Sewar of all sin; not only because all sin is
derived upon us, by generation, and so employed, and involved in original
sin; but because, almost all other sins have relation to this: for,
Gluttony is a preparation to this sin in our selves; Pride and excess is a
preparation to it, in others, whom we would enveigle and assure, by our
bravery; Anger and malice inclines us to pursue this sinful and inordinate
love, quarrelsomly, so, as, that then, we do not quarrel for ways, and walls
in the street, but we quarrel for our way to the Devil; and when we cannot go
fast enough to the Devil, by wantonness in the chamber, we will quarrel with
him, who hinders us of our Damnation, and find a way, to go faster in the
field, by Duells, and unchristian Murder, in so foul a cause, as unlawful
lust. In this rebellious part, is the root of all sin, and therefore did that
part need this stigmaticall mark of Circumcision, to be imprinted upon it.
Besides, (for the Jews in particular) they were a Nation prone to Idolatry,
and most, upon this occasion, if they mingled themselves with Women of other
Nations: And therefore, Dedit eft signum, ut admoverentnr de generatione pura,
says Saint Chrysostom, God would be at the cost even of a Sacrament, (which
is the greatest thing that passes between God and Man next to his Word) to
defend them thereby against dangerous alliances, which might turn their hearts
from God; God imprinted a mark in that part, to keep them still in mind of
that law, which forbade them foraigne Marriages, Theodor.
or any company of strange Women: Custodia pietati servandae, ne macularent
paternam Nobilitatem, left they should degenerate from the Nobility of their
race, God would have them carry this memorial about them, in their flesh. And
God foresaw that extreme Idolatry, that gross Idolatry, which that Nation
would come to, and did come to, when Maachah the Mother of Asa worshipped that
Idol, 1 Reg. 15. 13.
which Saint Hierome calls Belphegor, and is not fit to be named by us; and
therefore, in foresight of that Idolatry, God gave this mark, and this
mutilation upon this part. If Abraham were surprised with any suggestions, any
half reasons against this commandment, he might quickly recollect himself, and
see, that Circumcision was first, Signum memorativum, and monimentum isti
faederis, it was a sign of the Covenant between God and Abraham; Genesis 17.
the Covenant was the Messiah, who being to come, by a carnal continuance of
Abraham's race, the sign and seal was conveniently placed in that part. And
that was, secondly, Signum representativum, it represented Baptism, In Christ
you are circumcised, says the Apostle, in that you are buried with him, Colos.
2.
through Baptism: And then, that was Signum Distinctivum; for, besides that it
kept them from Idolatry, as the Greeks called all Nations, whom they despised,
Barbares, Barbarians, so did the Jews, Incircumcisos, Uncircumcised: And that
was a great threatening in the Prophet, Ezekiel. 28.
Thou shall die the death of the Uncircumcised; that is, without any part in
the everlasting promise, and Covenant. But yet, the principal dignity of this
Circumcision, was, that it was Signum figurativum, it prefigured, it directed
to that Circumcision of the heart; Circumcise the foreskin of your heart, for
the Lord your; Deuteronomy. 10.
God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords. And for all the other reasons that
could be assigned, of Remembrance, of Representation, of Distinction, Caret
ubique ratione Iudaica carnis Circumcisio, (says Lactantius) Nisi quod est
Circumcisionis figura, quae est Cor Mundum: The Jewish Circumcision were an
absurd and unreasonable thing, if it did not intimate and figure the
Circumcision of the heart: And that is our Second part of this Exercise: But
before we come to that, we are to say a word of the fourth branch of this part,
That as there is no Quaere to be made nor admitted against God, (which was our
first part) If Man, out of his infirmity, do fall into that, (which was our
Second) God provides and furnishes them with Reasons against those Reasons,
(which was our third.) And then, God rewards their fighting of that battle,
(which is his own work) with victories, and crowns, and blessings here;
(which must be our fourth branch.)

Of Examples of this, Retributio.
the Book of God is full: but we contract our selves only to that, which God
did to Abraham at this time, in contemplation of this obedience. We consider
Abraham at the end of one Age, he was almost one hundred, ninety nine when he
was Circumcised; and now was entering into another age, (for he lived seventy
five years after this:) this therefore was as the Eve of his New-years-day,
and God presents him thus many New-years-gifts: First, he gives him a new Name;
in which change of his Name, from Abram, to Abraham, (besides that he was
changed from Pater Magnus, to Pater Multudinis, from the Father of a great
possession and family, to the Father of a great successession and posterity,
for that diminishes any Greatness, to have no posterity to leave that to) this
also arises to be noted, that Gods Name Jehovah, having in that two Letters of
one kind, two H H, God divides with his Servant, God affords one of those
letters to the dignifying of Abraham's name, he adds an H of his own Name to
his: Jehovah is his essential name; and in communicating any beam of that
Essence, any letter of that Name, we become semen Dei, the seed of God; and
filii Dei, the Sons of God; and participes divinae naturae, Partakers of the
Divine nature; and idem spiritus cum Domino, the same spirit with the Lord; and
Hearers of that voice; Ego dixi Dii estis, I have said you are Gods: If we were
careful to answer our old name, the name of Christians, in our conformity to
Christ, and performance of Christianly duties, that were well, and other Names
needed not, as remembrancers unto us: But God does give us new Names and
additions of Offices, and Titles in School, or Court, or Commonwealth, as new
testimonies of his love, and rebukes of our former negligences, and
Remembrancers of our present Duties in those places, and Encouragers to a more
careful proceeding in them. Secondly, God gave Abraham a new Wife: in which,
the blessing was, that he took not from him that virtuous and obedient Wife
which he had before, Sara, but now he made her a Wife unto him, and he supplied
that only defect which was in her, Barrenness, and so made her fully a Wife,
a Mother. Thirdly, he gave him a new Son; for, God who purposed to bless all
Nations in Abraham's seed, would not only repair and furnish his old house,
(that is, bless Ismael with temporal blessings) but he would build him a new
house, raise him up a new Son, Isaac: He would not only fulfill that
petition of Abraham's, Oh that Ismael might live in thy sight! not only
preserve Ismael, which signifies, Exauditionem Domini, that the Lord had heard
that prayer, in the behalf of Ismael; but he would give him an Isaac, which
signifies, Risum, laetitiam, that is, he would give him a new, and true
occasion of joy. Fourthly, he gave him a new promise; that as in Adam he had
promised a Messiah, in semine mulieris, in the seed of the Woman; now he
contracts that promise to Abraham, in semine tuo, in thy seed shall all Nations
be blessed; and so makes Abraham, not only a Partner with his other Children,
in the Salvation of that Messiah, but he makes Abraham a means to derive that
Salvation upon others also, In semine tuo, thou shall not only be blessed in
the Seed of the Woman, but all Nations shall be blessed in thy seed. And
lastly, he gives him a new seal; not only that seal, under which he was wont
to deal with him, not only an inward seal in his heart, but he gives him a
new seal, a visible seal, the seal of Circumcision. This being then the
Dignity of Gods precepts, that they require a present, and an exact obedience,
without any counter-disputing; this being the infirmity of man's nature, that he
is ever ready to object and oppose reasons, according to flesh and blood,
against Gods precepts; this being the overflowing measure of Gods mercy to his
Children, to give them the issue with the tentation; Reason above that Reason,
victory at last, and alacrity in the performance of that precept; and this
being his infinite bounty, to give us such rewards and retributions for those
victories, of which, only his goodness, and his strength, was the Author in
us, when we do perform those duties, (all which we have seen in Abraham's
obedience to a fleshly Circumcision) that Circumcision being come to an end in
the Circumcision of Christ, performed this day: Let us come to this
Circumcision, of which, that was but a Figure, a Spiritual Circumcision, the
Circumcision of the heart, and God shall give us new Names (new Demonstrations,
that our names are written in the Book of life) and new Marriages (refresh his
promise in the Prophet, that he will marry himself to us for ever) and new
Sons, new Isaacks (assurance of new Joys, Essential and Accidental, in the
Kingdom of Heaven, and inchoative here in the way) and new promises, and new
seals (new obligations of his Blessed Spirit) that that Infallibility of
salvation which we have conceived, is well grounded.

We have done with our first part, 2 Part.
with that which was occasioned by the Institution of Circumcision in Abraham;
we pass to that, which is occasioned by the celebrating of this Day, in which
this legal Circumcision taking an end, in the Person of Christ, we come aptly
to consider Spiritual Circumcision, by which only we can be made conformable
to our pattern and example, Divisio.
Christ Jesus: In which, we will charge your memory but with these two
considerations; First, Quid sit, what this spiritual Circumcision is, (for in
that is employed the Quomodo, how this Circumcision is to be wrought and
effected) And Secondly, the Ubi, what part of a Man is to be circumcised in
this Circumcision, for that implies Integritatem, that it is the whole Man in
every part.

Briefly then, Quid.
Spiritual Circumcision is to walk in the spirit; for then, says the
Apostle, Gal. 5.
ye shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; no Circumcision can bring us to
this, that we shall not have them, for they are borne in us, and they will live
in us, whilst we live; but this is this Circumcision, not to fulfill them.
Neither was Abraham's race, which was to be circumcised, more numerous, more
plentiful, more manifold, then is this issue of the flesh, Sin: How
sudden, and how large a pedigree! A Child, at the first minute, when the
soul enters, is as good a Sinner, that is, as absolute a Sinner, and has as
good title to Damnation, by being conceived in sin, as the eldest man; nay,
he is as old a Sinner as the eldest man that is; nay, as the eldest man that
ever was; for, he sinned in Adam, and, though conceived but this night, sinned
6000 years ago. In young Men, vanity begets excess; excess;
licentiousness; licentiousness, envy, hatred, quarrels, murders; so that here
is generation upon generation, here are risen Grandfather and
Great-grandfather-sinnes quickly, a forward generation: And then they grow
suddenly to be habits, and they come to prescribe in us: Prescription is, when
there is no memory to the contrary; and we cannot remember when that sinful
custom begun in us: yea, our sins come to be reverenced in us, and by us;
our sins contract a majesty, and a state, and they grow sacred to us; we
dare not trouble a sin, we dare not displace it, nor displease it; we dare
not dispute the prerogative of our sin, but we come to think it a kind of
sedition, a kind of innovation, and a troubling of the state, if we begin to
question our Conscience, or change that security of sin which we sleep in,
and we think it an easier Reformation to repent a sin once a year, at
Easter, when we must needs Receive, then to watch a sin every Day.

There is scarce any sin, but that in that place of the Apostle to the
Galatians, it comes within the name of works of the flesh; for, though he
names diverse sins, which are literally and properly works of the flesh, (as
Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness) yet those sins that are
against a man's own self, (as Gluttony and Drunkenness) those that are
against other men, (as Contentions and Murders) those that are directed upon
new Gods (as Idolatry) those that are Contracts with the Devil (as Witchcraft)
those that are offenses to the Church (as Heresy) are all called by Saint Paul
in that place, works of the flesh: So that the object of this Spiritual
Circumcision is all that concerns the flesh, the world, the Devil, or God, or
man, or the Church; in every one of these we may find somewhat to circumcise.
But because abundance and superfluity begets these works of the flesh, (for
though we carry the Serpent about us, yet he does not sting, nor hiss, till
he be warm: As long as poverty and vvretchednesse freezes our Concupiscences,
they are not so violent) therefore spiritual Circumcision is well expressed
by Saint Bernard; Moralis Circumcisio est, victum and vestitum habentem, esse
contentum; A cutting off of these superfluities, is this moral, that is, this
spiritual Circumcision.

Now for some understanding of these superfluities, Medus.
we must consider, that sometimes a poor man, that has no superfluity in his
estate, is yet vvastfull in his mind, and puts himself to superfluous
expenses, in his diet, in his apparel, and in all things of outvvard show and
ostentation: And on the other side, a covetous man, that has a superfluous
estate, yet starves him self, and denies himself all conveniences for this
life: Here Is a superfluous confidence in the one, that he cannot want, though
he throvv away money; and here is a superfluous fear in the other, that he
shall want, if he give himself bread; and here is work for this spiritual
Circumcision on both sides: But then the Circumcision is not necessarily to be
applied to the riches of the rich man, so as that every rich man must
necessarily cast away his riches (a Godly man may be rich) nor necessarily
applied so to all outward expenses of the free and liberal minded man, as that
he should shut up doors, and wear rags; for, a Godly man may fare in his
diet, and appear in his garments, according to that Degree which he holds in
that state: But the superfluity is, and (consequently the Circumcision is to
be) in the Affection, in our Confidence, that whatsoever we wast, by one means
or other, we shall have more; or in our diffidence, that if we lay not up all,
we shall never have enough. These be the inordinate affections that must be
Circumcised: But how? for that is intended in this part. We need enquire no
farther, for the means of this spiritual Circumcision, then to the very word
which the Holy Ghost has chosen for Circumcision here, which is Mul and Namal;
for that word has in other places of Scripture, three significations, that
express much of the manner, how this Circumcision is to be wrought: It
signifies, Purgare, to purge, to discharge the Conscience: (and that is, by
Confession of our sins) It signifies, Mundare, to cleanse and purify the
Conscience: (and that is, by Contrition and Detestation of that sin) And it
signifies, Succidere, to cut down, to weed and root out whatsoever remains in
our possession, that is unjustly got (and that is) by Destitution.

Now for the first of these, Putgare.
the purging; the proper use and working of purging Physic, is, not that that
Medicine pierces into those parts of the Body, where the peccant humor lies,
and from which parts, Nature, of her self, is not able to expel it: the
substance of the Medicine does not go thither, but the Physic lies still, and
draws those peccant humors together; and being then so come to an
unsupportable Mass, and burden, Nature her self, and their own weight expels
them out. Now, that which Nature does in a natural body, Grace does in a
regenerate soul, for Grace is the nature and the life of a regenerate man. As
therefore the bodily Physic goes not to that part of the body that is
affected; we must not stay till out Spiritual Physic (the Judgments of God)
work upon that particular sin, that transports us: That God should weaken me
with a violent sickness, before I will purge my self of my licentiousness;
Or strike me with poverty, and loss of my stock, before I will purge my self
of my usury; or lay me flat with disgraces and dis-favours of great Persons,
before I will purge my self of my Ambition; or evict my land from me, by some
false title, that God, in his just Judgment, may give way to, to punish my
sins, before I will purge my self of my oppression, and racking of Tenants:
But before these violent Medicines come, if thou can take Gods ordinary
Physic, administered in the Word and Sacraments; if thou can but endure that
qualme of calling thy self to an account, and an examination; if thou can
draw all thy sins together, and present them to thine own Conscience, then
their own weight will find a vent, and thou will utter them in a full and
free Confession to thy God, and that is Circumcision; as Circumcision consists
in the purging of the Conscience, to be moved upon hearing the Word preached,
and the denouncing of his Judgments in his Ordinance, before those Judgments
surprise thee, to recollect thy sins in thine own memory, and pour them out
in a true Confession.

The next step in this Circumcision, Mundare.
(as they are intimated in that word, which the Holy Ghost uses here) is
Mundare, to cleanse; and this is a Contrition for those sins, and a
Detestation of those sins, which I have thus gathered in my Memory, and
poured out in my Confession. A house is not clean, though all the Dust be swept
together, if it lie still in a corner, within Doors; A Conscience is not clean,
by having recollected all her sins in the Memory, for they may fester there,
and Gangreen even to Desperation, till she have emptied them in the bottomless
Sea of the blood of Christ Jesus: and the mercy of his Father, by this way of
Confession. But a house is not clean neither, though the Dust be thrown out, if
there hang Cobwebs about the Walls, in how dark corners soever. A Conscience is
not clean, though the sins, brought to our memory by this Examination, be cast
upon Gods mercy, and the merits of his Son, by Confession, if there remain
in me, but a Cobweb, a little, but a sinful de light in the Memory of those
sins, which I had formerly committed. How many men sin over the sins of
their youth again, in their age, by a sinful Delight in remembering those
sins, and a sinful Desire, that their Bodies were not past them? How many
men sin over some sins, but imaginarily, (and yet Damnably) a hundred times,
which they never sinned actually at all, by filling their Imaginations, with
such thoughts as these, How would I be revenged of such an Enemy, if I were in
such a place of Authority? How easily could I overthrow such a wastfull young
Man, and compass his Land, if I had but Money, to seed his humors? Those
sins which we have never been able to do actually, to the harm of others,
we do as hurtfully to our own Souls, by a sinful Desire of them, and a
sinful Delight in them. Therefore is there a cleansing required in this
Circumcision; such a cleansing as God promises, I will cleanse their blood,
Joel 3.
that is, the fountain, the work of all corrupt Desires, and sinful Delights.
Now there is no clensing of our blood, but by his blood; and the infusion, and
application of his blood, is in the seal of the Sacrament; so that that soul
only is so cleansed, as is required in this spiritual circumcision, that
preserves it self always, or returns speedily, to a disposition of a worthy
receiving of that holy and blessed Sacrament: He that is now in that
disposition, as that, in a rectified Conscience, he durst meet his Savior at
that Table, and receive him there, (which cannot be done without Contrition,
and Detestation of former sins) has admitted this spiritual Circumcision, so
far, as is intended in the second signification of this word, which is, To
cleanse.

But then there is a third action, Succidere.
which is, succidere, to cut up, to root out all, from whence this sin may
grow up again, as the word is used in Job 18. His root shall be dried beneath,
and all his branches shall be cut down. In this Circumcision, we must cut the
root, the mother-sinne, that nourishes all our sins, and the branches too,
that if one sin have begot another, there be a fall of all our woods, of our
timber wood, (our grown and habitual sins) and of our under-woods, (those
lesser sins which grow out of them.) It is a cutting down, and a stubbing
up, which is not done, till we have shak'd off all, that we have gotten by
those Sins: It is not the Circumcision of an Excessive use of that sin,
that will serve our turn, but such a Circumcision, as amounts to an Excession,
a cutting off the root, and branch, the sin, and the fruits, the profits of
that sin. I must not think to bribe God, by giving him some of the profit of
my sin, to let me enjoy the rest: for, was God a venturer with me in my
sin? Or did God set me to Sea, that is, put me into this world, to see what I
could get by Usury, by Oppression, by Extortion, and then give him a part to
charitable uses? As this word signifies Excedere, to cut of all that is grown
out of sin, so from this word Namal, comes Nemala, which is Formicae, an Ant,
which the Hebrews derive from this word, out of this reason, That as an Ant
does gnaw all the Corn it lays up, upon one side, so that it may never grow
again, so this spiritual Circumcision must provide, that that sin take no
new root: but as long as thou make profit, or take pleasure in any thing
sinfully gotten, thy sin grows; so that this Circumcision is not perfected
but by restitution and satisfaction of all formerly damnified. These then be
all the ways that are presented in these significations and use of this word,
Ubi
which the holy Ghost has chosen here, purging by Consideration and
Confessing, clensing by Contrition and Detesting, preventing of future growth
by Satisfaction in Restoring. A little remains to be said (though it be also
employed in that which has been said) of the Ubi, the place where this
Circumcision is to be applied. The Scripture speaks of uncircumcised hearts,
and uncircumcised lips, and uncircumcised ears; And our eyes in looking, and
coveting, and our hands in reaching to that which is not ours, are as far
uncircumcised as ears, or lips, or hearts: Therefore we are to carry this
Circumcision all over; we must Circumcise, says Saint Bernard, In carne,
peccatum, the flesh, the body, the substance of the sin, in cute,
operimentum, in the skin, all covers, and palliations, and disguises, and
extenuations of the sin; and, in sanguine incentivum, in the blood all
somentations and provocations to that sin: the sin it self, the
circumstances of the sin, the relapses to or toward that sin must be
circumcised: Iudaeus ut parvulus, congruum accepit mandatum, exiguae
Circumcisionis, says the same Father, The Jew was but in an infancy, in a
minority, and God did not look for so strong a proceeding from the Jew, as
from us, but led him by the arms, by the help of Ceremonies and Figures, and
accordingly required but a Circumcision in one part of the body: but God looks
for more, at the hands of Christians, to whom he has fully manifested and
applied himself. As Christ said to the Jews, Except your righteousness
exeeed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, it is nothing: So
except our righteousness exceed them that exceeded the Scribes, it is nothing;
and therefore, Toto corpore baptizamur (says Bernard) quia totius hominis
integra Circumcisio; to show, that it is the whole man that is to be
circumcised; we are baptized, we are washed all over, (for so long, even to
Bernards time, it seems, that manner of Baptizing, by Immersion of the whole
body, and not by Aspersion upon the face only, continued in the general
practice of the Church.) So that if it be not an entire Circumcision of the
whole man, that will fall upon us, which God threatens in the Prophet, Jer. 9.
25.
I will visit all them which are circumcised, with them which are not
circumcised; If we circumcise in part, leave some sins, and cleave to others,
we shall be, in the sight of God, altogether uncircumcised; Adam was not the
less naked in Gods sight, for his Figge-leafe; halfe-repentances are no
repentances; either we are in a privation, or in a habit; covered over with
righteousness, or naked.

When therefore the Lord and his Spirit calls thee to this spiritual
Circumcision, remember that Abraham did not say when he was called, Lord, I
have followed thy voice, in leaving my Country; Lord, I have built thee an
Altar, what needs more demonstration of my obedience? Say not thou, Lord, I
have built an Hospital; Lord, I have fed the poor at Christmas; Lord, I have
made peace amongst thy people at home; I have endowed an Almes-house; but
persevere in doing good still, for, God takes not the Tree, where it grows,
but where it falls; for the most part, the death of a man is such, as his life
was; but certainly the life of a man, that is, his everlasting life, is such as
his death is. Again, Abraham did not say of this, that it was a Commandment
in a flight, and frivolous, and uncivil matter; do not thou say, that it is
an impertinent thing in this spiritual Circumcision, to watch thy eating and
drinking, and all such indifferent actions, and to see that all they be done to
the glory of God; for, as the Apostle says, That the foolishness of God is
wiser then the wisdom of man; so we may piously say, that the levity of God is
graver then the gravity of all the Philosophers and Doctors of the world; as we
may see in all his Ceremontall Laws, where the matter seems very light in
many places, but yet the signification very important; and therefore apply this
Circumcision, even in thy least, and most familiar action. So also Abraham was
not diverted from obeying God, by the inconvenience of having all his family
diseased at once; he did not say, I am content to circumcise my Son, but
would spare my Servants yet, for necessary uses; do not thou say, thou art
content to circumcise thine eldest Son, to abate somewhat of that sin which
thou beganst with in thy youth, but would feign spare some serviceable and
profitable sins for a time, and circumcise them hereafter. To pursue this
example, Abraham did not say, Cras Domine, Lord, I will do all this to morrow;
but, as the Commandment was given in that phrase of expedition, Circumcidendo
circumcides, In Circumcising thou shall circumcise; which denoted a diligent
and a present dispatch; so Abraham did dispatch it diligently and presently
that day. Do not thou say, Cras Domine, to morrow, some other day, in the day
of mine age, or of my Death, or of affliction and tribulation; I will
circumcise all, for age, and sickness, and t^ibulations, are Circumcisions of
themselves; a Fever circumcises thee then, or an Apoplexy, and not thy
Devotion; and incapacity of sinning is not sanctification: If any man put off
his Repentance till death, Fateor non negamus quod petit, says Saint
Augustine, I dare not deny that man, whatsoever God may be pleased to grant
him; Sed non presumimus, quod been erit; I dare not presume to say, that that
man died well, Non presumo, non vas fallo, non presumo, says that Father, with
some vehemence, I dare not warrant him, let me not deceive you with saying that
I dare, for I dare not: And, Beloved, that is but a suspicious state in any
man, in which another Christian has just reason to doubt of his salvation, as
Saint Augustine does shrewdly doubt of these late Repenters, Sicut ejus
damnatio inoerta, it a remissio dubia; As I am not sure he is damned, so I am
not sure he is saved, no more sure of one then of the other. It is true, we
have the example of the Crucified Thief, but it is but a hard case, when a
Thief must guide us and be our Example; we suspect wills that are made of
temporal goods in that state, at the last gasp, and shall we think a Man to
be compos mentis, of a perfect understanding for the bequeathing of his Soul
at his last gasp? non presumo, non nos fallo, non presumo, I should deceive
you, if I should say it, I dare not say it, says that Father. Come therefore
to this Circumcision betimes, come to it, this Day, come this Minute: This Day
thy Savior was Circumcised in the flesh, for thee; this Day Circumcise thy
heart to him, and all thy senses, and all thy affections. It is not an utter
destroying of thy senses, and of thy affections, that is enjoined thee; but,
Deuteronomy. 21. 11.
as when a Man had taken a beautiful Woman captive in the wars, he was not
bound to kill her, but he must shave her head, and pare her nails, and change
her garments, before he might marry her; so captivate, subdue, change thy
affections, and that is the Destruction which makes up this Circumcision: change
thy choler into Zeal, change thy amorousnesse into devotion, change thy
wastfulnesse into Alms to the poor, and then thou have circumcised thy
affections, and may retain them, and may confidently say with the
Apostle, Phil. 3. 3.
we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh. Do this to day; as God this
day gives thee a New year, and has not surpised thee, nor taken thee away in
the sins of last year; as he gives thee a new year, do thou give him a
New-years-gift, Cor novum, a new and a Circumcised heart, and Canticum novum, a
new Song, a delight to magnify his name, and speak of his glory, and declare
his wondrous works to the Sons of men, and be assured that whether I, or any
other of the same Ministry, shall speak to you from this place, this day
twelve month, and shall ask your consciences then, whether those things which
you heard now, have brought you to this Circumcision, and made you better this
year than you were the last, and find you under the same uncircumcision still,
be assured that God will not, God cannot be mocked, but as he will receive us,
with an Euge bone serve, Well done my good and faithful Servant; so he will
say to you, Perditio tua ex te, Your destruction is from your selves: Enough
has been done for you by me, enough has been said to you by my Servants,
Quare moriemini, Why will you die o house of Israel? And after a long despising
of his graces, he will come to a final separation; you shall come to say,
Nolumus hunc regnare, we will not have Christ Jesus to reign over us; and
Christ Jesus shall come to say, Nescio vos, I know you not, nor whence you are.
Hodie si vocem ejus, If you will hear his voice this day, Hodie eritis, This
day you shall be with him in Paradise, and dwell in it all the year, and all
the years of an Everlasting life, and of infinite generations. Amen.

SERMON L.
A Sermon Preached in Saint Dunstans.
1 THESE. 5. 16. Rejoice evermore.
WE read in the natural Story, of some floating Islands, that swim and move
from place to place; and in them a Man may sow in one place, and reap in
another: This case is so far ours, as that in another place we have sowed in
tears, and by his promise, in whose tears we sowed then, when we handled
those two words, Jesus wept, we shall reap in Joy: That harvest is not yet; it
is reserved to the last Resurrection: But the Corn is above ground, in the
Resurrection of our head, the first fruits of the Dead, Christ Jesus, and that
being the first visible step of his exaltation, begins our exultation, who in
him are to rejoice evermore. Prove. 14. 10.
The heart knows his own bitterness; he and none but he; others feel it
not, retain it not, pity it not; and therefore says the Text, A Stranger does
not intermeddle with his joy: He shall have a Joy which no stranger, not he
himself whilst he was a stranger to God, and to himself, could conceive. If
we ask, as Christ's Disciples asked of him, Mat. 24. 3.
Quod signum? what shall be the sign of thy coming, of this Joy in the midst
of thy bitterness? Aug:
Ipsae lachrymae laetitiae testes, and nuncii: The tears themselves shall be
the sign, the tears shall be Ambassadors of Joy; a present gladness shall
consecrate your sorrow, and tears shall baptize, and give a new name to your
passion, for your Wormwood shall be Manna; even then when it is Wormwood, it
shall be Manna, for, Ga^debitis semper, you shall Rejoice evermore.

But our Text does more then imply a promise to us, Divisio.
for it lays a precept upon us: It is not, Gaudebitis, you shall Rejoice, by
way of Comfort, but it is, Gaudete, Rejoice, see that you do Rejoice, by way
of Commandment, and that shall be our first part. Cadit sub praecepto; It has
the nature of a commandment. Angels pass not from extreme to extreme, but
by the way between; Man passes not from the miseries of this life, to the
joys of Heaven, but by joy in this life too; for he that feels no joy here,
shall find none hereafter. And when we pass from the substance of the
precept, to the extent thereof (which will be our second part) from the first
word, Rejoice, to the other, Rejoice always; we shall cleave that into two
periods, Gaudete in bonis, Rejoice in your prosperity, and Gaudete in malis,
Rejoice in your adversity too. But because it is in sempiternum, that must be
in sempiterno, because it is always, it must be in him who is always, yesterday
and to day, and the same for ever, Joy in God, Joy in the Holy Ghost, which
will be another branch in that second part; of which Joy, though there be a
preparatory, and inchoative participation and possession in this life, yet the
consummation being reserved to our entrance into our Masters Joy, not only the
Joy which he gives, that is here, but the Joy which he is, that is only there,
we shall end in that, beyond which none can go, no not in his thoughts, in
some dim contemplation, and in some faint representation of the Joys of
Heaven, and in that Contemplation we shall dismiss you.

First then it is presented in the nature of a Commandment, Part.
and lays an Obligation upon all, at all times to procure to our selves, and
to cherish in our selves, this Joy, this Rejoicing. Aquin: 12^. 28. 3.
What is Joy? Comparatur ad desiderium sic ut quies admotum; As Rest in the end
of motion, every thing moves therefore that it may rest, so Joy is the end of
our desires, whatsoever we place our desires, our affections upon, it is
therefore, that we may enjoy it; Ba^nez.
and therefore, Quod est in brutis in part sensitiva Delectatio, in hominibus
in part intellectiva est gaudium: Beasts and carnal men, who determine all
their desires in the sensual parts, come no farther then to a delight: but
men, who are truly men, and carry them to the intellectual part, they, and
only they, come to Joy. And therefore says Solomon, It is the joy of the just
to do judgment; to have lain still, and done no wrong occasions, is not this
Joy; Joy is not such a Rest, as the Rest of the Earth, that never moved; but as
the Sun rejoices to run his race, and his circuit is unto the end of
heaven; so this Joy is the rest and testimony of a good conscience, that we
have done those things which belong to our calling, that we have moved in our
Sphere. For, if men of our profession, whose Function it is, to attend the
service of God, delight our selves in having gathered much in this world; if a
Soldier shall have delighted himself, in giving rules of Agriculture, or a
Architecture; if a Counselor of State, who should assist with his counsel
upon present emergencies, delight himself in writing Books of good counsel for
posterity, all this occasions not this joy; because though there have been
motion, and though there be Rest, yet that is not Rest after the Motion proper
to them. A Man that has been out of his way all the day, may be glad to find a
good Inn at night; but yet it is not properly Joy, because he is never the
nearer home. Joy is peace for having done that which we ought to have done:
Banner ibid.
And therefore it is well expressed, Optima conjectura an homo sit in gratia
est gaudere; The best evidence that a Man is at peace, and in favor with God,
is, that he can rejoice. To try whether I be able by Argument and disputation
to prove all, that I believe, or to convince the Adversary, this is Academia
animae, the souls University, where some are Graduats, and all are not: To
try whether I be able to endure Martyrdom for my belief, this is Gehenna
animae, the rack, the torture of the Soul, and some are able to hold it out,
and all are not: But to try whether I can rejoice in the peace, which I have
with God, this is but Catechismus animae, the Catechism of the Soul, and
every Man may examine him self, and every Man must; for it is a Commandment,
Gaudete semper, Rejoice evermore.

It is, we cannot say the Office, but the Essence of God to do good; and when
he does that, Deuteronomy. 30. 9. Zeph. 3. 17.
he is said to rejoice: The Lord thy God will make thee plenteous; (there is
his goodness) and he will Rejoice again over thee for good, as he rejoiced
over thy Fathers. The Lord will love thee, there is his goodness; and rejoice
in thee, and he will rest in his love. Such a joy as is a rest, a complacency
in that good which he has done, we see is placed in God himself. It is in
Angels too: Their office is to minister to Men, (for by nature they are
Spirits, but by office they are Angels) and when they see so good effect of
their service, Luke 15. 10.
as that a Sinner is converted, There is joy in the presence of the Angels of
God. Christ himself had a spiritual office and employment, To give light to
the blind, and to inflict blindness upon those who thought they saw all. And
when that was done, Exultavit in spiritu, in that hour Christ rejoiced in the
Spirit, and said, I thank thee o Father, Luc. 10. 2^.
Lord of Heaven and Earth, etc. To have something to do, to do it, and then
to Rejoice in having done it, to embrace a calling, to perform the Duties of
that calling, to joy and rest in the peaceful testimony of having done so;
this is Christianly done, Christ did it; Angelically done, Angels do it; Godly
done, Esaias 62. 1.
God does it. As the Bridegroom rejoices in his Bride, so does thy God
rejoice in thee. Example, as well as the Rule, repeats it to you, Gaudete
semper.

But how far may we carry this joy? Basil. q. brevis 31.
To what outward declarations? To laughing? Saint Basil makes a round answer to
a short question. An in Universum ridere non licet? May a Man laugh in no case?
Admodum perspicuum est, It is very evident, that a Man may not, because Christ
says, Vae vobis, Woe be unto you that laugh; And yet Saint Basil himself in
another place says (which we are rather to take in explanation, Homil. de
gratiar. action.
than in contradiction, of himself) that that woe of Christ is cast in
obstreperum Sonum, non in sinceram hilaritatem: upon a dissolute and undecent,
and immoderate laughting, not upon true inward joy, howsoever outwardly
expressed. At the promise of a Son, Genesis 17. 17.
Abraham fell on his face and laughed; a religious Man, and a grave Man, 100
years old, expressed this joy of his heart, by this outward declaration.
Hierome's Translation reads it, Risit in Cord, he laughed within himself,
because Saint Hierome thought that was a weakness, a declination toward
unbelief, to laugh at Gods promise, as he thinks Abraham did. But Saint Paul
is a better Witness in his behalf; Romans 4. Amo.
Against hope he believed in hope; he was not weak in faith; he staggered not
at the promise of God, through unbelief. Quod risit, non incredulitatis, sed
exultation is indicium fuit, his laughing was no ebb of faith, but a flood of
joy. It is not as S. Hier.
Hierome takes it, Risit in Cord putans celare deum, aperte ridere non ausus;
he kept-in his laughing, and durst not laugh out; But as St. Ambrose says well,
Risus non irrisio diffidentis, sed exultatio gratulantis; he laughed not in a
doubtful scorn of Gods promise, but in an overflowing of his own joy: It is
well expressed, and, well concluded, Rupertus.
O virum aeterno risu vere dignum, and sempiternae jueunditati been
praeparatum, This was good evidence, that he was a man well disposed for the
joys of heaven; that he could conceive joy in the temporal blessings of God,
and that he thought nothing mis-becomming him, that was an outward declaration
of this joy. It is a dangerous weakness, to forbear outward declarations of
our sense of Gods goodness, for fear of mis-interpretations; to smother our
present thankfulness, for fear that some should say it was a levity to thank
God so soon, till God had done the whole work. For God does sometimes leave
half his work undone, because he was not thanked for it. When David danced and
leaped, 2 Samuel 6. 14.
and shouted before the Arc; if he laughed too, it mis-became him not. Not to
feel joy is an argument against religious tenderness, not to show that joy,
is an argument against thankfulness of the heart: that is a stupidity, this is
a contempt. A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance. Prove. 15. 13.
If it be within, it will be without too. Except I hear thee say in thine
actions, Gaudeo, I do rejoice, I cannot know that thou have heard the Apostle
say, Gaudete.

Joy for Gods blessings to us, joy for Gods glory to himself, may come ad
Risum, and farther: Not only ad Ridendum, but ad Irridendum, not only to
laugh in our own prosperity, but to laugh them to scorn that would have
impeached it. They are put both together in God himself, Ridebo, and Irridebo,
I will laugh at your calamities, and I will mock when your fear comes. Prove.
1. 26.
And this being in that place intended of God, is spoken in the person of
Wisdom; It mis-becomes not wisdom and gravity to laugh in Gods deliverances,
not to laugh to scorn those that would have blown up Gods Servants, when it is
carried so high as to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm 2. 2.
and the Rulers that take counsel against the Lord, and against his Anointed,
we may come Ad Gaudium, to joy in Gods goodness, but because their place, and
persons are sacred, we leave the Ridere and the Irridere to God: Verse 4.
who says, ver. 4. That he will laugh at them, and hold them in derision. But
at lower instruments, lower persons may laugh, when they fill the world with
the Doctrine of killing of Kings, and mean that that should animate men
against such Kings as they call Heretics, and then find in experience that
this has wrought only to the killing of Kings of their own Religion, we
lament justly the event, but yet we forbear our Ridere and our Irridere, at
the crossing and the frustrating of their plots and practices. Pharaohs Army
was drowned, Et Cecinit Moses, Moses sung, Sisera was slain Et Cecinit
Deborah, Deborah sung. Thus in the disappointing of Gods enemies, Gods servants
come to outward manifest signs of joy. Not by a libellous and scurrill
profanation of persons that are sacred, but in fitting Psalms and Sermons,
and Prayers, and public Writings to the occasion, to proceed to a Ridere and
Irridere, and as Saint Augustine reads that place of the Proverbs,
Superridere, to laugh Gods Enemies into a confusion to see their Plots so
often, so often, so often frustrated. For so far extends Gaudete, Rejoice
evermore.

Joy then, and cheerfulness, is Sub praecepto, it has the nature of a
commandment, and so he departs from a commandment that departs, and abandons
himself into an inordinate sadness. Psalm. 42. 5.
And therefore David chides his soul, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, why
art thou disquiesed within me? And though he come after to dispute against this
sadness of the soul, which he had let in, Hope yet in God, and yet the Lord
will command his loving kindness, and my prayer shall be unto the God of my
life, yet he could not put it off, but he imagines that he hears his enemies
say, Where is thy God? and when he has wrestled himself weary, he falls back
again in the last verse, to his first faintness, Why art thou cast down, O my
soul, why art thou disquieted within me? For, As he that takes away a garment
in cold weather, Prove. 25. 20.
so is he that sings Songs to a heavy heart: That heaviness makes him
incapable of Natural, of Moral, of Civil, of Spiritual comforts, charm the
Charmer never so wisely. Heli heard that the Battle was lost, and that his
Sons were slain, and admitted so much sorrow for those, that when the last
was added, 1 Samuel 4. 17.
The Arc was taken by the Enemy, he was too weak for that, and fell down and
brake his neck. It was his daughter in Laws case too; she overcharged her
soul with sadness for her husbands death, and her fathers death, and when the
report of the Arc came, she fell into labor and died; and though the women
told her, Fear not, thou have born a Son, yet she answered not. Though the
Ark of God, the worship of his Name, be at any time transferred from where it
was, despair not thou of Gods reducing it; for this despairing of others, may
bring thee to despair in some accident to thy self: Accustom thy self to
keep up the consideration of Gods mercy at the highest, lodge not a sad
suspicion in any public, in any private business, that Gods powerful mercy
can go but thus far: he that determines Gods Power and his Mercy, and
faith here it must end, is as much an Atheist, as he that denies it
altogether. The Key of David opens and no man shuts; The Spirit of Comfort
shines upon us, and would not be blown out. Monastery, and Ermimitage, and
Anchorate, and such words of singularity are not Synonym^ with those plural
words Concio, Coetus, Ecclesia, Synagoga and Congregatio, in which words God
delivers himself to us. A Church is a Company, Religion is Religation, a
binding of men together in one manner of Worship; and Worship is an exterior
service; and that exterior service is the Venite exultemus, to come and
rejoice in the presence of God.

If in any of these ways God cast a Cloud upon our former joys, yet to
receive good at Gods hand, and not to receive evil; to rejoice in the calm,
and not in the storm; this is to break at least half of the Commandment,
which is, Gaudete semper. And so from the first part, which is the substance
which we have passed by these steps, That this rejoicing has the nature of a
Commandment, it must be maintained, And that inward joy must be outwardly
expressed, even to the disgrace and confusion of Gods enemies, and to the
upholding of a joyful constancy in our selves: We pass now to the extent of
the Commandment, Gaude^e semper, Evermore.

Did God mean that we should rejoice always; 2 Part.
when he made six days for labor, and but one for rest? Semper.
Certainly he did. Six days we are to labor, and to do all that we have to
do: And part of that which we have to do, is to rejoice in our labor. Adam
in the state of Innocence had abundant occasion of continual rejoicing; but
yet even in that joyful state he was to labor, Genesis 2. 15. 3. 19.
to dress and to keep the Garden. After the fall, when God made the labor of
man more heavy in sudore vultus, that he should not eat, but in the sweat of
his browe, yet God gave him not that penalty, that occasion of sadness, till
he had first imprinted the root of true Joy, the promise of a Messiah; that
promise he made before he came to denounce the penalty, first came the Ipse
conteret, and then in sudore vultus: upon those words, Thou shall eat the
labor of thy hand; Debuit dicere fructum, non laborem, Psalm 128. 2. August.
says Augustine, David should have said, he shall eat the fruit, not the
labor of his hands. Sed ipsi labores non sunt sine gaudio, but the very
labors, the very afflictions of good men, have joy in them. Si labor potest
manducari and jucundari, manducatus fructus laboris qualis erit? And if labor
it self, affliction it self, minister Joy, what a manner, what a measure of joy
is in the full possession thereof in Heaven? And as the consideration of the
words immediately after the Text, has made more then one of the Fathers say,
Etiam Somnia justorum preces sunt, Even the sleep of the righteous is a service
to God, and their very Dreams are Prayers and Meditations, so much more
properly, may we call the sleep, and the bodily rest, nay, the bodily torments
of the righteous, joye, rejoicing. So that neither week day, nor Sabbath day
nor night, labor nor rest interrupteth this continual Joy: We may, we must
rejoice evermore.

Gaudete in bonis, Rejoice when God gives you the good things of this world;
First, In bonis Temporalibus.
in Temporalibus when God gives you the good Temporal things of this world.
Gaudete in Terra, Rejoice that God has placed you in so fertile, in so
fruitful a Land. Gaudete in pace, Rejoice that God has afforded you peace to
till the Land, Gaudete de Temporibus, Rejoice that God gives good seasons,
that the Earth may give her increase, and that Man may joy in the increase of
the Earth: And Gaudete de amicitiis, Rejoice that God gives you friendship
with such Nations, as may take of your superfluities, and return things
necessary to you. There is a joy required for Temporal things; for he that is
not joyful in a benefit, is not thankful. Next to that detestable assertion
(as Saint Augustine calls it) That God made any man to to damn him, it is the
perversest assertion, That God gives man temporal things to ensnare him. Genesis
9. 20.
Was that Gods primary intention in prospering Noah's Vineyard, That Noah should
be drunken? God forbid.

Does God give any man honor or place, Vt glorietur in malo, qui potens est,
that his power might be an occasion of mischief and oppression? God forbid. God
made light at first; but we know not what that light was: but God gathered all
light into the Sun, and all the world sees it. God infuses grace and spiritual
blessings into a man's heart, and no man sees that, but the Spirit that is in
that man; but the Evidence, the great Seal, that he pleads in the Eye of the
world, is Gods temporal blessings. When Assuerus put the Royal Vesture and
Ring, and Crown upon Mordecas, it was to show that he was in his favor; in
the same intention proceeds God too, when he gives riches, or honor, or
favor, or command; he would have that soul rejoice in these, as in
testimonies of his favor. God loves hilarem datorem, a cheerful giver, but he
that is not a cheerful receiver, is a worse natured man, and more dishonours,
nay, reproaches his benefactor. They then disobey this Commandment, of
rejoicing in temporal things, that employ not their industry, that use not all
good means to attain them. Every man is therefore planted in the world, that
he may grow in the world, and as venomous herbs delight in the shade, so a
sullen retiring argues a murmuring and venomous disposition; To contemn Gods
temporal blessings, or to neglect or undervalue those instruments, those
persons, by whom God sheds such blessings upon us, is to break that branch of
this Commandment Gaudete semper, Rejoice evermore; for he does not rejoice in
bonis temporalibus. So is it also, as not to seek them before, so not to use
them when we have them. When in a fear of growing poor, makes us think God to
be poor too, that if we spend this, God can give us no more, when for fear of
lacking at our end, we lack all the way, when we abound and yet will pay no
debts, not to our own bellies, our own backs, our own respect, and the decency
that belongs to our rank, these men so sordid, so penurious, and suspicious of
Gods Providence, break this branch of this Commandment too, because they do
not rejoice in bonis temporalibus. And as the not-seeker, and the not-user, so
the abuser of these temporal blessings is in the same transgression. He that
thinks all the world as one Jewel, and himself the Cabinet, that all was
made for him, and he for none, forgets his own office, his Stewardship, by
which he is enabled and bound to the necessities of others: to collect, he
that seeks not, he that denies all to himself, he that denies all but
himself, break this branch, for they do not rejoice in bonis temporalibus.

This we must do; In spiritualibus.
but in bonis spiritualibus, in the spiritual good things of this world, much
more we call those the spiritual good things of this world, which advance our
devotion here, and consequently our salvation hereafter. The rituall and
ceremonial, the outward worship of God, the places, the times, the manner of
meetings, which are in the disposition of Christian Princes, and by their
favors of those Churches, which are in their government: and not to rejoice in
the peaceful exercise of those spiritual helps, not to be glad of them, is a
transgression. Now the Prophet expresses this rejoicing thus, Venite exultemus,
let us come and rejoice. We must do both. And therefore they who out of a
thraldom to another Church abstain from these places of these exercises, that
do not come, or if they do come, do not rejoice, but though they be here
brought by necessity of law, or of observation, yet had rather they were in
another Chapel, or that another kind of service then in this: and they also
who abstain out of imaginary defects in this church, and think they cannot
perform David's De profundis, they cannot call upon God out of the depth, except
it be in a Conventicle in a cellar, Excles. 5. 8.
nor acknowledge Solomon's Excelsis Excelsior, that God is higher then the
highest, except it be in a Conventicle in a garret, and when they are here wink
at the ornaments, and stop their ears at the music of the Church, in which
manner she has always expressed her rejoicing in those helps of devotion; or
if there be a third sort who abstain, because they may not be here at so much
case, and so much liberty, as at their own houses, all these are under this
transgression. Are they in the Kings house at so much liberty as in their own?
and is not this the King of Kings house? Or have they seen the King in his
own house, use that liberty to cover himself in his ordinary manner of
covering, at any part of Divine Service? Every Preacher will look, and justly,
to have the Congregation uncovered at the reading of his Text: and is not the
reading of the Lesson, at time of Prayer, the same Word of the same God, to be
received with the same reverence? The service of God is one entire thing; and
though we celebrate some parts with more, or with less reverence, some
kneeling, some standing, yet if we afford it no reverence, we make that no patr
of Gods service. And therefore I must humbly entreat them, who make this Quire
the place of their Devotion, to testify their devotion by more outward
reverence there; we know our parts in this place, and we do them; why any
stranger should think himself more privileged in this part of Gods House, then
we, I know not. I presume no man will mis-interpret this that I say here now;
nor, if this may not prevail, mis-interpret the service of our Officers, if
their continuing in that unreverent manner give our Officers occasion to warn
them of that personally in the place, whenever they see them stray into that
uncomely negligence. They should not blame me now, they must not blame them
then, when they call upon them for this reverence in this Quire; neither truly
can there be any greater injustice, then when they who will not do their
duties, blame others for doing theirs.

But that we are bound to a thankful rejoicing in all that falls well to us,
In malis.
In bonis, admits less doubt, and therefore requires less proof: But the
semper of our Text extends farther, Gandete in malis, we do not rejoice
always, except we rejoice in evil days, in all our crosses and calamities.
Now, if we be not affected with Gods judgments, if we conceive not a sorrow
for them, or the cause of them, our sins, God is angry; will he be angry too,
if we be not glad of them, if we do not rejoice in them? Can this sorrow and
this joy consist together? very well. The School in the mouth of Aquinas gives
instances; Aquin. 3. 84. 9. 2.
If an Innocent man be condemned, Simul placet ejus justitia, and displices
afflictio, I congratulate his innocence, and I condole his death both at once.
So Displicet mihi quod peccavi, and placet quod displicet; I am very sorry that
I have sinned, but yet I am glad that I am sorry. So that, Ipsatristitia
materia gaudii; Some sorrow is so far from excluding joy, Aug.
as that naturally it produces it. S. Augustine has sealed it with this
advice, Semper doleat poenitens, Let him who has sinned always lament; But
then where is the Gaudete semper? he tells us too, Semper gaudeat de dolor, Let
him always rejoice, Basil.
that God has opened him a way to mercy, by sorrow. Lacrymae Seminium quoddam
sunt and foenus, quibus increscit gaudium; Sorrow is our Seminary, from whence
we are transplanted into a larger Orchard, into the dilatation of the heart,
Joy; sorrow, says he, Seminium est, and foenus est; It is our interest, our
use; And if we have sorrow upon sorrow, it is use upon use, it doubles the
principal, which is joy, the sooner. Cordae cum distenduntur, it is S.
Augustines musical comparison, when the strings of an instrument are set up,
the musical sound is the clearer; if a man's sinew be stretched upon the rack,
his joy is not the less perfect. Not that a man must seek out occasion of
sorrow; provoke the Magistrate by seditious intemperance, and call it zeal; or
macerate the body with fastings, Aug.
or mangle it with whippings, and call that merit; Non ut quaerant materiam
quam non habent, sed at inveniant came quam nescientes habent; This is the way
of joy, not to seek occasions of sorrow, which they have not, but to find out
those which they have, and know not; that is, their secret sins, the causes of
Gods judgments in themselves. To discern that that correction that is upon me,
is from God, and not a natural accident, this is a beam of joy, for I see that
he would cure me, though by corosives. To discern that God is not unjust, nor
cruel, and therefore it is something in me, and not in him, that brings it to
this sharpness, this is a beam of joy too; for I see how to discharge God, and
to glorify him, and how to accuse my self; and that is a good degree of
repentance.

But to perfect my repentance, A sensis.
Non sufficit dolere de peccatis, sed requiritur gaudi^m de dolor, It is not
enough to come to a sorrow in my sin, that may flow out into despair, but I
must come to a joy in my sorrow, for that fixes me upon the application of
Christ, and such a joy a man must suscitate and awaken in himself by these
steps, In malis temporalibus, in all worldly crosses; Else he does not Gaudere
semper.

No nor except he find this joy, In spiritualibus.
In malis Spiritualibus, in Spiritual afflictions too. When I fall into new
sorrow, after my former joy, relapse into those sins which I have repented (and
beloved, the dangerous falling in any man, is to fall backward, he that falls
forward, has his eyes to help him, and his hands to help him, but he that falls
backward lacks much) yet even out of these relapses we must find joy too. For
when Saint James says, James 1, 2.
Count it all joy when you fall into diverse tentations, as he speaks of all
joy, so he intends, or may justly be extended to all tentations, not only
tentations, that is, trialls, when God proves a man by affliction, where moral
constancy is exercised, but even in trial of religious constancy; in
tentations to sin, still there is fresh occasion of joy in discerning Gods
deliverance from the falling into the sin, or from lying in the sin. Ambros.
Ipsa tentatio sal animae, as salt preserves flesh, so tentations preserve the
Soul: not the sinning, but the discerning that it is, nay that that was a
tentation to sin, preserves the soul. And therefore, he calls tentationes
custodes; he makes even the evil Angels, our Guardians, our Tutelar Angels,
because by their tentations they bring us up in the fear of God, and in the
ways of joy. And therefore though it be a joyful thing to have overcome a
tentation, yet determine not your Joy in that; that if that tentation had
overcome you, you might have no more Joy, but (as Christ says) In this rejoice
not, Luke 10. 20.
that is, not only in this, that the Spirits are subject to you, but rather
rejoice that your names are written in heaven. Rejoice not in this, that is,
determine not, conclude not your joy in this, that you have overcome that
tentation, but rather in this; that God does not forsake you after a sin, nor
after a relapse into sin; but manifests your election by continual returning
to you: But that this may be the joy of the text, true Joy, not a joy that
induces presumption, for that will fail, that it may be Semper, it must be
in Sempiterno, a Joy rightly conceived, and rightly placed. Gaudium in Domino:
and that is our next step.

Rejoice in the Lord always, says the Apostle; and left it should admit any
interruption, he repeates it, In sempiterno. Basil.
Iterum dico gaudete, Again I say rejoice, But still in the Lord. For, Quasi
locus quidam, iustorum capax est Dominum: though God be in no place, God is the
place, in whom all good men are. God is the Court of every just King: God is
the Church of every holy Priest: God is the field of every valiant man; and the
bed of every sickly man: whatsoever is done in Domino, in the Lord, is done at
home in the right place. Chrysoft.
He that is settled in God, centred in God, Laetitiae fontem, voluptatis
radicem lucratus est. They are all considerable words; Lucratus est, he has
purchased something which he did not inherit, he has acquired something which
was not his before, and what? Fontem laetitiae; it is joy, else it were nothing:
for what is wealth if sickness take away the joy of that? Or what is health,
if imprisonment take away the joy of that? Or what is liberty, if poverty take
away the joy of that? but he has joy, and not a Cistern but a fountain, the
fountain of joy, that rejoices in God: He carries it higher in the other
Metaphore; he has radicem voluptatis; a man may have Flores, flowers of joy,
and have no fruit, a man may have some fruit, and not enough, but if he have
joy in God, he has radicem voluptatis; if we may dare to translate it so, (and
in a spiritual sense we may) it is a voluptuous thing to rejoice in God. In
rejoicing in another thing Saint Bernards harmonious charm will strike upon
us, Bern.
Rara hora, brevis mora, they are joys that come seldom, and stay but a
little while when they come. Call it joy, to have had that thou love, in
thine eye, or in thine arms, remember what oaths, what false oaths, it did
cost thee before it came to that? And where is that joy now, is there a Semper
in that? Call it joy to have had him whom thou hate, in thine hands or under
thy feet, what ignoble disguises to that man, what servile observations of some
greater, then either you, or he, did that cost you before you brought him into
your power? and where is that joy, if a Funeral or a bloody conscience benight
it? Currus Domini, says David, the Chariots of the Lord are twenty thousand,
Psalm. 68. 17.
thousands of Angels, says our translation; Millia laetantium, says the vulgat;
thousands of them that rejoice. How comes it to be all thing Angels and
Reioycers? Ne miremur illos laetari continuo subiecit, August.
Dominus in illis, Saint Augustine says, to take away all wonder, it is added,
the Lord is in the midst of them, and then, be what they will, they must
rejoice; For if he be with them they are with him, and he is Joy. The name of
Isaac signifies joy; Bern.
and the trial of Abraham was to sacrifice Isaac: Immola Isaac tuum, sacrifice
all thy Joy in this world, to God, Et non mactatus sed sanctificatus Isaac
tuus, thy Joy shall not be destroyed, but sanctified, so far from being made
none, that it shall be made better, better here, but not, better then that
hereafter; which is our last step, beyond which there is nothing, that even
true Joy, rightly placed, is but an inchoative, a preparatory Joy in this
world. The consummation is for the next; Gaudebimus semper.

Sicut laetantium omnium habitatio est inte, Psalm. 87. 7.
as Saint Hierome reads those words, speaking of the Christian Church here, It
is the house of all them, who do as it were rejoice; who come nearest to true
joy. And so, when the Lord turned again the Captivity of Sion, Psalm. 126.
Facti sumus sicut consolati, We were as it were comforted. Quare sicut, says
that Father, Why is it so modified with that diminution, as it were? Quia hic
etiam in Sanctis non perfecta consolatio; Because; says he, in this world,
even the Saints themselves have no perfect joy. Where the Apostle compares the
sorrow and the joy of this world, then the Quasi lies upon the sorrows side; it
is but a half sorrow; Quasi tristes, 2 Cor. 6. 10.
We are as it were sorrowful, but indeed rejoicing; but compare the best joy
of this world, with the next, and the Quasi will fall upon the joy of the
world. Ephesians. 1. 14.
For though we be sealed with the holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest
of our inheritance, (and this is the Tropique of Joy, the farthest that
Spiritual Joy goes in this Zodique, Hierom.
in this world) yet this carries us no farther, but Vt ex arrabone aestimetur
haereditas; That by the proportion of the earnest, we might value the whole
bargain: For what a bargain would we presume that man to have, that would
give 20000 l. for earnest? what is the Joy of heaven hereafter, if the earnest
of it here, be the Seal of the holy Ghost? God proceeds with us, as we do with
other men. Operariis in Saeculo, Bernard.
cibus in opere, merces in fine datur: In this world, we give laborers meat
and drink by the way, but wages at the end of their work. God affords us
refreshing here, but joy hereafter. The best Seal is the holy Ghost, and the
best matter that the holy Ghost seals in, is in blood; in the dignity of
Martyrdom; and even for that, 1 Pet. 4. 13.
for Martyrdom, we have a rule in the Apostle, Rejoice in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ's sufferings; That as he suffered for you, so you suffer for
him: but in what contemplation? That when his glory shall be revealed, ye may
be made glad with exceeding Joy; not with exceeding Joy, till then; For till
then, the Joys of Heaven may be exceeded in the addition of the body. There is
the rule, and the example is Christ himself, Who for the joy that was set
before him, endured the Cross; in contemplation of the Propterea exaltatus,
that therefore he should be exalted above all in heaven. Rejoice and be glad;
Mat. 5. 12.
why? for great is your reward: but where? in heaven. And therefore Ask and you
shall receive; John 16. 24.
Pray and you shall have answer: but what answer: but what answer? That your
joy shall be full. August.
It shall be; in heaven. For Quis sic delectat quam ille, qui fecit omnia quae
delectant: In whom can we fully rejoice, but him, who made all things in which
we rejoice by the way, Psalm. 89. 16.
In thy Name shall we rejoice all the day, says David; Si in nomine suo, August.
non tota die. St. Augustine says not that to any particular person, nor any
particular calling but to any man, to every man; Any Prince, any Counselor,
any Prelate, any General, any Discoverer, any that goes in any way of joy, and
glory, Si nomine suo, non tota die, If they rejoice in their own names, their
own wisdom, their own strength, they shall not rejoice all the day, but they
shall be benighted with dark sadness, before their days end; And their sun
shall set at noon too, as the Prophet Amos speaks. And therefore that shall be
Christ's expressing of that joy, at the last day, Enter into thy Master Joy, and
leave the joy of Servants (though of good Servants) behind thee; for thou shall
have a better Joy then that, Thy Masters Joy.

It is time to end; but as long as the glass has a gasp, as long as I have
one, I would breathe in this air, in this perfume, in this breath of heaven,
the contemplation of this Joy. Psalm. 89. 15.
Blessed is that man, qui scit jubilationem, says David, that knows the
joyful sound: August.
For, Nullo modo beatus, nisi scias unde gaudeas; For though we be bound to
rejoice always, it is not a blessed joy, if we do not know upon what it be
grounded: or if it be not upon everlasting blessedness. Cant. 5. 1.
Comedite amici, says Christ, bibite and inebriamini. Eat and drink, and be
filled. Joy in this life, Vbi in sudore vescimur, where grief is mingled with
joy, Bernard.
is called meat, says Saint Bernard, and Christ calls his friends to eat in the
first word. Potus in future, says he, Joy in the next life, where it passes
down without any difficulty, without any opposition, is called drink; and
Christ calls his friends to drink: but the overflowing, the Ebriet as animae,
that is reserved to the last time, when our bodies as well as our souls, shall
enter into the participation of it: Where, when we shall love every one, as
well as our selves, and so have that Joy of our own salvation multiplied by
that number, we shall have that Joy so many times over, as there shall be
souls saved, because we love them as our selves, how infinitely shall this
Joy be enlarged in loving God, so far above our selves, Matt. 9. 15.
and all them. We have but this to add. Heaven is called by many precious
names; Luc. 12. 32.
Life^ Simply and absolutely there is no life but that. And Kingdom; Simply,
absolutely there is no Kingdom, Esaias 66. 23.
that is not subordinate to that. And Sabba^u^ex Sabbate, A Sabbath flowing
into a Sabbath, a perpetual Sabbath: but the Name that should enamour us most,
is that, that it is Satietas gaud^orum; fullness of Joy. Fullness that needs
no addition; Psalm. 16. 11.
Fullness, that admits no leake. And then though in the School we place
Blessedness, in visione, in the sight of God, yet the first thing that this
sight of God shall produce in us (for that shall produce the Reformation of the
Image of God, in us, and it shall produce our glorifying of God) but the first
thing that the seeing of God shall produce in us, is Joy. The measure of our
seeing of God is the measure of Joy. See him here in his Blessings, and you
shall joy in those blessings here; and when you come to see him Sicuti est, in
his Essence, then you shall have this Joy in Essence, and in fullness; of
which, God of his goodness give us such an earnest here, as may bind to us
that inheritance hereafter, which his Son our Savior Christ Jesus has
purchased for us, with the inestimable price of his incorruptible blood. Amen.

FINIS.

