THE Country-Wake: A COMEDY.

As it is Acted at the NEW THEATER IN Little Lincoln's-Inn-Fields BY His
Majesty's Servants.

Written by Mr. THO. DOGGET, Comedian.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Briscoe at the Corner of Charles-street, in
Russel Street, Covent Garden; Sold by R. Wellington, at the Lute in St. Paul's
Churchyard; R. Parker at the Royal Exchange. 1696.

Price, One Shilling, Six Pence.

There is in the Press and will be speedily Published, Mr. Dennis's Miscellany
of Poems, with several Select Translations from the Ancient Poets: Also, The
Passion of Bibblis, Translated into English, By Mr. Dennis. (...)

Drammatis Personae.
MEN.
Sir Thomas Testie, Mr. Underhill. Woodvill, Mr. Betterton. Friendly, Mr.
Kenneston. Old Hob, Mr. Tresise. Young Hob, Mr. Dogget.

WOMEN.
Lady Testie, Mrs. Barry. Flora, Mrs. Bracegirdle. Lucia, Mrs. Bowman. Betty,
Mrs. Lee.

Clowns, Servants, etc.

SCENE, Gloucester.

TO THE Illustrious and Truly Noble Prince JAMES, Duke, Marquess, and Earl of
Ormond in England and Ireland; Earl of Ossory, and Viscount Thurles; Baron of
Arclo; Lord of the Regalities and Liberties of the County of Tiperary; Baron of
Lanthony; Earl of Brecknock; Chancellor of the University of Oxford, One of the
Lords of the Bedchamber to His Sacred Majesty, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter; and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Grace,
I Know what I ought to expect from this Presumption, but the assurance I had
of your Graces Goodness to forgive me, made me suffer my Inclinations to get
the better of me, and beseech your Protection for this poor Play, that has but
little else to recommend it to the World, the satisfaction I had to see the
little Success it undeservedly met with from the Town, gave me not so great
pleasure as I have to see your Graces Name fixed to the Dedication; not that I
Pride my Self upon any imaginary Desert; but the occasion it gives me of doing
the Duty of an Englishman, from whom all that is due to the Preserver of his
Country, should be paid to your Grace; this, I confess, ought to be my Task, I
own my Obligation, though I cannot pay it, nor am I much concerned at it, since a
better Pen than mine will find it a Duty too difficult to be Just in; and the
generality of Mankind, I Am sure, will think me in the right, not to profane
your Noble Character, by endeavoring to describe it, which would betray my
Ignorance, more than the Publishing this piece of Folly will do, which cost me
more Time (and Trouble) to get Acted, than did to Write it except one Act of
it, which I wrote three Years ago,) As for its Faults, one of them is, I hear,
that it is Obscene, I Am sorry it should appear so, I Am sure I never designed
it, and I believe it will be hard to find a Comedy with less in it; those that
have the clearest Reputation, have more Reason to blush for that Sin, than this
has; I own there is a scarcity of that which some call Wit, and what many
Authors in this Age run mad after, endeavoring to produce it out of every
bodies Mouth, whether it belongs to their Character or no, still losing the Man
to go out of the way for a Jest; it is what I shall never labor for, (either
in Writing, if I were capable, or Acting;) for he that will make Nature his
Study, will find more Charms in it, and a more certain way to Applause, than
can be produced from any abortive Conceit, which at best, can but repay him
with a loud Laughter from the Multitude, who should be pleased, I own, but not
at the expense of the Author, or the Actors Reputation, nor the Displeasure of
the Judicious, who I hope will not condemn this Play from the appearance it had
upon the Stage, where it suffered in the Acting. By the Industrious Care of
whom, was so visible to the Audience, I shall spare any further Reflection at
this time, which could chiefly be spent in begging your Grace's Pardon, for
presuming so unworthily to write my self,

Your Grace's most Humble, Faithful and Obedient Servant, THO. DOGGET.

PROLOGUE
Spoken by Mrs. BARRY.
NEW Plays as well as Guineas fall of late,
Like Addle Plotters hurried to their Fate,
And yet our Ben would needs be Plotting too,
But only Plotted for himself and you;
But yet I fear he will not please to day,
Alas! it is a mere out-of-fashion Play;
No Bawdy in it to make the Ladies Glow,
Nay, what is worse, the Play's without a Beau;
No Chit-Chat Repartee, nor Raillery,
Such as Masks sell Sins within the Gallery;
Stuff learnt by Rote, pass with you for Sense,
Brought here by Wits, and by Fools carried hence,
Nay, he has to day, spared min' honest Citt,
Who Is Holiday Half Crown seats him in the Pit,
And Laughs when he is abused, because it is Wit;
Thus all he does but Politickly spare,
He fears to Bite, yet hardly can forbear,
The Poet would be at you, if he might,
Did not the Player deter him from the Fight;
He Draws on your side, Swears you shall not frown,
The Comic Vein shall keep the Cynick down,
'Twixt you and him no Quarrel yet has been
If now he eres, he will freely own his Sin;
Nay, what is more strange, he will repent on it too,
But not as other wretched Scriblers do:
Attempt to mend, yet trouble still the Age,
Confirm them Blockheads, and Confound the Stage.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Betterton.
THE Careful Pilot, when he Views the Shelf
Where others have been lost, secures himself;
The Cautious Robber from that road abstains,
Where his unlucky Comrade hangs in Chains;
Thus all, except the Brothers of the Quill,
Take Early Warning by another's ill.
Writing's the Fatal Rock, on which has split
Many a Stout, and well built Man of Wit;
And yet there is not a Sculler but shall Dare
To venture his weak, rotten Cock-boat there,
Bless me! What Wits might some Men be to th'Sight;
Would they be ruled, and neither Talk, nor Write;
For here is the Mischief of the Poet's trade;
He must be born a Wit, as well as made;
A Native, inbred spark of Heavenly heat,
In every Vein, in every Pulse must beat:
Nor will indifferent Writing do the feat,
For Poetry allows no Middle State.
No so-so Plays will do, no pretty-well,
You fail if you but Moderately excel;
It must be Heaven all, or else it is Hell.
Critics are Heralds, that deny one blot
To be of Honor in a Poet's Coat:
It Is time and labor thrown away in all,
But they that do perceive an inward Call;
And by the Orthodox none ought to be
Admitted to this Sacred Ministry,
Less then a Dryden, Congreve, Wycherly.
These Matters running in our Author's head,
He vows to me have almost made him Mad;
To know so well the Strictness of the Rule,
And yet to write; Incorrigible Fool!
Yonder he stands in Sad and Doloful Case,
Waiting the Judgment you shall please to pass;
I see he beckons to me, to entreat
That you would be Merciful as you are Great:
Almighty Critics, you his Judges sit;
If you consent he shall set up a Wit,
He swears he wont be prouder for it a Bit.
A Country-Wake.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Friendly and Servant. Serve. SIR, Here Is a Letter for you.


Friend. A Letter, Let me see it.

(Read. Dear Frank,
I arrived this Day at London, and to Morrow, purpose for Gloucester: where, if
after Three Years Travel, I can find my Friend what I left him; I cannot think
my Self Unhappy, how unfortunate soever I may seem to the World.

Woodvill.


I wish Ned, it were in my Power to make thee as happy, as it was in thy
Father's to make thee miserable; thou should find a better Welcome here from
thy Friend, then thou will from a Dead Sire, and departed Acres, Sirrah, go to
Sir Thomas Testies, and see if ^e's at home, and at leisure to receive an Hours
Conversation.


Serve. Yes Sir.

Enter Woodvill.
Wood. Franck Friendly.


Friend. Ned Woodvill.


Wood. What Acknowledgments shall I make my Stars for letting me live to see
once more, the Man that is nearest to my Heart?


Friend. There let me grow; till want of Friendship makes me unworthy, of the
Place -- I was just now Reading your Letter, and by that, did not expect to see
you these two Days; How came you so soon?


Wood. I designed to come in the Stage-Coach, but finding no other Company but
an old talkative Woman, and two overgrown Boys, I chose rather than be cooped
up with Old Age and Ignorance, to ride Post, and run the hazard of breaking my
Neck upon Hackney Jades: that have, I think, disjointed every Limb of me.


Friend. I wish Ned after the fatigue of thy Journey, I could Entertain thee
with something would divert thy present pain, and prove a Cordial for the
future; for the News I have to tell thee, I fear will disorder thy whole Frame,
and make thy Mind as distempered as thy Body.


Wood. Say thee so, prithee out with it at once; for I am Armed against the
worst that can befall me; my Life, which is the last and only thing Fate can
now take from me; I see in no Danger, as for any other misfortune, there can
come none so great as what is past.


Friend. I know not what you have met with abroad; but the greatest you are to
expect here, is the News of your Father's Death, who departed a Fortnight
since; but before he left the World, took care to make you a younger Brother to
his Extravagancy, which has left you never a Groat, for he played the last Game
with the last stake, and Died, leaving hardly enough to Bury him.


Wood. This I heard at London, and expected it long before: for when he sent me
abroad, it was only that I might not be a Curb to his Will, which was as
unbounded as his Lusts, that t would be obeyed in all those Vices his younger
Years ough to have been ashamed of; but the Age we live in is so perverted,
that Old Men pursue the Vanities of Youth (taking up the Cudgels they lay down)
and fumble with those Debauches, young Men grow weary of.


Friend. Thou say true, Ned; but I wish thou had not experienced it so
much at thy own Cost.


Wood. So do I Frank; but since it was in my Power to prevent it, it shall not
now be my fault to repine at it; the Old Gentleman could not 'a chosen a better
time to put me to my Shifts, since the War gives me so Glorious an opportunity
to try what Fortune has in store for me.


Friend. Fortune! Prithee what can thou hope from Fortune, with Bullets
flying about thy Ears, that could Buffet thee so unmercifully in the time of
Peace; Had thou a Friend indeed who had Interest to get thee a Commission,
that had Authority in it to keep thee out of Harms way, thou might hope as
much as another Man; But as thou have nothing to prefer thee, but a comely
Figure of Six Foot high, thou oughtst to look for nothing more, then after the
first Volley, to chance on a clean place to measure thy Length on, without
spoiling thy Clothes.


Wood. Prithee Frank, What Commands are those that have Power to awe a Bullet,
for till now, I never heard a Cannon made any distinction.


Friend. True Ned, if we come in their way; but I Have known some Men, whose
Actions were above being questioned, step aside when Danger faced 'em, but if
their Enemies (meeting with the worst of it) have been forced to turn their
Backs, have fallen in like Lions, to scramble for Honor, and come home laden
with as much as he that deserved most.


Wood. I must confess we have too frequent Examples of this kind; however it
shall not keep me from doing my best to serve my Country, nor make medespair of
Success.


Friend. You do well to hope the best; it doubles our misfortunes to afflict
our Selves with the Apprehension of 'em; which sometimes make 'em look more
dreadful than they are in themselves.


Wood. That will never be my fault, for disappointments are so frequent with
me, that I should look for nothing else, did I not believe all things must have
an end, one time or other.

Enter Servant. How now, Did not I send you to Sir Thomas Testies?


Serve. Sir, I was going as you commanded me; and met his Man by the way, coming
with a Message to you, and he is now without, waiting to speak with you.


Friend. This Old Knight (Ned) was a Citizen of London, but being weary of his
Vocation, and willing to keep a young Wife to himself, is come to inhabit here,
upon an Estate which he has lately purchased; part of it was your Fathers: he
has one only Daughter by a former Wife, whom Nature has been very bountiful to,
she wants no Charm to make her Self Adored, and has found that way to my
Heart, which none of her Sex could ever do before. There is a Niece (Ned) is
equally deserving, and would be equally desirable, did not Love to show his
Power, bias my Affections: Come, thou shall go with me and see them, if thy
Journey has not fatigued thee too much.


Wood. Never to hinder me from the Company of a pretty Woman Frank; that
Temptation is more prevalent with me than any other, Nature can be liable to:
But at present I must deny my self that satisfaction; I hear the Post goes
hence within these Two Hours, and I have Business obliges me to write by the
first opportunity; but let my Man go with you to acquaint my himself with the
way; and I will come to you, as soon as I have dispatched Jack, wait of Mr.
Friendly, and come back quickly.


Friend. *It Is very well, Your Servant; Come back.

(Exeunt severally.
SCENE II. A Room at Sir T. Testie's.
Enter Sir Thomas Testie and Lucia. Sir Tho. Niece, come hither, -- Come
hither, I say, and shut the Door.


Luc. Bless us! What Is amiss in the State, that I must be Closeted. -- The Door
is locked, Sir.


Sir Tho. Very well; Come hither then: -- Hark'ye, who am I?


Luc. Who are you, Sir!


Sir Tho. Ay; whom am I?


Luc. You are my Uncle, Sir, I think.


Sir Tho. Am I no more than your Uncle? your Father thought me worthy of a
better Title, when he made me your Trustee, and by that means empowered me to
make you a Beggar, had I not been your very good Friend as well.


Luc. Sir, you have been more than I could hope for -- Nor shall you ever find
me wanting in those Acknowledgments your Goodness has obliged me to pay you,
for your extraordinary Care of me, when I was left young and unable to take any
for my self.


Sir Tho. It Is very well; Why then, since occasion now presents, wherein you
may in some measure requite my Love, and discharge your Duty, I expect you
shall be sincere with me, and Answer me directly; -- When was Mr. Friendly last
with my Daughter?


Luc. Sir.


Sir Tho. I say, When was Mr. Friendly last with my Daughter?


Luc. To the best of my Remembrance -- Sir -- I will not -- be positive -- but --


Sir Tho. But -- No, no hold -- hold -- lookd'ye see, If I catch you stumbling,
or endeavoring by your Female Devil's Wit at a pinch, to cast a blind upon my
Understanding, I shall conclude you as bad as she, and both alike shall share
^y Resentment. Therefore come, I say, and Answer directly to the Question, for
I will know it, and from you Huswife -- You that are her Confident, as you call
it, -- Her Help-Mate to Iniquity: What, because I am Old, and cannot go withour
a Staff, you think I Am Blind and cannot See your Roguery without a pair of
Spectacles, -- but I have found you out Mistress, I have so. --


Luc. Found us out; I hope, Sir, you don't think that she would Act, or I
Assist her, in any thing, that might blame her Conduct to Mr. Friendly, who you
know to be a worthy Gentleman, and one, I Am sure, I have heard you say, you had
rather dispose of her to, then any Gentleman in the Country; and if so, I don't
know why I should conceal their being together, since their designs are
Honorable.


Sir Tho. How -- What -- Designs, and Honorable -- What -- without my
Knowledge -- without first consulting me -- that am her Father -- whose sole
Right it is to dispose of her Person; and dares he, without my Leave, my
Consent to Authorize his Pretensions, make Love to her, under my roof? Were he
a Prince, and would Endow her like a Queen, and should but think of such a
thing, without my License; I would Lock her up till the Green Sickness had made
her Eat her passage to him through the Wall, tell her so, do you hear --

Exit.
Luc. Indeed old Gentleman, you would a found neither Locks nor Bolts could
have held her, -- Had she not been disobliged by his making you acquainted with
his Love, for she is such a Friend to Disobedience, that she thought your being
privy to the matter, a sufficient Reason to discard him her Favor, so that now
I hope you may have a very Dutiful Child of her.

Enter Floria.
Flo. Was not that my Father that parted from you?


Luc. It was.


Flo. Was he in Humor?


Luc. Yes, a very ill one, at the news of your proceedngs with Mr. Friendly; If
you think you shall dye for Love Floria, you may prepare your self a Halter,
and swing to Elysium as soon as you please, for your Father has forbid the
Banes; had he been first acquainted with your Lovers Inclinations, you might
have eaten a Sack-Posset after a Matrimonial Grace together, according to
Custom; But you are now to be Locked up, and feed upon Chaulk and Lime, he
says, till you have eaten a Passage to your Spark through the Wall.


Flo. I Am glad to find him so resolved, I shall now dispose of my self to my
own liking; for had he been inclined to the Match, I was resolved never to ^ee
Friendly more, for affronting my Love, by seeking me at my Father's Hands, when
that had assured me to him before.


Luc. Why, Would you not have your Father have a Power in disposing you where
he likes best?


Flo. Yes, if he could Command my Love; But since that is decreed by a higher
Power, I must go with my Heart whether he will or no; nor shall he have any
Vote where he has no right to give it.


Luc. An excellent Piece of Sophistry to encourage Disobedience.


Flo. You may call it what you please. But in following the dictate of my
Passion, I obey the Power that made it; and my Duty toward Heaven is to be
considered before that to my Father I take it; I shall therefore Marry without
his Leave or Knowledge.


Luc. Why without his Knowledge?


Flo. For the pleasure of what thou call'st Disobedience. Why thou forget'st
sure that I am a Woman as thou art; the Sex that first taught it to the World,
would have me degenerate?


Luc. O, by no means, Madam; pray go on, have a care of being unjust to your
Self; whatever you do; and for the better encouragement to proceed, Know, your
Father has sent this day to Mr. Friendly to forbid him the House, or approach
it at his peril.


Flo. I know it, and by the same Messenger, I bid him me et me to night at the
Garden Door; I scorn the Old Gentleman should have the start of me.


Luc. And pray what is the business of your meeting? To contrive how you may run
away with him?


Flo. That Is as he shall deserve, if he is as fond of the Vagabond Trick as my
self, and will be contented to take me for my own sake, without any other
Consideration*


Luc. You Will be contented to pack up your Awls; that is a clean Smock, with a
Suit of Night Clothes thrust into a Band-box, and bid Good-buoy Daddy; -- Well
speed thee well, since thou art resolved upon a mad Trick, I think indeed, thou
could not have chosen an honester Fellow to play it with.


Flo. You may call it a mad Trick, but any other had been a foolish one,
witness my Mother-in-law, had she been Governed by her own Will, my Father had
wanted a Comforter in his old Age; and she had been better supplied with one in
her Youth.


Luc. Go, you're naught, I Will talk no more with you.

(Offers to go.
Flo. Nay, take me with you, for if you leave me here alone, I shall think
worse than I talk.


Luc. Come along then, Mad-Cap.

(Exeunt.
SCENE, Back Door of a Garden.
Enter Lady Testie, and Betty in their Hoods and Scarfs. Bet. Good dear Madam,
don't afflict your self, since you are bound to your Misfortune, resolve to
endure it, and make your self as easy under it, as you can; your Grief will
make you sick in earnest else.


Lady. I wish it could, that I might not be troubled to dissemble it; to keep
my self from the loathed Bed of that old nauseous Wretch, my Husband; who not
contented to Wed me to his withered Carcass, has also forced me from London
from my Friends, from every thing that might give me Comfort in my Misery, to
dwell here in a Country Town, where nothing is to be seen but such as himself.


Bet. Yes, Madam, here is something better to be seen then himself; -- What
think you of the Gentleman you saw alight yesterday at the Inn Door, when you
stood at the Window.


Lady. O don't name him, unless thou could give me another sight of him; and
yet I fear if I had my Desires, 'twou'd serve me only to beget another, and
another; still succeeding, till I had asked my Ruin. Did you enquire who he is?


Bet. I did, Madam, but cannot learn; he came from London, and it is thought by
the People of the House, he stays for Horses, to convey him farther.


Lady. Could not ye have contrived to have spoke to him?


Bet. I could, Madam, had you so commanded me; but 'to what end?


Lady. Nay, I know not, tho I wish he knew my Heart, and were inclined to take
me from my Plague my Husband, who, I Am resolved never shall enjoy me, tho I Am
sure to be the unhappiest of my Sex.


Bett. It Is impossible, Madam, I think, for you to hold out much longer; you
have kept him this Month (ever since you were Married) from your Bed, with the
pretense of Sickness, he now grows impatient, and begins to believe it is
designed through the want of Love.


Lady. I care not what he believes -- ha! -- Who Is that yonder?


Bett. Where, Madam?


Lady. Yonder, coming down the Walk.


Bett. 'Slife, Madam, it is the stranger we was talking of.


Lady. Put on your Mask.


Bett. Did not you say, you had a mind to see him, Madam.


Lady. I have, and speak to him; but he must not see my Face; but see, he makes
this way.

Enter Woodvill, and Jack the Boy.
Wood. Boy, which is the House?


Jack. Sir, they go in at one of these Garden Doors to it; but they are so much
alike, I cannot go directly to it; I Will knock, if you please, at one of them,
and enquire.


Wood. What Is here? Women, and Masked, I thought Vizards had been of no use at
night, out of London, where they did not serve to invite us to a Face that had
a mind to be seen; Jack, when you have found Sir Thomas Testies, wait for me at
the end of the Walk.


Jack. Yes Sir --

(Exit.
Wood. Ladies, is not the pleasure of the Walk lost, without company?

Not to us, Sir; we think Two enough, and are best pleased when we are by our
selves.


Wood. If one of you has hid a different Sex under her Petticoat, I could
believe you; but Two Women can only talk themselves into an Imagination of a
Pleasure; they can never produce without the help of one of us.


Lady. Ay; -- What Is that, Sir, which we of our selves are not able to possess,
without your assistance.


Wood. Lookyee Child, if you have an inclination to be informed, leave your
Friend and come with me to the other end of the Walk, and I Will show you
presently.


Lady. I do nothing without her, Sir; If you cannot instruct us both together,
we'll not Edify alone.


Wood Both together; -- I Will give you leave to seem as ignorant as you please,
if you have a mind not to understand me; but don't put me upon impossibilities;
-- If you will retire with me one at a time, I Will promise you shall be both
satisfied, before I leave you.


Bett. But how shall we be sore you will keep your Promise? Have a care you don't
put your self upon impossibilities.


Wood. 'Egad that is true too; I think I have been a little too forward; but
come my Dear, what I want in Power, you shall find I have in Will, therefore
don't lose time.


Bett. Who do ye speak to?


Lady. Aye; suppose we had a mind to take you at your word, which of us would
you choose first? for I don't see yet to which you are inclined?


Wood. Nay Gad, that I cannot tell; unless you agree to pull off your Masks, you
keep my Fancy in the dark.


Lady. And it is too light I think to show our Faces, after the liberty we have
taken -- How, or which way shall I contrive to keep him? If he leaves me now,
perhaps I may never see him more; and he has staid too long already, to part
with him for ever; think quickly, what shall I do?


Bett. I cannot tell how to advise you, Madam, unless you take him this back way
into the House with you; when we have him there, we shall have more time to
consider what is best to be done.


Wood. Ha! What are they doing, drawing Cuts who shall be first served; Ladies,
pray let no Dispute arise between you upon my Account; I Am resolved to go with
her that is nearest my own temper; let the coldest Constitution withdraw, till
the other and I have been a little better acquainted, and then --


Lady. Hold -- Hold, Sir -- Don't raise you Expectation too high, tho the
freedom we have given our selves, may cause a suspicion of our Conduct, you
will not find us to be what you imagine.


Wood. I Am sorry for that; Are you what you seem to be, Women?


Lady. Yes, but not fit for your Conversation, for we are Honest, yet were we
willing to be otherwise, our Age would want a Charm to provide for us.


Wood. Honest, -- and Old -- What, do ye study al^ays to my Courage, before I
come to engage -- Ha! -- Here Is a plump smooth Arm; and your Speech does not
betray any want of Teeth; and so far I Am sure, you are Young enough.


Lady. You Are Ear has deceived you then; for I want all my Teeth but three.


Wood. If you had two less than you have, I Am sure you have a Colt's-tooth, as
long as there is a Stump left; therefore that shall be no hindrance.

[Pulling her.
Lady. Hold, I say, where would you have me?


Wood. Have thee, Child, why to the next Green Bank we come at: It Is true, the
Place is not so well, as I could wish it; but Love will make hard shifts. --
See your Friend knows your Mind, she keeps her distance.


Lady. Forbear; and if it is in your Power to behave your self like a
Gentleman, follow me, and as you shall deserve expect a Return; But first, for
your Instruction, know you must put a Constraint upon your temper, and seem
Virtuous, which I believe will cost you some pain to do.


Wood. Seem Virtuous What a Pox does she mean by Cramping of me? -- Hark'ye
Child, does your Friend use to task her Lovers, as Conjurers do the Devil, with
things Impossible.


Bet. Whatever task she designs for you; it is such, I believe you would very
willingly go through, if you knew the Reward would follow.


Wood. Say thou so; I'gad I Will endeavor to guess, to Encourage me.

Whatever it is; it cannot but easy prove,
Enjoined by Beauty, and repaid with Love.
Exeunt
ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Friendly and Floria. Friend. HOwe'en you are pleased to reproach me,
Madam, I beg you will think better of my Love; than to believe it has a Thought
beyond your self: It Is true, I asked you of your Father; But I ask't nothing
else but you, that he might witness for me to the World how much beyond it I
preferred you.


Flo. Well; I Will not enquire any farther what your Reasons were; but whoever
has me must receive me from my own Gift, and consequently without a Portion;
for Sir Thomas parts with nothing that he can keep to himself; therefore, think
before it is too late, how Love and Marriage may agree with you, where there is
a Fortune wanting to support it.


Friend. I beseech you, Madam, If I am not wholly lost in your Esteem, name it
not; I have Estate enough to make us both happy, if Fifteen hundred Pounds a
Year, and an Unexhausted stock of Love can do it.


Flo. Well; for once I Will try to believe you; and in the mean time, take this
Confession, which I did not design so soon should a spoke my Inclinations, if I
am not yours on those Conditions, I here promise never to be another.


Friend. O say that again; that the Sound may dwell in my Ears, and the
business of my Life shall become my study to repay it.

Enter Maid.
Maid. O Madam, Madam, Sir Thomas has been enquiring for you all over the
House, and has sent me and the rest of the Servants to look for you.


Flo. Then I must leave you.


Friend. Unhappy Chance! Speak, my Soul, when shall I see you again?


Flo. I know not; -- When next I hear from you, If I can, I Will send you, word,
till then --


Friend. Ten thousand Angels dwell with my Love.

Exit Floria. Enter Jack. Boy, where is your Master?


Jack. I left him here, Sir, when I came to you; and he ordered me to come to
him to the end of the Walk, but I cannot find him.


Friend. Our staying so long, I believe, has tired his Expectation. Come, let us
go home.

Exenut.
SCENE II.
Enter Sir Thomas Testie and Betty. Sir Tho. Patience! What do thou preach
Patience to me for, when thou know I have not so much left, as will stay the
Roasting of an Egg.


Bet. asid^.) Had you as much as would go to the building of Paul's, I Am afraid
you would have occasion for it.

It Is very true, indeed, Sir, I must needs say, but where there is no Remedy, we
must bear it: Alas! my poor Lady has a double Portion of Sorrow; First from her
Sickness, and next to be kept from your Embraces, for sure, Sir, whatever you
are pleased to think, I Am confident she loves you.


Sir Tho. Do thou think so; I wish she would give me a Reason to think so, for to
me her sickness seems Apocryphal; she will take nothing, though the Doctors and
Apothecaries every Day send in as many Pots and Glasses, as would Kill or Cure
a whole Parish.


Bet. Alas, Sir, Her weak Stomach loathes every thing that is offered her, if it
has but the Name of Physsick.


Sir Tho. Why, what is to be done then?


Bet. Sir, She has to day, through my persuasion taken a Cordial to strengthen
her Stomach; and if to Night I can but get her to use something that is prepared
for her, it will put her kindly to rest, and make her clear another Woman by
the Morning.


Sir Tho. Say a so, my Girl; How thou reviv'st me What is it? Prithee tell
me, what it is?


Bet. That your Worship shall know time enough; for if it agrees with her, it
must be your Care hereafter to see that she has it often, or it will endanger a
Relapse; In the mean time, Sir, your best care will be to Command the Family
early to Bed; for if she be disturbed in its Operation, it may prove of
dangerous Consequence.


Sir Tho. I Will warrant thee, my Girl, not a Dog in the House shall dare to wag
his Tail after she is in her Chamber; but pri^hee see that she has enough of it;
and if she shows any disgust in the taking of it, bid her think of me, and that
for my sake she must be prevailed upon.


Bet. aside.) Nay, If she has the Pleasure (I should have) in using an Old Man
as he deserves, she will not forget ye; Though she will have a stronger Motive to
think of something else, when she is in the Arms of a Young Fellow that she
likes. -- Pray leave every thing to my management, and good Sir, be going early
to Bed, and pray our Endeavors may prosper.


Sir Tho. Pray -- Ay, Ay; Thou needs not fear but I Will pray, and I hope my
Prayers will be heard, for I am not often troublesome.

Exit.
Bet. So -- I hope I Have secured my Ladies pleasure, without the Fear of being
disturbed; Now to prepare the matter.

Exit. Enter Lady Testie, led in by Flora and Lucia.
Lady. Oh, Oh, -- lead me to a Chair; Oh, Oh, -- Betty, come hither.


Flo. Will your Ladyship be pleased to have any thing.


Lady. No, no; Nothing but a little more Air, if you please. Oh, -- Oh, --
where is Sir Thomas, I thought I heard him with you, when my Fit took me?


Luc. No, Madam; If you please we'll send for him.


Lady. No, it is no matter; -- My Distemper is such, it makes me fancy I see him
oftener than I do.


Luc. I believe you see him oftener then you wish.


Flo. You may be sure of it; Can any Woman look upon a Husband of his Years,
without fancying she is taking leave of the World; were I in (...) Condition,
'twou'd make me set the Sexton to Work without the help of a Physician.


Lady. Oh -- Oh --. (aside to Betty.) What have you done with the Gentleman?


Bet. I Have disposed him, Madam, as you bid me; but I fear it will be Impossible
to conceal him there till bed time, from every body's knowledge.


Lady. I know it. Sir Thomas therefore I design shall see him, and bid him
Welcome.

Enter Sir Thomas Testie.
Flo. 'Slife, here comes my Father, Lucia! How shall I avoid him?


Luc. The best way as I know, is to take your Hoels, Floria.

[She's running off.
Sir Tho. How now! What are you scared at the sight of me? Come back here
Gentlewoman, come back I say, thou Pimple of the Primitive Itch; that like thy
Grandmother Eve, will eat of no Fruit but what is forbidden thee; Pray, when is
it forsooth, that we are to dance at your Wedding, hah? -- Have you got the Man
in the Mind yet, you are ready I know, let him come when he dares.


Flo Sir, I Am never ready to do any thing I ought not to do; If I have received
the Addresses of Mr. Friendly, 'twas because I thought I saw nothing in him,
that you could disapprove, and his Love and Fortune claimed that return I but
justly made him.


Sir Tho. God so, Madam; I beg your Pardon, get you to him then, if you think
so; Go, get you gone to him then as fast as you can go; and let the Parson
mumble ye together, that you may dance your Matrimonial Jigg without loss of
time. Do you long to be Moulding of Cockeldebread, hah; get you out of my
sight, Hussy, go; Hold, now I think again, you shall not go, you shall stay
here and hang at my Girdle like a Horn-Book, till I have learnt ye through.


Luci. You Would sooner crack your Brains with her, Old Gentleman; that I can tell
you.


Sir Tho. But here, -- here is my greatest Grief, all my other Afflictions are
doubled and trebl'd in this one; and this will sink me to the Grave; How do
thou my Love? Is there no hopes of Comfort? Must I for ever live without the
use of my self; or, like Tantalus, have the Meat at my Nose, and yet be forbid
to Eat.


Lady. We must endeavor to be satisfied, my Dear a little time will, I hope,
restore me to my Health; you must needs think it is an equal trouble to us
both, though my Sex forbids me to express so much of it as you do.


Sir Tho. Say'st-a so; then I will be satisfied, if thou do love me, I Will
wait with more Patience than a Patriarch for thee.


Bett. You shall not need, Sir, I hope, if my Lady will be but ruled.


Lady. O my Dear, this importunate Wench would not let me alone, till I had
promised to take something to night, that she had provided for me; tho I fear
the very sight of it will disorder me.


Sir Tho. The sight of it; why, what need you look upon it, take it in the
dark; and if you can but get it into your Mouth, consider the good it will do
you, and I Will warrant you will get it down, therefore pray take it.


Lady. Why then I will my Dear, since you will have it so, pray come hither and
lead me in; but hold, I have something to say to you first; Betty has been a
very good Girl, and for that reason I will forbear to chide her, for her fault
in admitting a Man to my House, with any design, without my Knowledge.


Sir Tho. A Man! What do thou mean, hah? What Man, hah? What Man?


Bett. What Man, Sir -- Why -- a.


Lady. Hold your Tongue, and don't go about to excuse it.


Bett. With all my Heart; for I Am sure I Am at a loss to justify it.


Lady. 'Twas a fault, knowing how much Sir Thomas and I are your Friends; and
would rather promote a a good Husband for you; than he your hindrance*


Bett. Say you say -- Lies the Game there --

[Aside.
Lady. This Gentleman, my Dear (for so it seems he is, and the only Son of a
very good Family) has for tuned to fall in Love with this foolish Girl, and
comes unknown to them to Court her for a Wife; therefore pray Sir Thomas, if
you can be any ways assistant in forwarding the matter, do it in consideration
of her faithful Service to me.


Sir Tho. With all my Heart -- Betty -- Let me see him, and his Love shall not
want encouragement, and if, my Life, thou do recover thy Health, I Will make
her a Fortune that shall deserve a Gentleman.


Lady. Go Betty, bring him hither -- (Aside.) -- and be sure you caution him
how to behave himself, but keep him still, in ignorance of us and our purpose.


Betty. I will, Madam. --

(Exit.
Flo. What a dear Friend Dissimulation is to a Woman, how many moldy Kisses
has it saved my Mother-in-law, from my Fathers old brush Beard.

(Aside to Lucia.
Luc. Why, do you think she dissembles?


Flo. Aye, as sure as thou do, when you cry you will never Marry, and had
rather have me for a Bedfellow, than a Man.

(Betty goes to her Lady, and whispers. Enter Woodvill and Betty.
Wood. It Is well they have taken pity of me, and suffered me to breath in a
larger Room; I wish they may have Charity to reward my Sufferings, for I have
been thrust into such a hole, that no body but a Beau, who feared being drub'd
for Cuckoldom could a hid himself in it.


Lady. How! Not speak to him, say you?


Bett I could not, 'twas impossible, Madam.


Sir Tho. Odds so, a very handsome young Fellow; Sir, your Servant, you are
welcome, very welcome; and had I seen you before, and known your intent of
coming hither, your Reception ssiou'd not a been concealed, what ever your Love
was.


Wood. (Aside) Reception and Love, What a Pox does the Old Fellow mean, my
Fairy Mistress, I picked up by Moonshine, has not brought me here, sure, to
make a Jest of me: (Looking on Floria and Lucia.) Ha! there they are by this
light a Couple of pretty Creatures; Now would I part with any thing butmy
Manhood to know which of 'em I Am first to have a Fall with; for by their
Discourse, I found they had both a mind to try my strength.


Luc. I perceive by the Lovers Silence, my Uncle has put him out of Countenance.


Flo. He looks like a likely Fellow; if he does not want a Tongue, Betty has
made a good choice.


Sir Tho. Come, Sir, you seem surpised that I Am privy to this matter; don't
fear, I Am a Friend to her you love, and for her sake will assist you in this
Business, farther than you imagine.


Wood. (Aside.) Egad, may be so, and perhaps farther than I desire; I Thank
you, Sir, But however you came by your Knowledge, if she that brought me here,
had been as wise as she ought to be, she had known you were no more fit to be
acquainted with my Business, than you are to do it.


Sir Tho. Say you so, Sir; perhaps I mistake your Business, I thought 'twas
Honorable, 'twas so represented to me; Sir, if it is otherwise, there is the
Door, it is as wide as 'twas when you came in, you shall have no Coupling here,
if you come not I God's name.


Wood. (Aside.) What does the old Blade mean, and who a Plague does he take me
for?


Bett. Sir, as you hope to have a happy end of this Adventure, Humor my
Master's mistake, and seem to be what he would have you.

Aside to Wood.
Wood. What he would have me -- What Is that -- I -- I --

(Looking on the Maid, and sometimes on Sir Thomas. ask your pardon -- Sir, --
if l've been unmannerly -- I thought my Design had been concealed, but since it
has come to your Knowledge, I hope you will be my Friend as you have promised, for
there is but few I care to trust with a Secret of this Nature.


Sir Tho. The fewer the better; what need any body know of it, but we that are
present; but to prevent what may happen if they should let us come to a
conclusion, What say you, will you to Bed together presently?


Wood. With all my Heart, Sir, this Minute if you please. (Aside.) I-Gad this
will be rare; I wish I knew how these witty Rogues have plotted to gain the Old
Man's helping Hand, to the Friendly Office of Pimping for me. But I find my
Business is not to be inquisitive; I Am only to suffer my self to be led to the
Feast; and when every thing is prepared, then fall to.


Sir Tho. Hold your Tongue, Huzzy, and say no more; it shall be as I Would have it
--

(Aside to Betty.
Lady. Indeed my Dear I think she is in the right; so sudden, and at this time
of Night; it will not be decent.


Sir Tho. Decent; Fiddle Faddle; strick while the Iron's hot; many accidents
fall between the Cup and the Lip; if she don't know what is good for her self, I
do; she will make me a Curt'sie for it to Morrow Morning, and Than] me; go go,
presently to Amen the Clerk, and bid him bring Mr. Small Tithes, the Vicar.


Wood. The Vicar, Sir. --


Sir Tho. Aye? Why? -- He Will do it as well as the Parson.


Wood. I-Gad, but he shall not, Thank you.


Sir Tho. Go, Go Girl, make haste, when it is done, it is done, you know.


Wood. Aye, and I know any thing the Parson does, is not to be undone by any
body but the Hangman, and I Am not ready yet for eigher of their Noozes.


Lady. So, my Spark has made a fine hand on it; he has spoiled his Part by over
acting it. -- Betty, think of some way as you go along to bring himoff again.


Bet. If I should, I fear he would be gravelled again, for it is Impossible he
should find his way thus in the Dark.


Wood. Now I think again, Sir -- a -- a -- a -- I must entreat you defer this
matter till a Canonical hour; for I Am under an Obligation to a Deceased
Grandmother, not to marry out of one; and tho Dead I durst not disobey her
Commands.


Sir Tho. Why, that is well said; I love thee the better for it: But prithee let
it be suddenly.


Wood. The sooner the better, Sir.


Sir Tho. What say you, to morrow Morning then.


Wood. With all my Heart. -- By that timesure I may hope to be able to expound
this Riddle.

[aside.
Sir Tho. Very well. Niece and Daughter, entertain the Gentleman, while I wait
on my Wife to her Chamber, and I Will be with you again presently, Sir, your
Servant.


Wood. Sir, I Am yours.

[Exit.
Lady. Betty, hearken to their Discourse; and if any should happen to our
prejudice, be ready to step in, and break it off.

(Exit with Sir Thomas.
Bet. I will, Madam.


Wood. aside.] I wish that Old Fellow had not taken his Wife away with him; for
my Temper at this time has inclined my Heart more to the making of Cuckolds,
than the Destruction of Maiden-heads.


Flo. Now for a formal Bow, and a set Speech; these Country Sparks approach all
Women as they do their Godmothers, when they ask 'em blessing.


Luo. I believe you are mistaken, Floria; I fancy that Air will produce something
more than you imagine.


Flo. I should a fancied so too, if he had not made Love to my Mother's Maid.


Wood. Now the Enemy is drawn off, Ladies, I hope we come to a Close Parley
again; for since I have seen your Faces, it has cost me more Pain to hold my
Tongue, than 'twou'd a Maid of Forty, when she was bid say after a Parson for a
Husband.


Flo. Say you so; Well, and now it is at Liberty, what have you to say?


Wood. Nay, Gad, I think not much, for we were agreed in a manner before we
came hither; and what remains now, is to be done, Child, and not said. -- Come,
set aside that Improper Face upon the Matter, and show me the way to your
Chamber; I know you like me, or you would not a taken so much pains to a
brought me here


Flo. Luc. Ha, ha, ha.


Wood. What a Pox do they laugh at?


Flo. Prithee Cousin, what does he mean?


Luc. Nay, I must ask you that, who brought him here.


Flo. I bring him here!


Wood. Poch; You brought me here between you, and you shall share me between
you as far as I can go; therefore prithee let us Understand one another without
more a do


Flo. Luc. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Wood. You may laugh, Ladies; but if you force me away with your Jest, I'gad
you shall cry for me, before you have me again.


Flo. Luc. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Luc. Good, Sir, have a Modester Opinion of your self, than to believe the loss
of you would cost either of us one Tear, though we were those very kind Fools
you say we are.


Flo. No indeed, Sir; We are not so enamored of your sweet Sex, (tho we must
own here is a Scarcity in this Place) to weep for any Man, tho he promised more
to recommend himself, than any of your Mothers making.


Wood. Pray Madam, don't disparage my Mother's Huswifery; I think this Leg with
the true proportion of my Body, shows she made as good Instruments to raise
Succession to the Family, as any Dutiful Wife in the Parish; and let me tell
you, if you were not worse than an errant Widow, you would say so too, but it is no
matter; such as I am, I shall find somebody will know what it is to be thankful
for me, and for them only will I keep my self, and so Ladies your Servant.

[Going.
Flo. Luc. Ha, ha, ha, ha


Wood. Perhaps you think I will not go.


Luc. Sure he is Mad.


Flo. I believe so too; Good, Sir, let me ask y^ one Question. You seem to be
very well acquainted with us; Pray how long is it since, and where did our
acquanitance first begin?


Wood. Come along with me, and I Will show thee the Place presently; and as
forgetful as you seem to be now, if I don't give thee Reason to Remember it
these Nine Months, I Am a Capon.

[Pulling her. Enter Betty.
Bet. I Am afraid I Have staid a little of the longest. Sir, perhaps you are weary
with riding, and had rather be a-bed; if you please I Will light you to your
Chamber.


Luc. He does talk indeed as if he wanted sleep.


Bet. Madam, I believe my Lady will want you and Madam Lucia's help, for she is
grown exceeding ill.


Flo. I rather believe, Gentlewoman, you want our absence; which should we
afford you, I fear will give you occasion to be worse than you ought to be

[aside to Betty.
Bet. Pray, what do you mean, Madam?


Flo. Your pretended Lover here wears too thin a Disguise to pass upon us, tho
he has upon my Father; a Gentleman of his Sense is seldom so fond of Marriage,
to have such an honorable design upon a Chambermaid.


Wood. Ha; what is the Meaning of this? I honorable designs upon any body!


Bet. I hope, Madam, you don't think I Would admit of any Thoughts but what are so,
I Am sure, Sir, if you have any you never owned them to me, therefore pray
Winking on him. don't let your Carriage be such as may make the Young Ladies,
or any body else believe I would suffer any evil Proceedings; and if you think
so, you will find your self mistaken, I Will tell you that, for all I Am a Poor
Servant, Sir.


Wood. The Devil's at Work for me, I find, by this Wenches winking, but what I
must do or say to help the matter forward, I Am a Dog if I can tell.

Enter Sir Thomas Testie.
Sir Tho. Sir, my Wife continues very ill, and I cannot wait on you, but I hope
you will be so kind to Command my House however; Betty, see the Gentleman has
every thing that is fit to make him welcome: Come Girls, come here is no business
for you, therefore leave the Lovers to themselves, come.


Flo. Sir, be pleased to leave us here; and we'll wait upon you in a moment.


Sir Tho. To what end forsooth?


Flo. Sir, we have some reasons to suspect this Gentleman's pretensions to
Betty; and before, we leave him alone with her, my Cousin and I will enquire,
if you please, a little more into the Truth.


Sir Tho. Humph -- You enquire -- What -- What would you enquire? ha! -- What
would you enquire? -- What a mighty concern you have for every Morsel that goes
by your own Mouth; You enquire -- You have such an Itch to know how matters
stand toward Matrimony; you are for examining every body how it is with them --
Pray walk in, Pray do, -- You enquire.

Ex (Manent Bett. and Wood.)
Wood. Harkee Damsel, you that can tell, now the Coast is clear -- Pray let me
know what is my business here; and and how am I to be employed to Night?


Bett. What your Business will be, Sir, I can only guess; but mine is to light
you to a good Bed, and clean Lumen; a Bedfellow I cannot promise you, but
should you happen to find one you like, I hope you will remember your Benefactor.


Wood. Aside) Well hinted that I will, and to assure thee I Will keep my word,
there is earnest for thee; -- But may not I guess who this may be?


Bet. That you may, Sir, and be deceived; -- But if you hit the Nail on the
Head, I must not tell you.


Wood. Come, thou shall tell me; and tell me against thy Will; I Will ^orce thee
to it --

(Offers her Money.
Bett. I must not indeed, Sir, but if you will follow me, I will endeavor to
carry you, where you shall inform your self.


Wood. Will thou, that is better still;

Sure at the last we shall this Clew unwind,
At least the Ball if not the Bottom find.
(Exeunt.
ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Friendly and Robin, Servant. Friend. I Wish I could guess where my
Friend is: If we were in London, I should believe some Petticoat Companion had
picked him up; but here is no Traders; and for any other Woman, he has not had
time to fit her for his use: -- Robin, bid that Country-fellow without come to
me.


Rob. Yes, Sir.

[Exit. Enter Hob.
Friend. Hob, Can thou carry this Letter to Sir Thomas Testies House for me?


Hob. Yes, Sir.


Friend. Do so; and give it to Madam Flora; but take care no Body sees you
deliver it.


Hob. Yes, Sir, -- But must I car it to Night, it is very dark?


Friend. You must go immediately.


Hob. I hope Sir, there is no difference between you and Sir Thomas?


Friend. Why do thou hope so?


Hob. Why truly, Sir, I do hear there is; and if so, I shall not greatly care to
meddle or make between Friends, that I must tell you, for it is but an
unthankful Office; besides, you know Sir Thomas is a Man that is very cursed; and
if he does but respect I concern my self between you, may hap he may take the
Law of me.


Friend. Pish, the Law of thee, no, no, I Will secure thee from any harm.


Hob. Very well, Sir, very well, that is as much as I can desire; but pray don't
take unkindly what I say; for you know no Man is willing to bring himself into
a primunire if he can help it.


Friend. No, no, prithee be gone.


Hob. I will, Sir, I will -- for*for -- Pray, Sir, be pleased to read the
Subscription for me.


Friend. 'Sdeath, how I Am tortured with this foolish Fellow? and I can send no
Body else, without being suspected; don't trouble thy self with the
Superscription, but deliver it as I bid thee.


Hob. Very good, Sir, very good; -- it is main dark; Would it not do as well,
Sir, if I should car it in the Morning? -- I had rather carry it in the Morning.


Friend. Why so?


Hob. Why truly, Sir, I Will tell you; -- At the lower end of Sir Thomas's
Orchard, one of our poor Neighbors, being in a dispariging condition, has gone
and Hanged himself: -- Now there is some does say who have seen him, how that
he walks by Night in several shapes.


Friend. What, and so you're afraid, are you?


Hob. No indeed, Sir, I Am not afraid, I thank Providence, I defy the Devil,
and all his Works.


Friend. A Pox upon thee then, get thee gone.


Hob. Though I must tell you, I have a great conceit that he will appear to me;
for you must know, to Morrow the Crowner's Quest does sit upon him, whereof,
de'e see, I am to be one; and who knows but he may have something upon ^is
Spirits that may make him break his Mind to me; and if so -- Let me tell you,
I Am afraid it will make a bad Day for some Body: For if Sir Thomas had kept his
Fences whole, may hap this Man had never been tempted to 'a gone into his
Ground to 'a Hanged himself: But be it as it will, I Will do your Business for
you; therefore pray take you no care, Sir.


Friend. Prithee about it then.


Hob. Aye, aye, I Will warrant you, I Will warrant you, don't trouble your self no
further.

[Exeunt severally.
SCENE II. Room, Table, Book and Candle.
Enter Woodvill, in a Nightgown. Wood. Adventures of this kind, that look with
the face of a Reward, make Expectation great and uneasy; but mine has been so
often jilted, since I Have been here, I begin to wish it Morning, that I might go
home and laugh at my self for my damned impertinent Curiosity -- Yet methinks
this Business should not end so, if this Virgin, Wife, or Widow, or what the
Devil she is I know not, (that does trick me) should suffer me to sleep to
Night, with a bare Pillow in my Arms; may she have the Curse of always lying
alone, and never know the use of a Bedfellow. [Sees a Book on the Table.] How
now, what is here, a Book? As I Am a Whore-master, an errant Pray'r-Book: Let me
see what Title does it bear -- The Crumbs of Comfort -- A Plague of your Diet;
-- Is that feeding for a Gentleman? -- Now have I a good mind to read and be
Converted; fall a singing of Psalms, and disturb the whole Family; -- But
that is to mortify my self now I think on it; I Will even go to Bed, and try to
forget 'em.

[Puts out the Candle, and is going to Bed. Enter Lady Testie, in a Nightgown.
Lady, So, now the Candles out, I may with safety venture: -- Sir, -- Sir, --


Wood. Ha! Who Is there?


Lady. A Friend.


Wood. What would you have?


Lady. I Am come for Satisfaction for a Wrong you have done in coming hither to
seduce my Mistress from me.


Wood. Your Mistress; Who are you?


Lady. A Gentleman.


Wood. Then good Gentleman, go and fetch a Light, and you shall have what you
come for presently; though the Devil take me, if I Am acquainted with either thee
or thy Mistress that I know of.


Lady. Sir, there needs no Light, the Dark is fitter for my Revenge, therefore
guard your self as well as you can, for I have more Swords than my own to
assist me.


Wood. Ha! Then I fear I Am fallen into the hands of a Villain, not of a
Gentleman; but come, I Am bound to try it, come on.


Lady. Hold, Sir, hold a little, 'Slise if he should make me smart for my
fooling, 'twou'd make but an ill Jest;

Pray, Sir, suspend your Fury a while, here will happen no danger, unless you
apprehend any from a Woman.


Wood. A Woman! -- I thought indeed the Voice did not found very much like a
Hero's, -- But how shall I know you're a Woman? You Have accosted me but odly.


Lady. Cannot you tell how to find that out?


Wood. I don't know faith, I could a done; I Will try.


Lady. Pray put up your Weapon first.


Wood. Aye, that I will; I think this is too sharp for a Woman's use, But why
came you in the Dark?


Lady. For fear you should not like me in the Light.


Wood. It must be a very ill Face that cannot recommend it self to one Nights
Lodging -- Prithee let me take a Kiss to sweeten my Imagination however:
[Kisses.] -- Ha, -- A plump smooth Lip, and a Breath sweet as a new plucked
Rose; -- Now say you are a Blackamoor if thou will, for nothing after this can
turn my Stomach.


Lady. Where are you pulling me?


Wood. Pulling thee, why to Bed.


Lady. Hold, not so fast; -- I Am come resolved to give my self wholly to you,
but e're I do so, you must promise me something to deserve it.


Wood. That I will; my Dear, any thing.


Lady. But will you perform what you promise?


Wood. Don't doubt it; What is it?


Lady. To esteem this Favor, as it is the first I ever granted to any, and in
return swear, to love me as long as you live.


Wood. Humph -- That Is a little hard, before I see your Face.


Lady. When I think sit to show it you, and it prove not a Tolerable one, you
shall be dissolved from your Oath.


Wood. That Is fair, as a Man can desire.


Lady. Swear then.


Wood. I do; By the dear Pleasure I Am going to possess; upon that Condition, I
swear to love thee, and only thee, to the end of my Life. -- (Aside) --
Whatever we believe of a Woman before Enjoyment, we seldom like 'em so well to
think 'em tolerable after it; so there is no great fear of my being forsworn;
Come, dear Rogue, come.


Lady -- (Aside) What a lightness do I wear to seem the thing I am not? Love is
too powerful in me to be this Airy thing he takes me for, and before I leave
him, I fear I shall betray it, which yet I would not do.


Wood. What means this Pause Child? I hope no foolish Qualms to check your
Reason.


Lady. No, Sir, Only a few Ejaculations before I go to Execution; and now
dispose of me as you please.


Wood. Then Heaven have mercy upon thy Soul, for I shall have little on thy
Body.

[Pulls her, and the Scene shuts upon 'em. Enter Sir Thomas in a Nightgown,
and Servant.
Sir Tho. Are you sure no Body has been here, to speak with my Daughter from
Mr. Friendly?


Serve. Not that I know of, Sir.


Sir Tho. No; nor no Messenger sent from my Daughter to him?


Serve. I cannot tell, Sir; I did not see any.


Sir Tho. Sirrah, stand you here and watch, till toward Morning, and see if
you can observe any Body walking about the House, whistling at the Windows, or
crying Hist! Ten to one I shall have my Blade a Evesdropping by and by, or some
Body from him; but it shall go hard but I Will spoil their business.


Serve. Sir, Sir, -- Yonder Is some Body with a Light coming down the Field.


Sir Tho. Stand still then, and observe.

Enter Hob, with a Candle and Lantern.
Hob. So; -- This is the House; -- Now let me see, how shall I go about to do
this same business? if this Old Fox Sir Thomas, should chance to spy me, he will
maul me for certain: But let me alone, I Will be cunning enough for him, I Will
warrant me; if he sees me, he must have more Eyes then two -- Hold, -- hold, --
Now let me see for this same Letter; -- Oh, here it is; -- For Madam Flo -- Flo
-- Madam Flora.

[Sir Thomas snatches the Letter.
Sir Tho. Where are you carrying this Letter Friend?


Hob. Letter, Sir.


Sir Tho. Letter, Sir, -- aye Letter, Who did you bring it from?


Hob. Bring it from, Sir; I brought it from no Body, not I.


Sir Tho. How came you by it?


Hob. By it, Sir? -- Why I found it in my Pocket.


Sir Tho. Found it in your Pocket; -- What did it grow there? -- Ha? -- Where
are you going with it?


Hob. Going with it, Sir; -- I don't know where I was going with it, not I.


Sir Tho. What do you here at this time of Night?


Hob. I cannot tell what I do here, Sir, not I; -- I Will go home, Sir, if you
please: -- God buy to you, Sir; -- I wish you a good Night:


Sir Tho. Hold, -- hold a little, Friend; let me reward you first for bringing
of it however.


Hob. Not a Farthing, Sir, indeed, I must not take one Farthing; for Mr.
Friendly charged me to the contrary, therefore pray don't offer it.


Sir Tho. O ho -- Did he so? But something I will give you however; pray take
that, and that, and that Sirrah.

[Beats him.
Hob. O Lord -- O Lord -- What do you strike me for? What do you strike me for? A
fore God I Will take the Law of ye, see an I don't; What do you go to Murder me?


Sir Tho. I Will Law ye, -- you Rogue; -- Are you their Letter Carrier? There Is
more for you, Sirrah.


Hob. Bare Witness -- bare Witness; -- see an you don't pay for this; O Lord! O
Lord!


Sir Tho. Sirrah, see him out of my Ground.

[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Woodvil and Lady as from Bed.
Wood. O Night, thou darling Friend to active Love, keep still thy Mantle
spread, and hide us from the World. Beauty needs no light but its own, to see
the way to Joy; -- Why? -- Oh! -- Why my Love, will you be gone so soon? The
few short hours we have loved, has given us but a taste of what we might possess.


Lady. Do not ask me more than I Am willing to give; what I have already done,
might sure convince you that I had rather stay had I not more weighty Reasons
so soon to leave you.


Wood. Go not till the Day is broke.


Lady. That you may see my Face; -- Go, I should chide your Ungrateful
Curiosity; Will you contribute nothing to spare my Blushes? Think what I Have
done, the Jewel I have parted with; and no security for your faith, but a
promise of a moment's growth, what should 'a been dearest to me, like a Toy,
I Have thrown away; and to complete me wretched, you may desire my Ruin.


Wood. Can it be your Ruin to make my Happiness complete?


Lady. Whilst I Am Concealed, should you prove unkind, 'twould rob me but of
Life; but if Exposed; take from me, Life and Reputation.


Wood. You allay my satisfaction, when you doubt my Love, and both that and
Honor tie me to secure your Reputation.


Lady. If you have either, I conjure you do not ask it any more; when it is fit
you should know me better, Love of it self will betray me to you; -- for 'twill
not be in my power to conceal my self.


Wood. Tell me then, when I shall be so blessed?


Lady. I cannot; but if in the mean time, it will stay your Curiosity to be
admitted here another Night, perhaps I may be persuaded to Morrow or next Day
to write to you, till then farewell; I know your Lodging.


Wood. O do not stay till the next day, let it be to Morrow, and to Morrow, and
every Morrow; let every day be fed with Expectation of the approaching Night,
and every Night like this; but with a more lasting Ecstasie.


Lady. How unwillingly my Legs convey me hence; and yet they trembled when they
brought me here; my Virgin fears hang heavy on my Limbs, and feebl'd all my
Joints! O Love how strange are all thy ways! With dread thou leadst us where we
long to be, and when possessed of what we come for, with double pain conveys us
back again.

[Exeunt. Enter Flora and Lucia.
Flo. Prithee don't rail at him any more; thou have done enough already to
convince me you love him.


Luc. I could almost be angry with you for saying so; though I know you don't
think so.


Flo. Indeed I do; and should he Marry Betty to Day, (as I Am sure that is but a
pretense to farther some other design, he has in coming here) it would break
thy Heart.


Luc. You think me very amorous sure to be so smitten with a Man at first sight?


Flo. You cannot help it if you are.


Luc. But why do you think I am?


Flo. I Will answer you with another Question: Why would you not let me sleep
last Night for Talking of him?


Luc. Who began it?


Flo. I did; because I thought the Discourse would please you.


Luc. For what reason?


Flo. Because all the Evening you did as you do now, Blush when any Body spoke
of him,


Luc. Who can forbear it, to hear you Talk so?


Flo. No Body indeed in thy Condition; -- Come prithee Lucia don't vail thy
Heart from me; for if thou do, I Will certainly make thy Case known, and tell
Betty what a Rival she has.


Luc. I find it is but a folly to say any thing to you; but do you really think
he can be so in Love with that foolish Girl? -- A Man, to all appearance, so
much above a Thought so low, methinks it is an Injustice to him to believe it,
such a Mien and Air in all he says and does, so free and unaffected his
Discourse, it creates a Delight in all that hear him.


Flo. His Wit indeed is very engaging.


Luc. Ay, is it not? And when he addresses -- Though it is not in a style so
awful as the nicest Virtue would expect; yet it Charms beyond the Oratory of a
God.


Flo. Ha, ha, ha, ha.


Luc. Why do you Laugh?


Flo. Only at your not being in [Lucia holds down her Head, hides her Face with
her Fan, and runs away. Love, Madam. What a Tyrant is this little Deity? Not
satisfied with having us poor Virgins in his power, but must show us in our
Fetters; you need not run away from me Lucia, for if thy Malady increase, the
Cordial of a Friends advice will soon fetch thee to me again.

As she is going off, Enter. Enter Hob, and Country People with a Man
Dead-Drunk.
Hob. Come Neighbors, bring him along, and set 'en down here, for he must be
examined, before we part with 'en.


Flo. How now Friends; What Body's that you have got?


Hob. Body, -- This no Body forsooth; this is a Carcass, one that was a wicked
Body.


Flo. What has he done?


Hob. Why he has Hanged himself.


Flo. Alas poor Wretch! What was the Cause?


Hob. The Cause; -- Why he is Married, and has a Wife and six Children.


Flo. Is that a Cause for a Man to Hang himself? What is he?


Hob. What is he? Why he is a Jacobite, and he Hanged himself, because he would
not pay double Taxes.


Flo. Pish; --

[Exit.
Clown, Come Neighbor Hob, you that can tell, pray let us know what we are to
do.


Hob. Why we that are the Crowner's Quest, the Law says, must enquire how he
came by his Death.


Clown, But of whom must we enquire?


Hob. Why, of they that can tell, and no Body knows that so well as himself.


Clown, Well, but he is Dead.


Hob. Why ay, so it seems; and he must be Buried if we say he must; and if we
say not, it may be not neither.


Clown, I suppose that is as we shall find him guilty; therefore pray tell me,
Neighbor Hob, whether you think a Man that Hangs himself, is guilty of his own
Death, or no.


Hob. Why truly that is a hard case to judge, Neighbor Clumsey.


Clown, I think now, that he is guilty.


Hob. Hold, hold, take heed, don't be too rash; -- for your Conscience must be
Umper in this Case: -- Look'ee -- I put this Point to you now, Whether every
one that Hangs himself, is willing to die?


Clown, I, -- I, -- Sure he is willing.


Hob. Now I say no, for may-hap he might he Non Complementus, and if a Man be
Non Complementus, he don't know his own Mind.


Clown. That Is true indeed; but now being Dead, pray who must answer the King
for the loss of his Subject?


Hob. Marry he that Hanged his Subject: That was himself.


Clown. Nay, nay, 'twas the Halter that hanged him.


Hob. Aye, in some sort it did; but that was in se Offendendo, for it may be he
went to break the Rope, and the Rope held out in his own defense.


Clown. But is not this same Rope-maker now that made the Rope, in some danger?


Hob. No, no, the Rope-maker can be in no fault; -- for do you see, when he makes
the Rope, he goes backwards, and how can he see before, what shall follow
after? -- Nor indeed is the Rope in fault, for may be he might urge the Rope
Solus Volence, as the Law says, neither is he himself in fault, for may be his
Time was come, and he was born to be Hanged: -- Therefore I do conclude that he
was Conscious and guiltless of his own Death.


Clown. Why then Neighbor, he may be buried.


Hob. O, of great reason, always he that is alive must die, and he that is dead
must be buried.


Clown. Yet truly I think in my Conscience, he does not deserve to be Buried.


Hob. O you speak partiously Neighbor Puzzle-pace, -- not deserve to be
Buried, I say he deserves to be Buried alive, that shall Hang himself;
therefore don't Take of that.


Clown. Well, but what must we do with his Clothes?


Count. His Clothes, why they are the Hangman's.


Clown. Why then he must have 'em himself.


Hob. Hold, hold, -- This is a shrewd point of Law, and must be well handled;
Did he make a Will?


Clown. No, he died detestable.


Hob. Why then they fall to the right Heir Male; for look'ee do you see, the
Female can inherit no Breeches, unless she can prove she wore them in her
Husband's Days.


Clown. But suppose he has no Heirs at all?


Hob. Why then they go to the chief Mourner, -- and look'ee do you see, that will
be I, I will take his Clothes; here now I begin with his Cloak, -- there
now*let every one take a quarter of him, and I Will follow with doleful
Lamentation.


Clown. Why then, we have done Neighbor, have we?


Hob. Ay, ay.


Clown. How dolefully you look Neighbor?


Hob. Why, aye; it is the fashion so to do; I Am chief Mourner, I must be sad.

[Exeunt Omnes. Enter Roger and another Servant.
Rog. Art thou sure he is Drunk?


Serve. I Am sure I left him Dead-drunk.


Rog. Then I believe they take him for the Man you gave out hanged himself in
Sir Thomas's Orchard to fright the Boys from stealing the Fruit.


Serve. I believe so too, therefore prithee let us make haste for fear they bury
him alive.


ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter Woodvill and Friendly. Friend. IT IS strange you should not see her Face,
but when you tell me you love her, I must laugh at you; what if you have
enjoyed her, 'twas in the dark, and in the same minute your fancy painted her a
Venus, you might has supposed her a Dowdy, and yet have been more just to her.


Wood. Aye, but I Am never such an Enemy to my pleasure, to suppose her the
last, when I Would more reason to believe her the first; but ^^unck you mistake me,
if you think it is her I love; no, that is impracticable after Enjoyment; dear
Rogue, it is the Married Woman I told thee of, that has charmed my heart; and I
have some reason to believe hers is not impenotrable.


Friend. Why, d'eo believe it? You durst not sure tell her so?


Wood. Why not, her Complexion promised me a hearing, and having an opportunity
as I was coming away this Morning, through the Garden where she was walking, I
spoke to her, and told her, the seign'd Love I owned last Night for her
Servant, was a Plot I had bribed her Maid to assist me in, to get an
opportunity to confess the real one I had for her.


Friend. Very good; -- and no doubt but she beliv'd you.


Wood. She seemed at first a little surpised, but before I left her, I
prevailed so for, to gain a promise to see her again; and how much that may
conduce to a good conclusion, you may imagine.


Friend. How do you know, but this may be the same Woman you lay with last
Night.


Wood. Prithee don't call my Judgment in question; can thou believe me so raw
a Gamester not to know a Maid from a Married Woman.


Friend. I know not what you may do; but I Am sure it is a Secret I Am yet to
learn; but come you must go along with me, Flora has sent me word to day will
be kept a Wake before their house, and if in the Crowd she can get loose from
her Father, we may chance make work for the Parson.


Wood. I Am sorry for it, I had rather help you to make work for the Midwife, I
don't care to meddle where the Church is concerned.

[Exeunt. Enter Lady and Betty.
Lady. Is not that he, see.


Bet. It is Madam.


Lady. Follow him, and give him this.


Bet. To what end, Madam; you have found him false already.


Lady. Dispute not my Commands, but fly. [Ex. Betty. He has undone me, if he
leaves me not, which I too justly fear; for he has already discovered the
Inconstancy of his Sex, and what he promis'dd me unknown at Night, in the
Morning broke to me, when he took me for another.

Enter Betty; How now! Did you give it him?


Bet. I did, Madam; and he will see you he says.


Lady. Do not think he suspects me to he her that was with him last Night?


Bet. No, Madam; but believing me to be confident to both her and you, he has
bribed me to keep you ignorant of each others Loves, and assist him in your
several In^rigues.


Lady. Perjured base Villain! Why am I fated to Love, and not the Infection on
my Lips, that when his flattery would feal my ruin, he there might meet his
own.

[Exeunt.
SCENE II. A Fair.
Enter Old Hob and his Wife, with Benches to set at the Door and Forms. Wife.
Come, Husband, good now make haste; the Town will be full of People, before we
shall get fitted.


O. Hob. Don't trouble thy self Wife, every thing within Doors is ready; and
there is nothing wanting without but the Sign to be put up, and look'ee, that
shall be done present; Hob -- Hob --


Hob within. What say you Father?


O. Hob. Go and Tap th'Ale, quick, quick.


Hob. Aye, aye Father.


O. Hob. There -- Now he that will drink good Ale, let e'n come to th'Sign
oth'Potlid. Come, Wife, let us to our business within.

[Exeunt. Enter Friendly and Woodvill: Sir Thomas, Flora, and Lucia at the
Balcony.
Friend. If these Disguises will let us stand unsuspected, we may be able to
attempt something to gain my Flora's freedom.


Wood. Ay, and lose thy own.


Friend. Yonder she is with her pretty friend; and old Argus that sticks to
'em, like Murder to a troubled Conscience.


Wood. (Aside.) Ha! Are these the Jewels of such virtue? One of them I Am sure
has none to boast of; nor will the other, I believe, be a Martyr for her Honor.


Friend. Now Ned, tell me, How do like my Mistress?


Wood. Like her?


Friend. Ay, like her?


Wood. Very well for a Mistress.


Friend. A Mistress!


Wood. Ay, why do think I can like her for any thing else?


Friend. I do, Sir, and think my self happy in my Choice.


Wood. I Am glad you are so pleased, Sir, I can have her at a clieaper rate.


Friend. Ha! What dice mean?


Wood. What do you mean?


Friend. Not to hear any thing dishonourably spoken of her I Love, though by my
Friend.


Wood. Hum -- (Aside) -- Nor ought I indeed in honor, if it was she that did
me the favor last night, though it be to my Friend; Come, prithee smooth thy
Brow, Franck, thou know I have but a loose Opinion of all Women, which but
seldom will let me speak well of any, though they deserve it.


Friend. Good Manners should correct that ill Custom in a Gentleman, and for
your own sake, pray be persuaded to forget it.


Wood. Grave Sir, I shall Edify -- (Aside) -- in the knowledge of my Mistress,
I hope, the next time I have her at Blindman's-Buff, or she shall keep my Head
in the Bag*


Sir Tho. Come Gentlewomen, if you must see the Pastime, you may have as fair a
Prospect of 'em here, as you can in the Crowd, and with less danger to your
Reputations.


Luci. Our Reputations! In what can they suffer, amongst such people as resort
here?


Sir Tho. Why these are Men, and fitter for Women's use than Finical Fops, that
have only the appearance of Men; mere outsides, the signs of Men; and such I
have known a Woman fond of.


Luci. It Is very hard Sir, we cannot be where we like best, I think we are at
Age to look after our selves.


Sir Tho. Aye, if you had but Grace to take care of your selves too.


Flo. Women at our years, know how to make their choice; or if we did not we
are seldom instructed by ill usage.


Sir Tho. Eh -- eh -- What, -- what are you a chattering Magpye, he -- do you
want to have your Legs at liberty?


Flo. If I do, I can have patience; for I shall not want it long, unless you could
confine my inclinations too.


Sir Tho. Let me come at her, -- let me come at her, -- what does she prate
again to me? You are one to be entrusted with your self indeed, look'e here
else, witness this Letter, I got scouting from your Lover to ye; de'e see here
I cannot read it now for want of my Spectacles, but here he says how that she
has given him a new life, from the last favor she was pleased to grant him; --
Hark'ee Hussy, what favor was that you were so pleased to grant him, tell me,
for I will know what that favor was?


Flo. I don't know what you mean Sir?


Sir Tho. What, not by the last favor? -- Before God i will have her searched; --
i will know how far the honor of my Family was concerned in that last favor of
hers; -- I will Gentlewomen. -- And sure I shall find an Expedient too, to keep
you asunder, if Locks, and Bolts, and Bars can do it: -- Odso well remembered,
let me see if my Doors are all fast, and then if you can shufle Love through
the Keyhole, withal my heart.

[Exit.
Luci. Prithee see Flor, if I Am not mistaken, on of those men yonder looks like
your lover Friendly in disguise.


Flo. And the other the very sperk that lay here last night, I now begin to
think Friendly employed him about that piece of Knight Errantry; to get news
from our enchanted Castle, or to try if thou had Chrams enough to engage him
to yoke with his friend.


Luci. Why do you think so?


Flo. Because there are few men that marry in this Age; but are ashamed of
their fortune; and would therefore draw in as many of their friends as they can
to Countenance their folly as they call it.


Luci. I have a better opinion of your Lover, Flora.


Flo. He Is obliged to ye Madam.

Enter Hob with a blue Apron on.
Hob, Ch'm coming, Ch'm coming; your Servant Mr. Friendly, I Am glad to see you;
you are welcome to the Fair.


Friend. I thank the Honest Hob.


Hob, I should know that Gentleman, -- Master Woodvill I think.


Wood. Aye Hob, how do do?


Hob, O Lord Master, how de'e do? Faith I Am glad to see you with all my heart;
Lord a mercy upon us; how strangly you be grown since you have been over-Seas;
-- Come, pray sit you down -- Master Freindly, -- Come pray stay, and drink one
Pott before you go.


Friend. Prithee let us sit down, or this fellows impertinence will make us
observed.


Wood. What do thou do with an Apron Hob?


Hob, A Dod, I put un on but just now; Father will do as Meighbours do, and
every one in the Town a most sells Ale on Fair day, but now we sell several other
sorts of liquor; and Wine too an occasion be.


Wood. Wine?


Hob, Aye, all sorts of Wine.


Wood. Say a so, bring us some Claret then.


Hob, Claret Sir, we have no Claret, we must not sell Claret; it is against the
Law, now you may have some of your Port, your red Port now, or your white Port,
or such sort of Stuff.


Wood. Such stuff as thou have then, Prithee bring us.


Hob, Yes Sir, -- (is going and then turns back.) -- Now in my mind Sir, --
what do you think of a little Sack, a little Sack now, and some of your Sugar
in it, is main good.


Friend. Pirthee bring, what thou like best thy self -- For I Am sure 'twill
please no palate but thy own.

[Exit. Hob.
Wood. I fear Frank, your project will not answer your end, for I see no way of
getting at the Ladies.


Friend. There is but little hopes indeed Ned, since I see the doors shut, and
the old Knight in their Company; fortune may do something unexpectedly to
befriend us.

Enter Hob with two Black Potts, a Trencher with Tobacca, Pipes, and Bread and
Cheese upon it.
Hob, Ch'm coming, ch'm coming, here Sir.


Wood. Where is the Sack?


Hob, Sack Sir, -- Od I don't know, I thought you said you had rather have Ale
-- Ale is indeed much wholsomer now, for your English Stomaches; -- for my
Part, i would rather have Ale now; Master Woodvill, bite a bit before you drink: --
Come and mean time i will put a little Sugar in the Ale; and make it as good as I
can for you: -- Come Sir, against your dispose'd --

[He drinks all.
Wood. Thank ye Hob, this fellows kindness will poison me before I go hence.


Friend. Not whilst you have such a Taster; for I don't see that he intends to
leave you any.


Hob, A Dod it is main good Sir; -- will you have the other Pott Sir?


Wood. No, prithee drink this too, and then fetch us a Couple.


Hob, Yes Sir, -- I will, I will.

[Drinks and Exit. Enter Countrymen.
Sir Tho. above, Come my merry Countrymen, every man take his Lass, and give us
a Dance or two, and then we will have the Cudgells, out.

Enter Hob with the Potts of Ale, stares on the Dancers and Dance -- minds not
the Gentlemen.
Clow. Yes, an't like your Worships, we are all ready, come Scratch strike up.
-- Dance.


Hob, Aye marry Sir, well done Ralph; set to u'n Joane, set toe'n.


Hob's Mother within. Hob, Hob.


Hob, Ch'm coming, ch'm coming (he Sings) Toll, ^^ll, in Mary, Sides all now,
sides all.


Friend. Hob, Hob.


Hob, Ch'm coming, ch'm coming Master, toll, loll, etc.


O. Hob, within. Hob, Hob.


Hob, Ch'm coming, ch'm coming, what a Plague ails my Father trow? and old
Fool! Udsbled he makes more a noise, -- set to now, William, ah rarely done; in
Mary, O dainty Mary, turn her about now John, now, now, a murrain, you're quite
out: Hold, hold, ye are all out, look Ralph should a cast off, and while John
had turned Mary about, Thomas should a led up Nan, and Joan met Ralph at Bottom
again, mean while John should a sided with Mary; and then Mary should back to
back with Ralph, and then Thomas had come in again in his own place, and so all
had been right. -- Come begin again, strike up scratch, Toll, loll, doll, loll,
etc.


O. Hob within, Hob, Hob, Where be ye?


Hob, Ch'm coming, ch'm coming, what the Devil cannot you be quiet a bit, toll,
loll, etc.

Enter Old Hob.
O. Hob, Hey day, hey day, this is rare sport, I God, i will strap you, ye base
Rogue you; must you be danceing here, and your Mother and I at work.

[Striks him.
Hob, Hey day! what is the matter now? what, must I be beat all the days of my
life?


O. Hob, Ye Graceless Rogue, mind your business then, do ye, yonder is your poor
Mother within a scoreing and a scoring till she sweats again, and no body to
draw one drop of Beer:


Hob, I don't care a farthing, I will not draw a drop more if you go to that, do
your worst, and take your Course.


O. Hob, Sirrah, come ye in, and don't ye stand dancing here, don't ye.


Hob, I will not go in, so I will not, if that trouble yo, I will Dance, and Dance
again -- Angerly, toll, loll, etc.


O. Hob, Aye you are an untoward Boy as e're was born; Mercy forgive me for
begetting the.

[Exit. Enter Roger.
Hob, Marry come up, what is here to do I trow?


Clow. Here Is the Cudgells an't like you, will your Worship please to have us
begin.


Sir Tho. Aye, Aye, by all means make have Roger, and bring forth the Hatt and
the Favor.


Roger, Here it is, an't please ye.


Sir Tho. Hang it up there, and he that wiens it, let him wear it. The first
Sommersetshireman that breaks a Head, here is half a Crown for him to drink; and
he that breaks that Rogue Hobs head, shall have another.


Hob, Shall he -- look'e, he that breaks my Head, shall have somewhat to do,
i will tell you that, let 'en be who he will, he shall earn his Money, Ecod ill
rib 'en -- And look'e, to begin here i will take up the Cudgel, -- And now let
the best man here, take up the other, an he dare, if he be a Sommersetshireman,
let 'en be a Sommersetshireman, -- I sight for Glostershire; I don't care who
knows it.


Sir Tho. At him, at him there -- What, is there no body dare venture upon him?
Neighbor Puzlepate, take up the to 'ther Cudgel.


Puzzle, Not I (...)'t please you, I have enough of 'en already, he broke my
Head but last week.


Sir Tho. Roger, -- Sirrah, do you take up the Cudgel, and thrash him, do'e
hear -- thrash him soundly Sirrah.


Roger, I cannot promise that Sir, I Will do my best, I Will break his head if I can
in Love; and if he breaks mine, much good may do him.


Friend. This is as I could wish; If Hob does but get the better of the Combat,
the Testy Knight will certainly be provoked to come down, and then we shall
have sport.


Wood. Prithee let us encourage him then; O brave Hob, now for Glostershire Hob.


Hob, I warrant ye Master, let me alone.


Friend. Here Hob, there is an Angel for thee.


Wood. And break his head Hob; and I Will give the another.


Hob. Don'te fear Master, I God I Will anoint 'en.


Rogger, Do if thou can; I don't fear thee Hob.


Hob, S'bleed, I Will dress thy Jacket; I Will dowse thy Somersetshire Coat for
thee.


Roger, Come on then.


Clown, Obrave Hob.


Clown, Obrave Roger.


Clown, Obrave Hob.

Here they play and Hob breaks to'thers Head.
Clown, Obrave Roger.

All the Clowns Hollow!


Hob, I God I Have don't; I Have don't Faith.


Sir Tho. Foul, foul, foul.


Hob, Fair, fair, fair.


Clown. Here take the Hat Hob.


Sir Tho. You lie, you Dogs, 'twas foul.

All Clowns Hollow!


Friend. Stand upon thy Guard Hob, the Kinght's coming down to thee.


Hob. Is a, let 'en come and welcome; here I Will stand, I Will take no other than
St. George's Guard; if he let us drive at me, Fore-god I Will hit 'en over the
Sconce, if he was a Knight of Gold.

Enter Sir Thomas from the Balcony.
Sir Tho. Where are these Bumpkins? -- Now who dars say it is fair.

I say it is foul.


Hob, I say it is fair.


Sir Tho. So is that too Sir Thomas and Hob fights; Hob break^ the Knights
Head; the Clowns hollow and cry sair; then the Knight draws his Sword and beats
Hob and the Clowns off.


Wood. O brave Knight!

He has bestirred himself I says, with as much courage, as if he fought for
distressed Damsels.


Friend. So he has I thank him: Here Is liberty for you Madam unexpected, if
you will embrace it come down quickly.


Wood. Your Jaylor's gone Ladies, and the doors open, come down and we'ell
knock off your Fetters.


Flo. To put on stronger of your own


Wood. Not I faith, I Would have every Woman use her legs as she pleases.


Friend. So shall thou thy tongue hereafter; But prithee let me Confine it now,
for we have no time to talk.


Flo. What is it, you would have of me Friendly?


Friend. Remember your promise Madam; and spare that question.


Wood. I don't know what his design is Madam; but here is a Parson planted hard
by I can till you, I believe a purpose to do mischief.


Flo. I own my promise to marry you, but do not remember I ever obliged my self
to time.


Friend. Be it still unlimited, I Will never press it against your will: All I
ask now is, to deliver your self from Bondage.


Flo. What say thou Lucia, shall I go?


Luoi. If I thought you would take my advice, I Would give it you, but I Am sure you will
adhere to none but that of running away, therefore prithee make haste and
begone.


Flo. Farewell then.


Luci. But have thou the Conscience to leave me behind, to be punished for thy
sins?


Flo. Aye, if you can have the heart to let me go without ye.


Friend. Make haste Madam, your Fathers returning.


Flo. We come, we come, fly good Lucia.

[Exeunt from the Balcony.
Wood. It Is pity that Marriage should be the end of this Adventure, it looks so
like Whoring; I wish the old Fellows Wife had been in their company, to a got
me a Stomach to the Business.

Enter Flora.
Friend. Upon my Knees I should receive you Madam; but the place --


Flo. Will not let us lose time in talking -- where is my Cousin? Where Is my
Cousin?


Friend. Leave her to my Friends charge -- He Is an honest Gentleman, and will
take care of her.


Wood. A Pox of your honest Commendations, let me speak for my self, Madam,
here is your Man.


Luci. What to do? Not to follow our Friends example I hope.


Wood. No faith Child, I Am better principl'd; thou shall have me upon easier
Terms.

[Exeunt Omnes. Re-enter Sir Thomas.
Sir Tho. There -- there you Rustich Rogues, -- you hard headed Dogs, I think
I Have at last met with your Sculls; I believe I have notch't some of your
Noddles for you; I have made you pay for shedding my Blood.

Enter a Maid and Roger, and Servant.
Maid, Oh Sir, Sir, We Are undone, Madam Flora and Madam Lucia.


Sir Tho. What of them?


Maid, They are gone Sir.


Sir Tho. Gone where?


Roger With a Couple of Gentlemen Sir, No body knows where.


Sir Tho. The Devil go with 'em -- which way are they gone?


Servant, They have taken toward the Road Sir, but they cannot be got far.


Sir Tho. Bid every one of your fellows take Horse immediately, and ride
several ways; -- Have they slipped through my fingers at last. -- Make haste you
Dogs -- (beats 'em) make haste fly, fly.

Enter Lady Test and Betty.
Lady, If reason had a power in Love, I should not fann this fire within me, to
make a Ruin of my Peace, -- But oh I strive in vain, my ungoverned passion
drives me on, though sure Destruction follows me: What is it a Clock?


Betty, Four Madam.


Lady, Look if you can see him coming.


Betty, He Is just here Madam.


Lady, O could he bring a heart like that he will find here; how happy would this
meeting be? -- But that is impossible.

Enter Woodvill.
Wood. So much for my honest obligation; we have housed they Lads; my friends
business is done: -- Now let me look after my own --; it is something past the
time, -- ha!


Lady, You see Sir, how much you have prevailed upon me, am I not punctual?


Wood. Pardon me Madam, if I seem not so, in suffering you here before me; a
fault nothing but a businss of no less concern than Life and Death, should a
made me guilty of.


Lady, So, there is one lie already. -- (aside) -- What business? The carrying
away Sir Thomas's Neice and Daughter.


Wo^d. How the Devil came she to know that?

(aside.
Lady, Come, since I know you were engaged in that pi^ce of Chivalry, you may
spare the expense of an invenion to hide it.


Wood. It Is true Madam; I did give some little assistance in that affair to the
service of my friend, but --


Lady, But the extent of your desire is only to engage my heart i will warrant.


Wood. It Is the last of all my wishes, from the first moment I saw you at
Church --


Lady, At Church?


Wood. Aye, at Church Madam; -- pray Heaven she goes to Church (aside). 'Twas
there I first beheld you; and there promised never to think of any other Women.


Lady, My pretended flekness has kept me from Church, ever since I Have been
here; but I believe if he could have thought I had been to be found at Rome, he
had said he had seen me there; -- Well Sir, I will not question the truth of
what you say: But if I should be inclinable to believe you, what would you do
to deserve it?


Wood. All things that is possible my Unartful Passion will Compel me to.


Lady, All things but Constancy; and that I fear is not in your Passion.


Wood. It is the only sin of my Affection, if it be one to love forever.


Lady, O Heaven! that truth dwelt in his words. (aside) -- Swear -- Swear that
thou love me.


Wood. I do by all --


ady Hold, -- hold -- I know there is nothing but he will Swear: And break it
when he has done; and yet he must swear it; -- for there is such a Charm in the
Cheat; that again I must hear him, and be again deceived.

Enter Betty and whispers.
Betty, How then, I must leave you, when next I see you.


Wood. You Will perhaps again be taken from me; let me not part with you now.


Lady, I must be gone.


Wood. Then take me with you.


Lady, What to do?


Wood. That we will talk of by and by.


Lady, But the time will be so short.


Wood. That we shall have no time to talk; -- Well hinted I Gad -- [Aside, On
then my Dear, that we may not lose that little we have.

Enter Sir Thomas with Constable and Watch.
Sir Tho. A Pox upon you, for a company of uncultivated Clods; where de'e hall
me?


Constable. Sir, what we do we are bound to; it is our Office, therefore pray
forgive us


Sir Tho. You are not going to Execution with me, you ask pardon so like a
Hangman;


Constable. No Sir, Our Warrant is only to carry you before a Justice, and from
thence I believe to Prison: but where afterward I dare not say; but I am
afraid your Worships time is but short.


Sir Tho. Not so short as you would make it, you dund-headed Dogs, to be tried,
Condemned and Hanged in a Breath.


Constable. No Sir, I hope not; Tho your Worship made but quick work with poor Hob.


Clow. Aye, aye poor man; his head has done aching by this time:


Sir Tho. I Am glad of it; and had I my Sword, and my hands at liberty none of
your should trouble you long.


Clow. O bloody, bloody, away with him; this is bloody Neighbors.

All, Away, away with him.

[Eexeunt Omnes. Enter Friendly and Robin, meeting Probe the Surgeon.
Friend. So Mr. Probe, how de'e find your Patient?


Probe, Alas his Wound is nothing; his Scull is not so much as touched tho he
fancies it impossible for a cut with a Sword to be less than Mortal.


Friend. Poor Hob, you must still keep him ignorant of his Condition, and make
him believe it is dangerous; it may be of use to me:


Probe, I need not do that, his fears will not let him believe otherwise; let me
say what I can.


Friend. Robin, come let us go see if we can find Mr. Woodvill, for without his
help we shall hardly bring our Plot to perfection.

[Exeunt. Enter Woodvill and Lady Testy.
Wood. Not Jove in all his transformations, when he Ungodded himself for Mortal
Pleasures, had one hour of Love like me. O for a Night to Revel in; that the
Taste might be turned into a Feast; And my longing Soul be filled with delight.


Lady, Is not this Ecstasy feigned: And shall not the easy access you have
found to my heart, make me one day slighted for another.


Wood. Wrong not thy self with such a thought, -- there can be no other but
thee: Thou Charmer tell me when shall I see thee again?


Lady, I cannot tell, this Evening i will endeavor it; and if it is possible I
will meet you here; -- tell then -- Farewell.


Wood. Farewell my Dear, Dear Creature.

Enter Betty with a Bundle.
Lady, Have you my things Betty?


Betty, Here they be Madam.


Lady, Give 'em to me; i will put 'em on as I go; if he takes not the nearest way
I may meet him at the lower end of the Walk.

Exeunt. Re-enter Woodvill, meeting Friendly and Robin.
Friend. O well met; I find I might have looked long enough for you, had not
chance brought me to a sight of you: -- Come Robin the things, quick, qu^ck.


Robin, Here Sir, here.


Wood. How now, what are these for?


Friend. Nay, prithee ask no questions; But if you will do me a piece of service,
come on with this Holy outside, you must suffer a Transformation Ned; from a
Town Bull to Parish Priest.


Wood. That Is the same thing still Frank; But to what end must I wear this
Mantle, for Iniquity?


Friend. Cannot you guess?


Wood. Not I faith, unless it be to mock Matrimony; And if that is the business
come on, as fast as you will, I Am for you.


Friend. How! I did not think thou had been so well acquainted with Religion,
to be able to act any thing of it.


Wood. Yes, yes, to serve a friend upon occasion Franck; I have studied it a
little.


Friend. And a very little, nor that for any affection thou had to it, i will
be sworn, Come, come along.

[Exit. As Woodvill follows, Enter Lady Test at the other side Masked -- And
pulls him back.
Lady, A word with you Sir, -- If the care of some departing Soul does not make
you too much in haste.


Wood. Thou dear Creature, have I met thee here again? And art thou come to
perform they last promise; and let me see that beauteous Face of thine?


Lady, Why should you be so curious? for if it prove handsome you know the
engagement you lie under.


Wood. What, to love thee? -- It Is impossible my dear for me ever to love any
body else.


Lady, So, -- What de'e do with this habit then? -- I fear there is something
to be managed in this disguise, not of a piece with your vows.


Wood. This habit Child; why I procured it a purpose to try if by it is
assistance I could find some way to get access to thee.


Lady, Thou lie thou Devil; and the Curse of broken promises pursue thee for
it.

[Exit.
Wood. Hey day! what is the meaning of this Divinity, if you bring me no better
fortune, you must go home and Cloak for the good Wives of your own Parish again.

To Levies Tribe they will part with any thing.
And thank the Saint that takes the Offering.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT. V.
SCENE. I.
Hob is brought in a Chair by some Country Fellows, his Father and Mother with
him. Old Hob, COme easy Neighbors, easy, set 'en down easy.


Mother, O my poor Child, how do thou do?


Hob, Worser and worser, I find I Am not for this Life.


Old Hob, Then I hope you will take warning, how often have I said. Hob says I
don't thee concern thy self; what business is it of thine? Let every Tub stand
upon its own bottom; but thou thought because --


Hob, Pray now don't ye talk to me, pray now don't; Don't ye vex me so: It Is a
strange thing you cannot let me depart in peace.

Enter a Parson.
Pars. How de'e Neighbor? how does your Son?


O. Hob. Ah Sir, the poor boy I Am afraid will dye.


Hob, Who is that Neighbor?


Clown, It is the Parson come to Pray with thee Hob.


Hob, Ha! What do say, the Parson? -- O Lord, I hope it is not come to that
is it? -- O my heart, O my poor heart will break; O -- O Lord.


Pars. Come Patience, Patience Neighbor, have a little Patience -- And I hope
as you have lived a good Christian, you will take care to dye so.


Hob, Aye sure Sir, that I will, under Mercy; for if I live I will dye a good
Protestant.


Pars. That Is well said, then the first thing you must do, is to forget and
forgive.


Hob. Forgive? -- What must I forgive him that has knocked out my brains? Why
then may hap he will do so again.


Pars. If he does, you must forgive him.


Hob, Aye, -- why then if I must, I do forgive him.


Moth. Hob, Child here is Mary come to see thee.

Enter Mary.
Mary, How do find thy self Hob.


Hob, Ah Mary, I cannot speak to thee.


Moth. Poor heart; -- do try to speak to her child, for she is thy Wife and no
other.


Hob, I know I Am sure to her, -- and I do own it before you all, I ask't her
the Question, last Lammas; and at Allhollows-tide we broke a piece of Money;
and if I had lived till last Sunday, we had been asked in the Church.


Moth. Ha poor wretch I always thought 'en to pretty to live -- Mary, go and
kiss 'en Mary.

[Mary goes and kisses him.
Hob, I do desire you all present, to take notice of my last Will and
Testimony. -- I have forty Shillings in a leatherpurse under my Beds-head,
which I do bequeath unto Mary; And the ball'd-fac'd Heifer that I bought at
Tukesbury* Fair, I do bequeath unto Mary; -- And my new leather Breeches, which
I bought against Whitsontide: I do bequeath unto Mary; And my Bible, and new
Pitchfork, and Tobacco-box, I do bequeath unto Mary: Mary, come and kiss me
once more, Mary you may never kiss me again.

Enter Probe the Surgeon.
Probe, How now, what is the matter; -- how do do Friend?


Hob, Dead Sir, -- I Am a Dead Man.


Probe, How Dead! Thou art the first Dead Man that ever told me so; let me feel
thy Pulse.

[Feels his Pulse.]
Hob, O Sir, they do beat, beat, like any Durm.


Probe, O your Pulse beats very temperate.


Hob, Do they Sir?


Probe, Aye, aye, you're better than you was a great deal.


Hob, Am I indeed Sir?


Probe, What have you given him to eat?


Hob, Nothing Sir, I have eat no kind of thing: Sir Thomas sent a Doctor here,
and I believe he had a mind tof amish me, he gave me a sort of stuff here made
of Barley; -- Barley Porridge I think they call it; 'twas no sooner in but out
again; it runs through a man and does no manner of good.


Probe, You must have some thing to strengthen him; what have you a mind to?


Hob, I don't know Sir; I could eat something fit for a man in my Condition; --
a little somewhat Roast; -- what de'e think of a little Roast-beef now; -- and
a little Pepper and Vinigar to make it Savory, may hap I could get a bit of
that down.


Probe, O a very good thing for a sick man; let him have it, and give him some
Sack now and then; there is half a Dozen Bottles within, which Mr. Friendly sent
to comfort him with.


Hob. Has a, -- God bless 'en -- *Ha! he is a good man -- Mother give me a
little Sack, will ye pray now do.


Probe, Well, how de'e find your self now?


Hob, Ha, -- ha -- add I don't know Sir, -- methinks I Am pretty hoddy now as
'twere.


Probe, That Is well, why then let him drink another Cup.


Hob, Shall I? -- Why so, I will then -- Mother give me a sup or two more --
He -- he -- he.

[Belches.
Moth. Ah much good do thy precious heart; how do do now Child.


Hob, Ha -- add I Am fine and spract now.


Probe, Pough, -- you will do very well again; I Would have you try to get up, and
i will come and see you again anon.


Hob, Thank you Sir, heartily; -- Sir, Sir, pray take the Parson a long with
you, I don't care to see 'en here, a looks unlucky methinks.


Probe, Aye, aye, I will.

[Exit with Parson.
Hob, Mother I Will try if I can walk a bit.


Moth. Do then stand up.


Hob, Pray lend me my Breeches Father.


Moth. O don't be too bold good Hob.


Hob, Give me a little more Sack [Drink] -- It Is good Sack Mother, pray lend me
the -- O Lord.


Moth. Get on thy Cloths first, good Child.


Hob, I Am, I Am, very fainty, -- I wont venture too soon Mother.


Moth. Don't then, sit down, and let them carr thee in again.


Hob, Aye, so I will.


O. Hob, Come help Neighbors.

[Exeunt Omnes
SCENE. II.
Sir Thomas in Prison. Sir, Tho. I have misfortunes enough to send me into the
other world, without a Halter; I need not swing thither for a Rogue not worth
the Money the Rope will cost; -- but if I be hanged, it shall be a day of
mourning for somebody.

Enter Wood vill habited like a Parson.
Wood. Save you Sir.


Sir Tho. And you too Sir, have you any thing to say to me?


Wood. Yes Sir, I hear you are to be tried for Murder, and as the Fact appears
to me, you will suffer for it.


Sir Tho. Well, and what then?


Wood. I would know in what state, you are in, and if you are prepared for
Death as you ought to be.


Sir Tho. You know; -- What with that Face, -- prithee get some hair on thy
Chin first -- boy -- thy outside will beget no veneration in me.


Wood. My inside will not I Am sure -- [Aside] -- Sir, I expected another sort of
treatment from a man in your Condition.


Sir Tho. Why, what is my Condition Cobble Conscience?


Wood. Do ye know where you are a going?


Sir Tho. No nor you neither Sir, for all you get your living by it.


Wood. This way Sir, will not convey you to Heaven.


Sir Tho. Why then I Will go to to'ther place along with you.


Wood. And is this all the Preparation you intend to make for your Journey.


Sir Tho. Aye Sir, I shall go just as I am, without Boots or Spurs; you may
therefore spare your pains, if you please.


Wood. What an old Reprobat have I to work upon.

Enters Saywell and Friendly. dressed like a Lawyer.
Say. Your Servant Sir, I Am glad to see you in such good Company.


Sir Tho. It Is the Company Neighbor Saywell, that will bring me to the
Gallows; -- The Parson and the Hangman are the two last that take leave of us
there. Have you brought my Writings.


Say. I have Sir, and here is a Gentleman recommended to me for an able Lawyer,
that will settle your Estate as you shall think fit.

Enter Jailer.
Jay. Sir, here is a young Lady without, desires to see you.


Sir Tho. O it is my Wife, let her come to me.


Wood. I Am afraid the help I can give you, will do but little service, for he is
as much averse to a black Gown, as a Non-Con is to a Surplice: What have you
done with the Ladies?


Friend. They Are safe at my Aunt Friendlies.


Wood. Does Flora know of your Plott.


Friend. No, nor of her Fathers being here; nor durst I tell her, till I have
effected my design; for tho it is only for her sake, if I do get her Fortune,
yet t'wou'd displease her if she knew I but attempted it. -- Ha!

Enter Flora.
Flo. O, show me, show me, where on my knees I may fix, till my Tears have
washed away my Offenses; O Sir, forgive my Disobedience, that has I fear been
too much the cause of this most fatal accident.


Sir Tho. Hum, -- get out of my sight, -- get out of my sight -- Go get you
gone to your Rogue, that will have mehang'd, go and I Will provide for ye; --
I Will give you a Portion, Twelve-pence and thy Fathers Curse, be thine
Inheritance.


Wood. What a Pox is the meaning of all this?


Flo. O do not Curse me Sir, I have not deserved that, leave me a Beggar if you
please, but with your Blessing and I will be contented.


Sir Tho. What, bless thee for contriving to have me hanged? be gone* -- begone
from me quickly, or I will fist thee from me.


Flo. Do any thing Sir, so you will heat me; -- Let me clear my Innocence, and
banish me your sight forever turning to Wood. O Sir, I beseech you plead for
me, it is your Duty to Reconcile us, and yours, and yours turning [to Mr.
Saywell and Friendly]: And every good man's, to help the distressed.


Friend. I Am so amazed I cannot think what to do, if I discover my self to her
in this humor, she will not have patience to let me undeceive her.


Wood. So, I find our Plot is growing to an end already; How like two Fools we
shall look by and by, if they find us out in our borrowed shapes.

[Aside.
Say. Come, pray let me persuade you to hear her however, you are never the
farther from your Resolution.


Sir Tho. What can she say for her self, am I not brought here for Murder,
provoked to it by their invention, she and her Rogue Friendly, that she ran
away with; did you not run away with him Huzzey.


Flo. I did Sir.


Sir Tho. Very good; Come, I Will reason the matter calmly with you; and have you
not married him too, against my express Command to the Contrary.


Flo. No, Sir nor never will.


Sir Tho. Swear, swear that, and damn thy self.


Flo. By all my hopes of future Blessings, he is not my Husband; nor till
within this half hour, did I know of your imprisonment, or the fatal cause.


Sir Tho. If this be true.


Flo. If it be not let misery p^rsue me.


Sir Tho. Will you promise me not to marry him when I Am dead, for hang me I
suppose they will.


Flo. O do not name him, Death would be a thousand times more welcome to me,
than such a Husband.


Friend, So now I may go hang my self.

[Aside.
Sir Tho. Well, on condition that all you have said is true, I do forgive thee,
rise up and Heaven bless thee.


Friendly, Dear Ned, what shall I do.


Wood. Why, as thou said just now, hang thy self; for since thou can not
marry to cure thy passion, I know no other way.


Say. You will do well, Sir Thomas, for she has expressed her self a very dutiful
Child.


Sir Tho. She has so, and I will reward her for it, here is a Deed of Gift of
half my Estate, which I did once before design for her, but happening to fall
in Love at that Juncture, and marrying I altered my Resolution, here Sir, --


Say. Mr. Nonsuit;


Sir Tho. Come and witness this, the rest of my Estate I will settle upon my
Wife, and let the Writings be drawn as soon as you can.


Friendly, Sir, they shall be ordered immediately.


Sir Tho. Sir, your hand too.


Wood. Withal my heart; and heav^n give a blessing to it:


Say. Amen.


Sir Tho. There I deliver this as my Act and Deed.

[Delivers it to Floria.
Friend. So, I Am glad however I Have seen this done for her! tho she has
renounced me for ever.

[Aside.
Sir Tho. I wish I could have lived to a seen thee married; my death had been
more supportable to me.


Flo. I wish so to Sir, for I Am young and know not how the subtilties of men
may prevail, when you are gone that should advise me: But for fear this
Friendly should attempt me again, to make me break the promise I have made you;
I will this minute put it out of my power, and give my self to this Gentleman
Mr. Nonsuit, if he will please to accept of me.


Friend. Ha, accept of thee.


Flo. Nay, -- you don't deserve me, for not letting me know your designs upon
my Father, am I not fit to be trusted with my own welfare think ye.


Sir Tho. Oons!


Friend Forgive me Madam, and had I --


Flo. Nay, no Apology, I Am satisfied that I Am not obliged to your Plot for
what I have, but my own.


Friend. By all that is sacred I will deserve thee, if it be in Love to reward
this unexpected blessing, tell me you Powers, if there be any that knows a
happiness like mine; how shall I express my Joy.


Sir Tho. Woons, what is all this?


Wood. O good Sir, forbear swearing; it is an hollowed sound, and my ears cannot
bear it.


Sir Tho. Rot you and your ears, you Canonical Pimp, Confussion I Am cheated out
of my Estate too, as well as my life.


Friend. No Sir I will take care your Estate shall be disposed of according to
your Act and Deed; and you may live to now if you please, and enjoy your
liberty.


Flo. Which you had never wanted (Pardon me Sir) had you given me mine.


Sir Tho. Patience give me Patience.


Say. In troth, Neighbor, -- it is the best Remedy you can have; even make use
of it, and let that seem your choice which is not now in your power to help.


Sir Tho. What would you have me do? Would you have me give her to him?


Say. Aye, and your Blessing too, or they will be happy without it; an Estate is
a good step to it, and that you have given 'em already; and there few Children
in this Age, that think their Parents can add any thing more.


Sir Tho. Come hither, -- Take her, and make her --


Wood. Any thing but a Wife, or I forbid [Woodvile interposes. the Banes.


Sir Tho. You forbid the Banes.


Friend. What Is the meaning of this?


Wood. Look'ee Frank, while the Jest would bare, I was willing to carry it on;
-- But the Business grows now too much in earnest; and the Welfare of my Friend
obliges me to make bold with my Mistress.


Friend. What say ye, your Mistress?


Wood. Aye your Lady, and her Companion, were the two Masks that I told you I
picked up, and one of 'em, I thank her, did me the Favor to afford me her
Company that Night, if it was Flora she has something very particular in her
behavior that makes her a very agreeable Bedfellow.


Friend. Thou durst not sure say this to me in earnest?


Wood. But I dare, Sir, if it be truth, as I Am sure it is; though, perhaps, you
may not care to hear it.


Friend. By Heaven thou lie, and did not her presence make this place sacred,
thou shoud'st pay dear for this Blasphemy.


Wood. Are you so hot? Follow me, and I Will find you a place to allay your fury
in.


Friend. Follow thee --


Flor. Hold, you shall not go; What Is the meaning of this?

Enter Lucia.
Luc. What Is the matter? -- [As Wood. is going out,

Enter Lady Testie in a Mask, meeting him.
Lady. With your leave, Sir.


Wood. Ha!


Lady. What are you surpised to see me here?


Wood. Ay, I'gad, am I, more than ever I was in my Life.


Lady. Sir, it is hard to conceal wrongs, from a Jealous Mistress.


Wood. And it is harder for me to do you right, whilst you conceal your self.


Lady. Why did you not meet me, as you promised?


Wood. Meet you; S'bud I thought I had you here; but since I find I Am mastaken,
pray, Madam, satisfy me, who you are? For if you remember, when you and I
Bargained for a little Familiarity, I was to be under no obligation, till I had
seen and liked you.


Lady. That you have done already, if you spoke truth; but since you are so apt
to forget, refresh your Memory and look again; What are you Dumb? [Pulls off
her Mask.


Wood. I should be dumb, Madam, if --

[Wood. starts.
Lady. If thou had nothing to say, but thou have a Tongue can never want
words to excuse thy Perjury, should I stay to hear it; farewell, ungrateful Man.

[Exit.
Wood. So, very well, what trick next; Fortune is pleased to be very merry with
me to day, I find I have made a very pretty hand of this matter; -- Lost both
my Mistresses, wronged a virtuous Lady, abused my Friend, and brought a Quarrel
upon me, all in one quarter of an hour, -- Hark'ee, Friendly, --


Friend. Well, Sir.


Wood. It Is as thou say, I do lie; and prithee forgive me for it.


Friend. It Is very well, Sir; -- But do you think this will satisfy me?


Wood. At present I hope it will; to Morrow thou shall know more.


Friend. In the mean time then pray make some amends to the Lady.


Wood, I can only ask her pardon, what else is requisite do thou do for me,
anon when the Curtains are drawn.

[Woodvile goes to Flora.
Friend. Fear not, Sir; you shall not be troubled with any Night-work of mine.


Sir Tho. That I should have both my Eyes, and yet not see these pair of
Counterfeit Knaves; well, it is not the first time that Whoremongers and
Adulters have been cloak't with the Law and the Gospel.

Enter Lady Testie. My Dear, art thou ventured hither too?


Lady. Ay, my Dear, to fetch thee home, hearing Hob was well and abroad, I
could no longer bear to have you here, since I have recovered health enough to
be happy with you at home.


Sir Tho* What say thou? -- Health, -- and be happy? -- What do thou
mean, ha! -- Shall I have thee in my Arms? And will it thou be my Bride to Night?


Lady. I shall be what you please to have me.


Sir Tho. Why then let sorrow vanish, and a Fig for my Daughter, Friendly, take
her, and do what thou will it with her.


Friend. I thank you, Sir; and to deserve this Kindness; if you get an Heir to
Inherit your Estate, you shall have it again.


Sir Tho. Hum! Do you jeer an Old Man? Well, if I cannot get an Heir, do you,
I Am contented now, it should be for my Grandson.


Friend. How now Ned, engaging afresh? If you purchase there, it must be for
Life.


Wood. With all my heart; -- Madam, shall I have Possession upon that Condition?


Luc. I don't know what may be, after seven Years Acquaintance.


Friend. He Will be worn out in half that time, Madam, if you don't reclaim him.


Lady. Do you think it is possible, Sir, to reclaim him?


Friend. I hope so, Madam.


Lady. So do I, though I doubt it; Neice have a care of him.


Sir Tho. Let her take care of her self; her Father left her at my disposal,
and if she Marries him, I will not give her a Groat.


Luc. Then, Sir, I suppose your Courtships at an end; for without that Charm,
my Beauty, I fear, will have but little force.


Wood. Enough, Madam, to make me a Convert, if you dare put me to a Trial --
(Aside.) -- I know not whether Infected by Friendly's Example, or any concealed
Mischief in this holy Covering, but I find my self of a sudden strangely
inclined to do something to repent of, as well as the foolish part of Mankind.


Flo. I know she loves him, and if I thought he loved her, --

[Aside to Friendly.
Friend. You need not doubt it, if he Marries her, for nothing but Love can
make him do such a Violence to himself. [Aside to Woodvil.] Ned, pursue your
purpose, if it is honorable for such a Beauty, and eight thousand Pound, -- (if
we can work the old fellow to consent) will be a better Fortune then any thou
can hope for in Flanders.


Wood. If Love goes on as it begins, I shall be of thy Opinion Frank.


Sir Tho. Ask what thou will, my Dear, I will deny thee nothing; for thou art
every thing to me; What wou^d I give now, that it were Bed time, Neighbor, ha


Say. Not so much as your Lady would give to have it Morning again; for we old
Fellows, Sir Thomas, are but troublesome Companions between a pair of Sheets.


Sir Tho. Say you so, Sir; you may be mistaken; what say thou my dear?


Lady. I hope so too, Sir.


Sir Tho. Ha! My little Rogue.


Lady. [Aside.] Why should I be angry that he cannot love me? I would not love
him if I could help it: Shall I then think that a Crime in another, I would my
self be guilty of; Alas, it is neither of our faults; for fate has decreed me
wretched to make him happy, and this way it must be done; -- Neice to Day I am
Sir Thomas, and your Fortune now you shall receive from my Gift, -- take it,
and dispose of it with yourself, as you please.


Luc. Madam, I should blush so to receive it, if I did not hope you would
command both it and me.


Lady. If I do, it shall be to bestow you here; -- I know your Inclinations.


Wood. Madam, this generous Act has --


Lady. (Aside.) Deserved better usage than you have treated me with; but I
forgive you, and hope I shall forget you too.


Wood. Never, Madam; for though I cannot as a Lover, as a Friend I Will hope to
deserve a place in your Memory.


Lady. A Friend! A cold distinction for a heart like mine, unless it could
degenerate, and be as yours has been to me; however be happy, and if I have
contributed any thing to make you so, 'twill please me that I had it in my
Power.


Sir Tho. That both these young Jades should get the better of me!


Friend. Aye, and you may thank Heaven for it, or we had hanged you; for Hob's
Life depended upon your good Behavior; and had you been still refractory, we
had knocked out his Brains and you should a Swung for it.


Sir Tho. A very Christian-like Contrivance.


Wood. 'Twas such as would a served our turns, Sir.

Enter Jailer and Hob.
Jayl. There Is Master Friendly.


Hob. God bless you, Sir.


Friend. O, honest Hob!


Sir Tho. What, durst that Rogue venture hither? Give me my Sword, I Will have a
Collop of him I Am resolved.


Hob. Will you? -- As I hope to be saved -- Master Friendly -- For the Lord
sake do'nt let e'n draw his Sword upon me again, pray now don't.


Friend. No, no, prithee don't fright thy self; -- Good Sir, let me entreat for
him.


Hob. Don't ye thirst after Blood so, don't ye; -- You have enough of mine to
answer for already.


Sir Tho. What brought him here?


Hob. Brought me here? -- Why look'ee, Sir, I am through Providence here a
going to be Married to Mary; and I don't know how it may please God to deal
with me; therefore I desire before I go to Church, that I may be at Peace with
all the World; forgive me, and I Will forgive you.


Wood. Poor fellow, he is the first I ever knew in his Condition that seemed to
have a sense of it.


Sir Tho. Well, since you will have it so, let him give us a Dance, and I will
be Friends with him.


Flo. And the Farm next his Father's, for his Life shall be his, if he makes a
good Husband; -- It Is in my Gift yet, Sir.

[To Friendly.
Friend. And shall be ever so, Madam; and to show I Am pleased with your Bounty,
I will stock it for him.


Hob. O Lord, Scratch, strike up Scratch --


Flo. And I Will make one.


Wood. Nay then we'll all join.

[Dance. Enter Country People with a Fiddler Playing before 'em. Hey-day! What Is
here the Country come in upon us?


Sir Tho. So much for Dancing, now, my Dear, let us Home; for since this proves
not a Tenement for Life, I don't care how soon I get hence.


Flo. And where shall we go?

[To Friendly.
Friend. To Church, Madam, and then --


Flo. Even where you please;

Marriage makes us yours, but remember still
To keep us so, Women must have their Will;
For by restraining us, you will only prove
There Is no Obedience, where the Tye's not Love.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, lately Printed for Sam. Briscoe in Covent Garden.
LOve's last Shift, a Comedy, writ by Mr. Cibber. Love for Money, or the
Boarding-School, a Comedy, by Mr. Durffey. Fatal Mistake, or the Plot spoiled,
a Comedy, by Jos. Haines. Very good Wife, a Comedy. The Wife's Excuse, or
Cuckolds make themselves, a Comedy, by Mr. Southern. True Widow, a Comedy,
written by Mr. Shadwell. Marriage-hater Matched, a Comedy, by Mr. Durffey.
Country Wife, a Comedy, by Mr. Wisherley. Richmond Heiress, a Comedy, by Mr.
Durffey. The First Part of the Comical History of Don Quixote, a Comedy, by Mr.
Durffey. The Second Part of the Comical History of Don Quixote, a Comedy, by
Mr. Durffey. The Third Part of the Comical History of Don Quixote, with the
Marriage of Mary the Buxom, with Don Quixote's last Will, a Comedy, by Mr.
Durffey. Pyrrus King of Epirus, a Tragedy, by Mr. Charles Hopkins.
Mock-Marriage, or a Woman wears the Breeches, a Comedy, by Mr. Scot. She
Ventures and he Wins, a Comedy, by a Lady. Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow,
a Tragedy, by Mr. Lee. The Traitor, a Tragedy, written by Mr. Rivers. Agnes de
Castro, a Tragedy, by a Lady. Neglected Virtue, a Play by an unknown hand. The
Country Wake, a Comedy, written by Tom Dogget. Mr. Durffey's Songs in three
Parts, bound in one Vol. Folio, set to Music by Mr. Henry Percel, Dr. Blow,
Mr. Eagles, Capt. Pack, Mr. Cour(...)vil, Mr. Akoroide, and other Eminent
Masters of this Age, which the Songs of Love's last Shift, set to Music by Mr.
Daniel Pursel* Price 7 s. 6 d. bound, or single if required.
A Poem on the Death of Queen Mary, written by Mr. Cibber. Gloriana, a
Piddarick Poem on the Death of the Queen, by Mr. Durffey.


BOOKS Newly Printed.
THe Courtier's Manuel Oracle, or the Art of Prudence, written in Spanish; by
Baltazer Graetion, translated into English, with Remarks. Instructions and
Maxims, Political, Moral and Divine, in four Centerys, written originally in
English. Polybius's General History of the Transactions of the World,
translated from the Greek, by Sir Honey Sheers, with a Character of the Author
by Mr. Dryden. Plautus Comedies, translated into English, with Remarks. Mrs.
Behn's Histories and Novels, viz. Oronoko, Agnes de Castro, Fair Jilt,
Lover's-Watch, Lady's Looking-glass, Luckey Mistake, Love Letters, in one Vol.
with her Picture, curiously engraved on a Copper-Plate, with her Memoirs writ
by a Lady of her Acquaintance. Familiar Letters on several Occasions, written by
Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wicherly, Mr. Congreve, Mr. Dennis, with Love Letters, written
to a Lady. There is in the Press, and will speedily be published Love Letters,
written by the late most Ingenious Mr. Thomas Otway, and other most eminent
hands. The Luckey Discovery, a Novel, writ by the Honorable the Lady S -- P --
Mr. Dennis's Miscellany Poems, with several Translations of Horace, Juvenal and
Ovid, etc.



