A PICK-TOOTH FOR SWEARERS, OR A LOOKING-GLASS FOR Atheists and Profane
PERSONS.

WHEREIN The Greatness of the Party Offended, the Solemn giving of the Law,
Together with the Strickness and Purity thereof; The Unquestionable Verity of
the Holy Scriptures, and what fearful Sentence the Wicked may expect in the
Great Day, are briefly touched.

EDINBURGH, Printed by JOHN REID, at his Printing House in Bells-Wynd, ANNO
DOM: School.

Unto the Right Honorable SIR ARCHIBALD MURE of Thorntown, Lord Provost,
Bailies.
WILLIAM MEINZIES ARCHIBALD RULE JAMES NAIRN GEORGE MITCHEL PATRICK HALIBURTON
Dean of Guild. SAMUEL M'CLELLAN Theasurer.
And the Remanent Council of the Ancient and Honorable CITY EDINBURGH,
Right Honorable,
THe Great Disposer of all Things in His Providence, has committed the
Oversight and Care of a great many Persons, unto your Charge; And GOD be
thanked at present, this Honorable and Ancient City, the Metropolis of
Scotland, is provided with Magistrates and Counselors, who testify their
Dislike of Prophanity, and Immorality, and give a Copy to those under their
Charge, to study Piety and Virtue; Notwithstanding of all which, more of these
Vices abound in this Place than can be easily Suppressed, Even tho the
Government has lately Emitted a Proclamation, for putting the Ancient Laws
against such Transgressors, more punctually in Excution. I am fully convinced
every one according to their Capacity's and Stations, ought to contribute their
Endeavors for suppressing vice, and I have Essayed to Compose a few Verses,
whereby the reprehending thereof is in some measure aimed at, How meanly soever
the Subject be handled, it is all the Mite I can throw in, toward the
prosecution of such a Laudable Design. Your Lordship and Honors are the only
Persons, I judge these few Lines can most fitly be addressed unto. Wherefore I
with all Humility offer Them to Your Consideration, and if they may Contribute
any ways toward the discouraging of Prophanity and Looseness, it shall yield
great Satisfaction to

Your LORDSHIP and HONORS most Humble Servant, Ja: Donaldson.

A PICK-TOOTH for SWEARERS, etc.
GReat Master of the Muses, Mighty THOU,
Before whose Rom: 14, 11,
Face all Knees shall trembling bow,
Thou, who commands Thy Sacred Name to be
With Psalm: ^9, 7.
Reverence mentioned, and Humility;
And holds him guilty of Attrocious sin,
That needlessly does take it his lips within.
Thou who does make Math: 12, 22.
the Dumb distinctly Talk,
And Blind to See, Math: 11, 5.
and Lame with eveness Walk.
And Psalm: ^, ^.
makes Babes to give Thee perfect Praise
Inspire my Pen and my Affections Raise.
Afford me Matter, so Assist my Quill,
That I may Write according to Thy Will:
Then shall my joy and happiness be more,
Then these whose Cups with Wine and Oil run Over.
The Exo^ 3, 14,
Great I AM who only Isa: 44, 6, Psalm 11 4,
IS Alone,
And in the Heavens established hath-his Throne.
HE who Job: 37, 18.
spread forth the Azure Skies above,
And in their Spheres makes all the Planets move. Job; 9, 7, etc.

He that the Job 3^, 4, Pro: 8, 29,
Earth's Foundations strong did lay,
And made these Gen: 1 16,
Lights which separat Night from Day,
He who the Isa: 48. 13.
Heavens does Measure at one Span,
And of the Dust Created Mortal Gen: 2^^.
Man.
He that does fill the 1 King^^, 27,
Heavens, Earth, Sea and Air,
Without Dimensions present every where;
Who Job: 26 13, 9.
Framed the Crooked Serpent, Bounds the Waves,
And Fashon'd all the Isa: ^^^ 33
Subterraneous Caves.
He who the Psam: 14, 7.
Stares does number all by Name,
At whose Command Gen 1, 1, Psalm: 36 8
all things from Nothing Came.
He who does weigh the ^sa: 40 12.
Mountains in a Scale,
And Lay'th in Balance every Hill and Dale:
In whose great Sight 15,
all Nations seem to be,
As Crawling Worms, yea les than Gnat or Flee.
Great HE put on a Rob of Majesty,
And on the Wing of Subtle Air did Fly.
Before his Face the (...); 18 9
Stable Heavens did Bow,
Cloud HE Visits Earth Below.
In Thickest Darkness Wrapped Exodus: 14. 16,
his Hallowed Light,
Least Mortals had been Struck dead at the Sight.
The Pslm: 68, 9.
Earths Foundations moved Heaven's Pillars Shook,
All Creatures Trimbled while this Great HE Spoke.
The Hills 114. 4.
did Leap like Timorous Kids or Lams,
The Mountains trembled as their helples Dames:
When Bear or Woulf Comes on their young to Prey,
Even so the whole Creation Quaked that Day.
Mount Sinai Smoked, Lightnings Abroad did Fly,
By voice of Thunder than His Majesty
Expres'd his Greatness in a solemn Way,
The Trembling Camp thought Heaven and Earth that Day.
To their first Naught should be Reduced anon,
And Instantly his Judgment Seat, or Throne
Erect'd should be, while the great Troump did sound
Some Fled, and some Fell flate upon the Ground.
The Trumpet still sounds Louder till at last,
The Eternal HE was pleased to stop the Blast. d: 19. 18.

Than by a distinct voice to Israel said,
These words which after in the Ark were laid;
Engraven on two Tables, made of Stone:
Wrote by the Finger of the Great THREE-ONE.
And must Imprinted be on every Heart,
That would not in Eternal Torments Smart*
Thus Spoke Great HE,
I Am Thy Lord and King,
Exodus: 2^
Who does Alone from Bound Slavery bring.
No other Gods have thou at all but ME.
And to no Image Bow, or Bend thy Knee.
My Sacred Name take not at all in Vain.
Nor any of My M^^^: 2, 2,
Attributes Profane.
Such as Transgress shall no ways Guiltless be:
But holden Exodus: 2^
Guilty in a high Degree.
Men may esteem the Trespass small, but I
Will after such M^^^: 2, 2,
Offenders strictly try:
My Hand shall find them out, Exodus 20, 7,
I will not Spare
That vile presumptuous Wratch who is bold to darr, ^ Psalm: 9 17.

In his vile Mouth to take My Hallowed Name,
Without due Reverence, and a Praying Frame.
I Will Smite him Through with Darts of fiercest Wrath
And Sharpest Vengeance; yea Eternal, Death,
And hightned Fury on his Soul shall Seize,
Without the least hours Rom: 14, 10,
Respite, Sift, or Ease
His Tongue shall Fry in hotest Pot of Hell,
That thus Offends; yea and his Soul shall Dwell
In most exquisit Torments, in that Exodus 2^. 19.
Cave,
Which for the Devils I Prepared have.
First to the Eye is represented there
Most dreadful Specter, Round them every where.
Hobgoblings dancing in prodigious Shapes,
Like Lions, Tigers, Dragons, Bears, and Apes,
With Horns of Steel, and Iron-Teeth like Darts,
And forked Claws for tearing Sinners Hearts.
Thou no glad Music in that place shall hear,
Nor other Noise shall touch thy Cursed Ear,
But Ruefull Shrikes, and Knocks of Rattling Chains;
And mutual Curses of Dire Ghosts in Pains,
Who One Another tempted have to Sin,
Plagueing the Day their, 'quantance did begin.
No Sweet Refreshing Smell shall there be found,
But noxious Savor Eevery Where abound,
Filth, and stinking Sulphurous Smoke,
Least Smell of which all Mortal Flesh would Choke,
Were it not now so strongly Verg'd about,
With thickest Earth that none thereof gets Out.
No softer touch is there than Scorpions Stings
And Biting Asps: yea all Termenting Things,
Do there Combine, and all their Force Unite
To Plague the Body* and Torment the Sp'rit*
The M^rk 9, ^^^,
Worm of Conscience Gnawing thee Within,
When thou Reflects upon thy By-pass-Sin,
Its gentlest Byts much Sharper are by Far,
Than Dragons, Claws or red Hot Pincers were,
Thy Heart and Bowels plucking out At Once;
Or Ravenous Birds thy Flesh tear from thy Bones.
Hot Burning Coals of Juniper shall be
Thy Bed of Down, and then to Cover thee
A Quilt of Boiling Brimstone thou must take,
And Wrap thee in, till thou full Payment make,
To Divine Justice for thy great Offense,
In that thou have without due Reverence,
My Hallowed Name Profaned, and taken in Vain.
Thou surely shall endure Eternal Pain,
Because thy Sufferings no Proportion have,
To that Infinite Offense which thou gave.
The Head, the Hand, the Nose, the Ear, the Eye;
Yea, every Member shall tormented be
Apart, and such exquisite Tortures fill
Each Joint, as would great Leviathan kill.
Yet thy frail Body I Will make to subsist
Under such Torments, while I do exist.
No Wine, or Beer, is there to quench thy Drowth,
Nor liquid Luke 16. 24.
Drop, at all to cool thy Mouth.
But bitter Dreggs of that great Psalm ^ 5. 8.
Cup of Wine
Of Indignation in my Hand Divine;
Which without Mixture every Soul shall Take,
And drink and Vomit, in that Burning Lake.
My holy Sabbath see thy self thou keep,
And every Soul within thy Gates that Sleep.
Thy Parents Honor, and thy Days Prolong:
And Kill thou not, nor do thy Neighbor Wrong.
Form all Unchastness keep thy Body pure:
And do not Wealth by wrongful Means Procure.
Bear not False Witness; Neither Covet thou
Thy Neighbor's Wife, his Servant, Ox or Cow.
WHILE Israel stood, and all these Words did hear,
Their Hearts did Fail, Almost i distract'd by Fear, Exodus 2^. 19.

To Moses came, and trembling they Beseech,
The Almighty ONE may please no more to Preach,
In such a Dreadful most Confounding way,
Least by his Presence Mortal Flesh should dye:
But rather by his Prophets speak and They
His holy Laws will willingly Obey.
Their Suit is Granted, and the Almighty ONE
Approves the Deuteronomy: 5. 24. 25.
Motion, as they have said it is Done:
He sends them Prophets of their Brethren, Men
Of such like Passions with Themselves, that when
They speak his Word, their Presence may not Make
Their Hearers tremble, not their Joints to shake.
But such is Man's perverse Corrupted Will,
That out of Good he had Engendereth Still.
To have the Message of the Almighty King,
Brought by frail Men like us in every Thing;
To whom with freedom we Recourse may have,
To solved be of Doubts, and Counsel Crave.
To have the Bread of Life, brought down from Heaven
In Earthen Pots, and to Men's Children Given,
If Right Considered special Mercies Are,
And so by Israel they esteemed Were,
In that dread Day when the Almighty GOD,
From top of Sinai Thundered Mighty Loud;
No Man nor Beast the Hallowed ^xod: 19.13.
Mount might Touch,
Nor to the Borders thereof durst Approach,
Save Moses self: But now it is not so,
All Men may freely to the Altar go,
And Offerings Glad of Joy and Praise present,
And back Receive Heavens Liberal Complement, John: ^4. 2^.

And by the Prophets be instructed Still,
In every Thing that is the Almighty's Will:
Yea, all the Prophets from that very Day,
Do early Rise and to the People say,
Repent, Mark: 1, 15,
do Justice, o Mercy love, and see,
Ye with your GOD all Humble Walkers be. Mic: 6. 8.

But froward perverse Man replys, I hate,
To Curb my Lusts, or at the Narrow Gate,
Once strive to Enter, since along I May
Not take my Darling Sins in Company.
Tush, what is said by yonder Man we are Sure,
The Mickle Devil himself cannot endure,
What? tell us live like Hermits, Pray and Whin,
Abstain from pleasure, Falsely Nick-nam'd Sin.
These Babbling Priests may Superstitious Wives
Charm by their Doctrine to reform their Lives,
Or make some timorous simple Fools amuz'd
But gallant Spirits will not be so abused.
We plainly see Priestcraft is but a Trade,
And don't believe one Word of what is said,
Further then Interest or Self-gain does go,
In every Land and Country is it not so?
Do not all Sects, and Parties stiffly plead
Their way is only Right, what further need
Of Proof to show, that all Religion's Vain;
By Priests invented merely for Self-gain,
The Turks, the Pagans, Papists, and what not;
Of Thousands more, would all be thought Devote;
Yet Black and White are more alike then they,
Therefore in short, there is nothing Truth they Say.
But grant there be a GOD, as they Give out;
He is so very good we do not doubt,
He Will Spare and will not Torture, nor Afflict
Poor Mortal Flesh, yea, sure he is not so Strict,
Severe and Rigid, as those Bablers tell,
And fright the Simple with a Scarcrow-Hell.
If Hell there be at all, it is only This,
A bare exclusion from Celestial Bless;
Which to speak plainly we almost would Choose,
And all the Toilsom joys of Saints Refuse,
Since constantly they must give Praise Divine,
A work to which we do not much incline.
O Wretched Athiest! does thou think indeed,
These Scriptures which thou frequently may Read,
Are forged by Art, or Subtle Man's Ingine?
And are not Marked with a Stamp Divine?
The dreadful Plagues made Exodus 9. 14.
known on Egypt Land,
Redeeming Israel with a Mighty hand. Exodus, 13. 8.

The ^xod. 13. 21*
Sea divided Exodus 3: 16.
Jordans Streams back turned;
And Law emitted while the Deuteronomy. 4. 8.
Mountain Burned
Are these Romances, Lies or Forged Tales?
Were not Divine Unquestioned useful Seals?
Fixed to the Law, Commencing from the Day
These Acts were Done; Pray there fore show what Way?
Could Israel be Imposed on, or Deceived
When all the Laws and Statutes they Received?
Enforced were from what their Eyes had Seen;
And to their Sense Demonstrated had Been.
These very words which all the Camp heard Spoke
From midst the Cloud; the Fire, and dreadful Smoke;
Engraven are on Tables made of Stone,
And short time after to the Exodus, 34: 29.
People showen,
And Copies thereof all Required to take,
And on their Deuteronomy. 6, 9.
Walls and Door-Posts fast them make;
And both the Tables in the Ark uplaid.
In time to come to show what GOD had said.
It Is more then Plain, had not the thing been true
When Moses first exposed unto their view,
These Sacred Tables, and Commanded All
To mind, so said the GOD of Israel
From top of Sinai, which your selves did Hear;
Their Answer had been thus, it is more then Clear,
We never Heard such words, nor Saw such things
As by this Doctrine to our Ears thou brings.
We never heard this Law from Sinai Given,
Nor saw the Fire which almost rached Heaven:
We never saw these Plagues on Land of Ham,
Nor through the Sea on dry Land ever Came.
We never saw proud Jordans Channel dry
Nor there Stons Fixed for furture Memory.
Therefore these Laws we'll not Receive at all;
Nor to our Offspring e're commit them shall.
Since none of these wrought in our Sight have been,
Nor any Shadow thereof have we seen.
But so it was that on the self same Day
The Angel did all * Egypt's first born Slay; Exodus 12, 21,

The Israelits first Solemnized the Feast,
And every Year they killed that hallowed Beast
The Pasca-lamb; in memory of this Thing,
And other Mercies to Rememberance Bring. Jo^^, 5. 8.

The Law of b Circumcision they likeway
With punctual strictness constantly Obey.
In Testimony of the Covenant made
With Abraham, and all his Numerous Seed,
Whereby they their Pollution did confess,
And to be cleang'd evince their willingness:
The Table, Stones, and Aarons budding Rod.
For Monuments are keep'd, to show what GOD
Had for them Done, and at their hands does Crave;
And several other symbols they Receive:
And did Retain till that Great Prophet came.
Who was e're Moses, and is still the Same;
From whose Blessed Lips vain Word did never Fall;
Bnt Good and Gracious were his Speeches all.
He Taught, Explained, Confirmed, and did Fulfill
The Holly Law, and Showed the Fathers Will.
He taught with Meekness, and with Power Divine,
In him the Fathers Image bright did Shine.
More Pure and Heavenly was his Doctrine far,
Then Speech of Joh. 7. 46,
all that e're before Him were;
More sweet and pure was every Word he Spoke
Than precious Honey droping from the Rock
More Fragrant than the sweetest Myrrh or Rose
Spicknard, pure Incense, Aloes; yea all those,
Dull Methophores are in the least to Show,
What Sacred Language from his Lips did Flow.
He did not with the Scribes place Holiness,
In washing off External Filthiness;
Nor bare avoiding Scandelous Offense,
He taught the Law in a quite other Sense.
Thus was his Doctrine.
You have Mat: 9. 21. etc.
heard of old,
And doubtless by your Fathers have been told,
Thou shall not Kill, who ever kills shall Be
To Judgment brought, and he himself shall Die.
But now, I Say, not only such as Kill,
And Cruelly his Neighbors Blood does Spill,
Shall die the Death, but such as Angry are
Without Just cause the Judgment too may Fear;
Yea such as shall his Brother but Nickname,
Without all doubt's in danger of the Same:
But such as call him Fool, Hell's fire may Dread,
Therefore Forgive and lay aside all fead
Then to the Temple thou may freely go,
And Pray and look to be Forgiven also.
Adultery too you also have heard tell,
Deserves GODS Wrath, and Punishment in Hell.
That Is true Indeed, but also tell I must,
Such is his Guilt, that gives way to Lust.
And does not bound the Passions of his Mind,
When they run loose on vile Thoughts of that kind.
Downright For-swearing, and Blasphemy too,
You have heard tell procures GOD's Wrath also.
Such gross atrocious Sins, the Scribs I know
Without reprooff do not often times let go.
The Law requires more I tell thee plain,
Thou ought not Speak, nor move thy Lips in vain:
Far less to Swear by Heaven in any Case,
Because it is GOD's Hallowed Dewlling Place:
Nor by the City of the Mighty King,
Nor by his Footstool, Earth, nor any Thing
That being has; No, not a Hair or Thread;
Or least excression of thy Beard or Head:
But let your Common talk be Yea and Nay,
What e're is more, proceeds of ill I say.
Thus he the Law taught in its Geninue sense,
And Heav'nly-food did to men's Sons dispense,
By Miracles of Mercy, also he
His Doctrine proved to be of verity
The Sick are Healed, Mat. 11. ^,
the Blind their Sight receive,
Dumb, Deaf, and all what e're Disease they have,
Are straightway cured, when he but spoke the Word,
Yea, Spirits foul, must needs Confess him LORD
Of Heaven and Earth, Luke 4 41.
and by them very Soon
(Against their Wills.) what He Commands is done
He in Compassion with Luk: 5, 36 etc.
a little Bread,
Mirac'lously great Multitudes did Feed.
These great Things were not in a Corner wrought,
But openly, and he no Credit sought.
Further than what his Adversaries might
See publicly Performed in their sight,
Doctrine must be True,
Since what he taught was not before a Few
By Miracles confirmed John 1^. 20.
But even before.
Great Multitudes who did him not Adore,
Nor Love his Person, 'cause they would not See
The Radient Beams of his Divinity,
Through his Sweet, Humble Humane-Vestment shine,
They could not think his Person was Divine.
'Cause he came not with Earthly Pomp and Power,
Few him Employed their Sin Sick-Souls to Cure.
The blessed Disciples who his great Acts Saw,
And heard him Preach, and thus explain the Law,
Believed his Word, in token thereof They
Themselves give up his Statutes to Obey:
With Watter Clean soon then they Sprinkled are,
By which they their polluted State declare,
The Cleansing Virtue, and Excelling Worth
Of that Rich Blood which from his Side sprung forth.
And least that they that Covenant forget,
Seal of Baptism is set,
Just at that Instant they their Names receive,
That afterward they may Remembrance have
Of this blessed Bargain when their Names they hear
But Mentioned, and to their Children Dear
Transmited have this Ordinance, so we
It to this Minute Handed Down may see.
These Scriptures, Atheists! are of Verity,
As even the Devils themselves dar not deny;
As has been proved, how comes it then that thou
Does not unto the Great MESSIAH bow?
And Homage pay to the Almighty King,
At whose Command All Things from Naught did spring?
Art thou in Terms His great Power to Resist?
The Universe who holds in his Fist;
Who in a moment can all Creatures kill,
And turn to Nothing, if it were his Will.
Did he not cause one of his Angels slay,
And on the Ground near g tenscore thousand Lay
Of Sirian Corpses, 2 King. 19, 35.
in a single Night?
What Mortal dare with such a Champion fight?
Yet many Rev: 5. 11.
Legions of such Angels stand,
And wait to flee at this great King's Command,
To execute his Will where he does send,
Against such a party, how dare thou Offend?
How dar thou Baffle his Great Hallowed Name,
At whose Dread Presence in 1 Pet: 3. 10.
a Burning Flame
The Eliments shall all disolved be, ^ These: 5, 2.

Before h his Face; the Heavens and Earth shall flee:
Yea from the presence of this Angry Judge
*All Isles and Lands shall seek to find Refuge.
In that dread Day the Sun shall Rev: 6, 12. etc.
lose his Light,
And Black as coal the Moon turn in his sight:
Together he Isa: 34. 4.
the Firmament shall Roll
As when a Scrib folds up a Parchment Scrol.
As thick as Hailstones, Stares then drop down shall,
Or as the leaves in Autumn frost, do fall
By a strong Wind, that blows down Tree and all.
Then shall Rev: 20, 11.
Erected be his great white Throne
In Flaming Fire the Judge shall sit thereon,
And distribute Pure Justice to each one.
Then Stoutest Champions to Deaf Rocks shall cry,
To hide them from his Penitrating Eye!
Yet all in vain, ^ Rev: 6, 1^.
for Earth, Sea, Death and Hell,
Shall yield up all the Guests that in them dwell.
To the prophain Cursed Swearer, Athist Wretch,
The Judge shall on this ways derect his Speech*
The ARAIGNMENT of the WICKED
WHat? daring Wretch have I now found thee out
That at my Threatenings hitherto durst Flout,
And mock my Envoys, that my Message bore,
And frequently stood knoking at thy Door,
With precious Offers of a Crown of Joy,
And freedom from all things that do Anoy,
But these rich Jewels, Pearls, and Dimonds thou
Did trample on, and like a Hog or Sow,
Delight did take, to puddle in the Mire,
Than Sensual Pleasures knowing nothing higher.
Did not my Preaching Prophets tell thee plain?
Thou ought not take my Hallowed Name in vain?
Nor swear at all by Conscience, Faith, nor Truth,
Nor Curse thy Neighbor with thy Lips or Mouth;
Yet even these very Lips, and Mouth which I
Created have, my Name to Magnify,
Thou have employed as Instruments of Sin,
And wickedly have taken my Name therein
In calling me thy Wrath to execute
On Innocents; therefore now I will shoot
Hot Thunder Bolts of vengeance through thy Soul,
And make thee still in Utter-Darkness howl.
Thy Cruel Curses on thy self I Will turn,
And make thee in Eternal Fire to burn.
Often called thou Fiends thy Neighbors Souls to take,
Now shall they cast thee in the Burning Lake.
As heretofore thou Mercy still did hate,
So shall thou not one Drhant of Mercy get.
Of all the VVretches that this day stand here,
None are so guilty as thou who durst Swear.
By my Blessed Name, Psalm: 40. 6.
my VVounds, and Precious Blood,
Which from my side did Spring forth as a Flood
To quench that fury which naught else could Please, Micc^ ^6, 6,

No, not all Creatures in one Sacrifice.
All other VVights, but thou have some Excuse,
Of Gain or Pleasure that did them Induce
To break my Law; but thou has none at all.
Yea, Turks and Pegans against thee witness shall:
Their Idols names they never Baffled so,
As thou has mine* Pack hence, and from me go.
Come Mastive Dev'ls them neck and heell, ty fast,
And in hot Boiling Brimstone-Pots them cast.
FINIS.
Reader,
PErhaps some may be surprised to see any thing of this kind come forth under
my Name, and others, seeing this acknowledged by me, may be ready to Conclude,
I have also Composed several other Papers latly exposed to the Public,
especially those signed J. D. I love not to Rob any Man of his due* none of
these are mine; This being the first thing in Rhyme ever possed the Press,
whereunto my Name is Affixed directly, or indirectly. These Notes I have
subjoined for Answering an^ Objection that may Ocurr, and explain any thing,
that may not be so easily understood by those of weakest Capacities; not that
the same Matter, contained in the Notes may not he expressed in Rhyme, as well
as the rest, but to degress in explaining every thing that may seem difficult
would much mar the Grace and Harmony of the Poem, This method is used by the
best English Poets, (I mean those that write in English) that I have seen, and
I judge it very convenient; It Is impossible to please every one, or to solve
all objections and doubts that may be made about or against this, if I get the
Approbation of the sober and discreet it is enough: However I am resolved to
take my hazard for ^ee, whatever sensure I meet with.

TO invocate the Muse or some supposed Diety has been an Ancient custom among
Poets in the entry of their works, and so far imitated by our Modern Rhimers,
that not only follow they the same Method; But also invocat the same supposed
Dietys, The first propably were Serious in their Invocations, believing these
Dietys could assist them; but I do not think it approveable in the Letter, for
neither in Jest or Eat; nest is it Lawful to invocat any other Object but the
True and Living GOD, for things not in the power of any Creature to bestow.

2 Perhaps some may carp at the word Stabl^, because we are informed by Holy
write, The Heavens shall Depart as a Scrol when it is Rolled together. This I
hope none will think I deny, especially seeing I mention the same in the 19
Page; but that which I use this Expression for, is to show there is nothing so
great, spacious, firm, or Perminable, But it gives way to, and pays Homage
at the presence of this Infinite and Incomprehensible Being. If I had Room here
I might tell you the Opinion of some Divines on this point; That tho it be
Acknowledged the Firmament or Visible Heavens shall suffer by the Universal
Confragration for their Purgation, because they are polluted and made subject
to Vainity, yet the Blessed Mansions of the Elect Souls (called Coelum
Empyreum) are not incident to any such Change, not needing to be purged, not
Unclean thing ever having entered there. see Mr. Durham on Rev. 21, 1

3 I have seen an Abridgements of the Commands in Rhyme much after this sort;
but I have endeavored to express the same matter in other words than what was
in these Verses, and so far as I remember have not repeated any of them
Verbatim.

4 It may be thought strange that I should aleadge one part of the Torments of
Hell Consists in beholding fearful Objects, seeing the Scripture informs us
it is always dark there, yea, it is freqently called Utter Darkness: Yet seeing
there is nothing wanting in that place to Complete the Horror and Torments of
the Damned; And the Beholding of dreadful Objects, being that which does Creat
Horror almost as much as any one thing, I do not think it absurd to believe
that that may be one part of their Torment. Tho with corporal eyes in the state
we not are it be impossible to behold any Object without light: Yet it is not
unlike some such Dreadful objects may be Represented to the Apprehension of the
Damned

5 Something both of the Place and Quality of Hell may seem here to be
asserted, that cannot be well agreed unto by every one. First as to its
quality, I believe most People do grant there shall be nothing wanting that may
complete the Misery of such as are there; and seeing the Damned shall after the
great Day* be Corporally in Hell, I do not think it Absurd to believe they
shall be Tormented even by matteriall Fire, and that all the Sulpherous,
Betumnious, and Vile matter now Disperssed through the Universe shall be
gathered to that Place, this seems to be the opinion of Aquinas and several
Schoolmen Q^oted by Durham Rev: 21 I which that Reverand Author does not
oppose, but rather Homologat: For when the Eliments are refined and purged by
the great Confragration, all the impure matter in them must either be
Annihilated, or placed some where or other, I see no need of its Anicholation,
neither can I think of any other place more proper to Lodge it in. As to the
place of the Damned, the Scriptures seem to determine, in speaking of it
always as a place below the surface of this Terrestrial Glob, and in the
Instance of Core Da^ban and Abiram, it is expressly said they went down alive to
the sides of the pit, such as will have all Scripture expressions on this point
Methaphorical, I shall not dispute with: But let them know it is no good place
be where it will*

6 This may seem very gross and absurd, but Nevertheless beside the inumerable
Multitudes who by their Practice say no less I have even heard some Verbaly
express as much, and plead almost in the same words.

7 The Quakers abuse this Scripture when they make use of it against Swearing
in Judgment, when Necessarly called thereto, To fear the LORD, and swear by
His Name, is no part of the Cerimonal Law, as some of them Foolishly Plead:
Neither is Swearing altogether Discharged as does appear by the 37 Verse, where
it is laid. But let your Communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, what ever's
more; (to wit in Common Discourse) comes of evil. And Paul writing to the
Galatians Chap. 1, Ver. 20. uses a more solemn Attestation, in taking GOD to
witness the truth of what he wrote; And I hope no Quaker will aledge there is
any evil in this Expression. It Is Probable Sweating by the Temple, Altar, and
Jerusolem have been the Common Oaths of those times; Wherefore our Savior
Particularly mentions them, thereby giving a Copy to his Apostles and
Ministers, to insist in Reproving the predomining sin of the times wherein they
Live. I confess the Quakers run in the safest exeem; it is much better to
Decline sweating in Judgment, than Rapp out such Dreadful and Execrable Oaths,
so frequently as many do; But all Extremes being bad, none of them are
approveable.

8 It Is observable all the Miracles wrought by our Blessed Savior, were of
Mercy and Compassion. He could have made Wine of Water at any time, but He did
it not till there was need for it; And the People that invited Him to the
Wedding like to be affronted for want thereof. He could have created Bread at
any time, but he did it not till there was need thereof, to Refresh great
multitudes in desert places, when Food could not easily be otherwise had; And
so forth of all the Rest.

9 There Is one thing renders the Miracles pretended to be wrought by the Church
of Rome greatly suspicious (much contrar to the example of our Savior and his
Apostles) they work their Miracles always before such as doubt nothing of the
Truth of their Doctrine; Whereas the other only before Great Multitudes of
unbelievers did work Miracles, of purpose they might believe. I confess I have
heard some times the Papists have Endeavored to put a cheat on others not of
their own profession, impretending to Cure some Persons that they have Suborned
to faign themselves Impotent, as that Boy at Aberdeen mentioned in Kno^^
History. One at Dublin within this seven years. And a Woman in the North of
Ireland, that through their Persuasion feigned her self Dumb, whom a Gentleman
that law her Carried about by some Priests or Friars, showing her to the
People, and Offering to restore her to her speech, told me that he was in
Company Where a Gentleman Jealous of the deceit Threatened her, and when she
would not speak for a long time, he Lashed her soundly with a Whip, til she
Cried out, and Confes'd the deceit; Some such wonderful Miracles, I believe may
be wrought by these Gentlemen: But I Resolve to suspend my Faith of their
Doctrine: (I mean their Traditions and Tenets Repugnant to Holy Write) till I
see them Confirmed by some Miracle where there is no ground of Suspicion. I do
not doubt but the Gentlemen who Endeavor to put such Hocus Tricks upon the
simple, may also deny the matter of Fact of these Instances I have given, and
no wonder since one of that gang with whom I Discoursed within these few year^,
had the Impudence to deny their was any such thing as a Masacker of the
Protestants by the Popists in Ireland within these forty or fifty years, though
the Fact be so Natour, and many Thousand^ yet Alive that saw it with their
eye^. He affirmed the Protestants had a Design to cut off of all the Papists,
and they in their own Defense only, were obliged to use some Hostilities, etc.

10 Just while this was at the Press, a Pamphlet Intitulat An Easy way with
the Diests, came to the Public, which solveth this Point Pretty well;
wherefore I referr you to it. Only by the by, I would say to the Quakers, if
the Church had Contemned, and neglected the Sacraments, as they do; we would
have wanted one good Proof for confirming the Truth of the Holy Scrip^ures; For
not only do these Ordinances Exhibit, and hold forth to our Senses the
Efficacy and Virtue of Christ's Blood and Sufferings; and help us to a more
distink uptaking of spiritual things: But also are a most pregnant Evidence of
the Verity of the Scriptures, seeing they Commence from the very Day these
Public and Nottour Miracles were wrought, on Purpose to Convince the Beholders
of the Truth of what is therein Revealed.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Husbandry Anatomized, or several Rules, and Measures for the better
Improvement of the Ground, particularly calculat for Scotland; wherein it is
showed much more Increase may be had, than in following the Common way; and yet
much of the present Labor and Expense Saved. To which there is now added a
postscript, further Clearing and applying the same. Edinburgh sold at the ^aigh
Coffee house on the North side of the Street near the Cross, price 14 sh: Scots
with a Reasonable Abatement to such as Buy them in Gross or Unbound.


