AN Epistle of Love AND Good Advice To my Old Friends and Fellow Sufferers in
the Late TIMES, The Old Royalists And their Posterity, And to all others that
have any sincere Desires toward GOD.
There was a Man sent from God, whose Name was John, the same came to be a
witness, to hear witness of the Light, John 1. 6, 7, 8, 9.

My Friends;
ALL you that lay under the Lash of the late Times, I cannot forget our
Sufferings, nor the Mercies of God to us, but must needs put you in mind to be
weighty and serious in improving your Deliverance to better ends, than many of
you have done hitherto, that ye may come to know the things belonging to your
Peace, before they be hidden from your Eyes, that whatsoever happen ye may be
fitted and prepared for it, so that ye may escape the Snares of the old Enemy
of Mankind, who is profound in Subtilty, and has his Agents about in all
places to promote his Kingdom of Darkness, and Delusions, which are discovered
only by the true Light, that enlightneth every man that comes into the World,
which shines into the Heart of man to give him the Knowledge of God; 2 Cor.
4.6,
for as the outward Sun in the Firmament is not to be seen but by its own Light
that shines from it, so God that is a supernatural inward Light, is not to be
seen or known but by his own Light, that shines into the dark Heart of Man,
that is gone out from him into the fallen state; and as you do watch and wait
for this Light you will see your Redemption, and will be fenced from the Power
of this crooked Serpent, and his jealous Whisperings, and detracting
Insinuations, that have made all the Broyls in this Nation from time to time to
this very day, and mostly upon the account of Religion.

Happy had it been for this Nation, if Religion (so often pretended to) had
been real, without any mixture of man's Invention; but God that saw that Men
were not fitted and prepared for it, through their own neglect and carelessness,
in not being faithful to what they knew was their Duty toward him and their
Neighbors, upon this account has the Lord withheld this great Blessing from
many of the great Pretenders and Sticklers in matters of Religion as well as
others, so as they have missed of the real and Spiritual Knowledge of this
Ministration of the glorious Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which
is Peace on Earth, Good Will toward men; this is truly preached by some, both
in their Doctrine, Lives and Conversations in this day spring of divine Light
and Love, which has appeared in a large measure to all those that have been
faithful to what they knew of God in their own Hearts and Consciences, whose
Hearts are tender, and brought low before him, and have given up all their
Concerns to him, and can part with all for him: These, I say, are the Plants of
Renown, and no others, neither can any come to be grafted into this Stock by
any outward Rule or Observation of man's contrivance; the divine Virtue must be
in our selves, it is not in the Power of Man to put it into us, it is the Gift
of God in our own Hearts, that inward Principle that leads to the divine Life,
which is the blessed Grace of God that brings Salvation, which has appeared
to all men, as says the Scriptures, and those that are taught by it, they do
deny all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and do live Soberly, Godlily and
Righteously in this present World; 2 Tit.2. 11, 12.
these are they that are brought out of the Vanities and Deceits thereof, and
have received the Anointing that teaches them of all things, so as they need
no man to teach them. 1 John 2. 27.
But how this will relish with those that keep People always in teaching, that
they may always be paying them, I know not, neither am I concerned for that;
the Gift of God in our own Hearts is not to be denied nor concealed; this Gift
is given to all mankind, even to the Rebellious, that the Lord may dwell
amongst them, as says the Psalmist; Psalm. 68. 18.
it shows to man his Rebellion against God, and exhorts him to come out of it;
it teaches Humility of Mind, and all other Moral, Heroic and Divine Virtues;
This Light, Power and Spirit of the Lord God is tendered to all mankind, as well
Women as Men, if they do wait in Faith and Patience to receive it; this may be
easily proved, first by the believing Woman of Samaria, that carried the
Tidings of the Messiah to the Samaritans, whereby many of them were converted:
And also after the Resurrection of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, he
appeared first to two Women, and sent them to carry the Glad-tidings of his
Resurrection to his Disciples. John 4.
The Apostle Peter in the Acts Acts 2.
preached out of the Prophet Joel, to those People that said the Apostles were
drunk with new Wine, and showed them their mistake, that they were not drunk as
they supposed, but it was that which was spoken of by the Prophet, That should
come to pass in the latter days, (says God) that I will pour out of my Spirit
upon all Flesh, your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy, and on my
Servants, and on my Handmaids will I pour out of my Spirit, and they shall
prophecy: This has confirmed that saying of the Apostle Paul, That there is
neither Jew nor Greek, Bond nor Free, Male nor Female, but are all one in
Christ: Gal. 3. 28.
And the same Apostle in one of his Epistles to the Corinthians. 1 Cor. 11. and
14. 34.
speaks concerning Women's Service in the Church, both of Praying and
Prophesying; and in some other places in the Scripture 1 Timothy 2 11, 12.
he forbids some Women's teaching and usurping Authority over the Man; all which
do no ways obstruct nor contradict what is formerly declared concerning such
Women as have received Power from God to Pray, Prophecy or declare the
Glad-tidings of the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ Jesus: Much more
might be said in this case, which I do forbear, this being sufficient. The
Protestant- Religion forbids expounding one place of Scripture to make it
repugnant to another; see that remarkable Article of the Church of England,
called the Twentieth Article: It is the Subtilty of the Serpent to expound one
place of Scripture to make it repugnant to another, to uphold such Formalities
as he can creep into; although the Scriptures of Truth be all an equal Truth,
yet they are not all of an equal weight, the Substance declared therein is of
more weight than the Forms and Circumstances thereof. Our Lord Jesus Christ the
God of glory, has visited People under several Forms, and has left them again
desolate and empty of his presence; when their Forms come once to be admired or
adored, then they are no better than an Idol, and a cover for Hypocrites. Also,
this I have seen in my time of understanding things of this nature, which is
above forty Years, although the Lord Christ has appeared to People in several
Forms, yet he dyed to end Shadows and Typical Forms; our great concerns are to
be conformable to his Death, that we may be partakers of his Resurrection; It
is usual with the Serpent to creep into Forms, but he cannot creep into this
true Conformity, there is no Harbor for him in the Cross, he is not willing
that any should take up the Cross, and become a true Disciple of Christ Jesus:
It is the Seed of the Woman, that bruises the Serpents Head; Genesis 3. 15.
(I pray mark that) for wheresoever this Seed is sown, either in Man or Woman,
that is sown upon the good Ground, Mat. 13. 31.
it will bring forth its Increase, according as is declared in the Scriptures
of Truth, and is there called the least of Seeds, and is the Day of small
things, which many have despised, for that which they have accounted to be
greater Enjoyments, which are but as the glory of the World, Zach. 4. 7. 10.
which the Devil, the God of the World has shown them, who tempts Man and
Woman at this day, as he did our Savior in the days of his Flesh, when he
showed him all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them, and as these
pretended Gifts of the god of the World are received, they blind the mind of
Man and Woman, lest they should believe in the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the Image of God, or that it should shine into them; this is
that inward Principle of the divine Light and Life, which is given of God to
man and woman to be their Guide, to bring them out of their fallen state, that
the Work of the Devil may be destroyed in them, which is Pride, Vain Glory,
Covetous Minds and Corrupt 2. Cor 4. 4.
Manners, feigned and contrived Religion, which is Hypocrisy, all which this
Nation is much poisoned withal.

And further, I shall add this, that the Lord is opening the Storehouse of his
divine Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, to all those that do sincerely wait
in silence, that their Minds may be made empty of all Imagination, whereby they
may be fitted and prepared to receive that inward Principle of Gods love to
mankind, in all Humility and Resignation to him, that his divine Power and
precious Grace may be their Teacher, to lead them out of their outward
Observations into that inward Principle of the divine Life, whereby all Gods
Children do govern their Actions; O that ye may all come to this, to dwell with
God, and he with you, as it is written by that Evangelical Prophet Isaiah, Isa.
57. 15.
Thus says the high and holy One that inhabits Eternity, whose Name is Holy, I
dwell in that High and Holy Place, with him also that is of a Contrite and
Humble Spirit, To revive the Spirit of the Humble, and to revive the Heart of
the Concrite One, this is that that all will desire at one time or other, and
That they may dye the Death of the Righteous also; Ay! but this will not serve
your turns, you must come to live the life of the Righteous first, which is To
order your Conversations aright, and then you will see the Salvation of God;
and ye will then see the destruction of the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of
the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, and whatsoever is contrary to God; By the work
of God in your own Hearts, and by his inward and spiritual Grace, Sin will be
mortified in you, and ye will be brought into a serious Consideration and
heavenly Contemplation of the Beauty and Glory of a Celestial Life, that ye
may be fixed Stars in the Kingdom of God forever. Psalm. 50. 23.


All you that are like the Noble Bereans, that are diligent Inquirers of this
Age, I shall leave you to search the Scriptures, and see if these things be not
true; for this is written in true Love to all, but more especially to awaken
those that are asleep in their mistaken Judgment, and led away by the dreaming
Conceits of Imagination: These are they that have taken up a Religion upon
Trust, upon the Credit and Relation of the Sons of Tradition, whose Faith,
Doctrine and Discipline are the Commandments of Men, making a Money-Trade of
Religion, and Persecuting such as do not conform to it: Some of these have
publicly declared themselves to be neither Papists nor Protestants, but true
Sons of the Church of England. I desire you in all love, to examine how far she
is degenerate from her first Principle, it may be easily discovered, if you
understand Bishop Iewel's Apology for the Church of England, and also the
Principle and Practices of both these and the late Times, which differ not much
in the ground. I have no Enmity in my Heart against any Person or People, but
desire the good of all men, and that ye may be truly informed, and also to
remember this Saying of the Wise Man, Faithful are the Wounds of a Friend, but
the Kisses of an Enemy are deceitful. Prove. 27. 5, 6.
My aim is, that ye may understand me as I am, and not otherwise, not
accounting me Worldly Wise, but honest, in dealing so plainly with you at this
day, when the Ruin of the Dissenters from the Church of England, is threatened,
I my self being one of them; and also that the Projectors of Self-Interest
amongst you have gotten more Power to destroy, than Honesty to preserve our
Protestant-Interest. But to return to my purpose, which only concerns the
ground of True Religion; The Faith unfeigned, which is the Gift of God only,
and not at man's disposing, this was confessed by the Apostle Paul, when he
said, Not for that we have Dominion over your Faith, 2 Cor. 2. 24.
but as Helpers of your Joy; for by Faith you stand; True Faith being the
substnce of things hoped for, the Evidence of things not seen; Heb. 11. 1.
it comes from God, and leads up to God again, and has nothing of man's
contrivance in it: Therefore let all cease from imposing Faith and Worship
toward God upon his People, and let God alone to be King and Lawgiver in men's
Consciences, in matters of Faith and Worship toward him, unto whom alone it
belongs, whose right it is to reign there in the heavenly Dominion, which
gives Victory over Death, Hell and the Grave; they that do otherways, do but
lead men out from God, into Man's Contrivances, from that inward Principle of
the divine Life, that God has put in their Hearts and Consciences, to be the
Guide of all Mankind, and is the only Infallible Way for them to trust to; for
this brings them out of the Pride, Vanity and Deceits of the World, the other
keeps them in them; so that few of them come to the true Knowledge of God, but
continue in following the Devices and Desires of their own hearts, offending
Gods holy Laws until they lay down their heads in everlasting Sorrow. And thus
is the Creation of God destroyed, by the craft and subtilty of those blind
Guides that see not beyond their own worldly Interest and profit; but if men
would have regard to the Commandments of God, to keep them, that would make
them wiser than their Teachers, that have been the chief cause of sowing
Discord between the King and People, and between one sort of People and
another, which have strengthened both Faction and Atheism, and will do more and
more, if it be not prevented. Psalm. 119. 6, 98, 99, 100.


Let these things be weighed in a sincere humble Mind, which is a true
Balance, left any be deceived by the false Weights and Measures of those that
make a Trade of Religion, which are the Buyers and Sellers of the Souls of men;
these have been the chief cause that Hell has enlarged it self abundantly of
late years, to the great Grief of all sincere true Christians; for since this
Dayspring of divine Light and Love that has appeared so effectually to all
those that have waited in Faith and Patience to be Partakers of it, the old
Enemy of Mankind, which is the great Accuser of God's People in all Ages, has
raged more abundantly, seeking by Persecution, Slanders, and Reproaching the
Children of Light, to remove all that may obstruct his Kingdom of Darkness and
Delusions; but the Lord God Everlasting will more and more break forth by his
Almighty Power to blast the Expectations of all those his Agents and
Instruments, that have strengthened man in his Wickedness, to prevent or hinder
the Prosperity of Peace and Truth in this Land of our Nativity, whether they be
Professors of Religion, or Profane loose Persons.

O Eternal Powerful Lord God! hasten this thy Work, that all Mankind may fear
and tremble before thee: Then shall the works of Darkness be destroyed, and thy
holy Power will be adored more abundantly in the Hearts and Consciences of the
Sons and Daughters of Men, to thy Everlasting Praise and Glory for evermore,
Amen.

Written in the Year 1683. Anne Docwra.


THe Mystery of God's Love to all
Is Light within: Now since the Fall,
Vain man, that is rock't asleep in Sin,
Sees not the Day Star coming in. 1 Pet. 1. 19.

The fond Desires of Vain Delight
Brings Sorrow and Eternal Night.
Awake, Awake, come to the Light, Ephesians. 5. 13, 14, 15.

Which shows thy Deeds that are not Right:
Why should thou sleep the Sleep of Death!
And lie in Sorrow down Beneath,
When Light is given thee for thy Guide,
To bring thee from thy Life of Pride?
The humble lowly Truth invite
All men to stoop, to it unite,
That thou may know a Resting Place
With God, that will the Proud debase.
This Testimony of God's Love, John 3. 19, 20, 21. 2 Cor. 4. 6.

The Light descending from above,
That shines into the Hearts of all,
For to Redeem out of the Fall;
It shows to man, how to begin
The Work of God that Conquors Sin,
Discovering Vice and Virtue clear,
To all that will to it adhere,
That every man may see his Sin,
Even by the Light that shines within;
Which shows to every one, his Deeds
Spring from the good or evil Seeds.
This Light is for the Righteous sown, Psalm. 97. 11.

The Just man's Path, where God is known:
Sons of Corruption come not there. Prove. 4. 8, 9.

No Vipers in this Path appear.
This troublesome Insect that Aspires,
To Rob man of his good Desires
To Justice, Mercy, Love and Peace,
That no true Virtue may increase;
Their Sun will set, and Storms will come,
A Bed of Sorrow is their Doom,
Though in the Sun these Vipers play,
And think not of a Reckoning day.
Awake, my Friends, come and behold,
This Light divine will not be sold,
Nor bought for Money, it is too dear
And precious, as it does appear.
Our bounteous God, he has sent forth
His Proclamation of great worth, Isa. 55. 1.

Which calls to all to come and buy John 7. 37, 38, 39,

Of him, that will not Life deny,
Wine and Milk without Coin,
Both heavenly, pure and divine;
All those that freely feed on it,
In heavenly places they shall sit.
Anne Docwra

THE END
BOOKs Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Crooked Billet in Holloway-Lane
in Shoreditch.
NO Cross, No Crown: Or a Discourse showing the Nature and Discipline of the
holy Cross of Christ.

An Answer to a foolish Libel, called, The Quakers Opinions.

England's present Interest discovered, with honor to the Prince and safety to
the People.

An Epistle to the Churches of Jesus throughout the World.

An Epistle to the Children of Light.

An Address to Protestants upon the present Conjuncture.

A brief state and exmination of Liberty Spritual.

Wisdom justified of her Children.

Reason against Railing, and Truth against Fiction.

The Invalidity of I. F's Reply.

Innocence with her open face.

An Epistle, containing a solemn Farewell, etc. All writ by William Penn.

The Christian-Quaker and his divine Testimony vindicated by Scripture, Reason
and Authorities; in two Parts, Writ By W. Penn and G. Whitehead.

A Lamentation over England and faithful Warning to the Inhabitants thereof. By
William Bingley.

Due Order of Law and Justice pleaded, against Irregular and Arbitrary
Proceedings. By George Whitehead.

The Real Quaker a Real Protestant. By G. W.

The Religious Assemblies of the People called Quakers vindicated.

A legal Examination of Abuses of Law. Concerning 1. Forcible Entry; 2.
Imprisonment without Warrant, how contrary to Law; 3. Riots, Routs and Unlawful
Assemblies; 4. The public Peace. and Breach of it; 5. Oppression and Duress by
Goals and Goalers, and what Privilege the Law allows to Prisoners.

The Prisoners Vindication, with a sober Expostulation and Reprehension of
Persecutors. By John Gratton.

Lawson's Treatise concerning the seven Liberal Arts.

Something in Answer to them that say, the Quakers are no Christians. By G. F.

Universal Love. By W. Smith.

The great Case of Tithes once more revived. By Fr. Howgill.


