THE SPEECH Of the Right Reverend Anthony Bishop of Mead, when the Clergy
waited on His Majesty at His Camp nigh Dublin, July 7. 1690.
Together with His Majesty's most Gracious Answer.
May it please Your Majesty,
WE are some of the Remains of the Clergy that have ventured to stay behind our
Brethren in Perilous Times, and under great Discouragements, for the Discharge
of our Duty to God and the People. Two of us are Bishops, who, together with
five more in the Kingdom, thought our selves obliged to continue here, to
preserve the Succession of the Clergy, by the Ordination of Priests and
Deacons, and the Seminary of the Church by Confirmation. The rest of our
Members are the Clergy of this City, and the Rural Clergy. The former of these
have staid upon their Charge, under great Wants and Discouragements, having not
only been deprived of all their Maintenance, but exposed to daily Dangers, in,
and for the Discharge of their Duties: And the latter are Persons driven from
their Cures, and forced to seek Relief and Sanctuary in this City.

We may possibly be censured by those, who understand not the Grounds and
Reasons of our continuance in this Kingdom, as Trimmers, or favorers of
Popery: From the first we are able to acquit our selves, having been guilty of
no Complyances, but such as were the effects of Prudence and Self-preservation,
such as were at once both innocent and necessary, and fit to be observed to a
Power, that was able to crush us far worse than it did: And we are so far from
being guilty of the latter, that we humbly conceive, That we could not more
effectually oppose the growth and inundation of Popery, than by keeping up the
public Assemblies, by sticking to our Flocks, and preventing their seduction
by the Romish Emissaries.

We do not come to crave your Majesty's Protection for our Persons, our
Churches, our Religion, or our Properties, which have been all in some measure
Invaded. Our Persons have been imprisoned, our Churches taken from us, our
Properties destroyed by a late Act of Parliament, that took away our Tithes;
and the free exercise of our Religion for some time interrupted. A Request of
this Nature might perhaps look like a distrust of Your Majesty's Care of us,
and seem to contradict the Glorious Design of Your coming into this Kingdom. We
are sensible that the generous end of Your Majesty's Presence is to rescue us
from the Oppressions and Tyranny of Popery; and are well assured, that the same
Paternal Affection, that moved Your Majesty to pity our Distress, will still
protect us now we are Delivered.

We come rather to bless God as the Author of our Deliverance, and Your Majesty
as the Happy Instrument raised up by His Providence for the effecting it; to
express our Gratitude and Duty to Your Majesty, who has a double Title to our
Services, not only as our King, but as our Gracious Benefactor and Deliverer:
To pray for the Success of Your Majesty's Forces, for the Consummation of that
Good Work that you have with so much Personal Hazard undertaken: That you may
carry your Victorious Arms into other Countries, where the Cries and the Groans,
and the Oppressions of the Afflicted Protestants, are as great as they have
been here; That God would be an Helmet of Salvation to You in the Day of
Battle, and deal with You as He did with Nebuchadnezzar, when He promised him
the Kingdom of Egypt, for his hard Service against Tyrus: May He likewise
recompense Your hard Labor in this Kingdom, with the Addition of another that
is far more valuable: And may You prove as Happy and Successful in the
succouring of others, as You have been of the Poor Afflicted People of this
Kingdom.

His MAJESTY'S Answer.
I Am come hither to Deliver you from the Tyranny of Popery and Slavery, to
Protect the Protestant Religion, and Restore you to your Liberties and
Properties; and you may depend upon it.

LICENSED, July 22. 1690.

Printed at London, and Reprinted at Edinburgh, by the Heir of Andrew
Anderson, Printer to Their most Excellent Majesty's, Anno Dom. 1690.


