THE LADY ELEANOR, HER APPEAL TO THE HIGH COURT OF PARLJAMENT.

PSALM. 123. Behold, even as the eyes of Servants look to the hand of their
Masters, etc.

Printed in the year, 1641.

MAT. 8. 4. See thou tell no man, but go thy way, show, etc.

TO THE HONORABLE ASSEMBLY OF THE High Court of Parliament.
MOST Honorable Lords, Noble Knights, and Gentlemen: This JOSEPH, and about to
take his flight, hated hitherto, for the Evill-report brought of his Brethren:
Also a Striplin grown up of 17. years; many colors or pieces whose Coat too,
craves Your patience, to hear him a few words here.

The Preface.
THe road way not to baulke, a preface omitted neither to the reader:
complement, although laid aside, soft lineing of that sort, these therewith
prefaced not; rather preferred for all weather serviceable, a piece of plain
Leather. In Paradise our livery made up without hands, that of Skins: And for
that precious Stone, without hands cut out; this piece or appollogie serving,
set here without coullours or flowers, as for enammeling such, having none
Artificial.

And heretofore a show, having bin of these handled: Though the substance
unmanifested or maine sum; Times mystery unknown that treasure, till the
Evening and fulness of time, as those Trenches filled even with Water before
the fire fell, and purifying-pots, those first with Water filled: likewise the
mystery of times and seasons so late revealed, made known for the failing of
the future. This good Wine kept till now.

And this thing now, who knows not too well; tedious to touch and foul: but
Blaines and Running-Soares nothing else all over, from the Elbow unto the
feet: so this annoynting commended to all, for the blessed Readers and Hearers
both:

Farewell. From Kensington, the Angel sign. Whitsontyde, 1641.
THE LADY ELEANOR, her appeal to the high Court of PARLIAMENT.
DAN. 2. 34. Thou saw till that a Stone was cut out without hands, which
smote the Image upon the feet: That of Iron, and Clay, and brake them in
pieces, etc.
Here these touching the Iron-age, remains of time, a taste thereof; the
Sons of the Prophets for their use, needless; as into the water to cast a
Logg, wherein a stick cut down, but thrown suffices, or to give a touch,
etc. As far either from building upon others foundation, theirs etc. The
lantern unusefull, when the Moon giving light at full, not trespassing in
that way here, nor borrowing either etc. And so farther of the latter days,
these even being become dross changed, even commanded these by him.

The Judge all-sufficient, God able to change all, and them reform: As
doubtless the end, the final day before of doom refined reformed to be: to
this end commended by us, and being high time to make some preparation; the
tidings of a troublesome time cut of, unfruitful, etc.

In short showed, those sharp days shortened, the brittle feet parted those, a
warning piece, as follows.

In pieces broken, destroyed at the last, though nothing than mettle lasting
more: That stone then unmovable invincible, the everlasting Law, as the
workmanship of the Creators finger, moreover his heavy hand therewith: None
other that great Image but spiritual aspiring BABYLON the fall of both, the
other Babell likewise that taken, going before the end of the World; like this
dream the World gone in a moment. And before the worlds departing, not without
a Cutt^ng blow threatened forthwith, as when that hasty Decree sent forth his
Proclamation for his own Nation; those wise men to be destroyed. That first
borne Monarchy, Babylons great revolution, visible even in our Horizon, that
end or time, closing with the time of the end, and from the hand also a fair
sign after to appear.

And here so much for parallizing of this expensive time, with that time of
wantonness, in his reign not found current. In which want none found: of
weakness, willfulness begetting, lifted up like the empty Scale, when the
full descends: The Sun like at lowest, making then the longest shadow. Thus
represented in this Mirror of former times, the present age the visage thereof,
etc. Also, no spare body, unwildy grown and great, every way dangerous
division thereby unable to stand upon the feet: Not spared by Her, whose song
the Worlds farewell these. Disburthened in this ensuing brief. And plain to
be in undoing this knot too, the Iron-age done, finished, although this piece
difficult to digest, somewhat, etc.

Thou saw, till that a Stone was cut out without hands, etc. The sum of
these words signify, the Burden of Gods word in the last days, of a truth
disclosing the time of the end. And of premises the conclusion following: So
unexpected Judgments foretold from them: Also made evident the end of time.
Here Stone sharpening Iron, and striking fire, High favors (for the most part)
not without a heavy hand imparted: like Jacob and his Brother, the unlike
twins begotten, or the Blessing in one hand, a Rod of correction in the
other, and of which fire already kindled, loving Kindness and Judgment, going
hand in hand together, the evil times but touched only.

Thou saw, till that a Stone was cut out without hands, which smote the
Image. The Sign in the feet; So in these last days: see here, and behold
fulfilled, how that very saying:

Thou saw till that, etc. By Thee beheld, as much to say, to read a certain
Manuscript, the weighty Stone become a Book, not waiting long for Privilege,
Imprinted, howsoever soon after.

Certainly; in what year testifying the Worlds disolution, Manifested with a
heavy one: In the year One thousand six hundred twenty five.

That great Plague year, out of Darkness, when the Visions translated of the
Man, greatly beloved DANJELL. For the great days breaking forth, cleared those
clowdy Characters: As delivered not without a token, since made good, the
Brittle standing of his own Kingdoms, dedicated to the KING of Great
BRITAIN, Defendor of the Faith.

And of whose making to justify here, by whom Published; though hitherto by
authority with-stood.

ELEANOR AVDELEY, handmayden of the most high GOD of Heaven, this Book brought
forth by Her, fifth Daughter of GEORGE, Lord of CASTLEHAVEN, Lord AVDLEY, and
Tuitchet. NO inferior PEER of this Land, in Ireland the fifth EARL.

Which name blotted a House or Castle, of late fallen by the ancient of days:
His Kingdoms mysteries displaying, nor chosen any obscure Motto. God has
divided thy Kingdom, and numbered, etc.

And farther, of this Stone; of the Builders cast aside: the Sum of this
Book or Subject, besides the day of Judgment revealed, even that Some
standing here, shall not taste of Death, till they see that day. Herewith fell
upon the ROMAN-EMPIRES disolation. The World, the great MAN: the disolution
ushered with GERMANIES overthrw unexpecting: As moreover one last serving these
Feet, great Britains foot too, and Germany divided both between two
opinions, Religions, and Buisnesses, where never since a Nation such
distractions. For Plagues and greivances, such inward and outward ones,
striving to outstrip one another.

Heere-withall foreshewed, the Furious Progress of the French and Spannish
Forces, with those Leagues not in force now. Notwithstanding corsse Marriages,
etc. never before so.

The Kings of the North, by those France signified: Likewise the Kings of the
South, the AVSTRIAN Family, these like whirlwinds tossing the World up and
down from this side to that, etc AND for the shutting up of this Treatise,
lastly; with a Salutation concluded for the Son of Peace, if he had been there
saluted, etc.

And at that time shall MICHAEL stand up, the great Prince, etc. Angel land, or
ENGLANDS-ILAND, therefore the Archangels Name; here the half name and
abbreviated words, the age or time shortened betokning, etc. And for future
things derided their Music. Daniels. Prophecy shut up prohibited, this time
of trouble, their's come to pass notwithstanding. So passing or poasting to
the time, at last of deliverance, the blessed resurrection. Here unfolded that
treble or threefold Coard, not easily broken nor altered: Sworn with a high
hand, that meeting a Trienniall etc.

For a time and times, and half, (or part) from the half of Seven, the hand
pointing at the seaventeenth-hundred year: That very time, about the half but
fulfilled of the last Centerie, as five hundred years filling up a Period.
Lastly, given under the hand lifted up, even five thousand years complete for
the age of the World. The Worlds Ages too, parted into three prats, allotted
two thousand years a piece, or thereabouts. The shortest lot drawn last, for
a time and times, and half; shortened in the behalf of His Elect.

From Adam unto Abraham, (offering of his son) the first Stage or time; so
unto Jerusalems destruction the second. And the last or third, to the end of
the World, the glorious Resurrection, etc. And yet farther, for the fortunate
figure of five, (Blessed is he that waits and comes*) etc. Here two hundred
and ninety, and three hundred and five and thirty, amounting to six hundred
twentie-five, signifying thereby, the year wherein unsealed the Book of the
Prophet Daniell, 1625. and 17. years current, sithence a time and times and
half Likewise, this Books Resurrection-time also appointed, waiting for the
appeasing near of these storms and troubles, a Peaceable time: God was not in
the Wind, not in the Earthquake, not in the Fire: after the fire, at last, the
small still voice. AND so finished this Book. (Beyond expectation,) but so
came to Pass in the year aforesaid, 1625. She awakened by a voice from
HEAEVN, in the FIFTH month, the 28. of July, early in the Morning, the
Heavenly voice uttering these words.

There is Ninteene years and a half to the day of Judgment, and you as the
meek Virgin. These sealed with Virgins state in the Resurrection, when they not
giving in Marriage.

And to take heed of Pride, or to that effect spoken or added: But as for the
Golden number that heeded well or heard: the clear voice of a Trumpet
inclining thereto; and like the chafe of the Summer-threshing-flowre
scattered. When the City flying or fled from the Pestilence, that Summers
great Visitation, the fifth months Farewell, July 28. the Heavy hand, in that
very week, as weekly the number certified, five thousand deseased of the
Plague: Moreover; the ensuing Week, giving up the reckoning more full, the
number of the dead, amounting to five thousand five hundred and odd, etc. there
stoppt or stayed immediately, as much to say; but a spanne the Worlds age,
graven with that deadly Dart, and never to be forgotten, within few days how
scarce a token? So suddenly ceasing then.

VERSE. 36. This is the dream, and we will tell the interpretation thereof
before the King: thou art this head of gold.

The Iron touched with the Lodestone, turns toward the North, Great
Britains four Crowns or Kingdoms: This gyant-Image armed at all points,
England, Angel-gold fought the first fight, incountred Romes Dragon, put to
flight his Anges.

The Reformations Leader, the other inferior Kingdom, France the Breast and
Arms of Silver, sometimes subject to this Ilands-Crowne, bears only the
Lilly argent for Arms, etc.

Another third Kingdom bearing, rule over all: of brass, Scotland; Bell
Mettle, the Belly and Thighs, the Breeches to wit, or blessing wrestled for,
having shrunck a sinnew, halting too.

The fourth kingdom of Iron, the feet Ireland broken in pieces by an army,
their old customs turned into new Laws, and divided between two Religions,
our Ladies and our Lords at strife together: but Woman, what have we to do
with thee, but Potters earth and myrie clay, but water with wine compaird.

And drawing here to the end, or foot of this Image: The fourh Monarchies
heavy estate, and that fourth Kingdom weighed both here together, where
Princes and Nobles going a begging: The basse set on Horseback commanding,
without doubt the Gentiles their return, to wallow in the mire, or
Heathenisine-covetousnes and Idolatry: this massy piece importing and
expressing no less. And further, the Iron feet as inferring besides Irelands
denominations, the names of Ferdinand, by whom the devision of these days,
left for a Legacy to his heirs. Also, of that Arch-engin great pieces, Volues
of shot where distance of so many miles, not securing without hands or mercy
in a moment. Towers trodden under foot, and Ships as towns broken in pieces:
doubtless which cruel Invention among Christians, sounding the Alarm of the
day of Judgemeut at hand, by those thunderbolts discharged. And in days of
old, had the mighty Volumes bin, those of late Imprinted, out of doubt repented
they had, But this Joseph they knew not the holy Scripture. So old days
presedents made for the future, the Fathers as it were laying up for the
Children, and more tolerable in the day of Judgment for them, then for these
times, and these of that rare Art also of the Press, as well as pieces, in an
instant performed, drawn within the compass of this stone, cut out without
hands, become a mountain: the Kingdom of heaven at hand, pointing thereat to be
revealed too.

Lastly, this name of Charles, no small Favorites of the Fisherman taken in
his nets, stooping to his unsavorie toe; so come to the French and Spanish
Emperors. And Charles the great, since whose days, a thousand years expired
near: Feet of the longest size, of the Ten^s. Four of his Race succeding in
the Western Empire, setting in Europes-Ocean that eye of the World, No little
one, either the other great toe, Charles the fifth, and of his successors some
six of them.

Thus of two thousand and two hundred years standing, this great Image; four
stories in height, or a nail driven to the head: laid upon the Anvill by
those, in all Arts so able, that further a^plification u^necessary, but
commended these.

DAN, verse 44. And in the days of these Kings, shall the God of heaven set up
a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the Kingdom shall not be left
to other people, it shall break in pieces.

Finally, for a watch word also these, let fall; at the end of twelve months,
etc. verse, 29 And the end of all these at aimed, either Heavens departing: for
without some farther mystery, doubtless not. Even the not known day and
hour, showed about New-yeares-day, when that good time falling, or
twelfe-tyde, there then to watch, as those night-watchers, the happy
Shepherd, our example.

And Nebuchadnezer for examples sake too, for the future chastised, by whom an
Act published the earth throughout, for those that walk in Pride to beware.
And signs and wonders for to observe from above; which some careless
observing not, othersome not discerning not, as blockish. So this son of the
Morning, walking in his majesty, the heavy sentence falling, as foretold by
the Prophet Daniel, for to avoid the Tree, whereof the leaves fair, and fruit
much; as much to say, a fair Pedigree, Kings and Princes growing thereon. And
the axe laid to the trees root, wherefore to show mercy at length to the
poor: Counseled for lengthning of his well-faire and tranquillity; lest of
the lash tasting as well as others.

And upon greatness, none to presume, this Daniel penning feigned Tragedies,
none sets forth plain this great Assiryan how; taking his Sabbaticall
progress. In all have driven from his privy Chamber, how doing in the field
open Penance, also grazing before his Palace, feeds with his fellow Ass: And
like Eagles-plumes, those stareing locks of his overgrown; a heavy crown or
capp, to keep his head from cold. Also Oxens pushing hornes-like, thereto
crooked nails as birds of prey, the inseparable crown and septor so going
together: Pride and cruelty here, which Brutish condition before served out,
that apprentiship before added excellent Majesty, etc. and Lords seeking to
him, constrained to cast those high looks lower, little dreamed of that
estate: sometime who from the Bed to mind calling the grave no doubt, and
thoughts in their own likeness begetting Dreams. By this great Monarch
dreamed, thought he saw an Image and a stone of that greatness, certainly lay
thinking, when he gone the way of all flesh, gathered to his fathers, upon some
piece in his own likeness some everlasting Monument. From whose sudden awakning
and up rising also, the Prophet revealing earthly dominions and Monarchs, the
heaven therewith passing away in a moment of time, even mortallities change for
no other passage this, or place of Scripture. But like these mettels four, the
Elements melting, so live for ever, etc.

FINIS.
DANIEL J end all.

