DANGERFIELDS Dance.
Giving an Account of several Notorious Crimes by him Committed; VIZ, He
pretended to be a DUKE, And feigned Himself to be MONMOUTH, With several other
PRANKS: For which he was Sentenced To Stand in the Pillory, to be VVhip'd at
the Carts Arse, and to be sent back to Prison.

This may be Printed, July 2. 1685. R. L. S.

Entered according to Order.

For a Seditious LIBEL.


SPECTATVM ADMISSI RISVM TENEATIS AMICI.


IT is no Wonder in this Crittick Age,
To see Offenders mounted on the Stage,
And Shameful Punishment on them attend,
Who on their Shamming Wits so much depend;
Scourging and Pillorys fall to their share,
But all too little to make them beware:
And Impudence to such a height is grown,
As I believe the like was never known.
Here you may see how Dangerfield's Aspired!
Who needs would be a Duke! by all admired!
His subtle Crotchets, and his cunning Pate,
Has brought his Person to a dreadful State.
How he did Scamper, if you did but mind,
When on his Back he did the Torment find
Of Scourging Justice, it would make you Smile,
To see how Fortune did his hopes beguile;
And brought his feigned Highness to the Lash,
Till brinish Tears his Brazen-Face did Wash.
O hapless Dangerfield! thou art mistook,
That did for Honor and Obedience look.
Thy great Ambition all Men do Rebuke,
Could nothing serve, but thou must be a DUKE?
Fie, fie, it was too great and high a Style,
Though Fortune for a moment seemed to Smile;
Yet from thy Honor thou came tumbling down,
When she once faced about on thee to Frown:
Old Newgate was the place to Entertain
The Shamming DUKE, where thou did long remain;
Till thou were Whipped and Scourged along the Streets,
Which seemed Sour Sauce after so many Sweets;
Yet 'twas but Just thou should it undergo,
Because that you such Shirking Tricks did show;
And brought thee unto Condign Punishment,
If It please Tour Highness, what was your intent?
Poor Women to deceive, and get their Coin,
It is no better then for to Purloyn;
And make the World believe thou were some Spark
Who had such Honor from thy Servant Mark,
Like Oats, thy hopes are now in pieces crash'd,
The Brains of thy Ambition out are dashed.
Whipping, instead of Cringing unto thee,
Thou may expect will now thy Portion be.
Thy Name for ever will be on Record,
Thou must not be a Duke, nor yet a Lord;
A Newgate-Bird thou may accounted be,
Highly deserving of the PILLORY.
And since so Arch and Cunning thou art grown,
To play such Pranks as never before was known;
It Is pity thou should 'want of thy Desert,
Though now thy Title is not worth a Fart.
And so Duke Dangerfield I bid adieu,
A thousand Lashes I bequeath to you;
And hope you may to others warning be,
Never to practice such base Villainy.
Your Suffering, you cannot well deny,
Is the Reward of your Audaucity;
To this your Reason cannot choose but yield,
And now look to your Hits, Duke Dangerfield.
FINIS.
London, Printed by J. M. in the Year MDCLXXXV:


