The Bill of Excommunication, For abolishing henceforth the SABBATH Called
Sunday or First day. By the Lady ELEANOR.

Apocalips, cap. 1. Printed in the Year, 1649.

The Bill of EXCOMMVNICATION For abolishing henceforth, The Sabbath called
Sunday or First day, from the Lady Eleanor, ( Apoc. cap. 1.)
AS showed by whom (when passed by) in his admonition: Whom ye ignorantly
worship, him show I unto you, (Acts) so understood of you even alike Prophesies
Mystery, especially this Book of Apocalips: The last, etc. times and seasons
preordained bounds, whereof the sum, in season now; of which obtruse Oracle by
Her as ensues; a blessing far from every one of you neither; the most Supreme
and reserved.

Containing three Articles or Arguments first Prophecy, like the Eagle
renewing its strength. Secondly, of a new Sabbath instituted, namely Moonday,
One for Thee, as it were, one for Moses, and one for Elias. Lastly, Of the
Lords second coming in the last days, revealed to be, also of time, persons and
place, no unnecessary circumstances.

The Book superscribed thus, Reader and Hearer, both with a blessing crowned,
keep the words hereof, for the time is at hand. ver. a sufficient Motive.

Which passages profound till come of full Age, under custody of Metaphors and
Figures, by him Secretary to the Holy Ghost, on this wise, under his Hand
Joann. The grace of God signifying, Anno Dom. These Visions when awakened,
that alone Peacemaker.

Ver. John to the seven Churches, grace and peace from him which was, and which
is, and which is to come, and from the seven Spirits in presence of his Throne:
Times voices past, present and future, bids farewell him, a Father become of
many Generations, bearing date the last seven hundred years, those in the rear
next to eternity: That sits not on Thrones by hands erected.

As in the next place Easters Anniversary day, the Resurrections comemoration
(ver.) And from Jesus Christ and first begotten of the dead, that washed us in
his Blood, etc. implying (Jesus CHR:) even Lord of Sabbaths three, from his
rest; a greater then Caesar slain then, or CH: R: either of Britains three
Isles, styled Defenders or Saviors, etc. whose Coronations father and son both
about Easter, J. and C. those first and last.

And AS he comes he comes, (Psalm.) Let the great Isles be glad thereof, To
him be glory and dominion for ages of ages, even so Amen. (ver.) A. and O. All
and Some, beginning and ending of the Roman and Norman Tyranny both, also
pointing to the Hebrew Language and Greek, Old and New Testament, where the one
begins, the other Finis subscribes.

And so a brief Remonstrance of whose Sabbath or First day, not only how of
late profaned, but accompanied with a mass of abomination as far as these
narrow limits permit.

To steal the hearts of the people, Absoloms policy like, consecrated to
Maygames and VVakes, when crowding and piping to fall to their Heathen
exercises, needs not be awakened, to give ear to these lessons, like him that
made Israel to sin; such a care had of the people, least weary themselves that
way, answerable to those presumptious prefaces annexed to Bibles, lest it
troublesome either, that except the Revelations Book, and other like least
edifying, and such as may be best spared, allowing the rest once a Week to be
read; Doubtless in process of time, not without an intent to poison the rest
likewise of those living Fountains, by like aspersions.

Pretending it only concerns Rome, as by their Marginals all upon that Dragon
laid and his Red Livery. And thus proceeding with that Ivory Box, dissolved
those Spirits oderiserous Ointment alike acceptable, to the world as when she
of everlasting memory, before his Burial then brake the other, no less then
before times departure prefiguring the Spirit of Prophecy distilling that dew
on Mount Sion, etc. a threefold testament importing.

But leaving that, like to the three measures of meal taken by her, wherein
hidden, etc. till the whole leavened again return where left him; after had his
ample Salutations signified; Relates by what Authority sets out the ensuing.
Proclamation or (...)


