The Lord Marquess of Dorchesters LETTER to the Lord ROOS: With the Lord
ROOS'S Answer thereunto.

Whereunto is Added the Reasons, why the Lord Marquess of Dorchester published
his Letter of the 25. of Febr. 1659. Dated the 13. of the same month.

With his Answer to the Lord ROOS his Letter.

London, Printed, 1660.

A true and perfect Copy of a Letter Written by the Lord Marquess of
Dorchester, to the Lord Roos.
Printed the 25. of Feb. 1659. but sent to him on the 13. of the same Month.
SUre you were in one of your Drunken Fits, the Pot flew high when you writ
your Sottish and Clownish Paper to me, that rellishes of nothing but a Tippl'd
Fool, and a Bragging Coward; and the latter in so poor and mean a manner, that
I am ashamed it should come from one that bears the Name, though not the Nature
of a Gentleman: Your own fearful guilty Soul knows that my late Letter, as
well as a former to your self, (together with all Passages between us) were
almost as soon communicated to your Father and Mother, as to your self, and not
long after to some of your nearest Relations; Nay, many of the Servants of both
your Families were privy thereunto, and knew as much as your self, and so did
diverse others in several places: All this I can prove by persons well reputed;
and for the Letters, I dare swear, they were not kept very secret, for I have
heard of diverse passages in them, which I am sure came to no body by
Revelation, and yet you have the frontlesse impudence to lay this aspersion
upon me: I have fought before now, and I hope never came off with the loss of
honor; and must I now be afraid of such a Shadow, such a half-man as you are?
and it is well if you be so much: You remember I challenged you twice in one
Week, and you poorly and basely refused both, pretending you would give me
full satisfaction; you came indeed (but full sore against your will, and
contrary to the Huffs you gave out in the Country in your Drink) and promised
as much as I could expect, but afterward performed nothing: And now be your
own Judge, whether it is possible for any one to believe, that I that knew you
had poorly refused twice, should avoid the meeting you now: If you needs must
lie, follow my advice, and hereafter lie Colourably, for these are such gross
ones, that they are palpable, like the Aegytian Darkness. I must needs say, it
much troubles, and afflicts me, to be compelled by your barbarous and unmanly
provocations, to use such speeches, contrary to my nature and disposition; but
you began, and I do no more than retaliate, and the law of Retaliation is just
and equal: But I believe, you will bear all quietly, was it more; for you abound
in Passive fortitude, though you have in you not one jot of the Active. If this
any whit galls, you know the way to London (no other place for the present
being possible to be chosen without most apparent and evident suspicion) There
will be the most privacy, and who plays the Pultroon, will be most easily
discovered But what do I talk of London to you, you will as soon-come on your
Head as on Horseback or in Coach, to meet me with a Sword in your hand: But,
was it a Bottle, none would be more forward; and with such a weapon you may
venture upon a Dutchman: But if there be a spark of Fire in so dull a Flint, I
will strike it. From the beginning to the end of your Letter you falsely lie,
and if you dare appear, I will cram it down your Throat with my sword; if there
need any more, I say and resay, You are a base Coward. If you must have another
Push, I will divulge it to the World in Print what a Coward You are, and make
public all the passages between us; Your foolish bragging Letter shall not be
omitted, which will speak you more than I have done, and this shall follow
after it; then 'twill to all appear what a Captain Puff you are, fit for
nothing but a Cudgel. For shame leave the Petticoat off, and put on Brecches;
use my Argument against my self; if I was so mean to discover this; you may
infallibly conclude I will do so again; but you will use none of this way of
Argumentation, you too well know my innocence therein; if I may see a Miracle,
that is, you with a Sword in your hand, I will before our Seconds and your
self, beseech God that what I wished in my Letter to your Second, may fall upon
me, [viz.] That if in the least, directly or indirectly, I be guilty of this
discovery, or any Circumstance that can but tend thereunto: Nay, I will go
farther, If I did not my utmost to avoid all suspicion, may I fall by your
Sword, to my eternal shame and ruin. This, upon my Honor, I will declare upon
our Meeting, in manner as I have said, which I am sure you dare not
respectively do for your self; Your guilty trembling Conscience will hold you
off when you are so near danger.

Dorchester.
Monday Febr. 13. 1659.

The Messenger was sent Post with this Letter to the Lord Roos, on the day of
the date thereof, but was forced to follow him from place to place, it being
given out be was gone three or four several ways; at length he found him at
the Lord Mountague' s in Northamptonshire; and there after many Examinations,
with much difficulty, he delivered this Letter to the Lord Roos his own hands,
on Thursday morning the 16. of this instant Febr.

A true and perfect Copy of the Lord Roos his Answer to the Marquess of
Dorchester's Letter written the 25- of February 1659.
Sir,
SUre you were among your Gallipots and Glisterpipes, when you gave your
Choler so violent a Purge, to the fouling of so much innocent paper, and your
own reputation (if you had any, which the wise very much doubt) you had better
bin drunk and set in the Stocks for it, when you sent the Post with a whole
packet of Chartells to me; in which you have discovered so much vapouring
nonsense and railing, that it is wholsomer for your credit, to have it thought
the effect of drink, then your own natural talent in perfect mind and memory:
for if you understand any thing in your own Trade, you could not but know that
the Hectic of your own brain is more desperate than the Tertian fits of mine,
which are easily cured with a little sleep; but yours is past the remedy of a
Mortar and braying. But I wonder with what confidence you can accuse me with
the discovery of private passages between us, when you are so open your self,
that every man sees through you; or how could I disclose perfectly any thing in
your Epistles to my Father and Mother, the which was not before very well
known unto your Tutors or School masters, whose instructions you used in
compiling those voluminous works. Let any man judge, whether I am so likely to
divulge secrets as you, who cannot forbear printing and publishing: Your
Labors are now cried in the streets of London, with Ballads on the Rump and
Hewsons Lamentations; and the Lord of Dorchester's name makes a greaer noise in
a close Alley than Kitchin-stuffe or work for a Tinker: and all this by your
own industry, who are not ashamed at the same instant to pretend to secrecy,
with no less absurdity than you commit, when accusing me for using foul
Language, you do outdo Billingsgate your self. But now you begin to vapor, and
to tell us you have fought before; so I have heard you have, with your Wife,
and Poet, but if you come off with no more honor, than when you were beaten by
my Lord Grandison, you had better have kept that to your self, if it were
possible for you to conceal any thing: but I cannot but laugh at the untoward
course you take to render your self formidable, by bragging of your Fights,
when you are terrible only in your medicines: if you had told us how many you
killed that way, and how many you have cut in pieces, besides Calves and Dogs,
a right valiant man that has any wit, would tremble to come nere you: and if
by your threatening to ram your Sword down my Throat, you do not mean your
Pills, which are a more dangerous weapon, the worst is past, and I am safe
enough: as for your Feats of Arms, there is no half quarter of a man that is
so wretched, but would venture to give you battle, but you are most
unsufferable in your unconscionable engrossing of all Trades: Is it not enough
that you are already as many things as any of your own receipts, that you are
a Doctor of the Civil Law, and a Barister at the Common, a Bencher of Gray's
Inn, a Professor of Physic and a Fellow of the College; a Mathematician, a
Chaldean, a Schoolman and a piece of a Grammarian, (as your last work can show
were it construed) a Philosopher, Poet, Translator, Antisocordist, Solliciter,
Broker and Usurer; besides, a Marquess, Earl, Vicount and Baron; but you must,
like Dr. Subtle, profess quarrelling too, and publishing your self an Hector;
of which calling there are so many already, that they can hardly live one by
another. Sir, truly there is no conscience in it, considering you have not
only, a more sure and safe way of killing men already then they have, but a
plentiful Estate besides: So many Trades, and yet have so little conscience to
eat the bread out of their mouths; they have great reason to lay it to heart,
and I hope some of them will demand reparation of you, and make you give them
compounding dinners too, as well as you have done to the rest of your
Fraternities; and now be your own Judge, whether any one man can be bound in
honor to Fight with such an Hydra as you are; a Monster of many heads, like
the multitude, or the Devil that called himself Legion; such an encounter would
be no Duel but War, which I never heard that any one man ever made alone; and
I must levy Forces ere I can meet you, for if every one of your capacities had
but a Second, you would amount to a Brigade, as your Letter does to a
Declaration; in which I cannot omit, that in one respect you have dealt very
ingeniously, and that is in publishing to the world, that all your Heroical
resolutions are built upon your own opinion of my want of courage: this argues
you well studied in the dimensions of quarrelling; among which, one of the
chiefest shows how to take measure of another man's valor, by comparing it with
your own, to make your approaches accordingly: but as the least mistake
betrays you to an infallible beating, so you had fared, and perhaps had had
the Honor, which you seem to desire, of falling by my Sword, if I had not
thought you a thing fitter for any man's contempt then anger.

Roos.


The Reasons why the Lord Marquess of Dorchester printed his Letter the 25. of
Febr. 1659. Dated the 13. of the same Month.
Together with my Answer to a printed Paper, called, a true and perfect Copy of
the Lord Roos his Answer to the Marquess of Dorchester's Letter, Written the
25. of Febr. 1659.
ON the 13. of Febr. last, about five in the afternoon, I received the Lord
Roos his Paper, mentioned in my printed Letter, and immediately thereupon I
writ that Answer, and sent it away Post the next day: And though, both before
and after, I was frequently informed, what report he gave out in the Country,
yet I held them only worth my scorn, and at that time had not the least
intention of making any thing public; my letter being writ ad hominem, and not
for the press. But when I saw for three days together (before I thought of
printing it) those scandalous papers, that were scattered up and down, posted,
and cried by the common Crier all London over: And this done (besides the
injuries most uncivilly offered unto my Daughter, when she had not put him one
penny in debt) to confirm by so notorious an act his idle boasting, that I was
afraid to meet him; I was compelled so to vindicate my self, being deprived of
all other means; for then I well knew he durst not Fight. The Posted Papers I
need not recite, because they are so common; For the Jewels and Plate therein
mentioned, the first were all her own, except one Necklace of Pearl, and some
trivial Diamonds: The Place was no more than she used in her Bedchamber, and
under the value of threescore pound: Before she secured these, she was often
threatened they should be all taken from her, and not so much left her as a Ring
or Spoon: And since, I entreated Persons of Honor to acquaint his Mother (which
they did accordingly) that I would make good both what her Son, and my self
gave her, and at their own Rates; But all would not serve, Spleen and Folly
prevailed against Honor and Reason. And now upon the whole matter, whether,
and how far I am justifiable in publishing that letter, I willingly submit to
the judgment of any indifferent person. And thus I come to the Lord Roos his
Answer to the Lord Marquess of Dorchester's Letter, etc.

This Whelp has for this month been licked over and over, and is yet without
form, a rude and indigested lump; if you had used the like quicknes in your
Reply, as I did in my Answer to your Letter, and therein required an account of
me with my Sword in my hand, and in stead of Eleven days I allowed you, you had
given me but Two, nor so much neither, but in respect of the distance of our
dwellings; if in that short time you had not heard from me, with full
satisfaction to your demand, you might then upon some grounds have divulged
this and more; but now after a months space, when you durst not do like a Man,
to answer like a Child, clear from the purpose, and most apparent scope of my
letter, which was to provoke you to Fight, and not to Rail; This I say would
have stigmatized you with an indeleble mark, if you were capable of more
Infamy, than is now upon you; For you are still a Coward, and dare not Fight.
This Expression I must use often, as Cato did his Puto Carthaginem esse
delendam: you know the saying, Cloth an Ape in Tissue, and it but adds
deformity to the Beast; and the more a Coward seeks to conceal, the more he
discovers his Fears: Of the truth of this you are a shame. full Example. What a
noise and blustering do you make, to appear Some body, as if with Homer's
Ulysses you had got the Winds into your empty bottles? but all in vain; for it is
with you like a Jade in the Mire, your laboring to get out, but plunges you
the deeper in; For you are still a Coward, and dare not fight. You say, I was
amongst my Gally-pots and Clyster-pipes, when I gave my Choler so violent a
Purge: If so, I was prescribing a Clyster for you to take before our Meeting,
else I should sooner have had you in my Nose, than in my Sight. You go on; I
had better have been drunk, and set in the Stocks for it, when I sent the Post
with a whole Packet of Chartels to you. I mention this piece of Eloquence for
no other end, than to show what Wit there lies in the Froth of Ale. You
proceed, That if I understand any thing in my own Trade, I could not but know,
that the Hectique of my own Brain is more desperate than the Tertian Fits of
yours, which are easily cured with a little sleep. Is it possible for any man
to be so stupid, as to publish himself in print a common Drunkard? This is the
plain English of your Tertian Fits, which if you had called Quotidian, you
would easily have been believed; though indeed they have out-lasted any
Quartane. You talk of Tutors and Schoolmasters; I have been long since out of
their hands; but it is high time you were under their correction; and had I
known you, as well before I sent to you in a way of Honor, as I do now, I
would for once have played the Schoolmaster my self, and have brought, in stead
of a Sword, a good Rod, the only fit Weapon to encounter such an Adversary;
For you are still a Coward, and dare not fight. You add, That now I begin to
vapor, and tell you I have fought before; and that you have heard I have, with
my Wife, and Poet; but if I came off with no more honor then when I was beaten
by my Lord Grandison, I had better have kept that to my self. What you mean by
my Poet, I cannot imagine; but you may conceive it is not impossible for me to
beat a Woman, since I declared such a proneness to Cudgel you. The business
between my Lord Grandison and my self, is so fully known to the world, and his
Second (an Ey-witnesse of what passed) yet alive, that there is no need for me
to speak a word therein; only this, as a Hector (a name amongst others you are
pleased to bestow upon me) I tell you, He that will Fight, though he have never
so much the worse, loses no reputation: And I protest, I had rather meet with a
man of Honor and Courage, though he did beat me (as you word it) then now to
Fight and Beat you: But there is no great danger of that, For you are still a
Coward, and dare not fight. Next, you scrible about my cutting up Calves, and
Dogs, and if by threatening to cram my Sword down you Throat, I do not mean my
Pills, you are safe. Indeed, Experiments in Anatomy have much conduced to the
bettering man's knowledge; and I make no doubt, had I the dissecting of you
instead of a Calf, I should find the place, where Cowardice is seated. This
would be an acceptable Discovery to our College of Physicians. As concerning
my Pills, those you would most fear to take, must be prepared with Steel, for I
know between Steel and you, there is a great Antipathy. And whereas you say,
There is no half quarter of a man but would venture to give me battle; Alas
poor wretch! you do not understand what Dirt you throw in your own face; for
your not daring to meet me, proves ex ore tuo, that you are less then half a
quarter of a man; and surely here is both good Grammar and Logic to boot. And
now you tell me, I am most unsufferable in my unconscionable engrossing of all
Trades; That I am a Doctor of Civil Law, a Parrister of the Common, a Bencher
of Greys-Inn, a Professor of Physic, a Fellow of the College, a
Mathematician, Caldean, a School-man, and a piece of a Gramarian (as my last
work shows, were it construed) a Philosopher, Poet, Translator, Antisocordist,
Solicitor, Broker and Usurer; a Marquess, Earl, Viscount, Baron, and a Hector:
And there is no dealing with me without a Brigade, if I have a second for every
capacity. What ridiculous stuff is here? Risum teneatis Amici? yet I think a
less number would scarce secure your fears, and even then, you durst not appear
in the Head of them; For still you are a Coward, and dare not fight. You say,
for eating the bread out of the Hectors mouths, you hope some of them will make
me give them Compounding dinners, as well as I did to the rest of my
Fraternities. I think you escape fairly, if for abusing them, you can be
admitted to Compound for Dinners and Supper too. You pithily write, That I
measure another man's valor by comparing it with my own. I understand in what
sense you would be taken, and laugh at it: But yet it is true, I ever did and
shall think, of all Gentlemen as I do of my self, till I find them such as you
are: And now for the future, I shall measure all Cowards by your Scal. I will
omit (for brevity) the rest of your Billinsgate nonsense (indeed your whole
Letter is ejusdem farinae) and give you this friendly admonition, that you be
more careful and circumspect hereafter, and not charge a fault upon another,
when at the same instant you commit a greater in the same kind; I mean, your
accusing me of railing, when you your self transcend therein. I have but a word
or two more, and I have done with you: You say, that I might have had the
honor I desired to have fallen by your sword. I see the Proverb does not hold
true in you, that Bad memories have good Wits: I did not desire absolutely
[Printed the 20th. of March 1659. the day after the Printing the Lord Roos his
Answer, etc. above mentioned the Date whereof by him purposely omitted.]
to fall by your sword, but under the condition mentioned in my printed letter:
And as for the honor you vainly put upon falling by it; I think there is not
any, but will believe me without swearing; if I could have thought upon a more
ignominious thing, I had named it. And now sir, If your back be not
sufficiently laden, go on, and I will lay more and more weight upon you, till
you fall under the burden; and still you are a Coward and dare not fight.

Dorchester.



