XXVI. SERMONS (Never before Published) PREACHED BY THAT Learned and Reverend.

DIVINE John Done, Doctor in Divinity, Late DEAN of the Cathedral Church of St
Paul's, London.

The Third Volume.

DVM PREMOR ATTOLLOR
blazon or coat of arms

LONDON. Printed by Thomas Newcomb, and are to be sold at the several
Book-Sellers-shops in London, and at Westminster Hall. 1661.

To His most Sacred Majesty, CHARLES II. By the Grace of God King of ENGLAND,
SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith etc.
Most Dread and Gracious Sovereign,
IN this great Revolution, when every body is come to pay unto Caesar, those
things that are due unto Caesar, I am bold to present to Your Sacred Majesty
these Sermons, not only due unto You, as You are Head of the Church, but as
they were most of them preached in Your Chapel, and approved by Your Royal
Progenitors. Your Statues, Pictures, and Meddals, famous for their Workmanship,
and Antiquity, cannot pretend to a greater Elegancy or a nobler Descent, then
the Doctrine that is here taught; For, it is primitively Christian, not
depending upon the absolute Authority of any present visible company of Men,
nor, yet refusing to be guided by those Ancient Fathers of the Church, that
concur with the Apostolical Writers, as being the Supreme Rule of our Faith;
And, though the Author be many times very severe against the Roman-Church, yet
he is never very indulgent to her Rigid Opposers, not being desirous to make a
rent in that Garment, which is to cover and keep alive the Flock of Christ,
which being immediately committed to Your Majesty's Care in these Your Realms,
cannot be better preserved, then by that exemplar Piety, that reigns in Your
Sacred Majesty, which will be a Living Sermon, even to those Reverend Pastors,
that Your care, and Gods Providence has now appointed to restore His Church to
her ancient Splendour, and to have awakened that Light of the Gospel, which we
could never have expected, but by Your Glorious Return, or a new Fiat.

Your Majesty's most humble, and most devoted Subject, JOHN DONE.

TO THE READER.
UPon the Death of my Father Dr. Done, sometimes Deane of Paul's, I was sent
to, by his Majesty of Blessed Memory, to recollect and publish his Sermons; I
was encouraged by many of the Nobility, both Spiritual and Temporal, and
indeed, by the most Eminent Men that the Kingdom then had, of all Professions,
telling me, what a public good I should confer upon the Church, and, that by
this means I should not only preach to all the Parishes of England, but to
those, whose Affairs carried them into Foreign Countries; and to those, whose
infirmities did not suffer them to come to their own Churches at home, But,
above all, I was encouraged by the example of St. Paul, who, though he took
wages of other Churches, and yet served the Corinthians, thought himself
excusable, in that, he was always doing service to the Church of Christ.

The first Volume that I published, consisting of Fourscore Sermons, I
dedicated to his Majesty then living, by whom, it was not only graciously
received, but I had fresh Encouragements to proceed: For the Second Volume, I
was forced to take Protection from those that were then in Authority, lest (our
duty to our King being so often, and so pathetically urged) they might have
incurred the danger, First, to have been voted No Sermons, and then, that No
Sermons should have bin burnt by the hand of the Public Executioner; and, the
use that might have bin made of them, by keeping up the Banks of the Church,
against that Torrent of Heretics, that did then invade her, might have been
absolutely defeated: for now began to swarm and muster the Ebionites,
Sabellians, Jovinians, Eutichians, Corpocratians, Sethians, Cerinthians,
Theodotians, Nicolaitans, Samocetanians, Apolenarians, Montaneans, all against
the second Person of the Trinity.

And, although, in some parts of the World the Sun may see the Men eating their
god, and in six hours journey farther, he may see the gods eating the Men,
though he may have beheld as many Religions, as he produced Insects, yet he
could tell us of no such Python, as appeared here, who swallowing up all the
other Heretics, pretended that he himself was the very Son of God; not
knowing how dearly that Imposter paid for it, that adventured upon that
design, but in the days of Queen Elizabeth; for though it be true, That he
that is baptized into Christ, may put on Christ, his Person, nay Him, so that
God may take him for his own Christ, and look upon him, as all Mankind; Yet,
it is a hard matter to appear so before Man, for Homo homini demon, we see
nothing, we hear of nothing but the Imperfections of one another, and then we
are not only content to ground our Faith upon slight Reports, but to believe,
even Impossibilities.

The People concluded Paul to be a Murderer, but first, they saw a Viper seize
upon him after he had escaped Shipwreck; but still proceeding upon new
Evidence, when they saw him shake off that Viper, they said he was a God; and
certainly, though a Calumniator, with a two-edged tongue, sharper and more
venomous then the teeth of any Viper, may traduce the reputation of any man, so
far as to make impressions upon some pious and godly persons, yet if those
persons would but retreat from those sudden assaults unto those Forts which
their Charity may, nay, ought to erect, but to reasonable Evidences; they may
reasonably conclude, that if many thousands were converted by one Sermon to the
Christian Faith; he that has spent so many years, in publishing so many Sermons
for the propagation of that Faith, and preserving the Light of that Gospel, so
as to dazzle and extinguish those New Lights, those ignes fatuas, with their
great Leader William-a-the-Wispe, (who drawing men, first out of the known
paths, carries them into Boggs, Quagmires, and Whirlepools of Confusion) cannot
possibly be but a well- grounded Christian.

When the Jews intended the building of the Temple, their wise King Solomon
sent to Hiram many thousand measures of corn, knowing that the Fellers of
Timber, the hewers of stone, and those that bore the burden, must be provided
for, as well as the great Officers, the Overseers. Fac hoc and vives, was often
repeated to me when I undertook this work, and a fair reward was promised me;
but at last I am constrained, hoc facere ut vivam, to publish them at my own
cost that I may sell them; which I had not been able to perform, if I had not
been assisted by the bounty of our most Honorable Lord Chancellor, (who is not
only content, that the Churches should be furnished with good Preachers, but
that those Preachers should have good Sermons) and I am to rest satisfied with
that Text, that tells us, that To those that have much, more shall be given;
and to those that have nothing (and there is nothing so near of kin to Nothing,
as a Reversion) that that they have shall be taken away.

A better method (I confess) might have been observed in their Publication;
whereby those that are called to the service of private Churches, and have not
the convenience of Public Libraries, might have made more use of them, (for, I
have seen many great Edifices, many noble Palaces erected without one stone
taken out of the Quarry) but, so near an Age, where Holy Confusion is
prescribed to the Preacher, a little disorder (I hope, Gentle Reader) may be
pardoned in the Publisher.

JO. DONE.
Postscript.
BY the Dates of these Sermons, the Reader may easily collect, that although
they are the last that are published, they were the first that were Preached;
and I did purposely select these from amongst all the rest, for, being to
finish this Monument, which I was to erect to his Memory, I ought to reserve
those materials that were set forth with the best Polish: The Impression
consists only of Five hundred, which will somewhat advance the Price; but the
buyer being at liberty, he can receive no prejudice.



Upon the sending the First Volume of these SERMONS to the Right Reverend
Father in God, the Bishop of Peterborough, then my Diocesan, I received this
Letter.

SIR,
YOu have sent me a Treasure, and I would not share time to tell you so, till I
had somewhat satisfied the thirst I had to drink down many of those Excellent
Sermons, which I have so long desired: And by this I have the advantage, that I
can know what I thank you for, though I could presumptuously value them, by the
rest of his which I have heard, and read formerly, (for I think I have all
those, that in the Press did foreran these) yet by this time, I can sensibly
acknowledge to you, how great cause so many of us have to thank you: How well
may your Parishioners pardon your silence to them, for a while, since by it you
have Preached to them and their Childrens children, and to all our English
Parishes for ever: For; certainly, many ages hence when they shall be made
good, or confirmed in goedness, by studying your Father, they shall account
these times Primitive, in which he Preached; and you will then, if not now, be
in danger to lose your propriety in him, he will be called a Father of the
Church.

Sir, Though this Book, with his former Printed Sermons be a great Stock to the
Church, from one man, yet if you shall please to perform the trust of a good
Executor, there is, I presume, a great remainder of his Legacy, which, when you
have taken breath, we must call you to account for, in a Court of Equity;
though you may think this will abundantly satisfy, yet believe it, Sir, it
will but increase our appetite: We shall give you time, Sir, but no general
release, yet his God and yours assist you, to whose blessing I commend you, and
am Sir

Your very Friend in Christ Jesus Jo. Peterborough.
Peterborough, July 20. 1640.
THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I. A Lent Sermon Preached at White Hall, February 20. 1617.

Luc. 23.40. Fear thou not God, being under the same condemnation? Page 1
SERMON II. A Lent Sermon Preached at White Hall, February 12. 1618.

Ezekiel. 33.32. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely Song, of one that
has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument; for they hear thy
words, but they do them not. p. 15 SERMON III. A Lent Sermon Preached at
White Hall, February 20. 1628.

James 2.12. So speakye, and so Do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
Liberty. p. 28 SERMON. IV. A Lent Sermon Preached before the King at
White Hall, February 16. 1620.

1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness: God
was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into Glory. p. 45
SERMON V. A Lent Sermon Preached to the King at White Hall, February 12. 1629.

Mat. 6.21. For, where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also. p. 61
SERMON VI. A Sermon Preached at White Hall, April 21. 1616.

Eccles. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the children of men is fully set in them to do evil. p.
75 SERMON VII. A Sermon Preached at White Hall, November, 2. 1617.

Psalm. 55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God. p. 89
SERMON VIII. A Sermon Preached to the Household at White Hall, April 30. 1626.

Mat. 9.13. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. p.
101 SERMON X. A Sermon Preached at White Hall, April 2. 1620.

Eccles. 5. There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the Sun: Riches
reserved to the owners thereof, for their evil. And these riches perish by evil
travail: and he begets a Son, and in his hand is nothing. Ver. 12. and 13.
in Edit. 1. In alia 13. and 14. p. 129 SERMON XI. A Sermon Preached at
Greenwich April 30. 1615.

Esa. 52.3. Ye have sold your selves for naught; and ye shall be redeemed
without money. p. 153 SERMON XII. A Sermon Preached at White Hall April 12.
1618.

Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over
this Jordan, and now I am become two bands. p. 169 SERMON XIII. A Sermon
Preached at White Hall, April 19. 1618.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That
Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, of which I am the chiefest.
p. 177 SERMON XIV. A Second Sermon Preached at White Hall, April 2. 1621.

1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That
Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, of which I am the chiefest.
p. 190 SERMON XV. A Sermon Preached, at White Hall, February 29. 1627.

Acts 7.60. And when he had said this, he fell asleep. p. 205 SERMON XVI. A
Sermon Preached at White Hall, February 22. 1629.

Mat. 6.21. For where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also. p. 220
SERMON XVII. James 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged
by the Law of Liberty. p. 241 SERMON XVIII. A Sermon Preached to Queen Anne, at
Denmark-house, December. 14. 1617.

Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall find
me. p. 257 SERMON XIX. A Sermon of Valediction at my going into Germany, at
Lincolns-Inne, April 18. 1619.

Eccles. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. p. 269
SERMON XX. Two Sermons, to the Prince and Princess Palatine, the Lady Elizabeth
at Heydelberg, when I was commanded by the King to wait upon my L. of Doncaster
in his Embassage to Germany. First Sermon as we went out, June 16. 1619.

Romans 13.11. For now is our Salvation nearer then when we believed. p. 281
SERMON XXI. A Sermon Preached at St. Dunstans, January 15. 1625. The first
Sermon after our dispersion by the Sickness.

Exodus 12.30. For there was not a house where there was not one dead. p. 285
SERMON XXII. A Sermon Preached at the Temple.

Esther 4.16. Go and assemble all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast
ye for me, and eat not, nor drink, in three days, day nor night: I also, and my
Maids will fast likewise; and so I will go in to the King, which is not
according to the Law: And if I perish, I perish. p. 298 SERMON XXIII. A Sermon
Preached at Lincolns-Inne, Ascension-day, 1622.

Deuteronomy. 12.30. Take heed to thy self that thou be not snared by following them
after they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou inquire not after their
gods, saying, How did these Nations serve their gods? Even so will I do
likewise. p. 311 SERMON XXIV. A Sermon Preached at Paul's Cross to the Lords of
the Council, and other Honorable Persons, 24 Mart. 1616. It being the
Anniversary of the Kings coming to the Crown, and his Majesty being then gone
into Scotland.

Prove. 22.11. He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the
King shall be his friend. p. 322 SERMON XXV. A Sermon Preached at the Spittle
upon Easter-Monday, 1622.

2 Cor. 4.6. For, God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ. P. 357 SERMON XXVI. Psalm. 68.20. And unto God, the Lord,
belong the issues of Death. (from Death.) P. 397
A Lent-SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, February 20. 1617. SERMON I. Sermon. 1.

Luc. 23.40. Fear not thou God, being under the same condemnation?


THe Text it self is a Christning-Sermon, and a Funeral-Sermon, and a Sermon at
a Consecration, and a Sermon at the Canonization of himself that makes it. This
Thief, whose words they are, is Baptized in his blood; there is his Christning:
He dies in that profession; there is his Funeral: His Diocese is his Cross, and
he takes care of his soul, who is crucified with him, and to him he is a
Bishop; there is his Consecration: and he is translated to heaven; there is his
Canonization. We have sometimes mention in Moses his book of Exodus, according
to the Roman Translation, Operis Plumarii, of a kind of subtle and various
workmanship, employed upon the Tabernacle, for which it is hard to find a
proper word now; we translate it sometimes Embroidery, sometimes Needle Work,
sometimes otherwise. It is evident enough, that it was Opus variegatum, a work
compact of diverse pieces, curiously inlaid, and varied for the making up of
some figure, some representation: and likelyest to be that which in sumptuous
buildings, we use to call now Mosaic work: for that very word originally
signifies, to vary, to mingle, to diversifie. As the Tabernacle of God was, so
the Scriptures of God are of this Mosaic work: The body of the Scriptures has
in it limbs taken from other bodies; and in the word of God, are the words of
other men, other authors, inlaid and inserted. But, this work is only where
the Holy Ghost is the Workman: It is not for man to insert, to inlay other
words into the word of God. It is a gross piece of Mosaic work, to insert
whole Apocryphal books into the Scriptures. It is a sacrilegious defacing of
this Mosaic work, to take out of Moses Tables, such a stone as the second
Commandment; and to take out of the Lords Prayer, such a stone as is the
foundation-stone, the reason of the prayer, Quia Tuum, For thine is the
kingdom, etc. It is a counterfeit piece of Mosaic work, when having made up a
body of their Canon Law, of the rags and fragments torn from the body of the
Fathers, they attribute to every particular sentence in that book, not that
authority which that sentence had in that Father from whom it is taken, but
that authority which the Canonization (as they call it) of that sentence gives
it; by which Canonization, and placing it in that book, it is made equal to the
word of God. Thesaurus Catholicus.
It is a strange piece of Mosaic work, when one of their greatest authors
pretending to present a body of proofs, for all controverted points, from the
Scriptures, and Councels, and Fathers (for, he makes no mention in his promise
of the Mothers of the Church) does yet fill up that body with sentences from
women, and obtrude to us the Revelations of Brigid, and of Katherine, and such
She-fathers as those. But when the Holy Ghost is the workman, in the true
Scriptures, we have a glorious sight of this Mosaic, this various, this
mingled work; where the words of the Serpent in seducing our first parents, The
words of Balaams Ass in instructing the rider himself, The words of profane
Poets, in the writings and use of the Apostle, The words of Caiaphas
prophesying that it was expedient that one should dye for all, The words of the
Devil himself (Jesus I know, and Paul I know) And here in this text, the words
of a Thief executed for the breach of the Law; do all concur to the making up
of the Scriptures, of the word of God.

Now, though these words were not spoken at this time, when we do but begin to
celebrate by a poor and weak imitation, the fasting of our Savior Jesus
Christ, but were spoken at the day of the crucifying of the Lord of life and
glory; yet as I would be loath to think, that you never fast but in Lent, so I
would be loath to think that you never fulfill the sufferings of Christ Jesus
in your flesh, but upon Goodfriday, never meditate upon the passion, but upon
that day. As the Church celebrates an Advent, a preparation to the Incarnation
of Christ, to his coming in the flesh, in humiliation: so may this humiliation
of ours in the text, be an Advent, a preparation to his Resurrection, and
coming in glory: And, as the whole life of Christ was a passion, so should the
whole life (especially the humiliation) of a Christian, be a continual
meditation upon that. Christ began with some drops of blood in his infancy, in
his Circumcision; though he drowned the sins of all mankind, in those several
channels of Blood, which the whips, and nails, and spear, cut out of his body
in the day of his passion. So though the effects of his passion be to be
presented more fully to you, at the day of his passion, yet it is not
unseasonable now, to contemplate thus far the working of it upon this condemned
wretch, whose words this text is, Division.
as to consider in them, First, the infallibility, and the dispatch of the
grace of God upon them, whom his gracious purpose has ordained to salvation:
how powerfully he works; how instantly they obey. This condemned person who had
been a thief, execrable amongst men, and a blasphemer, execrating God, was
suddenly a Convertite, suddenly a Confessor, suddenly a Martyr, suddenly a
Doctor to preach to others. In a second consideration, we shall see what
doctrine he preaches; not curiosities, not unrevealed Mysteries, not Matter of
State, nor of wit, nor of carnal delight, but only the fear of God: Nonne
times Deum? And for a third part, we shall see his Auditory, the Church that he
preached to: he contented himself with a small Parish; he had most care of
their souls, that needed him most: he applies himself to the conversion of his
fellow-Thief. He works upon those sins which he knew to have been in himself.
And he works upon him by all these steps: First, Nonne Tu? howsoever the rest
do revile Christ, because they stay behind, and look for a temporal Messiah,
to make this life sweet, and glorious unto them; yet what is that to thee? thou
art to have no part in it; howsoever they be, art not thou affected? Nonne Tu
times? If the bitterness of thy torment cannot let thee love, though thy
stomach will not come down to kiss the rod and embrace correction, yet Nonne Tu
times? Does it not imprint a fear in thee? Nonne times Deum? Though the Law
have done the worst upon thee, Witnesses, Advocates, Judges, Executioners can
put thee in no more fear; yet, Nonne times Deum? Fear not thou God? who has
another Tribunal, another execution for thee; especially when thou know thy
condemnation, and such a condemnation; Eandem, the same condemnation; And that
this condemnation is not imminent, but now upon thee: when thou art now under
the same condemnation, fear thou not God?

The first thing then is, the powerfulness and the dispatch of the grace of God
in the conversion of them, who are ordained unto it. In Judas, the Devil entered
into him when Christ gave him the Sop; Part. I. Gratia.
but the Devil had put the treason in his heart before. The tentation had an
Inchoation, and it had a Meditation, and it had a Consummation. In Saint Paul,
in his conversion, God wrought upon him all at once, without any
discontinuance; He took him at as much disadvantage for grace to work, upon as
could be; breathing threatenings and slaughters against the disciples, and
provided with Commissions for that persecution. But suddenly there came a
light, and suddenly a stroke that humbled him, and suddenly a voice, and
suddenly a hand that led him to Damascus. After God had laid hold upon him, he
never gave him over, till he had accomplished his purpose in him.

Whether this grace, which God presents so, be resistible or no, whether man be
not perverse enough to resist this grace, why should any perverse or ungracious
man dispute? Has any man felt a tentation so strong upon himself, but that he
could have given another man reason enough to have kept him from yiedling to
that tentation? Has any man felt the grace of God work so upon him at any
time, as that he has concurred fully, entirely with that grace, without any
resistance, any slackness? Now fashions in men, make us doubt new manners; and
new terms in Divinity were ever suspicious in the Church of God, that new
Doctrines were hid under them. Resistibility, and Irresistibility of grace,
which is every Artificers wearing now, was a stuff that our Fathers wore not, a
language that pure antiquity spoke not. They knew Gods ordinary proceeding.
They knew his Common Law, and they knew his Chancery. They knew his chief
Justice Moses, that denounced his Judgments upon transgressors of the Law; and
they knew his Chancellor Christ Jesus, into whose hands he had put all
Judgments, to mitigate the rigor and condemnation of the Law. They knew Gods
law, and his Chancery: But for Gods prerogative, what he could do of his
absolute power, they knew Gods pleasure, Nolumus disputari: It should scarce be
disputed of in Schools, much less served in every popular pulpit to curious and
itching ears; least of all made table-talke, and houshold-discourse. Christ
promises to come to the door, and to knock at the door, and to stand at the
door, and to enter if any man open; Revel. 3.
but he does not say, he will break open the door: it was not his pleasure to
express such an earnestness, such an Irresistibility in his grace, so. Let us
cheerfully rely upon that; His purpose shall not be frustrated; his ends shall
not be prevented; his ways shall not be precluded: But the depth of the
goodness of God, how much good God can do for man; yea the depth of the illness
of man, how much ill man can do against God, are such seas, as, if it be not
impossible, at least it is impertinent, to go about to sound them.

Now, what God has done, Fac.
and will do for the most heinous offenders, we consider in this man: First, as
he was execrable to men, a Thief; and then, as he execrated God, a Blasphemer.
Now this Thief is ordinarily taken, and so, in all probability, likely to have
been a bloody thief, a Murderer: for, for theft only, their laws did not
provide so severe an execution as hanging upon the Cross. We find that Judas,
who was a thief, made it a law upon himself, by executing himself, to hang a
thief; but it was not the ordinary justice of that country. First, then, he
had been an enemy to the well-being of mankind, by injuring the possession,
and the propriety, which men have justly in their goods, as he was a thief; and
he had been an enemy to the very being of mankind, if he were a Murderer.

And certainly, the sin of theft alone would be an execrable, a detestable sin
to us all, but that it is true of us all, Si videbas furem, Psalm. 50.
currebas cum eo: we see that all men are thieves in their kinds, in their
courses; but yet we know, that we our selves are so too. We may have heard of
Princes that have put down Stews, and executed severe Laws against
Licentiousness; but that may have been to bring all the Licentiousness of the
City into the Court. We may have heard Sermons against Usury; and this may have
been, that they themselves might put out their money the better. We may cry out
against Theft, that we may steal the safelier. For we steal our preferment,
if we bring no labor, nor learning to the Service; and we steal our Learning,
if we forsake the Fountains, and the Fathers, and the Schools, and deal upon
Rhapsoders, and Common placers, and Method-mongers. Let him that is without
sin, cast the first stone; let him that has stolen nothing, apprehend the
thief: rather, let him that has done nothing but steal, apprehend the thief,
and present himself there, where this thief found mercy, at the Cross of
Christ. Every man has a sop in his mouth; his own robberies will not let him
complain of the theft of excessive Fees in all professions; of the theft of
preventing other men's merit with their money; (which is a robbing of others,
and themselves too;) of the theft of stealing Affections, by unchaste
solicitations; or of the great theft of stealing of Hearts from Princes, and
Souls from God, by insinuations of Treason, and Superstition, in a corrupt
Religion in every corner. No man dares complain of others thefts, because every
man is felo de se; not only that himself has stolen, but that he has stolen
away himself. Yea, he is Homicida sui, Tertul.
a Murderer of himself. Omnis peccator homicida, Every sinner is a Murderer.
Quaeris quem Occiderit? does he plead Not guilty, or does he put me to prove
whom he has murdered? Si quid ad Elogii ambitionem faciat, non inimicum, non
extraneum, sed seipsum. It he think it an honor to him, let him know, it is not
an enemy, it is not a stranger, that he has murdered, but himself, and his own
soul. And such a Thief, such a Murderer was this; but not only such, but a
public Malefactor too; and so execrable to men: which is his first
Indisposition.

Blaspemy.
He had also execrated God; he had reviled Christ. This Evangelist Saint Luke
does not say so, that both the Thieves reviled Christ: but that acquits not
this thief, that Saint Luke does not say it, no more then it acquits them both,
that S. John does not say, that either of them reviled Christ. And then both
the other Evangelists, Saint Matthew and Saint Mark, charge them both with it.
Mat. 27.4.3. Mar. 15.32.
The same (that is, those reviling words which others had used) the thieves
that were crucified cast in his teeth. And, they also that were crucified with
him, reviled him. Athanasius in his Sermon Contra omnes haereses, Athanasius.
makes no doubt of it: Duo Latrones; altero execrante, altero dicente, quid
execramur? One Thief said to the other, Why do we revile Christ? Origin.
so that de facto, he imputes it to them both; both did it. Origin says,
Conveniens est, inprimis ambos blasphemasse; not only that that is the most
convenient Exposition, but that it was the most convenient way to God, for
expressing Mercy, and Justice too, that both should have reviled him. Origin
admits a convenience in it. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom implies a necessity, Ne quis composito rem factam putaret: lest
the world should think it a plot, and that this Thief had been well disposed
and affected toward Christ before, therefore, says he, first he declares
himself to be his enemy, in reviling him, and then was suddenly reconciled
unto him. Hilarious.
Hilary raises and builds a great point of Divinity upon it; that since both
the Thieves, of which one was elect to salvation, did upbraid Christ with the
ignominy of the Cross, Universis etiam fidelibus scandalum Crucis futurum
ostendit: This shows, says he, that even the faithful and elect servants of
God, may be shak'd, and scandalized, and fall away for a time, in the time of
persecution. He raises positive and literal Doctrine. And Theophylact raises
mystical and figurative Doctrine out of it; Theophylact.
Duo latrones figura Gentilium and Judaeorum: both Jews and Gentiles did
reproach Christ, Sicut and primo ambo latrones improperabant, as at first both
the Thieves that were crucified did. Hierom.
S. Hierome inclines to admit a figure in S. Matthews words: and he says, that
S. Matthew imputes that to both, which was spoken by one: But S. Hierom had no
use of a figure here; for himself says, that Matthew, which imputes this to
both; and Luke, which imputes it to one, differ not: for, says he, both
reviled Christ at first; and then, one, Visis miraculis credidit, upon the
evidence of Christ's Miracles, changed his mind, and believed in him. Only S.
Augustine is confident in it, that this Thief never reviled Christ; but thinks,
that that phrase of Matthew, and of Mark, Augustine.
who impute it to both, is no more, but as if one should say, Rusticani
insultant; mean men, base men, do triumph over me: which, says he, might be
said, if any one such person did so. Now, this might be true, if it had been
said, Thieves and Malefactors reviled Christ: But, when it is expressly said,
The Thieves that were crucified, I take it to be a way of deriving the greater
comfort upon us, and the greater glory upon Christ, and the greater assurance
upon the Prisoner, to leave him to the mercy of God, rather then to the wit of
Man; and rather to suffer Christ Jesus to pardon him, being guilty, then to
dispute for his innocence. For, perchance, we shall lack an example of a
notorious Blasphemer, and reviler of Christ, to be effectually converted to
salvation (of which example, considering how our times abound and overflow with
this sin, we stand much in need) except this thief be our example; that though
he were execrable to men, and execrated God, yet Christ Jesus took him into
those bowels which he had ripp'd up, and into those wounds which he had opened
wider by his execrations, and had mercy upon him, and buried him in them. And
this was his second Indisposition.

Now, for the speed and powerful working of this Grace, Impetus.
to his Conversion; we must not insist long upon it, lest we be longer in
expressing it, then it was in doing. We have no impression, no direction of the
time, when his conversion was wrought. None of the Evangelists mention when nor
how it was done: None, but this Evangelist, that it was done at all. But he
mentions it in the clearest and safest demonstration of all; that is, in the
effects of his conversion, his desire to convert others. And therefore we may
discern, Impetum Gratiae, in impetu poenitentis: the force, the vehemence of
Gods grace, in the vehemence of his zeal. Christ himself was silent, when this
thief reviled him: and yet this thief comes presently to a zealous impatience,
he cannot hear his companion revile. Christ had estated his Apostles in heaven;
he had given them Reversions of Judiciary places in heaven, twelve Seats, to
judge the twelve Tribes: and yet Facit fides innocents Latrones, facit
perfidia Apostolos criminosos: Ambr.
he infuses so much faith into this thief, as justifies him; and leaves his
Apostles so far to their infirmity, as endangers them. To the chief of these
Apostles (in some services) to Peter himself, Jo. 13.36.
he says, Whither I go, thou can not follow me now; and to this thief he
says, Hodie mecum eris, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. So soon
did he bring this thief, Cui damnari ad tempus expedivit, Ambros.
that had a good bargain of death, that escaped by being condemned, and was the
better, and longer lived for being hanged; (for he was thereby, Collega
Martyrii, and particeps Regni, Cyprian.
partaker of Christ's Martyrdom, and partner of his Kingdom; he brought him so
soon to that height of faith, that even in that low state upon the Cross, he
prayed for a spiritual Kingdom: whereas the Apostles themselves, in that
exaltation, when Christ was ascending, talked to him of a temporal Kingdom.
He came to know those Wounds which were in Christ's Body, Ambr.
Non esse Christi, sed Latronis, and amare caepit; then he began to love him
perfectly, when he found his own wounds in the body of his Savior. So he came
to declare perfect faith, Gregory.
in professing Christ's innocence, This man has done nothing; and perfect Hope,
in the Momento Mei, Remember me in thy Kingdom; and perfect Charity, in this
increpation and rebuking of his companion. August.
He was, as S. Augustine says, Latro Laudabilis and miraculis; such a thief as
deserved praise, and afforded wonder: but the best is the last, that he was
imitabilis; that he has done nothing, but that we may do so too, Idem.
if we will apprehend that grace that he did. Assumamus vocem Latronis, si non
volumus esse Latrones: If we will not steal our selves out of the number, Idem
to whom God offers his saving grace. Ut sedeamus a dextris, pendeamus a
dextris; let us be content to suffer, but to suffer in the right. Suffering as
Malefactors, is somewhat too much on the left hand; though even that suffering
do bring many to the right hand too. But suffering for Schism in pretense of
Zeal, suffering for Treason in pretense of Religion; this is both to turn out
of this world on the left hand, and to remain on that hand for ever after in
the world to come. This thief hung on the right hand, and was suddenly made a
Confessor for himself, a Martyr to witness for Christ, a Doctor to preach to
his fellow. If the favor of a Prince can make a man a Doctor, per saltum, much
more the mercy of Christ Jesus, which gives the Sufficiency as well as the
Title: as he did in this Thief, this new Doctor, whose Doctrine it self is our
next consideration.

Part. II. Doctrina.
This doctrine was the fear of God, which was a pregnant and a plentiful common
place for him to preach upon. And upon such an occasion, and such abundance of
matter, we have here one example of an extemporal Sermon; This Thief had
premeditated nothing. But he is no more a precedent for extemporal preaching,
then he is for stealing. He was a Thief before, and he was an extemporal
preacher at last: But he teaches no body else to be either. It is true, that if
we consider the Sermons of the Ancient Fathers, we shall find some
impressions, some examples of sudden and unpremeditated Sermons. Saint
Augustine some times eases himself upon so long Texts, Ser. 10 de verbis Hpli.
as needed no great preparation, no great study; for a mere paraphrase upon
this Text, was enough for all his hour, when he took both Epistle and Gospel,
Ser. de Sancto Latrone, etc.
and Psalm of the day for his Text. We may see often in S. Bern. (Heri diximus,
and Hesterno die fecimus mentionem) that he preached diverse days together. In
the second of those Sermons of Saint Basil, which were upon the beginning of
Genesis, it seems that Basil preached twice in a day; and in his Sermon de
Baptismo, it seems that he trusted upon the Holy Ghost, and his present
inspiration: Loquemar prout Sermo nobis dabitur in apertione oris: I intend to
speak so, as the Holy Ghost shall give me utterance for the present. But as S.
Augustine says in another case, Da mihi Paulum; so Da mihi Basilios, and
Augustinos; bring such preachers as Basil and Augustine were, and let them
preach as often as they will; and let every man whose calling it is, preach as
often as he can; but let him not think that he can preach as often as he can
speak. An inordinate opinion of purity, brought some men to keep two Sabbaths a
week, and others two Lents every year; and an opinion of a necessity of two
Sermons every Sabbath, and two hours every Sermon, may bring them to an
opinion, that the sanctifying of the Sabbath consists in the patience of
hearing.

Here was an extemporal Sermon, but a short one: he preaches nothing but the
fear of God. It is not De arcanis Imperii, matter of State: nor De arcanis Dei,
of the unrevealed decrees of God. The Thief does not say to Christ, Perage quod
decreveris; Thou have decreed my conversion, and therefore that decree must be
executed, that must necessarily be performed, which thou had determined in
thy Kingdom before thou came from thence; but he says, Memento mei, cum
veneris; Take such a care of me, for my salvation, and preservation, and
perseverance, as that I may follow thee into that Kingdom, into which thou art
now going; for our salvation is opened to us in that way, which Christ has
opened by his death: and without him, we understand no assurance of election;
without his second going into his Kingdom, we know nothing of that which he
did, before he came from thence. This is then the fear of God, Psalm. 11.10.
Prove. 1.7.
which those royal Doctors of the old Testament, David and Solomon, both
preached, and which this Primitive Doctor of the Primitive Church, this new
Convertite preached too, That no man may be so secure in his election, as to
forbear to work out his salvation with fear and trembling: for God saves no man
against his will, nor any man that thinks himself beholding for nothing, after
the first decree. Dan. 11.38.
There is a name of force, of violence, of necessity attributed to a God, which
is Mauzzim: but it is the name of an Idol, not of a true God. The name of the
true God is Dominus tzebaoth, the Lord of Hosts; a name of power, but not of
force. There is a fear belongs to him; his purposes shall certainly be
executed, but regularly and orderly; he will be feared, not because he forces
us, imprints a necessity, a coaction upon us; but because, if we be not led by
his orderly proceeding, there he has power to cast body and soul into hell
fire; therefore he will be feared, not as a wilful Tyrant, but as a just
Judge; not as Mauzzim, the god of Violence, but as Dominus tzebaoth, the Lord
of Hosts.

Part 3.
This then is his Doctrine; and what is his Auditory? He is not reserved for
Courts, nor for populous Cities; it is but a poor Parish that he has; and yet
he thinks of no change, but means to dye there: and there he visits the
poorest, the sickest, the wretchedest person, the Thief. He had seen diverse
other of diverse sorts, Mat. 27.38.
revile Christ as deeply as this Thief: They that passed by reviled him:
Praetereuntes, they that did not so much as consider him, reviled him. They
that know not Christ, yet will blaspheme him: if we ask them when, and where,
and how, and why Christ Jesus was born, and lived, and dyed, they cannot tell
it in their Creed; and yet they can tell it in their Oaths: they know nothing
of his Miraculous Life, of his Humble Death, of his Bitter Passion, of the
Ransom of his Blood, of the Sanctuary of his Wounds; and yet his Life, and
Death, and Passion, and Blood, and Wounds, is oftener in their mouths in
execrations, then in the mouth of the most religious man in his prayers. They
revile Christ Praetereuntes, Origin.
as they pass along: not only as Origin says here, Non incedentes recte,
blasphemant, they did not go perversely, crookedly, Hierom.
wilfully, and so blaspheme: nor as Hierome, Non ambulantes in vero itinere
Scripturarum, blasphemant; they did not misinterpret places of Scripture, to
maintain their errors, and so blaspheme; but they blasphemed Praetereuntes,
out of negligent custom and habit; they blaspheme Christ, and never think of
it; that they may be damned obiter, by the way, collaterally, occasionately
damned.

Luke 23.24.
But it was not only they, Praetereuntes, but the people that stood, and
beheld, reviled Christ too: men that do understand Christ, even then when they
dishonor him, do dishonor him to accompany some greater persons upon whom
they depend, in their errors. The Priests, who should have called the
Passengers, Thr. 1.12.
with that, Have ye no regard, all ye that pass by the way? the Scribes, who
should have applied the ancient Prophesies to the present accomplishment of
them in the death of Christ: the Pharisees, who should have supplied their
imperfect fulfilling of the Law, in that full satisfaction, the death of
Christ: the Elders, the Rulers, the Soldiers, are all noted to have reviled
Christ: they all concur to the performance of that Prophecy in the person of
Christ; and yet they will not see that the Prophecy is performed in him: Psalm.
22.7. Psalm. 69.26.
All they that see me have me in derision: they persecute him whom thou have
smitten, and they add unto the sorrows of him whom thou have wounded: Our
Fathers trusted in thee, they trusted in thee, Psalm. 22.4.
and were delivered; but I am a worm and no man, a shame to men, and the
contempt of the people. Pilate had lost his plot upon the people, to mollify
them toward Christ; he brought him out to them, Flagellatum and illusum,
scourged and scorned, John 19.1.
thinking that that would have reduced them. But this Preacher leaves all the
rest, either to their farther obduration, or their fitter time of repentance,
if God had ordained any such time for them: and he turns to this one, whose
disposition he knew to have been like his own, and therefore hoped his
conversion would be so too; for nothing gives the faithful servants of God a
greater encouragement that their labors shall prosper upon others, then a
consideration of their own case, and an acknowledgement what God has done for
their souls. When the fear of God had wrought upon himself, then he comes to
his fellow, Nonne tu times? fear not thou? First, Times.
Nonne tu? We have not that advantage over our auditory, which he had over his,
to know that in every particular man, there is some reason why he should be
more afraid of Gods judgments then another man. But every particular man, who
is acquainted with his own history, may be such a Preacher to himself, and ask
himself Nonne tu, have not thou more reason to stand in fear of God then any
other man, for any thing that thou know? Know thou any man so deeply
indebted to God, so far behind-hand with God, so much in danger of his
executions as thou art? Thou know not his colluctations before he fell, nor
his Repentances since: when thou hear S. Paul say, Quorum maximus, had not
thou need say, Nonne tu? Do not thou fear, who know more by thy self, then
S. Paul's History has told thee of S. Paul? for in all his History thou never
see any thing done by him against his conscience: and is thy case as good as
that? But to this thief, this thief presses this no farther, but this, what
hope soever of future happiness in this life, by the coming of a Messiah, those
that stay in the world can expect, what is all that to thee, who art going out
of the world? Quid mihi, says that man, who looked upon the Rainbow when he
was ready to drown; though God have promised not to drown the world, what is
that to me, if I must drown? I must be bold to say to thee, Quid tibi? if God
by his omnipotent power will uphold his Gospel in the world, he owes thee no
thanks, if thou do nothing in thy calling toward the upholding of it. Nonne
tu? Do not thou fear, that though that stand, Gods judgment will fall upon
thee for having put no hand to the staying of it?

Nonne tu times? It had been unreasonable to have spoken to him of the love of
God first now, when those heavy judgments were upon him. The Fear of God is
always the beginning of Wisdom; most of all in calamity, which is properly
Vehiculum timoris, the Chariot to convey, and the Seal to imprint this fear in
us. Because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in this place; Genesis 20.9.
therefore I said Sarah was my sister. Where there is not the fear of God in
great persons, other men dare not proceed clearly with them, but with disguises
and Modifications: they dare not attribute their prosperity, and good success
to the goodness of God, but must attribute it to their wisdom: they dare not
attribute their crosses and ill success to the justice of God, but must
attribute it to the weakness or falsehood of servants and ministers: where there
is not this fear of God, there is no directness. Beloved, there is love enough
at all hands; it is a loving age every where, love enough in every corner, such
as it is; but scarce any fear amongst us. Great men are above fear, no envy
can reach them: Miserable men are below fear, no change can make them worse:
and for persons of middle rank, and more public fears, of plagues, of
famines, or such, the abundant and overflowing goodness of God has so long
accustomed us to miraculous deliverances, that we fear nothing, but think to
have miracles in ordinary, and neglect ordinary remedies.

Deum.
But what should this man fear now? his Glass was run out, his Bell was rung
out, he was a dead man, condemned, and judged, and executed; what should he
fear? In Rome, as the Vestal Virgins which dyed, were buried within the city,
because they dyed innocent: so persons which were executed by Justice, were
buried there too, because they had satisfied the Law, and thereby seemed to be
restored to their innocence. So that condemned persons might seem least of all
to fear. But yet, Nonne times Deum? fear not thou God, for all that? Have
not the laws of Men, Witnesses, Judges, and Executioners, all men, brought
fearful things upon thee already? and is it not a fearful thing, if all those
real torments, be but Types and Figures of those greater, which God will
inflict upon thee after death? How easily has a cunning malefactor sometimes
deluded and circumvented a mild Justice at home, that lives neighbourly by him,
and is almost glad to be deceived in favor of life! but how would this man be
confounded, if he came to be examined at the Council Table, or by the King?
Omni severius quaestione a te interrogari, was said by one of the Panegyricks
to one of the Roman Emperors, That it was worse then the rack, to be examined
by him. When we come to stand naked before God, without that apparel which he
made for us, without all righteousness, and without that apparel which we made
for our selves; not a fig-leaf, not an excuse to cover us; if we think to deal
upon his affections, he has none; if we think to hide our sins, he was with us
when we did them, and saw them: we shall see then by his examination, that he
knows them better then we our selves.

Tom. 10. in Append. Ser. 49.
And to this purpose, to show Gods particular judgment upon all men, and all
actions then, it is, that S. Augustine (if that Sermon which is the 130. de
Tempore, be his, for it is in the copies of Chrysostom too) reads those words
thus: Nonne times Deum tuum? fear not thou thy God? that if a man would go
about to wrap up all in Gods general providence (all must be as God has
appointed it) he might be brought to this particular consideration, that he is
Deus tuus; not only God of the world, and God of mankind, but thy God: so far
thine, as he shall be thy Judge: In all senses, and to all intendments, that
may make him the heavier to thee, he is thy God: he shall be thy God in his
severe examinations, as he is Scrutator Renum, as he searches thy reins: thy
God, in putting off all respect of persons, in renouncing kindred, Matter and
frater; they are of kin to him, that do his will: and in renouncing
acquaintance at the last day, Nescio vos, I know not whence you are: and thy
God in pronouncing judgment then, Ite maledicti, go ye accursed. He shall be
still Deus tuus, thy God, till it come to Jesus tuus, till it come to the point
of redemption and salvation; he shall be thy God, but not thy Redeemer, thy
Savior. And therefore it is well urged in this place by Saint Augustine, Nonne
times Deum tuum? Fear not thou thy God?

Especially this great calamity being actually upon thee now. Condemnatio.
Saint Peter when he would have converted Agrippa and all the company, he
wishes they were all like him, in all things, Act. 26.29.
Exceptis vinculis, excepting his bands. This new convert deals upon his fellow
with that argument, Quia in iisdem vinculis; since thou art under the same
condemnation, thou should have the same affections. Now the general
condemnation, which is upon all mankind, that they must dye, this alone scarce
frights any man, scarce averts any man from his purposes. He that should first
put to Sea in a tempest, he might easily think, it were in the nature of the
Sea to be rough always. He that sees every Churchyard swell with the waves and
billows of graves, can think it no extraordinary thing to dye, when he knows he
set out in a storm, and he was born into the world upon that condition, to go
out of it again. But when Nathan would work upon David, he puts him a
particular case, appliable to himself; and when he had drawn from him an
implicit condemnation of himself, then he applies it. When David had said, As
the Lord lives, 2 Samuel 12.
the man that has done this shall surely dye; and Nathan upon that had said,
Thou art the man: Then David came to his Peccavi coram Domino, I have sinned
against the Lord; and Nathan to his Transtulit Dominus, August.
The Lord has taken away thy sin. And so this preacher, Qui clavis confixus
non habuit sensum confixum, who though he were crucified in body, had his
spirit and his charity at liberty, he presses his fellow to this fear,
therefore, because he is under a particular condemnation; not because he must
dye, but because he must dye thus: and every man may find some such particular
condemnation in himself, and in his own crosses, if he will but read his own
history in a true copy.

Eadem.
It is sub eadem, the same condemnation. If this identity be intended, in
comparison with Christ's condemnation, the comparison holds only in this:
judgment is given upon you both, execution begun upon you both, both equally
ignominious, equally miserable in the eye of the world: why do thou insult
upon him, revile him, who art in as ill state as he? thou see him, who
(though thou know it not, has other manner of assurances, then thou can
have) in Agonies, in Fears, in Complaints, in Lamentations: Why fear not
thou, being under the same condemnation? If this eadem condemnatio be intended
in comparison of himself that speaks, then the comparison holds only thus, Thou
have no better a life then I, thou art no farther from thy death then I; and
the consideration of my condemnation, has brought me to fear God: why should
not thou fear, being under the same condemnation? especially there being no
adjourning of the Court, no putting off the Sizes, no Reprieve for Execution:
Thou art now under the same condemnation, the same Execution: why should thou
not fear now? why should thou not go so far toward thy conversion this
minute? To end all, it is all our cases; we are all under the same
condemnation: what condemnation? under the same as Adam, the same as Cain, the
same as Sodom, the same as Judas. Quod cuiquam accidit, omnis potest; what sin
soever God has found in any, he may find in us; either that we have fallen
into it, by our misuse of his grace, or should fall into it, if he should
withdraw his grace. In those that are damned before, we are damned in Effigy;
such as we are, are damned; and we might be, but that he which was Medius inter
personas divinas, in his glory, in heaven; and Medius inter prophetas, in his
Transfiguration in Mount Thabor; and Medius inter Latrones, in his Humiliation
in this text, is Medius inter nos, in the midst of the Christian Church, in the
midst of us, in this Congregation, and takes into his own mouth now, the words
which he put into the thiefs mouth then, and more: Since I have been made a
man, and no man; been born, and died; since I have descended, and descended to
the earth, and below the earth; since I have done and suffered so much to
rescue you from this condemnation, Nonne timetis? will ye not fear the Lord,
but choose still to be under the same condemnation?

A Lent-SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, February 12. 1618. SERMON II. Sermon. 2.

Ezekiel. 33.32. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely Song, of one that
has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an Instrument; for they hear thy
words, but they do them not.


AS there lies always upon Gods Minister, a vae si non, Woe be unto me, if I
preach not the Gospel, if I apply not the comfortable promises of the Gospel,
to all that groan under the burden of their sins; so there is Onus visionis,
(which we find mentioned in the Prophets) it was a pain, a burden to them, to
be put to the denunciation of Gods heavy judgments upon the people: but yet
those judgments, they must denounce, as well as propose those mercies: woe be
unto us, if we bind not up the broken hearted; but woe be unto us too, if we
break not that heart that is stubborn: woe be unto us, if we settle not,
establish not the timorous and trembling, the scattered, and fluid, and
distracted soul, that cannot yet attain, entirely and intensely, and
confidently and constantly, to fix it self upon the Merits and Mercies of
Christ Jesus; but woe be unto us much more, if we do not shake, and shiver, and
throw down the refractory and rebellious soul, whose incredulity will not admit
the History, and whose security in presumptuous sins will not admit the working
and application of those Merits and Mercies which are proposed to him. To this
purpose, therefore, God makes his Ministers speculatores; I have set thee for
their watchman, says God to this Prophet; that so they might see and discern
the highest sins of the highest persons, in the highest places: they are not
only to look down toward the streets, and lanes, and alleys, and cellears,
and reprehend the abuses and excesses of persons of lower quality there; all
their service lies not below stairs, nor only to look into the chamber, and
reprehend the wantonnesses and licentiousness of both sexes there; nor only
unto the house top and tarras, and reprehend the ambitious machinations and
practices to get thither; but still they are speculatores, men placed upon a
watchtower, to look higher then all this, to look upon sins of a higher nature
then these, to note and reprehend those sins, which are done so much more
immediately toward God, as they are done upon color and pretense of Religion:
and upon that station, upon the Execution of that Commission, is our Prophet in
this Text, Thou art unto them a very lovely song, etc. for they shall hear thy
words, but they do them not. Through this whole chapter, he presents matter of
that nature, either of too confident, or too diffident a behavior toward God.
In the tenth verse, he reprehends their diffidence and distrust in God: This
they say (says the Prophet) If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and
we pine away in them, how should we live? How should you live? says the
Prophet: thus you should live, by hearing what the Lord of Life has said, As I
live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked. In the
25 verse he reprehends their confidence; they say, Abraham was one, and he
inherited this land; we are many, this land is given us for our inheritance:
but say unto them, says God to the Prophet there, You lift up your eyes to
Idols, and you shed blood, and shall you possess the land? Ye defile one
another wife, and ye stand upon the sword, and shall ye possess the land? We
were but one, and are many; it is true: God has testified his love, in
multiplying Inhabitants, and in uniting Kingdoms; but if there be a lifting up
of eyes toward Idols, a declination toward an Idolatrous Religion; if there
be a defiling of one another wife, and then standing upon the sword, that it
must be matter of displeasure, or of quarrel, if one will not betray his wife,
or sister, to the lust of the greatest person; shall we possess the land? shall
we have a continuance of Gods blessing upon us? we shall not. And as he thus
represents their over-confident behavior toward God; God is bound by his
promise, and therefore we may be secure: And their over-diffident behavior;
God has begun to show his anger upon us, and therefore there is no recovery:
he reprehends also that distemper, which ordinarily accompanies this behavior
toward God, that is, an Expostulation, and a Disputing with God, and a
censuring of his actions: in the 20 ver. they come to say, The way of the Lord
is not equal; that is, we know not how to deal with him, we know not where to
find him; he promises Mercies, and lays Afflictions upon us; he threatens
judgments upon the wicked, and yet the wicked prosper most of all; The ways of
the Lord are equal. But, to this also God says by the Prophet, I will judge
every one of you after his own ways. The ways of the Lord are unsearchable;
look ye to your own ways, for according to them, shall God judge you. And then
after these several reprehensions, this watchman raises himself to the highest
pinnacle of all, to discover the greatest sin of all, treason within doors,
contemning of God in his own house, and in his presence; that is, a coming to
Church to hear the word of God preached, a pretense of cheerfulness and
alacrity, in the outward service of God, yea a true sense and feeling of a
delight in hearing of the word; and yet for all this, an unprofitable
barrenness, and (upon the whole matter) a despiteful and a contumelious
neglecting of Gods purpose and intention, in his Ordinance: for, Our voice is
unto them but as a song to an instrument; they hear our words, but they do them
not.

Though then some Expositors take these words to be an increpation upon the
people, that they esteemed Gods ablest Ministers, endued with the best parts,
to be but as music, as a jest, as a song, as an entertainment; that they
under-valued and disesteemed the whole service of God in the function of the
Ministry, and thought it either nothing, or but matter of State and
Government, as a civil ordinance for civil order, and no more: yet I take this
increpation to reach to a sin of another nature; that the people should
attribute reverence enough, attention enough, credit enough to the preacher,
and to his preachings, but yet when all that is done, nothing is done: they
should hear willingly, but they do nothing of that which they had heard.

First then, God for his own glory promises here, Divisio.
that his Prophet, his Minister shall be Tuba, as is said in the beginning of
this Chapter, a Trumpet, to awaken with terror. But then, he shall become
Carmen musicum, a musical and harmonious charmer, to settle and compose the
soul again in a reposed confidence, and in a delight in God: he shall be
musicum carmen, music, harmony to the soul in his matter; he shall preach
harmonious peace to the conscience: and he shall be musicum carmen, music and
harmony in his manner; he shall not present the messages of God rudely,
barbarously, extemporally; but with such meditation and preparation as
appertains to so great an employment, from such a King as God, to such a State
as his Church: so he shall be musicum carmen, music, harmony, in re and modo,
in matter and in manner: And then musicum so much farther (as the text adds) as
that he shall have a pleasant voice, that is, to preach first sincerely (for a
preaching to serve turns and humors, cannot, at least should not please any)
but then it is to preach acceptably, seasonably, with a spiritual delight, to a
discreet and rectified congregation, that by the way of such a holy delight,
they may receive the more profit. And then he shall play well on an instrument;
which we do not take here to be the working upon the understanding and
affections of the Auditory, that the congregation shall be his instrument; but
as S. Basil says, Corpus hominis, Organum Dei, when the person acts that which
the song says; when the words become works, this is a song to an instrument:
for, as S. August. pursues the same purpose, Psallere est ex preceptis Dei
agere; to sing, and to sing to an instrument, is to perform that holy duty in
action, which we speak of in discourse: And God shall send his people preachers
furnished with all these abilities, to be Tubae, Trumpets to awaken them; and
then to be carmen musicum, to sing Gods mercies in their ears, in reverent, but
yet in a diligent, and thereby a delightful manner; and so to be music in
their preaching, and music in their example, in a holy conversation: Eris,
says God to this prophet, such a one thou shall be, thou shall be such a one in
thy self; and then eris illis, thou shall be so to them, to the people: To them
thou shall be Tuba, a Trumpet, Thy preaching shall awaken them, and so bring
them to some sense of their sins: To them thou shall be carmen musicum, music
and harmony; both in re, in thy matter, they shall conceive an apprehension or
an offer of Gods mercy through thee; and in modo, in the manner; they shall
confess, that thy labors work upon them, and move them, and affect them, and
that that unpremeditated, and drowsy, and cold manner of preaching, agrees not
with the dignity of Gods service: they shall acknowledge (says God to this
Prophet) thy pleasant voice; confess thy doctrine to be good, and confess thy
playing upon an Instrument, acknowledge thy life to be good too; for, in
testimony of all this, Audient (says the text) They shall hear this. Now,
every one that might come, does not so; businesses, nay less then businesses,
vanities, keep many from hence; less then vanities, nothing; many, that have
nothing to do, yet are not here: All are not come that might come; nor are all
that are here, come hither; penalty of law, observation of absences, invitation
of company, affection to a particular preacher, collateral respects, draw men;
and they that are drawn so, do not come; neither do all that are come, hear;
they sleep, or they talk: but Audient, says our text, They shall be here, they
shall come, they shall hear; they shall press to hear: every one that would
come, if he might sit at ease, will not be troubled for a Sermon: but our case
is better, Audient, they shall rise earlier then their fellows, come hither
sooner, endure more pains, hearken more diligently, and conceive more delight
then their fellows: Audient, they will hear: but then, after all (which is the
height of the malediction, or increpation, Non facient, they will not do it;
Non facient quae dixeris, They will do nothing of that which thou have said to
them; nay, non facient quae dixerunt, they will do nothing of that, which
during the time of the Sermons, they had said to their own souls, they would
do; so little hold shall Gods best means, and by his best instruments, take of
them; They shall hear thy words, and shall not do them.

These then are our parts that make up this increpation: First, the Prophet
shall do his part fully: Secondly, the people shall do some of theirs: But then
lastly, they shall fail in the principal, and so make all uneffectual. First,
God will send them Prophets that shall be Tubae, Trumpets; and not only that,
but speculatores; not only Trumpets which sound according to the measure of
breath that is blown into them, but they themselves are the watchmen that are
to sound them: not Trumpets to sound out what airs the occasion of the present
time, or what airs the affections of great persons infuse into them; for so
they are only Trumpets, and not Trumpetors; but God has made them both: And,
as in civil matters, Angusta innocentia est, ad legem bonum esse, Seneca.
That Is but a narrow, but a faint honesty, to be no honester then a man must
needs be, no honester then the law, or then his bodily sickness constrains him
to be; so are these Trumpets short-winded Trumpets, if they sound no oftener
then the Canons enjoin them to sound; for, they must preach in season and out
of season: If the Canonical season be but once a month, the preaching between,
is not so unseasonable, but that it is within the Apostles precept too. If that
be done, if the watchman sound the Trumpet, says the beginning of this Chapter
(when you see it is the watchman himself that sounds, and not another to sound
him; he is neither to be an instrument of others, nor is he to sound always by
others, and spare his own breath) but if the watchman do duly sound, then there
is an Euge bone serve, belongs to him; Well done good and faithful servant,
enter into thy Masters joy: And if he be not heard, or be not followed, then
there is a vae Betsaida, a woe belonging to that City, and to that house; for,
if those works had been done in Sodom, if all this preaching had been at Rome,
Rome would have repented in sackcloth and ashes. Jer. 6.17.
I set watchmen over you, says God in another Prophet, Et dixi, Audite, I said
unto you, Hearken to them: so far God addresses himself to them, speaks
personally to them, super vos, and Audite vos; I sent to you, and hear you: but
when they would not hear, then he changes the person, Et dixerunt, says that
text, And they said, We will not hear: after this stubbornness, God does not so
much as speak to them: it is not Dixistis, you said it; God will have no more
to do with them; but it is Dixerunt, they said it; God speaks of them as of
strangers. But this is not altogether the case in our text: God shall send
Prophets, Trumpets, and Trumpetors, that is, preachers of his word, and not the
word of men; and they shall be heard willingly too; for as they are Tubae,
Trumpets, so they shall be musicum carmen, acceptable music to them that hear
them.

They shall be so, first In re, in their matter, in the doctrine which they
preach. In Re.
The same trumpets that sound the alarm (that is, that awakens us from our
security) and that sounds the Battle (that is, that puts us into a
colluctation with our selves, with this world, with powers and principalities,
yea into a wrestling with God himself and his Justice) the same trumpet sounds
the Parle too, calls us to hearken to God in his word, and to speak to God in
our prayers, and so to come to treaties and capitulations for peace; and the
same trumpet sounds a retreat too, that is, a safe reposing of our souls in the
merit, and in the wounds of our Savior Christ Jesus. And in this voice they
are musicum carmen, a love-song (as the text speaks) in proposing the love of
God to man, wherein he loved him so, as that he gave his only begotten Son for
him. God made this whole world in such an uniformity, such a correspondency,
such a concinnity of parts, as that it was an Instrument, perfectly in tune: we
may say, the trebles, the highest strings were disordered first; the best
understandings, Angels and Men, put this instrument out of tune. God rectified
all again, by putting in a new string, semen mulieris, the seed of the woman,
the Messiah: And only by sounding that string in your ears, become we musicum
carmen, true music, true harmony, true peace to you. If we shall say, that
Gods first string in this instrument, was Reprobation, that Gods first
intention, was, for his glory to damn man; and that then he put in another
string, of creating Man, that so he might have some body to damn; and then
another of enforcing him to sin, that so he might have a just cause to damn
him; and then another, of disabling him to lay hold upon any means of recovery:
there is no music in all this, no harmony, no peace in such preaching. But if
we take this instrument, when Gods hand tuned it the second time, in the
promise of a Messiah, and offer of the love and mercy of God to all that will
receive it in him; then we are truly musicum carmen, as a love-song, when we
present the love of God to you, and raise you to the love of God in Christ
Jesus: for, for the music of the Spears, whatsoever it be, we cannot hear it;
for the decrees of God in heaven, we cannot say we have seen them; our music
is only that salvation which is declared in the Gospel to all them, and to
them only, who take God by the right hand, as he delivers himself in Christ.

So they shall be music in re, in their matter, in their doctrine; and they
shall be also in modo, In modo.
in their manner of presenting that doctrine. Religion is a serious thing, but
not a sullen; Religious preaching is a grave exercise, but not a sordid, not a
barbarous, not a negligent. There are not so eloquent books in the world, as
the Scriptures: Accept those names of Tropes and Figures, which the Grammarians
and Rhetoricians put upon us, and we may be bold to say, that in all their
Authors, Greek and Latin, we cannot find so high, and so lively examples, of
those Tropes, and those Figures, as we may in the Scriptures: whatsoever has
justly delighted any man in any man's writings, is exceeded in the Scriptures.
The style of the Scriptures is a diligent, and an artificial style; and a great
part thereof in a musical, in a metrical, in a measured composition, in verse.
The greatest mystery of our Religion, indeed the whole body of our Religion,
the coming, and the Kingdom of a Messiah, of a Savior, of Christ, is conveyed
in a Song, in the third chapt. of Habakkuk: and therefore the Jews say, that
that Song cannot yet be understood, because they say the Messiah is not yet
come. His greatest work, when he was come, which was his union and marriage
with the Church, and with our souls, he has also delivered in a piece of a
curious frame, Solomon's Song of Songs. And so likewise, long before, when God
had given all the Law, he provided, as himself says, a safer way, which was to
give them a heavenly Song of his own making: for that Song, he says there, he
was sure they would remember. Deuteronomy. 31.
So the Holy Ghost has spoken in those Instruments, whom he chose for the
penning of the Scriptures, and so he would in those whom he sends for the
preaching thereof: he would put in them a care of delivering God messages, with
consideration, with meditation, with preparation; and not barbarously, not
suddenly, not occasionally, not extemporarily, which might derogate from the
dignity of so great a service. That Ambassador should open himself to a shrewd
danger and surprisall, that should defer the thinking upon his Oration, till
the Prince, to whom he was sent, were reading his letters of Credit: And it is
a late time of meditation for a Sermon, when the Psalm is singing. Loquere
Domine, says the Prophet; speak, O Lord: But it was when he was able to say,
Ecce paratus, Behold I am prepared for thee to speak in me: If God shall be
believed, to speak in us, in our ordinary Ministry, it must be, when we have,
so as we can, fitted our selves, for his presence. To end this, then are we
Musicum carmen in modo, music to the soul, in the manner of our preaching,
when in delivering points of Divinity, we content our selves with that
language, and that phrase of speech, which the Holy Ghost has expressed
himself in, in the Scriptures: for to delight in the new and bold terms of
Heretics, furthers the Doctrine of Heretics too. And then also, are we
Musicum carmen, when, according to the example of men inspired by the Holy
Ghost, in writing the Scriptures, we deliver the messages of God, with such
diligence, and such preparation, as appertains to the dignity of that
employment.

Now these two, to be Music both these ways, Vox suavis.
in matter and in manner, concur and meet in the next, which is, to have a
pleasant voice: Thou art a lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice.
First, A Voice they must have, they must be heard: if they silence themselves,
by their ignorance, or by their laziness; if they occasion themselves to be
silenced, by their contempt and contumacy, both ways they are inexcusable; for
a voice is essential to them, that denominates them: John Baptist has other
great names; even the name of Baptist, is a great name, when we consider whom
he baptized; him, who baptized the Baptist himself, and all us, in his own
blood. So is his name of Preacher, the forerunner of Christ (for in that name
he came before him, who was before the world;) so is his Propheta, that he was
a Prophet, and then, more then a Prophet; and then, the greatest among the sons
of women; these were great names, but yet the name that he chose, is Vox
clamantis, The voice of him that cries in the wilderness. What names and titles
soever we receive in the School, or in the Church, or in the State; if we lose
our voice, we lose our proper name, our Christian name. But then, John Baptists
name is not A voice, Any voice, but The voice: in the Prophecy of Esaias, in all
the four Evangelists, constantly, The voice. Christ is verbum, The word; not A
word, but The word: the Minister is Vox, voice; not A voice, but The voice, the
voice of that word, and no other; and so, he is a pleasing voice, because he
pleases him that sent him, in a faithful executing of his Commission, and
speaking according to his dictate; and pleasing to them to whom he is sent, by
bringing the Gospel of Peace and Reparation to all wounded, and scattered, and
contrite Spirits.

Instrumentum.
They shall be Music both ways, in matter, and in manner; and pleasing both
ways, to God, and to men: but yet to none of these, except the Music be
perfect, except it be to an Instrument, that is, as we said at first, out of S.
Basil, and S. Augustine, except the Doctrine be expressed in the life too: Who
will believe me when I speak, if by my life they see I do not believe my self?
how shall I be believed to speak heartily against Ambition and Bribery in
temporal and civil places, if one in the Congregation be able to jogge him
that sits next him, and tell him, That man offered me money for spiritual
preferment? To what a dangerous scorn shall I open my self, and the service of
God, if I shall declaime against Usury, and look him in the face that has my
money at use? One such witness in the Congregation, shall out-preach the
Preacher: and God shall use his tongue (perchance his malice) to make the
service of that Preacher uneffectual. Quam speciosi pedes Evangelicantium!
says S. Paul, Romans 10.
(and he says that out of Esaias, and out of Nahum too, as though the Holy Ghost
had delighted himself with that phrase in expressing it) How beautiful are the
feet of them that preach the Gospel! Men look most to our feet, to our ways:
the power that makes men admire, may lie in our tongues; but the beauty that
makes men love, lies in our feet, in our actions. And so we have done with all
the pieces that constitute our first part: God, in his promise to that Nation,
prophesied upon us, that which he has abundantly performed, a Ministry, that
should first be Trumpets, and then Music: Music, in fitting a reverent
manner, to religious matter; and Music, in fitting an instrument to the voice,
that is, their Lives to their Doctrine. Eris, said God here, to this Prophet,
All this thou shall be: and that leads us into our second part.

Now, in this second part, there is more; for it is not only Eris, Part. II.
Eris illis.
thou shall be so in thy self, and as thou art employed by me; but Eris illis,
thou shall be so unto them, they shall receive thee for such, acknowledge thee
to be such: God provides a great measure of ability in the Prophet, and some
measure of good inclination in the people. Eris illis Tuba, thou shall be to
them, they shall feel thee to be a Trumpet: they shall not say in their hearts,
There is no God; they shall not say, Tush, the Lord sees us not, or he is a
blind, or an indifferent God, or, the Lord is like one of us, he loves peace,
and will be at quiet; but they shall acknowledge, that he is Dominus
Exercituum, the Lord of Hosts, and that the Prophet is his Trumpet, to raise
them up to a spiritual battle. Eris illis Tuba, thou shall be to them a
Trumpet, they shall not be secure in their sins; and Eris illis carmen musicum,
by thy preaching they shall come to confess, That God is a God of harmony, and
not of discord; of order, and not of confusion; and that, as he made, so he
governs all things, in weight, and number, and measure; that he has a
Succession, and a Hierarchy in his Church; that it is a household of the
Faithful, and a Kingdom of Saints, and therefore regularly governed, and by
order, and that in this government no man can give himself Orders, no man can
baptize himself, nor give himself the Body and Blood of Christ Jesus, nor
preach to himself, nor absolve himself; and therefore they shall come to thee,
whom they shall confess to be appointed by God, to convey these graces unto
them: Eris illis carmen musicum: from thee they shall accept that music, the
orderly application of Gods mercies, by visible and outward means in thy
Ministry in the Church. Eris illis vox suavis, they shall confess thou
preachest true Doctrine, and appliest it powerfully to their consciences; and
Eris illis vox ad Citharam, thou shall be a voice to an Instrument; they shall
acknowledge thy life to be agreeable to thy Doctrine; they shall quarrel thee,
challenge thee in neither, not in Doctrine, not in Manners.

Such as God appoints thee to be, Eris, thou shall be; and Eris illis, they
shall respect thee as such, and reward thee as such: and they shall express
that, in that which follows, Audient, Audient.
they shall hear thy word. The worldly man, though it trouble him to hear thee,
though it put thorns and brambles into his conscience, yet though it be but to
beget an opinion of holiness in others, Audiet, he will hear thee. The
fashionall man, that will do as he sees great men do, if their devotion, or
their curiosity, or their service and attendance, draw him hither, Audiet, he
will come with them, and he will hear. He that is disaffected in his heart, to
the Doctrine of our Church, rather then incur penalties of Statutes and Canons,
Audiet, he will come, and hear: yea, there is more then that, intended,
Audient, they shall hear willingly; and more then that too, Audient, they shall
hear cheerfully, desirously. Here is none of that action which was in S.
Stephens persecutors, Act. 7.57.
Continuerunt aures, they withheld their ears, they withdrew themselves from
hearing, they kept themselves out of distance; here is no such Recusancy
intended; Psalm. 58.
neither is there any of their actions, Qui obturant aures, as the Psalmist
says, the Serpent does, who (as the Fathers note often) stops one ear with
laying it close to the ground, and the other with covering it with his tail:
here is none of their action, Jer. 7.26. Prove. 28.9.
Qui in durant, nor qui declinant; none that turns away his ear (for even his
prayer shall be an abomination, says Solomon; his very being here is a sin)
here, in our case, in our Text, is none of these indispositions; but here is a
ready, a willing, and (in appearance) a religious coming to hear: Expectation,
Acceptance, Acclamation, Congratulation, Remuneration, in a fair proportion;
we complain of no want in any of these now. Sumus, God has authorized us, and
God has exalted us, in some measure, to deliver his messages; and Sumus vobis,
you do not deny us to be such; you do not refuse, but you receive us, and his
messages by us; you do hear our words. And that is all that belonged to our
second part.

Part III.
Now in both these former parts, who can discern, who would suspect any
foundation to be laid for an Increpation, Non facient.
any preparation for a Malediction or Curse? God will send good Preachers to
the people, and the people shall love their preaching; and yet, 1 Samuel 3.11.
as he said to Samuel, he will do a thing, at which, both the ears of him that
hears it shall tingle. Now, what is that in our case? This; he will aggravate
their condemnation, therefore, because they have been so diligent herein, Et
non fecerunt, they have done nothing of that which they have heard. As our very
Repentance contracts the nature of sin, if we persevere not in that holy
purpose; but, as though we had then made even with God, sin on again upon a new
score: so this hearing it self is a sin, that is, such an aggravating
circumstance, as changes the very nature of the sin, to them that hear so much,
and do nothing. This is not a preparation of that curse in Ezekiel; 2.5.
whether they will hear or forbear, yet they shall know, that a Prophet has
been among them; that is, hear, or hear not, subsequent judgments shall
bring them to see, that they might have heard: but here God accompanies them
with a stronger grace, then so; Audient, they will hear. 58.
There are Vipers in the Psalm that will not hear, how wisely soever the
charmers charm; Mat. 3.7.
But there is a Generation of Vipers which do hear, and yet depart with none of
their viperous nature: O generation of vipers, who has warned you to flee from
the wrath to come! says John Baptist, there to the Pharisees and Sadduces,
that came to his baptism. They had apprehended Tubam, a warning, and they did
come; but when they were come, he found them in their Non faciunt, without any
purpose of bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance. Ver. 8.


Here then is S. Paul's Judaeus in abscondito, a Jew inwardly. Quae dixeris.
Romans 2.29.
Here is the true Recusant, and the true Non-conformitan; Audiunt, sed non
faciunt: he comes to hear, but never comes to do; there is Recusancy: he
confesses that he has received good instruction, but he refufes to conform
himself unto it; there is Nonconformity. First, Non facient quae dixeris, they
will not do those things which thou have said; and yet, that is strange, since
they confess thou say true: but yet that is not so strange; for they may be
Duri sermones; though it be true that we say, it may be hard, and it may
trouble them, and perchance damnifie them in their Profit, or mortify them in
their Pleasures. It may be we may say, that thy relapsing into a sin formerly
repented, submits thee again to all the punishment due to the former sin; and
that is Durus sermo, a hard saying: It may be we may say, that a repentance
which has all other formal parts of a true repentance, if it reach not to all
the branches, and to all the specifying differences and circumstance of thy
sins, so far as a diligent examination of thy conscience can carry thee, is a
void repentance; and that is Durus sermo, a hard saying. It may be we may say,
That though thou have truly and entirely repented, though thou do leave the
practice of the sin, yet if thou do not also leave that which thou have
corruptly got by the ways of that sin, the sin it self lies upon thee still;
and that is Durus sermo, a hard saying: And Christ's own Disciples forsook him,
and forsook him for ever, John 6.60.
Quia durus sermo, because that which Christ said, seemed to them a hard
saying. This we may say; and they may come to hear, and come to say we say
true, and yet Non facient quae dixeris, never do any of that which we say, Quia
duri sermones, because we press things hardly upon them.

But yet that is not so strange, as Non facere quae dixerint, Qud dixerint.
not to do those things which they have said themselves. That when, as the
Apostle says of the Corinthians, Vos estis, you are our Epistle, not written
with ink, but with the spirit of the living God: so a man, by hearing, is
become Evangelium sibi, a Gospel to himself; and by the preaching of the
Gospel, Sermon. 3.
is come to say, Non amplius, I will go, and sin no more, left a worse thing
fall unto me: yet he goes and sins again, fall what will, or can fall; and Non
facit quae dixerit, he does not perform his own promise to himself. He is
affected with some particular passage in a Sermon, and then he comes to David's
Secundum innocentiam; O Lord, deal with me according to my future innocence;
show thy mercy to me, as I keep my self from that sin hereafter; Job 9.31.
and then, abominantur eum vestimenta ejus, his old clothes defile him again,
his old rags cast vermin upon him, his old habits of sin threw new dirt upon
him. He goes out of the Church as that man's son went from his father, who sent
him to work in the Vineyard, Matthew. 21.28.
with that word in his mouth, Eo Domine, Sir, I go; but he never went, he turns
another way, Non facit quae dixerat, he keeps not his own word, with his own
soul: when he is gone out of his right way, a Sickness, a Disgrace, a Loss,
overtakes him, the arrows of the Almighty stick in him, and the venom thereof
drinks up his spirit; temporal afflictions, and spiritual afflictions meet in
him, like two clouds, and beat out a thunder upon him, like two currents, and
swallow him like two milstones, and grind him, and then he comes to his Domine
quid retribuam? Lord, what shall I give thee, to deliver me now? and non facit
quae dixerat, he pays none of those vows, performs no part of that which he
promised then. Christ had his Consummatum est, and this sinner has his: Christ
ends his passion, and he ends his action; Christ ends his affliction, and he
ends his affection: Distulit securim, attulit securitatem, says S. Augustine
of this case; as soon as the Danger is removed, his Devotion is removed too.
The end of all is, that what punishment soever God reserves for them, who never
heard of the Name of his Son Christ Jesus at all, or for them who have
pretended to receive him, but have done it Idolatrously, superstitiously; we
that have heard him, we that have had the Scriptures preached and applied to us
sincerely, shall certainly have the heavier condemnation, for having had that
which they wanted: Our multiplicity of Preachers, and their assiduity in
preaching; our true interpretation of their labors, when we do hear, and our
diligent coming, that we may hear, shall leave us in worse state then they
found us, si non fecerimus, If we do not do that which we hear. And to do
the Gospel, is to do what we can for the preservation of the Gospel. I know
what I can do, as a Minister of the Gospel, and of Gods Word; out of his Word I
can preach against Linsey-woolsey garments; out of his Word I can preach
against plowing with an Ox, and with an Ass, against mingling of Religions. I
know what I can do, as a Father, as a Master; I can preserve my Family from
attempts of Jesuits. Those that are of higher place, Magistrates, know what
they can do too: They know they can execute laws; if not to the taking of
Life, yet to the restraining of Liberty: Sermon. 2.
And it is no seditious saying, it is no sauciness, it is no bitterness, it
is no boldness, to say, that the spiritual death of those souls, who perish
by the practice of those seducers, whom they might have stopped, lies upon
them. And how knows he, who lets a Jesuit escape, whether he let go but a Fox,
that will deceive some simple soul in matter of Religion; or a Wolf, who, but
the protection of the Almighty, would adventure upon the person of the highest
of all? Non facient quae dixeris, is as far as the Text goes; they will not do
that we say: but Quae dixerint, is more; they will not do that which themselves
have said: But, Quae juraverint, is most of all; If they will not do that,
which for the preservation of the Gospel, they have taken an Oath to do, The
Increpation, the Malediction, intended by God, in this Text, that all our
preaching, and all our hearing shall aggravate our condemnation, will fall upon
us: And therefore, this being the season, in which, especially, God affords you
the performance of that part of this Prophecy, assiduous, and laborious, and
acceptable, and useful preaching; where all you, of all sorts, are likely to
hear the Duties of Administration toward others, and of Mortification in your
selves, powerfully represented unto you, this may have been somewhat
necessarily said by me now, for the removing of some stones out of their way,
and the chafing of that wax, in which they may thereby make the deeper and
clearer impressions; that so, we may not only be to you, as a lovely song,
sung to an Instrument; nor you only hear our words, but do them.

AMEN.
A Lent-SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, Sermon. 3.
February 20. 1628. SERMON III.
James 2.12. So speak ye, and so Do, as they that shall be Judged by the law of
Liberty.


THis is one of those seven Epistles, which Athanasius and Origin called
Catholic; that is, universal; perchance because they are not directed to any
one Church, as some others are, but to all the Christian world: And S. Hierom
called them Canonical; perchance because all Rules, all Canons of holy
Conversation are comprised in these Epistles: And Epiphanius, and Oecumenius
called them Circular; perchance, because as in a Circle, you cannot discern
which was the first point, nor in which, the compass begun the Circle; so
neither can we discern in these Epistles, whom the Holy Ghost begins withal,
whom he means principally, King or Subject, Priest or People, Single or
Married, Husband or Wife, Father or Children, Masters or Servants; but
Universally, promiscuously, indifferently, they give All rules, for All
actions, to All persons, at All times, and in all places; As in this Text, in
particular, which is not, by any precedent, or subsequent relation, by any
connection or coherence, directed upon any company, or any Degree of Men: for
the Apostle does not say, Ye Princes, nor ye people; but ye, ye in general, to
all, So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of
liberty: So these Epistles are Catholic, so they are Canonical, and they
Circular so. But yet, though in a Circle we know not where the compass began,
we know not which was the first point; yet we know, that the last point of the
Circle returns to the first, and so becomes all one; and as much as we know the
last, we know the first point. Since then the last point of that Circle, in
which God has created us to move, is a kingdom (for it is the kingdom of
heaven) and it is a Court (for it is that glorious Court, which is the presence
of God, in the communion of his Saints) it is a fair and a pious conception,
for this Congregation, here present now in this place, to believe, that the
first point of this Circle of our Apostle here, is a Court too; and that the
Holy Ghost, in proposing these duties in his general Ye, does principally
intend, ye that live in Court, ye whom God brings so near to the sight of
himself, and of his Court in heaven, as that you have always the picture of
himself, and the pourtraiture of his Court in your eyes: for a Religious King
is the Image of God, and a Religious Court is a Copy of the Communion of
Saints. And therefore be you content to think, that to you especially our
Apostle says here, Ye, ye who have a nearer propinquity to God, a more
assiduous conversation with God, by having better helps then other inferior
stations do afford (for though God be seen in a weed, in a worm, yet he is seen
more clearly in the sum) So speak ye, and so Do, as they that shall be judged
by the law of liberty.

Now, Divisio.
as the first Devils were in heaven (for it was not the punishment which they
feel in Hell, but the sin which they committed in heaven, which made them
Devils) and yet the fault was not in God, nor in the place; so if the greatest
sins be committed in Courts (as even in Rome, where they will needs have an
Innocent Church, yet they confess a guilty Court) the faults are personal,
theirs that do them, and there is no higher author of their sin. The Apostle
does not bid us say, that it is so in Courts; but lest it should come to be so,
he bids us give these rules to Courts, So speak ye, and so Do, as they that
shall be judged by a law of liberty. First then, here is no express precept
given, no direct commandment, to speak: The Holy Ghost saw, there would be
speaking enough in Courts; for, though there may be a great sin in silence, a
great prevarication in not speaking in a good cause, or for an oppressed
person; yet the lowest voice in a Court, whispering it self, speaks a loud, and
reaches far; and therefore, here is only a rule to regulate our speech, Sic
loquimini, So speak ye. And then, as here is no express precept for speaking,
so here is no express precept for Doing; The Holy Ghost saw, there would be
Doing enough, business enough in Court: for, as silence, and half silence,
whispering, may have a loud voice; so, even undoing may be a busy Doing; and
therefore, here is only a Rule to regulate our Doings too, Sic facite, So do
ye. And lastly, as there is speaking enough, even in silence, and Doing enough,
even in undoing, in Court; So the Court is always under judgment enough.
Every discontented person that has missed his preferment, though he have not
merited it; every drunkard that is over-heat, though not with his own wine;
every conjecturing person, that is not within the distance to know the ends, or
the ways of great Actions, will Judge the highest Counsels, and Executions of
those Councels. The Court is under judgment enough, and they take liberty
enough; and therefore here is a rule to regulate our liberty, A law of liberty:
So speak ye, and, etc. But though for the more benefit of the present
congregation, we fix the first point of this Circle, that is, the principal
purpose of the Holy Ghost, upon the Court; yet our Text is an Amphitheater. An
Amphitheater consists of two Theaters: Our Text has two parts, in which, all
men, all may fit, and see themselves acted; first, in the obligation that is
laid upon us, upon us all, Sic loquimini, sic facite: And then in the Reason of
this Holy diligence, and religious cautelousness, Quia judicandi, Because you
are all to be judged, by, etc. which two general parts, the Obligation, and the
Reason, flowing into many sub-divided branches, I shall, I think, do better
service, both to your understandings, and to your memory, and to your
Affections, and Consciences, to present them as they shall arise anon, in their
order, then to pour them out, all at once now.

Part I. Loquimini.
First then, in our first part, we look to our Rule, in the first Duty, our
speaking; Sic loquimini, So speak ye. The Comique Poet gives us a good Caution,
Si servus semper consuescat silentio, fiet nequam; That servant that says
nothing, thinks ill. As our Nullifidians, Men that put all upon works, and no
faith; and our Solisidians, Men that put all upon faith and no works, are both
in the wrong; So there is a danger in Multi loquio, and another in Nulli
loquio: He that speaks over-freely to me, may be a Man of dangerous
conversation; And the silent and reserved Man, that makes no play, but
observes, and says nothing, may be more dangerous then he: As the Roman
Emperor professed to stand more in fear of one pale man, and lean man, then of
twenty that studied and pursued their pleasures, and loved their ease, because
such would be glad to keep things in the state they then were, but the other
sort affected changes: so for the most part, he that will speak, lies as open
to me, as I to him; speech is the Balance of conversation. Therefore, as God is
not Merx, but pretium; Gold is not ware, but the price of all ware; So speaking
is not Doing, but yet fair speaking prepares an acceptance before, and puts a
value after, upon the best actions. God has made other Creatures Gregalia,
sociable, besides man; Sheep, and Deer, and Pigeons, will flock, and herd, and
troup, and meet together; but when they are met, they are not able to tell one
another why they meet. Man only can speak; silence makes it but a Herding:
That that makes Conversation, is speech, Qui datum deserit, respuit datorem,
says Tertullian. He that uses not a benefit, reproaches his Benefactor. To
declare Gods goodness, that has enabled us to speak, we are bound to speak:
speech is the Glue, the Cyment, the soul of Conversation, and of Religion too.

Now, your conversation is in heaven; and therefore loquimini Deo, first speak
to him that is in heaven, speak to God. Some of the Platonique Philosophers
thought it a profanation of God, to speak to God; They thought, that when our
Thoughts were made Prayers, and that the Heart flowed into the Tongue, and that
we had invested and apparel'd our Meditations with words, this was a kind of
Painting, and Dressing, and a superfluous diligence, that rather tasted of
humane affections, then such a sincere service, as was fit for the presence of
God; Only the first conceptions, the first ebullitions and emanations of the
soul, in the heart, they thought to be a fit sacrifice to God, and all verbal
prayer to be too homely for him. But God himself, who is all spirit, has yet
put on bodily lineaments, Head, and Hands, and Feet, yea and Garments too, in
many places of Scripture, to appear, that is, to manifest himself to us: And
when we appear to God, though our Devotion be all spiritual, as he is all
spirit, yet let us put on lineaments and apparel upon our Devotions, and digest
the Meditations of the heart, into words of the mouth. God came to us in verbo,
In the word; for Christ is, The word that was made flesh. Let us, that are
Christians, go to God so, too, That the words of our mouth, as well as the
Meditations of our heart, may be acceptable to him. Surely, God loves the
service of Prayer, or he would never have built a house for Prayer; And
therefore we justly call Public prayer, the Liturgy, Service: Love that
place, and love that service in that place, Prayer. They will needs make us
believe, that S. Francis preached to Birds, and Beasts, and Stones; but they
will not go about to make us believe that those Birds, and Beasts, and Stones
joined with S. Francis in Prayer. God can speak to all things; that is the
office of Preaching, to speak to others: But, of all, only Man can speak to
God; and that is the office of Prayer. It is a blessed conversation, to spend
time in Discourse, in Communication with God. God went his way, as soon as he
had left communing with Abraham. Genesis 18. ult.
When we leave praying, God leaves us: But God left not Abraham, as long as he
had any thing to say to God; And we have always something to say unto him. He
loves to hear us tell him, even those things which he knew before; his Benefits
in our Thankfulness, And our sins in our Confessions, And our necessities in
our Petitions. And therefore having so many Occasions to speak to God, and to
speak of God, David ingeminates that, and his ingemination implies a wonder, O
that men would (And it is strange if Men will not) O that men would, says he
more then once or twice, O that men would praise the Lord, and tell the
wondrous works that he has done for the sons of Men! for, David determines not
his precept in that, Be thankful unto him; for a Tnankfulness may pass in
private, Psalm. 100.4.
But Be Thankful unto him, and speak good of his name. Glorify him in speaking
to him, in speaking of him, in speaking for him.

Diis.
Loquimini Deo, speak to God; And loquimini Diis, speak to them whom God has
called Gods. As Religious Kings are bound to speak to God by way of prayer; so
those who have that sacred office, and those that have that Honorable office to
do so, are bound to speak to Kings by way of Counsel. God has made all good
men partakers of the Divine Nature; They are the sons of God, The seed of God;
But God has made Kings partakers of his Office, and Administration. And as
between man and himself, God has put a Mediator, that consists of God and Man;
so between Princes and People, God has put Mediators too, who considered in
themselves, retain the nature of the people (so Christ did of man) but
considered in their places, have fair and venerable beams of his power, and
influences of him upon them. And as our Mediator Christ Jesus found always his
Fathers ears open to him; so do the Church and State enter blessedly and
successfully, by these Mediators, into the ears of the King. Of our Mediator
Christ himself, Heb. 5.7.
it is said, That he offered up prayers, and strong cries, and Tears; Even
Christ was put to some difficulties in his Mediation for those that were his;
But he was heard, says that text, in that he feared. Even in those things,
wherein, in some emergent difficulties, they may be afraid they shall not,
these Mediators are graciously and opportunely heard too, in the due discharge
of their offices. That which was David's prayer, is our possession, Psalm. 36.11.
our happiness, Let not the foot of Pride come against us: we know there is no
Pride in the Head; and because there is no fault in the Hands neither, that is,
in them, into whose hands this blessed Mediatorship is committed, by the great
places of power, and Council, which they worthily hold; the foot of pride,
foreign, or home-oppression, does not, shall not tread us down. And for the
continuation of this happiness, let me have leave to say, with Mordicai's
humility, and earnestness too, to all such Mediators, 4.14.
that which he said to Esther, Who knows, whether thou be not brought to
this place for this purpose, To speak that, which his sacred and gracious ears,
to whom thou speak, will always be well pleased to hear, when it is
delivered by them, to whom it belongs to speak it, and in such humble and
reserved manner, as such sovereign persons as owe an account but to God, should
be spoke too? Sic loquimini Deo, So let Kings speak to God, (that was our
first) Sic loquimini Diis, So let them, whom Kings trust, speak to Kings, whom
God has called Gods, (that was our second.) And then, a third branch in this
rule of our first duty, is, Sic loquimini imaginibus Dei, So speak you to Gods
Images, to Men of condition inferior to your selves; for they also are Images
of God, as you are.

And this is truly, Imaginibus Dei.
most literally the purpose of the Apostle here, That you under-value no Man
for his outward appearance; Verse. 2.
That your overvalue no man for his goodly apparel, or Gold Rings; That you
say not to a poor man, Stand thou there; Verse. 3.
or if you admit him to sit, Sit here under my footstool. But it is a precept
of Accessibleness, and of Affability; Affability, that is, A civility of the
City of God, and a Courtship of the Court of heaven, to receive other Men, the
Images of God, Apoc. 3.20.
with the same easiness that God receives you. God stands at the Door, and
knocks, and stays our leisure, to see if we will open, and let him in: Even at
the door of his Beloved, he stood, and knocked, till his head was filled with
dew, and his locks with the drops of the night. Cant. 5.2.
But God puts none of us to that, to which he puts himself, and his Christ:
But, Knock, says he, and it shall be opened unto you; Mat. 7.7.
No staying at the door, opened as soon as you knock. The nearest that our
Expositors can come, to find what it was that offended God, in Moses striking
of the Rock for water, is, that he struck it twice; Number. 20.10.
that he did not believe that God would answer his expectation at one striking.
God is no in-accessible God, that he may not be come to; nor inexorable, that
he will not be moved, if he be spoken to; nor dilatory, that he does not that
he does, seasonably. Daniel presents God Antiquum Dierum, as an Old Man; Ambro.
but that is as a Reverend, not as a froward person. Men's in sermonibus nostris
habitat, and gubernat verba: The soul of man is incorporate in his word; As he
speaks, we think he thinks: Et bonus paterfamilias, in illo primo vestibulo
aestimatur, says the same Father. As we believe that to be a free house, where
there is an easy entrance; so we doubt the less of a good heart, if we find
charitable and courteous language. But yet there is an excess in this too, in
this self-effusion, this pouring of a man's self out, in fair, and promising
language. Inaccessibleness is the fault, which the Apostle aims at here: and
truly the most inaccessible Man that is, is the over-liberal, and profuse
promiser: He is therefore the most inaccessible, because he is absent, when I
am come to him, and when I do speak with him. To a retired, to a reserved man,
we do not easily get; but when we are there, he is there too: To an open and
liberal promiser we get easily; but when we are with him, he is away, because
his heart, his purpose is not there. But, sic loquimini Deo, so speak ye to God
(that is a remembrance to Kings) Sic loquimini Diis, so speak ye to them whom
God has called Gods (that is a remembrance to Mediators between Kings and
Subjects.) Sic loquimini Imaginibus Dei, so speak ye to Gods Image, to all men
(that is a remembrance to all that possess any superiority over others) as that
your loquimini may be accompanied with a facite, your saying with Doing, your
good words with good actions: for so our Apostle joins them here, So speak ye,
and so Do: and so we are come to our second rule; from the rule of our Words,
to the Rule of our Actions.

Facite.
John Baptist was all voice, yet John Baptist was a forerunner of Christ. The
best words are but words, but they are the forerunners of Deeds: but Christ
himself, as he was God himself, is Purus Actus, all Action, all Doing.
Comfortable words are good cordials; They revive the spirits, and they have the
nature of such occasional physic: but Deeds are our food, our diet, and that
that constantly nourishes us. 1 John 3.18.
Non verbo, says the Apostle; Let us not love in word, nor in tongue; but in
Deed, and in Truth. Not that we may not love in words; but that our Deeds are
the true seals of that love, which was also love, Ambrose.
when it was in words. But Ne quod luxuriat in flore, attenuetur and hebetetur
in fructu; lest that tree that blew early and plentifully, blast before it
knit, second your good words with actions too. It is the Husbandry and the
Harvest of the righteous man; (as it gathered in David) The Mouth of the
righteous speaks wisdom: Psalm. 37.30.
so we read it; there it is in the Tongue, in words only: The Vulgar has it,
Meditatur, He Meditates it; so the heart is got in. But the Original, Hagah, is
noted to signify, fructificavit, He brings forth fruits thereof; and so the
Hand is got in too: And when that which is well spoken, was well meant, and
has been well expressed in Action, that is the Husbandry of the righteous Man;
then his Harvest is all in. It is the way of God himself; Philo Judaeus notes,
Exodus 20.18.
that the people are said to have seen the noise, and the voice of God;
because, whatsoever God says, it determines in Action: If we may hear God, we
may see him; what he says, he does too. Therefore from that example of God
himself, S. Gregory directs us; We must, says he, show our Love, Et veneratione
sermonis, and Ministerio largitatis, what a fair respect in words, and what a
real supply in Deeds. Nay, when we look upon our pattern, that is, God,
Tertullian notes well, That God prevented his own speaking, by Doing;
Benedicebat, quae benefaciebat; first he made all things Good, and then he
Blessed them, that they might be better; first he wrought, and then he spoke.
And so Christ's way and proceeding is presented to us too; so far from not Doing
when he speaks, as that he Does before he speaks. Acts 1.1. Luke ult. 19.
Christ began to Do, and to Teach, says S. Luke; but first to Do. And He was
mighty in Deeds, and in words; but first in Deeds. We cannot write so well as
our Copy, to begin always at Deeds, as God, and his Christ; But yet let us
labor to write so fair after it, as first to afford comfortable words; and
though our Deeds come after, yet to have them from the beginning in our
intention; and that we do them, not because we promised, but promise because we
love to do good, and love to lay upon our selves the obligation of a promise.
The instrument and Organ of Nature was the eye; The Natural Man finds God in
that he sees, in the Creature. The Organ of the Law, which exalted, and
rectified Nature, was the Hand; Fac hoc and vives; perform the law, and thou
shall live. So also, the Organ of the Gospel is the Ear, for faith comes by
hearing; But then the Organ of faith it self, is the Hand too; A Hand that lays
hold upon the Merits of Christ, for my self; and a Hand that delivers me over
to the Church of God, in a holy life, and exemplary Actions, for the
edification of others. So that All, All from nature to Grace, determines in
Action, in Doing good. Sic facite Deo, so do good to God, in real assisting
his cause: Sic facite Diis, so do good to them, whom God has called Gods, in
real secondings their religious purposes: Sic facite Imaginibus Dei, so do
good to the Images of God, in real relieving his distressed Members, as that
you do all this, upon that which is made the Reason of all, in the second part
of this text, Because you are to be judged by the law of liberty.

Timor futuri judicii hujus vitae praedagogus. Part. II. Basil.
Our Schoolmaster to teach us to stand upright in the last judgment, Judicium.
is the Meditation, and the fear of that judgment, in this life. It is our
Schoolmaster, and Schoolmaster enough. I said unto the fool, Psalm. 75.5.
thus and thus, says David: And I said unto the wicked, thus and thus, says he:
for, says he, God is the Judge: He thought it enough to enlighten the
understanding of the fool, enough to rectify the perverseness of the wicked,
if he could set God before them, in that Notion, as a Judge: for, this is one
great benefit from the present contemplation of the future judgment, that
whosoever does truly, and advisedly believe, that ever he shall come to that
judgment, is at it now; He that believes that God will judge him, is Gods
Commissioner, Gods Delegate, and, in his name, judges himself now. Therefore it
is a useful mistaking, which the Roman Translation is fallen into, in this
Text, in reading it thus, Sicut incipientes judicari; So speak ye, and so Do,
as they upon whom the judgment were already begun. For, Qui timet ante Christi
Tribunal praesentari, Aug.
He that is afraid to be brought to the last judgment, has but one Refuge,
but one Sanctuary, Ascendat Tribunal Mentis suae, and constituat se ante
seipsum; Let him cite himself before himself, give evidence himself against
himself; and so guilty as he is found here, so innocent he shall stand there.
Let him proceed upon himself, as Job did, 9.28.
and he is safe; I am afraid of all my sorrow, says he; Afraid that I have not
said enough against my self, nor repented enough; Afraid that my sorrows have
not been sincere, but mingled with circumstances of loss of health, or honor,
or fortune, occasioned by my sins; and not only, not principally for the sin
it self. I am afraid of all my sorrows, says he: but how much more then of my
mirths and pleasures? To judge our selves by the judgment of flatterers, that
depend upon us; to judge our selves by the event and success of things, (I am
enriched, I am preferred by this course, and therefore all is well) to judge our
selves by example of others, (others do thus, and why not I?) All these
proceedings are Coram non Judice, all these are literally Praemunire cases, for
they are appellations into foreign Jurisdictions, and foreign Judicatures.
Only our own conscience rectified, is a competent judge. And they that have
passed the trial of that judgment, do not so much rise to judgment at last,
as stand and continue in judgment: their judgment, that is, their trial, is
passed here; and there they shall only receive sentence, and that sentence
shall be, Euge bone serve; Well done, good and faithful servant; since thou
did enter into Judgment in the other world, enter into thy Masters Joy in
this. But howso ever we be prepared for that judgment, well, or not well; and
howsoever the Judge be disposed toward us, well, or not well, there is this
comfort given us here, that that judgment shall be per legem, by a Law, we
shall be judged by a law of Liberty; which is our second branch in this second
part.

Per Legem.
The Jews that prosecuted the Judgment against Christ, durst not do that
without pretending a Law: Habemus legem, say they, we have a law, and he has
transgressed that. The necessary precipitations into sudden executions, to
which States are forced in rebellious times, we are feign to call by the name
of Law, Martial Law. The Torrents, and Inundations, which invasive Armies pour
upon Nations, we are fain to call by the name of Law, The Law of Arms. No
Judgment, no Execution, without the name, the color, the pretense of Law; for
still men call for a Law for every Execution. And shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right? Shall God judge us, condemn us, execute us at the last
day, and not by a Law? by something that we never saw, never knew, never
notified, never published, and judge me by that, and leave out the
consideration of that Law, which he bound me to keep? 1 Cor. 1.20.
I ask S. Paul's question, Where is the disputer of the world? Who will offer to
dispute unnecessary things, especially where Authority has made it necessary
to us, to forbear such Disputations? Blessed are the peacemakers that command,
and blessed are the peace-keepers that obey, and accommodate themselves to
peace, in forbearing unnecessary and uncharitable controversies: 1 Timothy 3.16.
but, without controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness; The Apostle
invites us to search into no farther mysteries, then such as may be without
controversy: the Mystery of Godliness is without controversy; and godliness
is, to believe that God has given us a Law, and to live according to that Law.
This, this godliness, (that is, Knowledge and Obedience to the Law) has the
promises of this life, and the next too; all referred to his Law: for, without
this, this godliness (which is holiness) no man shall see God: All referred to
a Law. This is Christ's Catechism in S. John, That we might know the only true
God, 17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom he sent. A God commanding, and a Christ reconciling us,
if we have transgressed that Commandment. And this is the Holy Ghosts
Catechism in S. Paul, Deus remunerator, Heb. 11.6.
That we believe God to be, and to be a just rewarder of man's actions: still
all referred to an obedience, or disobedience of a Law. The Mystery of
godliness is great, that is, great enough for our salvation, and yet without
controversy; for, though controversies have been moved about Gods first act,
there can be none of his last act; though men have disputed of the object of
Election, yet of the subject of Execution there is no controversy: No man can
doubt, but that when God delivers over any soul actually, and by way of
execution to eternal condemnation, that he delivers over that soul to that
eternal condemnation, for breaking his Law. In this we have no other adversary,
but the over-sad, the despairing soul; and it becomes us all, to lend our hand
to his succor, and to pour in our Wine, and our Oil, into his Wounds, that
lies weltring and surrounded in the blood of his own pale and exhausted soul:
That soul, who though it can testify to it self, some endeavor in the ways
of holiness, yet upon some collateral doubts, is still suspicious, and jealous
of God. How often have we seen, that a needless jealousy and suspicion,
conceived without cause, has made a good body bad? A needless jealousy and
suspicion of his purposes and intentions upon thee, may make thy merciful God
angry too. Nothing can alienate God more from thee, then to think that any
thing but sin can alienate him. How would thou have God merciful to thee, if
thou will be unmercifull to God himself? And, Qui quid tyrannicum in Deo, Basil.
He that conceives any tyrannical act in God, is unjust to the God of Justice,
and unmercifull to the God of Mercy. Therefore in the 17. of our Injunctions,
we are commanded to arm sad souls against Despair, by setting forth the Mercy,
and the Benefits, and the Godliness of Almighty God (as the word of the
Injunction is, the godliness of God) for, to leave God under a suspicion of
dealing ill with any penitent soul, were to impute ungodliness to God.
Therefore to that mistaking soul, that discomposed, that shivered, and
shrivel'd, and ravel'd, and ruined soul, to that jealous and suspicious soul
only, I say, Let no man judge you, Coloss. 2.16.
says the Apostle, intruding into those things which he has not seen. Let no
man make you afraid of secret purposes in God, which they have not, nor you
have not seen; for, that by which you shall be judged, is the Law; that Law,
which was notified, and published to you. The Law alone were much too heavy, if
there were not a superabundant ease and alleviation in that hand, that Christ
Jesus reaches out to us. Consider the weight and the ease; and for pity to such
distrustful souls, and for establishment of your own, stop your devotions a
little, upon this consideration. There is Chyrographum, a handwriting of
Ordinances against me; 14.
a Debt, an Obligation contracted by our first Parents, in their disobedience,
and fallen upon me. And even that (be it but Original sin) is shrewd evidence;
there is my first charge. But, Deletum est, says the Apostle there; that is
blotted, that is defaced, that cannot be sued against me, after Baptism: Nay,
Sublatum, cruci affixum, it is canceled, it is nailed to the Cross of Christ
Jesus, it is no more sin; in its self it is; but to me, to condemnation, it is
not: here is my charge, and my discharge for that. 28.15.
But yet there is a heavier evidence, Pactum cum inferno, as the Prophet Esaias
speaks, I have made a covenant with death, and with Hell I am at an agreement;
that is, says S. Greg. Audacter, Indesinenter peccamus, and diligendo,
amicitiam profitemur: We sin constantly, and we sin continually, and we sin
confidently; and we find so much pleasure and profit in sin, as that we have
made a league, and sworn a friendship with sin; and we keep that perverse, and
irreligious promise, over-religiously; and the sins of our youth flow into
other sins, when age disables us for them. But yet there is a Deletum est, in
this case too; our covenant with death is disanull'd (says that Prophet) when
we are made partakers of the death of Christ, in the blessed Sacrament. Mine
actual sins lose their act, and mine habitual sins fall from me as a habit,
as a garment put off, when I come to that: there is my charge, and my discharge
for that. But yet there is worse evidence against me, then either this
Chyrographum, the first handwriting of Adams hand, or then this pactum, this
contract of mine own hand, actual and habitual sin (for of these, one is
washed out in water, and the other in blood, in the two Sacraments.) But then
there is Lex in Membris, says the Apostle, Romans 7.21.
I find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me. Sin
assisted by me, is now become a tyrant over me, and has established a
government upon me; and there is a law of sin, and a law in my flesh, which
after the water of Baptism taken, and the water of penitent tears given; after
the blood of Jesus Christ taken, and mine own blood given (that is, a holy
readiness at that time, when I am made partaker of Christ's death, to die for
Christ) throws me back, by relapses into those repented sins. This put the
Apostle to that passionate exclamation, O wretched man that I am! And yet he
found a deliverance, even from the body of this death, through Jesus Christ his
Lord: that is, a free, an open recourse and access to him in all oppressions of
heart, in all dejections of spirit. Now, when this Chyrographum, this bond of
Adams hand, Original sin, is cancelled upon the Cross of Christ; And this
Pactum, this band of mine hand, actual sins, washed away in the blood of
Christ; and this, Lex in membris, this disposition to relapse into repented
sins (which, as a tide that does certainly come every day, does come every day
in one form or other) is beaten back, as a tide by a bank, by a continual
opposing the merits and the example of Christ Jesus, and the practice of his
fasting, and such other medicinal disciplines, as I find to prevail against
such relapses; when by this blessed means, the whole Law, against which I am a
trespasser, is evacuated, will God condemn me for all this, and not by a Law?
When I have pleaded Christ, and Christ, and Christ; Baptism, and Blood, and
Tears; will God condemn me an oblique way, when he cannot by a direct way; by
a secret purpose, when he has no law to condemn me by? Sad and disconsolate,
distorted and distracted soul! if it be well said in the School, Absurdum est
disputare, ex manuscriptis, it is an unjust thing in Controversies and
Disputations, to press arguments out of Manuscripts, that cannot be seen by
every man; it were ill said in thy conscience, that God will proceed against
thee ex manuscripto, or condemn thee upon any thing which thou never saw,
any unrevealed purpose of his. Suspicious soul! ill-presaging soul! Is there
something else, besides the day of Judgment, that the Son of Man does not
know? Disquiet soul! Does he not know the proceeding of that Judgment, wherein
himself is to be the Judge? But that when he has died for thy sins, and so
fulfilled the Law in thy behalf, thou may be condemned without respect of
that Law, and upon something, that shall have had no consideration, no relation
to any such breach of any such Law in thee? Intricated, entangled conscience!
Christ tells thee of a Judgment, because thou did not do the works of Mercy,
not feed, not cloth the poor; for those were enjoined thee by a Law: But he
never tells thee of any Judgment therefore, because thy name was written in a
dark book of Death, never unclasped, never opened unto thee in thy life. He
says unto thee lovingly, and indulgently, Fear not, for it is Gods good
pleasure to give you the Kingdom; But he never says to the wickedest in the
world, Live in fear, dye in anxiety, in suspicion, and suspension for his
displeasure: a displeasure conceived against you, before you were sinners,
before you were men, has thrown you out of that Kingdom into utter darkness.
There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; the reason is added,
because the Law of the Spirit of Life has made them free from the Law of Sin,
and of Death. All, upon all sides, is still referred to Law. And where there is
no law against thee (as there is not to him that is in Christ; and he is in
Christ, who has endeavored the keeping, or repented the breaking of the Law)
God will never proceed to execution by any secret purpose never notified, never
manifested. Suspicious, jealous, scattered soul, recollect thy self, and give
thy self that redintegration, that acquiescence, which the Spirit of God, in
the means of the Church offers thee: study the Mystery of godliness, which is
without all controversy; that is, endeavor to keep, repent the not keeping of
the Law, and thou art safe; for that that you shall be judged by, is a Law. But
then this Law is called here a Law of Liberty; and whether that denotation,
that it is called a Law of Liberty, import an ease to us, or a heavier weight
upon us, is our last disquisition, and conclusion of all: So speak ye, and so
do, as they that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty.

Lex libertatis.
That the Apostle here, by the Law of Liberty, means the Gospel, 1.25.
was never doubted. He had called the Gospel so, before this place: Whosoever
looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, shall be
blessed in his deed; that is, blessed in doing so, blessed in conforming
himself to the Gospel. But why does he call it so, a Law of Liberty? Not
because men naturally affecting liberty, might be drawn to an affection of the
Gospel, by proposing it in that specious name of Liberty, though it were not
so. The Holy Ghost calls the Gospel a Pearl, and a Treasure, and a Kingdom,
and Joy, and Glory; not to allure men with false names, but because men love
these, and the Gospel is truly all these; a Pearl, and a Treasure, and a
Kingdom, and Joy, and Glory: And it is truly a Law of Liberty. But of what
kind, and in what respect? Not such a Liberty as they have established in the
Roman Church, where Ecclesiastical Liberty must exempt Ecclesiastical persons
from participating all burdens of the State, and from being Traitors, though
they commit treason, because they are Subjects to no secular Prince: nor the
liberty of the Anabaptists, that overthrowes Magistracy, and consequently all
subjection, both Ecclesiastical and Laick; for, when upon those words, Be ye
not servants of men, 1 Cor. 7.23.
S. Chrysostom says, this is Christian liberty, Nec aliis nec sibi servire,
neither to be subjects to others, nor to our selves; that is spoken with
modification, with relation to our first Allegiance, our Allegiance to God; not
to be so subject to others, or to our selves, as that either for their sakes or
our own, we depart from any necessary declaration of our service to God.

Deo.
First then, the Gospel is a Law of Liberty, in respect of the Author of the
Gospel, of God himself, because it leaves God at his liberty. Not at liberty to
judge against his Gospel, where he has manifested it for a Law; for he has
laid a holy necessity upon himself, to judge according to that Law, where he
has published that law. But at liberty so, as that it consists only in his
good pleasure, to what Nation he will publish the Gospel, or in what Nation he
will continue the Gospel, or upon what persons he will make this Gospel
effectual. So Oecumenius (who is no single witness, nor speaks not alone, but
compiles the former Fathers) places this liberty in God, that God is at liberty
to give this Gospel when he will; and at liberty so, as that he has exempted
no man, how well soever he love him; nor put on such fetters or manacles upon
himself, but that he can and will punish those that transgress this law. So it
is a Law of liberty to God; nothing determined upon any man, nothing concluded
in himself, lies so in Gods way, as to hinder him from proceeding in his last
judgment, according to the keeping or breaking of this law: still God is at
his liberty. And it is a Law of liberty in respect of us: of us, who are
Christians; and considered so, Nobis.
either with a respect to the natural man, or with a respect to the Jew. For,
if we compare the Christian with the natural man, the law of Nature lays the
same obligation upon the natural man, as the Gospel does upon the Christian,
for the moral part thereof. The Christian is no more bound to love God, nor
his neighbor, then the natural man is: therein the natural man has no more
liberty then the Christian; so far their law is equal: And then all the law
which the Christian has, and the natural man has not, is a law of liberty to
the Christian, that is, a law that gives him an ease, and a readier way to
perform those duties; which way the natural man has not, and yet is bound to
the same duties. The natural man, if he transgress that law, which he finds in
his own heart, finds a condemnation in himself, as well as the Christian;
therein he is no freer then the Christian: But he finds no Sanctuary, no Altar,
no Sacrifice, no Church; no such Liberties, as the Christian does in the
Gospel. So the Gospel is a law of Liberty to us in respect of the natural man,
that it sets us at liberty, restores us to liberty, after we are fallen into
prison for debt, into Gods displeasure for sin, by affording us means of
reconciliation to God again.

It is so also in respect of the Law given by God to the Jews. Judaei.
The Jews had liberties, that is, refuge and help of sacrifices for sin; which
the natural man had not: for, if the natural man were driven and followed from
his own heart, that he saw no comfort of an innocence there, he had no other
liberties to fly to, no comfort in any other thing; no law, no promise annexed
to any other action; not to Sacrifice, as the Jews; or to Sacrament, as the
Christians, but must irremediably sink under the condemnation of his own heart.
The Jew had this liberty, a Law, and a Law that involved the Gospel; but then
the Gospel was to the Jew but as a letter sealed; and the Jew was but as a
servant, who was trusted to carry the letter, as it was, sealed, to another, to
carry it to the Christian. Now the Christian has received this letter at the
Jews hand, and he opens it; he sees the Jews Prophecy made History to him;
the Jews hope and reversion, made possession and inheritance to him: he sees
the Jews faith made matter of fact; he sees all that was promised and
represented in the Law, performed and recorded in the Gospel, and applied in
the Church. John 15.15.
There Christ says, Henceforth call I you not servants, but friends. Wherein
consists this enfranchisement? In this; The servant knows not what his master
does (the Jews knew not that) but I have called you friends, says Christ, for
all things that I heard of my Father, Hebr. 7.19.
I have made known unto you. The Law made nothing perfect, says the Apostle.
Where was the defect? he tells us that; the old Covenant (that is, Galat 4.24.
the Law) gendreth to bondage. What bondage? he tells us that too, when he
says, The Law was a Schoolmaster. The Jews were as Schoolboys, always
spelling, and putting together Types and Figure; which things typified and
figured, how this Lamb should signify Christ, how this fire should signify a
holy Ghost. The Christian is come to the University, from Grammar to Logic, to
him that is Logos it self, the Word; to apprehend and apply Christ himself; and
so is at more liberty then when he had only a dark law, without any comment,
with the natural man; or only a dark comment, that is, the Law, with a dim
light, and ill eyes, as the Jews had: for though the Jew had the liberty of a
Law, yet they had not the law of Liberty. So the Gospel is a law of Liberty to
God, who is still at his liberty to give and take, and to condemn according to
that law; and a law of liberty to us, as we are compared to the natural man, or
to the Jew. But when we confine our selves in our selves, positively, without
comparison, it is not such a law of liberty to us, as some men have come too
near saying, That the sins of Gods children do them no harm; that God sees not
the sins of his children; that God was no further out with David in his
Adultery, then in his Repentance: But, as to be born within the Covenant, that
is, of Christian Parents, does not make us Christians, Aug.
(for, Non nascitur, sed renascitur Christianus) the Covenant gives us a title
to the Sacrament of Baptism, and that Sacrament makes us Christians: so this
law of liberty gives us not a liberty to sin, but a liberty from sin. Noli
liberate abuti, ad libere peccandum, says the same Father; It is not a
liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17.
but an impotency, a slavery, to sin. Voluntas libera quae pia, says he, only
a holy soul is a free soul. Where the spirit of the Lord is there is liberty,
Leo.
says the Apostle: And Splendidissimum in se quisque habet speculum, Every man
has a glass, a crystal, into which, though he cannot call up this spirit
(for the Spirit of God breathes where it pleases him) yet he can see this
spirit, if he be there, in that glass: every man has a glass in himself,
where he may see himself, and the Image of God, says that Father, and see how
like he is to that. To dare to reflect upon my self, and to search all the
corners of mine own conscience, whether I have rightly used this law of
liberty; and neither been bold before a sin, upon presumption of an easy;
nor diffident after, upon suspicion of an impossible reconciliation to my God:
this is Evangelical liberty.

So then (to end all) though it be a law of Liberty, because it gives us better
means of prevention before, and of restitution after, then the natural man, or
the Jew had; yet we consider, that it is this law of Liberty, this law that
has afforded us these good helps, by which we shall be judged; and so, though
our case be better then theirs, because we have this law of Liberty, which they
wanted, yet our case grows heavier then theirs, if we use it not aright. The
Jews shall be under a heavier condemnation then the natural man, because they
had more liberty, that is, more means of avoiding sin, then the natural man
had; and, upon the same reason, the Christian under a heavier condemnation then
either, because he shall be judged by this law of Liberty.

What judgment then gives this law? This; Qui non crediderit, Mark 16.16.
damnabitur; and so says this Law in the Lawmakers mouth, He that believes
not, shall be damned. And as no less light then Faith it self, can show you
what Faith is, what it is to believe; so no less time then Damnation shall
last, can show you what Damnation is: for, the very form of Damnation is the
everlastingness of it; and, Qui non crediderit, He that believes not shall be
damned: there is no commutation of penance, nor beheading after a sentence of a
more ignominious death, in that court. Do thou believe that thou do
believe? yet this law takes not that answer: This law of Liberty takes the
liberty to look farther; Through faith into works; for, so says the Law in the
mouth of the Lawmakers; To whom much is given, of him much shall be required.
Luke 12.48.
Have thou considered every new title of Honor, and every new addition of
Office, every new step into higher places, to have laid new Duties, and new
obligations upon thee? Have thou doubled the hours of thy Prayers, when thy
Preferments are doubled; and increased thine Alms, according as thy Revenues
are increased? Have thou done something, done much in this kind? this law will
not be answered so; this law of Liberty takes the liberty to call upon thee for
all. Here also the Law says in the mouth of the Lawmakers, If thou have agreed
with many adversaries, says Christ, Mat 5.25.
(let that be, If thou have satisfied many duties) (for duties are adversaries,
that is, temptations upon us) yet, as long as thou have one adversary, agree
with that adversary quickly in the way; leave no duty undischarged, or
unrepented in this life. Beloved, we have well delivered our selves of the
fear of Purgatory; none of us fear that: but another mistaking has overtaken
us, and we flatter our selves with another danger, that is, Compensation, that
by doing well in one place, our ill doing in another is recompensed: an ill
Officer looks to be saved, because he is a good husband to his wife, a good
father to his children, a good master to his servants; and he thinks he has
three to one for his salvation. But, as nature requires the qualities of every
element which thou art composed of; so this law of Liberty calls upon thee for
the exercises of all those virtues, that appertain to every particular place
thou hold'st: This liberty, this law of Liberty takes; It binds thee to believe
Christ, All Christ; Gods Christ, as he was the eternal Son of the Father, God
of God; our Christ, as he was made man for our salvation; and thy Christ, as
his blessed Spirit, in this his Ordinance, applies him to thee, and offers him
into thine arms this minute. And then, to know, that he looks for a
retribution from thee, in that measure, in which he has dealt with thee; much
for much; and for several kinds of good, according to those several good
things, which he has done for thee. And, if thou be first defective in these,
and then defective in laying hold upon him, who is the propitiation and
satisfaction for thy defects in these, this law of Liberty returns to her
liberty to pronounce, and he Judge to his liberty to execute that sentence,
Damnaberis, thou will be cast into that prison, where thou must pay the last
farthing; thou must; for, Christ dies not there, and therefore there they must
lie, till there come such another ransom as Christ; nay, a greater ransom
then Christ was, for Christ paid no debts in that prison. This then is the
Christians case, and this is the Abridgement of his Religion; Sic loquimini,
sic facite; to speak aright, and to do aright; to profess the truth, and not
be afraid nor ashamed of that; and to live according to that profession: for,
no man can make God the author of sin; but that man comes as near it as he can,
that makes Gods Religion a cloak for his sin. To this God proceeds not merely
and only by commadment, but by persuasion too; And, though he be not bound to
do so, yet he does give a reason. The reason is, because he must give account
of both; both of Actions, and of Words; of both we shall be judged, but judged
by a Law; a Law which excludes, on Gods part, any secret ill purpose upon us,
if we keep his Law; a Law which excludes, on our part, all pretense of
Ignorance; for no man can plead ignorance of a Law. And then, a law of Liberty;
of liberty to God: for God was not bound to save a man, because he made him;
but of his own goodness, he vouchsafed him a Law, by which he may be saved; a
law of Liberty to us: so that there is no Epicurism, to do what we list; no
such liberty as makes us Libertines; for then there were no Law; nor Stoicism,
nor fatality, that constraines us to do that we would not do, for then there
were no Liberty. But the Gospel is such a law of Liberty, as delivers us, upon
whom it works, Sermon. 4.
from the necessity of falling into the bondage of sin before, and from the
impossibility of recovering after, if we be fallen into that bondage. And this
is liberty enough; and of this liberty, our blessed God give us the right use,
for his Son Christ Jesus sake, by the operation of that Holy Ghost, that
proceeds from both.

Amen.
A Lent-SERMON Preached before the KING, At WHITE HALL, February 16. 1620.
SERMON IV.
1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of Godliness: God
was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached
unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into Glory.


THis is no Text for an Houre-glasse: if God would afford me Ezekiah's sign,
Ut revertatur umbra, 2 Reg. 20.9. Josh. 10.11.
that the shadow might go backward upon the Dial; or Joshuah's sign, Ut sistat
Sol, That the Sun might stand still all the day, this were text enough to
employ all the day, and all the days of our life. The Lent, which we begin
now, is a full Tithe of the year; but the hour which we begin now, is not a
full tithe of this day, and therefore we should not grudge all that: But
payment of Tithes is grown matter of controversy; and we, by our Text, are
directed only upon matter without controversy: And without controversy, etc.

Here is the compass, that the essential Word of God, the Son of God Christ
Jesus, went: He was God, humbled in the flesh; he was Man, received into glory.
Here is the compass that the written Word of God, went, the Bible; that begun
in Moses, in darkness, in the Chaos; and it ends in Saint John, in clearness,
in a Revelation. Here is the compass of all time, as time was distributed in
the Creation, Vespere and mane; darkness, and then light: the Evening and
Morning made the Day; Mystery and Manifestation make the Text.

The Doctrine of the present Season, is Mortification, Humiliation; and the
experience of the present Place, where we stand now in Court, is, that the
glory of the persons, in whose presence we stand, occasions Humility in us; the
more glorious they are, the humbler we are; and therefore to consider Christ,
as he is received into glory, is as much the way of our Humiliation and
Mortification, as to consider him in his Passion, in his exinanition: At least,
how small account should we make of those things which we suffer for Christ in
this world, when we see in this Text, that in the describing the History of
Christ from his Incarnation to his Ascension, the Holy Ghost pretermits, never
mentions, never seems to consider the Passion of Christ; as though all that he
had suffered for man, were nothing in respect of that he would suffer, if the
justice of God had required any heavier satisfaction. The Text then is a
sufficient Instruction to Timothy, to whom this Epistle is sent, and to us, to
whom it is sent too, that thereby we might know how to behave our selves in the
House of God, which is the Church of God, the pillar and ground of Truth; as is
said in the verse immediately before the Text, to which the Text has relation:
we know how to behave our selves in the Church, if we know in the Text that
such a Mystery of godliness there is, and know what it is. Our parts
therefore, are but two; Mystery and Manifestation. In the first, the Apostle
proceeds thus: First, he recommends to us such Doctrine as is without
controversy: and truly there is enough of that to save any soul, that has
not a mind to wrangle it self into Hell. And then he says, that this
Godliness, though it be without controversy, yet it is a Mystery, a Secret;
not present, not obvious, not discernable with every eye: It is a Mystery, and
a great Mystery; not the greatest, but yet great, that is, great enough; he
that knows that, needs no more. And then, for the second part, which is the
manifestation of the Mystery, we shall look upon that by all those beams, which
shine out in this Text, Abortu ad Meridium, from Christ's East to his Noon, from
his first manifesting in the flesh, to his receiving into glory.

Part I.
First then, he proposes Doctrine without controversy: for, Quod simpliciter
predicatur, Augustine.
credendum; quod subtiliter disputatur, intelligendum est. That which Christ
has plainly delivered, is the exercise of my Faith; that which other men have
curiously disputed, is the exercise of my understanding: If I understand not
their curious disputations; perchance I shall not be esteemed in this world;
but if I believe not Christ's plain Doctrine, I am sure I shall not be saved in
the next. It is true, that Christ reprehends them often, Quia non
intellexerunt, but what? Scripturas, legem: because they understood not the
Scriptures, which they were bound to believe. It is some negligence not to read
a Proclamation from the King; it is a contempt, to transgress it; but to deny
the power from which it is derived, is treason. Not to labor to understand the
Scriptures, is to slight God; but not to believe them, is to give God the lie:
he makes God a liar, 1 John 5.10.
if he believe not the Record that God gave of his Son. When I come to heaven,
I shall not need to ask of S. John's Angel, nor of his Elders, Ubi Prophetae,
ubi Apostoli, ubi Evangelistae; where are the Prophets, where are the
Evangelists, where are the Apostles; for, I am sure I shall see them there: But
perchance I may be put to ask S. Paul's question, Ubi Scribae? ubi Sapientes? 1
Cor. 1.20.
where are the Scribes? where are the Wise men? where are the Disputers of the
world? perchance I may miss a great many of them there. It is the Text that
saves us; the interlineary glosses, and the marginal notes, and the variae
lectiones, controversies and perplexities, undo us: the Will, the Testament of
God, enriches us; the Schedules, the Codicils of men, beggar us: because the
Serpent was subtiller then any, Genesis 3.1. 2 Cor. 2.3.
he would dispute and comment upon Gods Law, and so deceived by his subtilty.
The Word of God is Biblia, it is not Bibliotheca; a Book, a Bible, not a
Library. And all that book is not written in Balthazars character; in a Mean,
Tekel, Upharsim, that we must call in Astrologers, and Caldeans, and
Southsayers, to interpret it. That which was written so, as that it could not
be understood, was written, says the text there, with the fingers of man's
hand; It is the hand of man that induces obscurities; the hand of God has
written so, a man may run, and read; walk in the duties of his calling here,
and attend the salvation of his soul too. He that believes Christ, and Mahomet,
indifferently, has not proposed the right end: he that believes the Word of
God, and traditions, indifferently, has not proposed the right way. In any
Conveyance, if any thing be interlin'd, the interlining must be as well
testified, and have the same witnesses upon the Endorsment, as the conveyance
it self had. When there are traditions in the Church (as declaratory traditions
there are) they must have the same witnesses, they must be grounded upon the
Word of God: for there only is truth without controversy. Pilate asked
Christ, Quid veritas, what was truth; John 18.38.
and he might have known, if he would have staid; but, exicit, says the Text
there, He went out, out to the Jews; and there he could not find it, there he
never thought of it more. Ask of Christ speaking in his Word, there you shall
know; produce the Record, the Scripture, Jude 1.3.
and there is Communis salus; I wrote unto you of the common Salvation: What Is
that? Semel tradita sides, says that Apostle there: The Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints: where semel is not aliquando; once, is not once upon a
time, I cannot tell when; but semel is simul, once is at once: The Gospel was
delivered all together, and not by Postscripts. Thus it is, If we go to the
Record, to the Scripture: and thus it is, if we ask a Judge (I do not say, The
Judge, but A Judge) for, the Fathers are a Judge; a Judge is a Judge, though
there lie an appeal from him. And will not the Fathers say so too? Quod ubique,
quod semper; that is common salvation, which has bound the Communion of Saints;
that which all Churches always have thought and taught to be necessary to
salvation. Ask the Record, ask that Judge, and it will be so; and it will be
so, if you ask the Counsel on the other side. Ask the Council of Trent it self,
and the Idolaters of that Council will not say, that our Church affirms any
Error; neither can they say, that we leave any truth unaffirmed, which the
Primitive Church affirmed to be necessary to salvation. For those things which
the School has drawn into disputation since, as their form is, in the
beginning of every question, to say, Videtur quod non, one would think it were
otherwise; if when they have said all, I return to the beginning again, Videtur
quod non, I think it is otherwise still. Must I be damned? The evidence for my
salvation is my Credo, not their Probo; And if I must get Heaven by a
Syllogism, John 10.29.
my Major is Credo in Deum patrem, I believe in God the Father; for, Pater
major, the Father is greater then all: And my Minor shall be, Credo in Deum
Filium, I believe in God the Son, Qui exivit de patre, he came from God; And my
Conclusion, which must proceed from Major and Minor, shall be Credo in Spiritum
Sanctum, I believe in the Holy Ghost, who proceeds from Father and Son: And
this Syllogism brought me into the Militant Church in my Baptism, and this
will carry me into the Triumphant, in my Transmigration; for, doctrine of
Salvation is matter without controversy.

Myster.
But yet, as clear as it is, it is a Mystery, a Secret; not that I cannot see
it, but that I cannot see it with any eyes that I can bring: Mat. 16.16.
not with the eye of Nature: Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee,
says Christ to Peter: not with the eye of Learning; Thou have hid these things
from the wise, says Christ to his Father: not with the eye of State, that
wheresoever I see a good Government, I should presume a good Religion; for, we
do not admit the Church of Rome, and yet we do admire the Court of Rome: nor
with the eye of a private sense; 2 Pet. 1.20.
for no prophecy of any Scripture; for, Quod non nisi instinctu Dei scitur,
prophetia est; that which I cannot understand by reason, but by especial
assistance from God, all that is Prophecy.) No Scripture is of private
interpretation. I see not this mystery by the eye of Nature, of Learning, of
State, of mine own private sense; but I see it by the eye of the Church, by the
light of Faith, that is true; but yet organically, instrumentally, by the eye of
the Church. And this Church is that which proposes to me all that is necessay
to my salvation, in the Word, and seals all to me in the Sacraments. If another
man see, or think he sees more then I; if by the help of his Optic glasses, or
perchance but by his imagination, he see a star or two more in any
constellation then I do; yet that star becomes none of the constellation; it
adds no limb, no member to the constellation, that was perfect before: so, if
other men see that some additional and traditional things may add to the
dignity of the Church, let them say it conduces to the well-being, not to the
very being; to the existence, not to the essence of the Church; for that is
only things necessary to salvation. And this mystery is, Faith in a pure
conscience: 1 Timothy 3.9.
for that is the same thing that is called Godliness in this text: and it is to
profess the Gospel of Christ Jesus sincerely, and entirely; to have a
conscience testifying to himself, that he has contributed nothing to the
diminution of it, that he labors to live by it, that he hopes to die in it,
that he fears not to die for it. This is Mysterium, opertum, and apertum, 2
Cor. 4.3. Col. 1.26.
hid from those that are lost, but manifested to his Saints: It is a Mystery,
and a great Mystery; that is next: not that there is not a greater; Magnum.
for the Mystery of Iniquity is greater then the Mystery of Godliness: Compare
Creeds to Creeds, and the new Creed of the Trent Council, is greater by many
Articles then the Apostles Creed is. Compare Oaths to Oaths; and Berengarians
old Oath in the Roman Church, that he must swear to the Frangitur and teritur,
that he broke the flesh of Christ with his teeth, and ground it with his jaws;
and the new Oath of the Council of Trent, that he must swear that all those
subtle Schoole-points, determined there, in which a man might have believed
the contrary a few days before, and yet have been a good Roman Catholic too,
are true, and true de fide; so true, as that he cannot be saved now, except he
believe them to be so: the Berengarians Oath, and the Trent-oath, have much
more difficulty in them, then to swear, that K. James is lawful King in all his
Dominions, and therefore exempt from all foreign jurisdiction over him. There
is a Mystery of Iniquity, declared in a Creed of Iniquity, and in an Oath of
Iniquity, greater then the Mystery of Godliness: but yet this is great, that
is, great enough; he needs no more, that has this, says with a pure
conscience: he need not go up to heaven for more, not to a Vice-god, to an
infallible Bishop of Rome; Deuteronomy. 30.12.
he need not go over-sea for more, says Moses there; not to the hills,
beyond sea, nor to the lake beyond sea: for God has given him his station in a
Church, where this Mystery is sufficiently declared and explicated. The Mystery
of Iniquity may be great, for it has wrought a great while. 2 These. 2.7.
Jam operatur, says the Apostle in his time; the Mystery of iniquity does
already work, and it is likely to work still: It is but a little while since we
saw it work under ground, in the vault. But if (as has been lately, royally,
and religiously intimated to us all) their insolency have so far infatuated
them, In Parliam.
as to think themselves at an end of their work, and promise themselves a
holy day, our assurance is in this, Pater operatur adhuc, and ego operor, Joh.
5.17.
says Christ: My Father works yet, and I work: and if amongst us the Father
work, and the Son work; for all the vain hopes of some, and the vain fears of
others, the Mystery of godliness will stand and grow.

Part II.
Now, how far this Mystery, this great Mystery, this Mystery without
controversy is revealed in this Text, we are to look by the several beams
thereof; of which, the first is, Manifestatus in carne, God was manifested in
the flesh. Coeli enarrant, says David, The heavens declare the glory of God;
Psalm. 19.2.
and that should be the harmony of the Spheres. Invisibilia conspiciuntur,
says Saint Paul, Invisible things of God are seen in the visible; Romans 1.20.
and that should be the prospect of this world. The knowledge of God was
manifested often in the Prophets; he foretold, therefore he foresaw. His
Wisdom was manifested often, in frustrating all Councels of all Achitophels
against him. And his power was manifested often: In the water; consider it at
least in the Red sea, and in Pharaoh, if you will bring it no nearer home; And
in the Fire, consider it at least in the fiery Furnace, if you will bring it no
nearer home. His Knowledge, his Wisdom, his Power, his Mercy, his Justice, all
his Attributes are always manifested in all his works. But, Deus in carne,
that the person of God, God himself, should be manifested, and manifested in
our flesh, Areopag.
Ineffabile omni sermoni, omni ignotum intelligentiae, ipse Angelorum primati
non agnitum. And if the Primate of the Angels, the highest orders of them that
stand in Gods sight, know it not; if no understanding were able to conceive it,
that had all the refinings and concoction, that study, and speculation, and
zeal to be vir desideriorum (as the Angel said to Daniel) a man that desired to
dwell upon the meditation of his God, could give; must not I, who always come
with Moses uncircumcised lips, not to speak perswasively; and always with
Jeremies defect, Puer sum, nescio loqui, not to speak plainly; come now with
Zachary's dumbness, not to speak at all in this Mystery? But harkening to that
which he who only knew this Mystery, has said, Verbum Caro factum est, The
word was made flesh; And Deus manifestatus in carne, God was manifested in the
flesh; rest my self in his Word, and pray you in Christ's stead to do so too,
in this, and all Mysteries of your Religion, to rest upon the only Word of
God: for in this particular, it is nor mis-grounded, Fulgent.
nor mis-collected by him that says, Omnes pene errores, almost all Errors
have proceeded out of this, that this great Mystery, that God was manifested in
the flesh, Aut non omnino, aut non sicuti est creditum; is either not at all,
or not aright believed. The Jews believe it not at all; and to them Tertullian
says enough: Tertul.
Since out of their Prophets they confess, that when the Messiah shall be
manifested, they must for a time suffer many calamities in this world; if their
Messiah should be manifested now (says he) what could they suffer? They say
they must suffer banishment; Et ubi dispersio gentis, quae jam extorris?
whither shall that Nation be banished, which is already in banishment and
dispersion? Read statum Judaeis, let the Jews show me a State, a Kingdom, a
Commonwealth, a Government, Magistrates, Judicatures, Merchandise, and Armies;
let them show something to loose for a Messiah, and then let them look for a
Messiah. The Jews are within the non omnino, they believe not this Mystery at
all: And then, for the non sicut est, for the not believing it aright, as the
old Valentinians are renewed in the Anabaptists (for both deny that Christ took
flesh of the Virgin) so the old Manichaeans are not renewed, but exceeded in
the Transubstantiators: for they said the body of Christ was left in one place,
in the Sun; these say, it is upon as many Tables, and in as many Boxes as they
will. But whether the manifestation of God in the flesh were referred to the
Incarnation of Christ; or to his Declaration, when the wise men of the East
came to see him at Bethleem; whether when it was done, or when it was declared
to be done, has admitted a question, because the Western Church has called
that day of their coming to him, the Epiphany; and Epiphany is Manifestation.
Then therefore is God manifested to us, when, as these wise men offered their
Myrrh and Frankincense, we offer the Sacrifice of Prayer; and as they offered
their Gold, we offer our temporal wealth for the glory of Christ Jesus: And
when the love of him corrects in thee the intemperances of adorning thy flesh,
of pampering thy flesh, of obeying thy flesh, then especially is this Epiphany,
God is manifested in the flesh, in thy flesh.

Now, when he was manifested in the flesh, Justificat. in spirit. Romans 8.3.
it behooved him to be justified in the spirit; for he came in similitudinem
carnis peccati: they took him for a sinner, and they saw him converse with
sinners: for any thing they could see, it might have been Caro peccati, sinful
flesh; and they saw enough to make them sure that it was Caro mortis, mortal
flesh. Though he were Panis de coelo, Bread from Heaven, yet himself was
hungry; and though he were fons perennis, an everlasting spring, yet himself
was thirsty; though he were Deus totius consolationis, the God of all comfort,
2 Cor. 13.
yet his soul was heavy unto death; and though he were Dominus vitae, the Lord
of Life, yet Death had dominion over him. When therefore Christ was manifested
in the flesh, flesh subject to Death, Death, which was the reward of Sin; and
would take upon him to forgive sins; it behooved him to be extraordinarily
justified, extraordinarily declared to the world: and so he was; he was
justified in Spiritu, in the Spirit; first, in Spiritu Sancto, in the Spirit,
in the Holy Ghost; both when the Holy Ghost was sent to him, and when the Holy
Ghost was sent by him, from him. The Holy Ghost was sent to him in his
Baptism, and he tarried upon him: Christ was not, a Christian is not justified
by one access, one visitation, one approach of the Holy Ghost; not by one
religious act: it is a permanency, a perseverance that justifies: that
foolishness, and that fascination (as the Apostle calls it) that Witchcraft
which he imputes to the Galatians, is not so worn out, but that there are
foolish and bewitched Galatians still, that begun in the Spirit, and will be
made perfect in the Flesh; that received their Christianity in one Church, and
attend a confirmation, a better state, in a worse. Christ was justified by the
Holy Ghost, when the Holy Ghost came to him: so he was, when he came from him,
at Pentecost, upon his Apostles; and then he came in Tongues, and fiery
Tongues. Christ was not, a Christian is not justified in silence, but in
declarations and open professions; in tongues: and not in dark and ambiguous
speeches, nor infinite and retractable speeches, but in fiery tongues; fiery,
that is, fervent; fiery, that is, clear. He was justified so, a Spiritu Sancto;
and so he was, a Spiritu suo, by his own Spirit: not only in that protestation
of his, Who can accuse me of any sin? for S. Paul could say that he was
unreproachable in the sight of men, and yet he could not choose but say, Quorum
ego maximus; that he was the greatest sinner of all men. I were a miserable
man, if I could accuse Christ of no sin; if I could not prove all my sins his,
I were under a heavy condemnation. But that which we intend by his being
justified, a spiritu suo, by his own spirit, is, not by the testimony that he
gave of himself; but by that Spirit, that Godhead, that dwelt bodily in him,
and declared him, and justified him in that high power and practice of
Miracles. When Christ came into this world, as if he had come a day before any
day, a day before Moses his in principio, before there was any creature (for
when Christ came, there was creatures that could exercise any natural faculty
in opposition to his purposes) when Nature his Vicegerent gave up her sword to
his hands; when the Sea shut up her self like Marble, and bore him; and the
Earth opened her self like a book, to deliver out her dead, to wait upon him;
when the winds, in the midst of their own roaring, could hear his voice; and
Death it self, in putrid and corrupt carkases, could hear his voice; and when
his own body, whom his own soul had left and abandoned, was not abandoned by
this Spirit, by this Godhead (for the Deity departed not from the dead body of
Christ) then was Christ especially justified by this Spirit, in whose power he
raised himself from the dead; he was justified in Spiritu Sancto, and in
spiritu suo; two witnesses were enough for him. Add a third for thy self, and
justificetur in Spiritu tuo, let him be justified in thy spirit: God is safe
enough in himself, and yet it was a good declaratory addition, that the
Publicans justified God: Luke 7.29. Mat. 2.19.
Wisdom is safe enough of her self, and yet Wisdom is justified of her
children: Christ is sufficiently justified; but justificetur in Spiritu tuo, in
thy spirit. To say, If I consider the Talmud, Christ may as well be the
Messiah, as any whom the Jews place their marks upon; if I consider the
Alchoran, Christ is like enough to be a better Prophet then Mahomet; if I
consider the Arguments of the Arrians, Christ may be the Son of God for all
that; if I consider the Church of Rome, and ours, he is as likely to manifest
himself in his own Word here, as there in their word; to say but so, Christ may
be God for any thing I know: this is but to bail him, not to justify him; not
to quit him, but to put him over to the Sessions, to the great Sessions, where
he shall justify himself; but none of them, who do not justify him, testify
for him, in spiritu suo, sincerely in their souls: nay, that is not enough: to
justify is an act of declaration; 1 Cor. 2.2.
and no man knows what is in man, but the spirit of man: and therefore he that
leaves any outward thing undone, that belongs to his calling, for Christ, is so
far from having justified Christ, as that at the last day, he shall meet his
voice with them that cried Crucify him, and with theirs that cried, Not
Christ, but Barabbas: if thou doubt in thy heart, if thou disguise in thine
actions, non justificatur in spiritu tuo, Christ is not justified in thy
spirit; and that is it which concerns thee most.

Christ had all this testimony more, Visus ab Angelis, Visus ab Angelis.
he was seen of Angels: which is, not only visited by Angels, served by
Angels; waited upon by Angels: so he was, and he was so in every passage, in
every step. An Angel told his mother, that he should be born: and an Angel told
the Shepherd, that he was born; and that which directed the wise men of the
East where to find him, when he was born, is also believed by some of the
Ancients, to have been an Angel in the likeness of a Star. When he was tempted
by the Devil, Angels came and ministered to him, Mat. 4.2.
but the Devil had left him before; his own power, Luke 22.43.
had dissipated his. In his Agony in the Garden, an Angel came from heaven to
strengthen him; but he had recovered before, and was come to his Veruntamen,
Not my will, but thine be done. He told Peter, Mat. 26.53.
he could have more then twelve legions of Angels to assist him; but he would
not have the assistance of his own sword: he denies not that which the Devil
says, that the Angels had in charge, that he should not dash his foot against
a stone; Mat. 4.6.
but they had an easy service of it; for his foot never dashed, never stumbled,
never tripp'd in any way. As soon as any stone lay in his way, an Angel removed
it: Mat. 28.2.
He rolled away the stone from the sepulcher. There the Angel testified to the
women that sought him, not only that he was not there, (that was a poor
comfort) but where he was: He is gone into Galilee, and there you shall find
him. There also the Angel testified to the men of Galilee; that looked after
him, not only that he was gone up (that was but a poor comfort) but that he
should come again. Acts 1.2.
The same Jesus shall so come as he went. There in Heaven, they perform that
service, whilst he stays there, Heb. 1.6.
which they are called upon to do: Let all the Angels of God worship him; and
in judgment, when the Son of man shall come in his glory, all the holy Angels
shall be with him: in every point of that great compass, in every arch, in
every section of that great circle, of which no man knows the Diameter, how
long it shall be from Christ's first coming to his second, visus ab Angelis, he
was seen, he was visited, he was waited upon by the Angels. But there is more
intended in this, then so.

Christ was seen of the Angels, otherwise now, then ever before: something was
revealed to the Angels themselves concerning Christ, which they knew not
before; at least, not so as they knew it now. For, all the Angels do not
always know all things: if they had, there would have been no dissension, no
strife, no difference between the two Angels; Dan. 10.
the Angel of Persia would not have withstood the other Angel 21 days; neither
would have resisted Gods purpose, if both had known it; S. Dionyse, who
considers the names, and natures, and places, and apprehensions of Angels, most
of any, observes of the highest orders of Angels, Ordin. supremi ad Jesu
aspectum haesitabant; the highest of the highest orders of Angels, were amazed
at Christ's coming up in the Flesh; it was a new and unexpected thing to see
Christ come thither, in that manner. There they say with amazement, Quis iste?
Isa. 63.1
Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah? And Christ
answers there, Ego, it is I, I that speak in righteousness, I that am mighty to
save. The Angels reply, Wherefore are thy garments red, like him that treads
the wine press? and Christ gives them satisfaction, calcavi; You mistake not
the matter, I have trodden the wine press; and calcavi solus, I have trodden
the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me. The Angels then
knew not this, not all this, not all the particulars of this, The mystery of
Christ's Incarnation for the Redemption of Man: the Angels knew it in general;
for, it was commune quoddam principium; it was the general mark, to which all
their service, as they were ministering spirits, was directed. But for
particulars, as amongst the Prophets, some of the later understood more then
the former ( I understand more then the ancients, Psalm. 119.100.
says David) and the Apostles understood more then the Prophets, even of those
things which they had prophesied, Ephesians. 3.6.
(this Mystery in other ages was not made known, as it is now revealed unto the
holy Apostles;) so the Angels are come to know some things of Christ, since
Christ came, in another manner then before. Ephesians. 3.10.
And this may be that which S. Paul intends, when he says, that he was made a
Minister of the Gospel, To the intent, that now, unto principalities and
powers, in heavenly places, might be known by the Church, the manifold wisdom
of God. And S. Peter also speaking of the administration of the Church, 1 Pet.
1.12.
expresses it so, That the Angels desire to look into it. Which is not only
that which S. Augustine says, Aug.
Innotuit a seculis per Ecclesiam Angelis, That the Angels saw the mystery of
the Christian Religion, from before all beginnings, and that by the Church,
Quia ipsa Ecclesia illis, in Deo apparuit; Because they saw in God the future
Church, from before all beginnings; but even in the propagation and
administration of the Church, they see many things now, which distinctly,
effectually, experimentally, as they do now, they could not see before. And so,
to this purpose, Visus in nobis, Christ is seen by the Angels, in us and our
conversation now. Spectaculum sumus, says the Apostle; 1 Cor. 4.9.
We are made a spectacle to men and angels. The word is there Theatrum, and so
S. Hierom reads it: Hierom.
And therefore let us be careful to play those parts well, which even the
Angels desire to see well acted. Let him that finds himself to be the honester
man by thinking so, think in the name of God, that he has a particular tutelar
Angel, that will do him no harm to think so: And let him that thinks not so,
yet think, that so far as conduces to the support of Gods children, and to the
joy of the Angels themselves, and to the glory of God; the Angels do see men's
particular actions: and then, if thou would not solicit a woman's chastity,
if her servant were by to testify it; nor calumniate an absent person in the
Kings ear, if his friends were by to testify it; if thou can slumber in thy
self, that main consideration, That the eye of God is always open, and always
upon thee; yet have a little religious civility, and holy respect, even to
those Angels that see thee: That those Angels which see Christ Jesus now, sat
down in glory at the right hand of his Father; all sweat wiped from his Brows,
and all tears from his Eyes; all his Stripes healed, all his Blood stanch'd,
all his Wounds shut up, and all his Beauty returned there; when they look down
hither, to see the same Christ in thee, may not see him scourged again,
wounded, torn and mangled again, in thy blasphemings, nor crucified again in
thy irreligious conversation: Visus ab Angelis, he was seen of the Angels, in
himself, whilst he was here: and he is seen in his Saints upon earth, by
Angels now; and shall be so to the end of the world: Which Saints he has
gathered from the Gentiles: which is the next branch; Praedicat. Gentib. Psalm.
85.10.
Predicatus gentibus, he was preached to the Gentiles.

Mercy and truth meet together, says David: every where in Gods proceedings,
they meet together; but no where closer, then in calling the Gentiles. Jesus
Christ was made a Minister of the Circumcision for the truth of God: Romans 15.8.
wherein consisted that truth? to confirm the promises made unto the fathers,
says the Apostle there, and that is to the Jews: but was Christ a Minister of
the Circumcision only for that, only for the truth? No: Truth and Mercy meet
together, as it follows there; and that the Gentiles might glorify God for
his mercy. The Jews were a holy Nation; Gal. 2.15.
that was their addition; Gens Sancta; but the addition of the Gentiles, was
peccatores, sinners: we are Jews by nature, and not of the Gentiles, sinners,
says S. Paul: He that touched the Jews, touched the apple of Gods eye; And
for their sakes, God rebuked Kings, and said, Touch not mine Anointed: but upon
the Gentiles, not only dereliction, but indignation, and consternation, and
devastation, and extermination, every where interminated, inflicted every
where, and every where multiplied: The Jews had all kind of assurance and
ties upon God; both Law, and Custom; they both prescribed in God, and God had
bound himself to them by particular conveyance; by a conveyance written in
their flesh, Isa. 49.
in Circumcision; and the counterpane written in his flesh; I have graven thy
name in the palms of my hands: Ephesians. 2.12.
But for the Gentiles, they had none of this assurance: When they were without
Christ (says the Apostle) having no hope (that is, no covenant to ground a
hope upon) ye were without God in this world. To contemplate God himself, and
not in Christ, is to be without God. And then, for Christ to be preached to
such as these, to make this Sun to set at noon to the Jews, and rise at
midnight to the Antipodes, to the Gentiles, this was such an abundant, such a
superabundant mercy, as might seem almost to be above the bargain, above the
contract, between Christ and his Father; more then was conditioned and decreed
for the price of his Blood, and the reward of his Death: for when God said, I
will declare my decree; That is, what I intended to give him, which is
expressed thus, Psalm. 2.
I will set him my King upon my holy hill of Sion; which seems to concern the
Jews only: God adds then, Postula a me, petition to me, make a new suit to
me; and dabo tibi gentes: I will give thee not only the Jews, but the
Gentiles for thine inheritatnce: And therefore laetentur gentes, Psalm. 97.1.
says David, Let the Gentiles rejoice; and we in them, that Christ has asked
us at his Fathers hand, and received us: And Laetentur insulae, says that
Prophet too, Let the Islands rejoice; and we in them, that he has raised us
out of the Sea, out of the ocean sea, that over-flowed all the world with
ignorance; and out of the Mediterranean Sea, that has flowed into so many
other lands; the sea of Rome, the sea of Superstition.

There was then a great mercy in that, Predicatus gentibus, Creditus Mundo.
that he was preached to the Gentiles; but the great power is in the next,
Creditus mundo, that he was believed in the world. We have a Calling in our
Church; that makes us Preachers: and we have Canons in our Church; that makes
us preach: and we bring a Duty, and find favor; that makes us preach here:
There is a power here, that makes bills of Preachers: But in whose power is it
to make bills of Believers? Oportet accedentem credere, says S. Paul, Heb.
11.6.
He that comes hither should believe before he comes: But, Benedictus sis
egrediens, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 28.6.
God bless you with the power of believing, when you go from hence: where S.
James says, 1.22.
You deceive your selves, if you be hearers, and not doers; How far do you
deceive your selves, if you come not half way, if you be hearers, and not
believers? Tiberius, who spoke all upon disguises, took it ill, if he were
believed: he that was crucified under Tiberius, who always speaks clearly,
takes it worse, if he be not believed; for, he has reduced all to the
Tantummodo creed, only believe, and thou art safe: if we take it higher or
lower; either above, in hearing only, or below, in working only, we may
miss. It is not enough to hear Sermons; it is not enough to live a moral
honest life; but take it in the midst, and that extends to all; for there is no
believing without hearing, nor working without believing. Be pleased to
consider this great work of believing, in the matter, what it was that was to
be believed: That that Jesus, whose age they knew, must be antidated so far, as
that they must believe him to be elder then Abraham: That that Jesus, whose
Father and Mother, and Brothers and Sisters, they knew, must be believed to be
of another Family, and to have a Father in another place; and yet he to be as
old as his Father; And to have another proceeding from him, and yet he to be no
older then that person who proceeded from him: That that Jesus, whom they knew
to be that Carpenters Son, and knew his work, must be believed to have set up a
frame, that reached to heaven, out of which no man could, and in which any man
might be saved: was it not as easy to believe, that those tears which they
saw upon his cheeks, were Pearls; that those drops of Blood, which they saw
upon his back, were Rubies: That that spittle, which they saw upon his face,
was ennamel: that those hands which they saw buffet him, were reached out to
place him in a Throne: And that that Voice which they heard cry, Crucifige,
Crucify him, was a Vivat Rex, Long live Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews;
As to believe, that from that man, that worm, and no man, ingloriously traduced
as a Conjurer, ingloriously apprehended as a Thief, ingloriously executed a
Traitor; they should look for glory, and all glory, and everlasting glory? And
from that melancholic man, who was never seen to laugh in all his life, and
whose soul was heavy unto death; they should look for joy, and all joy, and
everlasting joy: And for salvation, and everlasting salvation from him, who
could not save himself from the Ignominy, from the Torment, from the Death of
the Cross? If any State, if any Convocation, if any wise Man had been to make
a Religion, a Gospel; would he not have proposed a more probable, a more
credible Gospel, to man's reason, then this? Be pleased to consider it in the
manner too: it must be believed by preaching, by the foolishness of preaching,
says the Apostle; by a few men, that could give no strength to it; by ignorant
men, that could give no reason for it; by poor men, that could give no
pensions, nor preferments in it: That this should be believed, and believed
thus, and believed by the world, the world that knew him not; He was in the
word, and the world knew him not: Joh. 1.10.
the world that hated them, who would make them know him; 15.19. 1 John 5.19.
I have chosen you, says Christ, and therefore the world hates you: That then
when Mundus totus in maligno positus, the world, and all the world, not only
was, but was laid in malignity and opposition against Christ; That then the
world, and all the world, the world of Ignorance, and the world of Pride,
should believe the Gospel; that then the Nicodemus, the learned and the
powerful man of the world, should stand out no longer, but to that one
Problem, Quomodo, How can a man be born again that is old; and presently
believe, that a man might be born again even at the last gasp: That then they
which followed him, should stand no longer upon their durus sermo, that it was
a hard saying, that they must eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood, and presently
believe that there was no salvation, except they did eat and drink that Flesh
and Blood: That Mary Magdelene, who was not only tempted (is there any that is
not so?) but overcom with the temptations (and how many are so!) and possessed,
and possessed with seven Devils, should presently hearken after the powerful
charm of the Gospel, and presently believe that she should be welcome into his
arms, after all her prostitutions: that the world, this world, all this world,
should believe this, Romans 11.33.
and believe it thus; This was the Apostles Altitudo divitiarum, the depth of
the riches of Gods wisdom: Ephesians. 3.18.
And this is his Longitudo, and Latitudo, the breadth, and length, and height,
and depth, which no man can comprehend. Theudas rose up, dicens se esse
aliquem, Act. 5.36.
he said he was some body; and he proved no body. Simon Magus rose up, Dicens
se esse aliquem magnum, saying, he was some great body; and he proved as
little. Christ Jesus rose up, and said himself not to be some body, nor some
great body; but that there was no body else, no other name given under Heaven,
whereby we should be saved; and was believed. And therefore, if any man think
to destroy this general, by making himself a woeful instance to the contrary;
Christ is not believed in all the world, for I never believed in Christ; so
poor an objection, requires no more answer, but that that will still be true
in the general; Man is a reasonable creature, though he be an unreasonable man.

Now when he was thus preached to the Gentiles, Receptus in gloria.
and thus believed in the world, that is, means thus established, for
believing in him, he had done all that he had to do here, and therefore,
Receptus in gloria, he was received into glory: He was received, assumed,
taken; therefore he did not vanish away; he had no airy, no imaginary, no
fantastical body; he was true man: and then he was received, reassumed, taken
again, and so was in glory before; and therefore was true God. This which we
are fain to call glory, is an inexpressible thing, and an incommunicable:
Surely I will not give my glory unto another, says God, in Isaiah. 48.11.
We find great Titles attributed to, and assumed by Princes, both Spiritual
and Temporal: Celsitudo vestra, and vestra Majestas, is daily given, and duly
given amongst us: and Sanctitas vestra, and vestra beatitudo, is given amongst
others. Aben-Ezra, and some other Rabbis mistake this matter so much, as to
deny that any person in the old Testament ever speaks of himself in the plural
number, Nos, We: 1 Reg. 12.9. and 22.3. 2 Chro. 10.9.
That Is mistaken by them; for there are Examples. But it is more mistaken in
practice, by the Generals, nay Provincials of some Orders of Friars, In libros
Porret. in Mat. etc.
when they sign and subscribe in form and style of Princes, Nos Frater, We
Friar N. etc. It is not hard to name some, that have taken to themselves the
addition of Divus in their lifetime; a style so high, as that Bellarmine
denies that it appertains to any Saint in heaven: and yet these men have
canonized themselves, without the consent of Rome; and yet remained good Sons
of that Mother too: We shall find in ancient styles, that high addition,
Eternitas nostra, Our Eternity: and not only in ancient, but in our own days,
another equal to that, given to a particular Cardinal, Numen Vestrum, Your
Godhead. We find a Letter in Baronius, to a Pope, from a King of Britain (and
so Baronius leaves it, and does not tell us which Britain; he could have been
content to have had it thought ours; but he that has abridg'd his Book, has
abridg'd his Britain too, there it is Britania minor: Spondamus.
But he was a King, and therefore had power, if he filled his place; and wisdom
too, if he answered his name; for his name was Solomon) and this King we find
reduced to this lowness, as that he writes to that Bishop, Adrian 2. in that
style, Precor omnipotentiam Dignitatis vestrae: he gives him the Title of God,
Almighty. But two or three years before, he was far from it; then, when he
writ, he placed his own name above the Popes: but it is a slippery declination,
if it be not a precipitation, to come at all under him: great Titles have been
taken, Ambition goes far; and great given, Flattery goes as far; greater then
this in the Text, perchance have; but it has not fallen within my narrow
reading, and observation, that ever Prince took, that ever subject gave this
Title, Gloria nostra, or vestra; May it please your Glory, or, It has seemed
good to our Glory. Glory be to God on high; and glory to the Father, and to the
Son, and to the Holy Ghost, and no more. As long as that scurff, that leprosy
sticks to every thing in this world, Vanitas, Vanitatum, that all is vanity;
can any glory in any thing of this world, be other then vainglory? What Title
of Honor has any man had in any State, in Court, that some prison in that
State has not had men of that Title in it? Nay, what Title has any Heralds
Book, that Lucifers Book has not? Or who can be so great in this World, but
that as great as he have perished in the next? As it is not good for men to eat
much honey; Prove. 25.27.
so, for men to search their own glory, is not glory. Crowns are the Emblems of
Glory; and Kings out of their abundant Greatness and Goodness, derive and
distribute Crowns to Persons of Title; and by those Crowns, and those Titles,
they are Consanguinei Regis, the Kings Cousins. Christ Jesus is crowned with
glory in Heaven, and he sheds down Coronets upon you; Honor, and Blessings
here, that you might be Consanguinei Regis; contract a spiritual Kindred with
that King, and be idem Spiritus cum Domino, as inseparable from his Father, as
he himself is. The glory of Gods Saints in Heaven, is not so much to have a
Crown, as to lay down that Crown at the Feet of the Lamb. The glory of good men
here upon earth, is not so much to have Honor, and Favor, and Fortune, as to
employ those Beams of Glory, to his glory that gave them. In our poor calling,
God has given us grace; but grace for grace, as the Apostle says, that is,
grace to derive, and convey, and seal grace to you. To those of higher Rank,
God has given glory; and glory for glory; glory therefore to glorify him, in
a care of his glory. And because he dwells in luce inaccessibili, in a glorious
light which you cannot see here; glorify him in that wherein you may see him,
in that wherein he has manifested himself; glorify him in his glorious
Gospel: employ your Beams of Glory, Honor, Favor, Fortune, in transmitting
his Gospel in the same glory to your Children, as you received it from your
Fathers: for in this consists this Mystery of Godliness, which is, Faith with a
pure Conscience: And in this lies your best Evidence, That you are already
co-assumed with Christ Jesus into glory, by having so laid an unremoveable hold
upon that Kingdom which he has purchased for you, with the inestimable price
of his incorruptible Blood. To which glorious Son of God, etc.

A Lent-SERMON Preached to the KING, Sermon. 5.
At WHITE HALL, February 12. 1629. SERMON V.
MAT. 6.21. For, where your Treasure is, there will your Heart be also.


I Have seen Minute-glasses; Glasses so short-lived. If I were to preach upon
this Text, to such a glass, it were enough for half the Sermon; enough to show
the worldly man his Treasure, and the Object of his heart (for, where your
Treasure is, there will your Heart be also) to call his eye to that
Minute-glass, and to tell him, There flows, there flies your Treasure, and your
Heart with it. But if I had a Secular Glass, a Glass that would run an age; if
the two Hemispheres of the World were composed in the form of such a Glass, and
all the World calcined and burnt to ashes, and all the ashes, and sands, and
atoms of the World put into that Glass, it would not be enough to tell the
godly man what his Treasure, and the Object of his Heart is. A Parrot, or a
Stare, docile Birds, and of pregnant imitation, will sooner be brought to
relate to us the wisdom of a Council Table, then any Ambrose, or any
Chrysostom, Men that have Gold and Honey in their Names, shall tell us what
the Sweetness, what the Treasure of Heaven is, and what that man's peace, that
has set his Heart upon that Treasure. As Nature has given us certain
Elements, and all Bodies are composed of them; and Art has given us a certain
Alphabet of Letters, and all Words are composed of them: so, our blessed
Savior, in these three Chapters of this Gospel, has given us a Sermon of
Texts, of which, all our Sermons may be composed. All the Articles of our
Religion, all the Canons of our Church, all the Injunctions of our Princes, all
the Homilies of our Fathers, all the Body of Divinity, is in these three
Chapters, in this one Sermon in the Mount: Where, as the Preacher concludes his
Sermon with Exhortations to practice, 7.24.
(whosoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them) so he fortifies his
Sermon, with his own practice, (which is a blessed and a powerful method) for,
as soon as he came out of the Pulpit, 8.1.
as soon as he came down from the Mount, he cured the first Leper he saw, and
that, without all vainglory: for he forbad him to tell any man of it.

Divisio.
Of this Noble Body of Divinity, one fair Limb is in this Text, Where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also. Immediately before, our blessed
Savior had forbidden us the laying up of Treasure in this world, upon this
Reason, That here moths and rust corrupt, and thieves break in, and steal.
There, the reason is, because the Money may be lost; but here, in our Text it
is, because the Man may be lost: for where your Treasure is, there your Heart
will be also: So that this is equivalent to that, Mat. 16.26.
What profit to gain the whole world, and loose a man's own soul? Our Text
therefore stands as that Proverbial, that Hieroglyphical Letter, Pythagoras his
Y; that has first a stalk, a stem to fix it self, and then spreads into two
Beams. The stem, the stalk of this Letter, this Y, is in the first word of the
Text, that Particle of argumentation, For: Take heed where you place your
Treasure: for it concerns you much, where your Heart be placed; and, where your
Treasure is, there will your Heart be also. And then opens this Symbolical,
this Catechistical Letter, this Y, into two Horns, two Beams, two Branches; one
broader, but on the left hand, denoting the Treasures of this World; the other
narrower, but on the right hand, Treasure laid up for the World to come. Be
sure ye turn the right way: for, where your Treasure is, there will your Heart
be also.

Cor fixum.
First then, We bind our selves to the stake, to the stalk, to the staff, the
stem of this Symbolical Letter, and consider in it, That firmness and fixation
of the Heart, which God requires. God requires no unnatural things at man's
hand: Whatsoever God requires of man, man may find imprinted in his own
nature, written in his own heart. This firmness then, this fixation of the
heart, is natural to man: Every man does set his heart upon something: and
Christ in this place does not so much call upon him, that he would do so, set
his heart upon something; as to be sure that he set it upon the right Object.
And yet truly, even this first work, to recollect our selves, to recapitulate
our selves, to assemble and muster our selves, and to bend our hearts entirely
and intensly, directly, earnestly, emphatically, energetically, upon something,
is, by reason of the various fluctuation of our corrupt nature, and the
infinite multiplicity of Objects, such a Work as man needs to be called upon,
and excited to do it. Therefore is there no word in the Scriptures so often
added to the heart, as that of intireness; Toto Cord, Omni Cord, Pleno Cord:
Do this with all thine heart, with a whole heart, with a full heart: for
whatsoever is indivisible, is immovable; a Point, because it cannot be
divided, cannot be moved: the Center, the Poles, God himself, because he is
indivisible, is therefore immovable. And when the heart of man is knit up in
such an intireness upon one Object, as that it does not scatter, nor sub-divide
it self; then, and then only is it fixed. And that is the happiness in which
David fixes himself; not in his Cor paratum, My heart is prepared, O God, my
heart is prepared; (for so it may be, prepared even by God himself, and yet
scattered and subdivided by us:) But, in his Cor fixum, My heart is fixed,
Psalm. 57.7.
O God, my heart is fixed; Awake my glory, awake my Psaltery and Harp: I my
self will awake early, and praise thee, O Lord, among the people. A Triumph
that David returned to more then once: for he repeats the same words, with the
same pathetical earnestness again. Psalm. 108.1.
So that his Glory, his Victory, his Triumph, his Peace, his Acquiescence, his
All Sufficiency in himself, consisted in this, That his heart was fixed: for
this fixation of the heart, argued and testified an intireness in it. When God
says, Fili, da mihi Cor; My Son, give me thy heart; God means, the whole man.
1 Cor. 12.17.
Though the Apostle say, The eye is not the man, nor the ear is not the man; he
does not say, The heart is not the man: the heart is the man; the heart is all:
and, Exodus 10.8.
as Moses was not satisfied with that Commission that Pharaoh offered him, That
all the men might go to offer sacrifice; but Moses would have all their young,
and all their old; all their sons, and all their daughters; all their flocks,
and all their herds; he would have all: So, when Gods says, Fili, da mihi Cor,
My Son, give me thy heart, God will not be satisfied with the eye, if I
contemplate him in his Works: (for that is but the godliness of the natural man)
nor satisfied with the ear, with hearing many Sermons: (for that is but a new
invention, a new way of making Beads, if, as the Papist thinks all done, if he
have said so many Aves, I think all done, if I have heard so many Sermons.) But
God requires the heart, the whole man, all the faculties of that man: for only
that that is entire, and indivisible, is immovable; and that that God calls
for, and we seek for, in this stem of Pythagoras his Symbolical Letter, is this
immovableness, this fixation of the heart. And yet, even against this, though
it be natural, there are many impediments: We shall reduce them to a few; to
three; these three. First, there is Cor nullum, a mere Heartlesness, no Heart
at all, Incogitancy, Inconsideration: and then there is Cor and Cor, Cor
duplex, a double Heart, a doubtful, a distracted Heart; which is not
Incogitancy, nor Inconsideration, but Perplexity and Irresolution: and lastly,
Cor vagum, a wandering, a way faring, a weary Heart; which is neither
Inconsideration, nor Irresolution, but Inconstancy. And this is a Trinity
against our Unity; three Enemies to that fixation and intireness of the Heart,
which God loves: Inconsideration, when we do not Debate; Irresolution, when we
do not Determine; Inconstancy, when we do not Persevere: and upon each of
these, be pleased to stop your Devotion, a few minutes.

Cor nullum.
The first is, Cor nullum, no Heart at all, Incogitancy, Thoughtlesness. An idle
body, is a disease in a State; an idle soul, is a monster in a man. 2 These.
3.10.
That body that will not work, must not eat, but starve: that soul that does
not think, not consider, cannot be said to actuate, (which is the proper
operation of the soul) but to evaporate; not to work in the body, but to
breathe, and smoke through the body. We have seen Estates of private men wasted
by Inconsideration, as well as by Riot; and a soul may perish by a
thoughtlesness, as well as by ill thoughts: God takes it as ill to be slighted,
as to be injured: and God is as much slighted in Cord nullo, in our
thoughtlesness and inconsideration, as he is opposed and provoked in Cord
maligno, in a rebellious Heart. There is a good nullification of the heart, a
good bringing of the heart to nothing. For the fire of Gods Spirit may take
hold of me, and (as the Disciples that went with Christ to Emmaus, Luke 24.
were affected) my heart may burn within me, when the Scriptures are opened,
that is, when Gods Judgments are denounced against my Sin; and this heat may
overcome my former frigidity and coldness, and overcome my succeeding tepidity
and lukewarmness, and may bring my heart to a mollification, 23.16.
to a tenderness, as Job found it; The Almighty has troubled me, and made my
heart soft: for there are hearts of clay, as well as hearts of wax; hearts,
whom these fires of God, his Corrections, harden. But if these fires of his,
these denunciations of his judgments, have overcome first my coldness, and
then my lukewarmness, and made my heart soft for better impressions; the work
is well advanced, but it is not all done: for Metal may be soft, and yet not
fusil; Iron may be red hot, and yet not apt to run into another mold. Therefore
there is a liquefaction, a melting, a pouring out of the heart, such as Rahab
speaks of, 2.11. and 5.1.
to Joshua's Spies; (As soon as we heard how miraculously God had proceeded in
your behalf, in drying up Jordan, all our hearts melted within us, and no man
had any spirit left in him.) And when upon the consideration of Gods miraculous
Judgments or Mercies, I come to such a melting and pouring out of my heart,
that there be no spirit, that is, none of mine own spirit left in me; when I
have so exhausted, so evacuated my self, that is, all confidence in my self,
that I come into the hands of my God, as pliably, as ductily, as that first
clod of earth, of which he made me in Adam, was in his hands, in which clod of
earth, there was no kind of reluctation against Gods purpose; this is a
blessed nullification of the heart. When I say to my self, as the Apostle
professed of himself, I am nothing; and then say to God, Lord, though I be
nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11.
yet behold, I present thee as much as thou had to make the whole world of; O
Thou that made the whole world of nothing, make me, that am nothing in mine
own eyes, a new Creature in Christ Jesus: This is a blessed nullification, a
glorious annihilation of the heart. So is there also a blessed nullification
thereof, in the contrition of heart, in the sense of my sins; when, as a sharp
wind may have worn out a Marble Statue, or a continual spout worn out a Marble
Pavement, so, my holy tears, made holy in his Blood that gives them a tincture,
and my holy sighs, made holy in that Spirit that breathes them in me, have worn
out my Marble Heart, that is, the Marbleness of my heart, and emptied the room
of that former heart, and so given God a Vacuity, a new place to create a new
heart in. But when God has thus created a new heart, that is, re-enabled me,
by his Ordinance, to some holy function, then, to put this heart to nothing, to
think nothing, to consider nothing; not to know our age, but by the
Church-Book, and not by any action done in the course of our lives, for our
God, for our Prince, for our Country, for our Neighbor, for our Selves, (our
selves are our souls;) not to know the seasons of the year, but by the fruits
which we eat, and not by observation of the Public and National Blessings,
which he has successively given us; not to know Religion, but by the
Convenience, and the Preferments to be had in this, or in the other side; to
sit here, and not to know if we be asked upon a surprise, whether it were a
Prayer, or a Sermon, or an Anthem that we heard last; this is such a
nullification of the heart, such an annihilation, such an exinanition thereof,
as reflects upon God himself: for, Respuit datorem, Tertul.
qui datum deserit, He that makes no use of a Benefit, despises the Benefactor.
And therefore, A rod for his back, qui indiget Cord, Prove. 10.13.
that is without a heart, without consideration what he should do; nay, what he
does. For this is the first Enemy of this firmness and fixation of the heart,
without which, we have no treasure; And we have done with that, Cor nullum, and
pass to the second, Cor and Cor, Cor duplex, the double, the divided, the
distracted heart, which is not Inconsideration, but Irresolution.

This Irresolution, Cor Duplex.
this Perplexity is intended in that Commination from God, The Lord shall give
them a trembling heart: Deuteronomy. 28.65.
this is not that Cor nullum, that melted heart, in which There was no spirit
left in them, as in Joshua's time; but Cor pavidum, a heart that should not
know where to settle, nor what to wish; but, as it follows there, In the
morning he shall say, Would God it were evening; and in the evening, Would God
it were morning. And this is that which Solomon may have intended in his
Prayer, Give thy servant an understanding heart: 1 Reg. 3.9.
Cor Docile, so S. Hierom reads it, A heart able to conceive counsel: for
that is a good disposition, but it is not all: for, the Original is, Leb
shemmeany, that is, Cor audiens, A heart willing to hearken to Counsel. But all
that, is not all that is asked; Solomon asks there a heart to discern between
good and evil; so that it is a Prayer for the spirit of Discretion, of
Conclusion, of Resolution; that God would give him a heart willing to receive
Counsel, and a heart capable to conceive and digest Counsel, and a heart able
to discern between Counsel and Counsel, and to Resolve, Conclude, Determine. It
were a strange ambitious patience in any man, to be content to be racked every
day, in hope to be an inch or two taller at last: so is it for me, to think to
be a dram or two wiser, by harkening to all jealousies, and doubts, and
distractions, and perplexities, that arise in my Bosom, or in my Family; which
is the rack and torture of the soul. A spirit of Contradiction may be of use in
the greatest Counsels; because thereby matters may be brought into farther
debatement. But a spirit of contradiction in mine own Bosom, to be able to
conclude nothing, resolve nothing, determine nothing, not in my Religion, not
in my Manners, but occasionally, and upon Emergencies; this is a sickly
complexion of the soul, a dangerous impotencie, and a shrewd and ill-presaging
Crisis. If Joshua had suspended his assent of serving the Lord, till all his
Neighbors, and their Families, all the Kings and Kingdoms about him, had
declared theirs the same way, when would Joshua have come to that protestation,
I and my house will serve the Lord? If Esther had forborne to press for an
audience to the King, in the behalf, and for the life of her Nation, till
nothing could have been said against it, when would Esther have come to that
protestation, I will go; and if I perish, I perish? If one Millstone fell from
the North Pole, and another from the South, they would meet, and they would
rest in the Center; Nature would con-centre them. Not to be able to con-centre
those doubts, which arise in my self, in a resolution at last, whether in Moral
or in Religious Actions, is rather a vertiginous giddiness, then a wise
circumspection, or wariness. When God prepared great Armies, 1 Samuel 11.7.
it is expressed always so, Tanquam unus vir, Israel went out, as one man. When
God established his beloved David to be King, 1 Chro. 12.38.
it is expressed so; Uno Cord, He sent them out, with one heart, to make David
king. When God accelerated the propagation of his Church, Act. 4.32.
it is expressed so; Una Anima, The multitude of them that believed, were of
one heart, and one soul. Since God makes Nations, and Armies, and Churches One
heart, let not us make one heart two, in our selves; a divided, a distracted, a
perplexed, an irresolved heart: but in all cases, let us be able to say to our
selves, This we should do. God asks the heart, a single heart, an entire heart;
for, whilst it is so, God may have some hope of it. But when it is a heart and
a heart, a heart for God, and a Heart for Mammon, howsoever it may seem to be
even, the odds will be on Mammons side against God; because he presents
Possessions, and God but Reversions; he the present and possessory things of
this world, God but the future, and speratory things of the next. So then, the
Cor nullum, no heart, Thoughtlesness, Incogitancie, Inconsideration; and the
Cor duplex, the perplexed, and irresolved, and inconclusive heart, do equally
oppose this firmness and fixation of the heart which God loves, and which we
consider in this stem and stalk of Pythagoras his Symbolical Letter: And so
does that which we proposed for the Third, The Cor Vagum, The Wandering, the
Wayfaring, the Inconstant Heart.

Many times, in our private Actions, Cor Vagum.
and in the cribration and sifting of our Consciences, (for that is the Sphere I
move in, and no higher) we do overcome the first difficulty, Inconsideration;
we consider seriously: and sometimes the second, Irresolution; we resolve
confidently: but never the third, Inconstancy: if so far, as to bring holy
Resolutions into Actions; yet never so far, as to bring holy Actions into
Habits. That word which we read Deceitful, (The heart is deceitful above all
things; who can know it? Jer. 17.9:
) is in the Original, Gnacob; and that is, not only Fraudulentum, but
Versipelle, deceitful because it varies it self into diverse forms; so that it
does not only deceive others (others find not our heart the same toward them
to day, that it was yesterday) but it deceives our selves; we know not what,
nor where our heart will be hereafter. Upon those words of Isaiah, Redite
prevaricatores ad Cor; Return, O sinner, to thy heart: Long eos mittit, says
S. Gregory, 46.8.
God knows whither that sinner is sent, that is sent to his own heart: for,
Where is thy heart? Thou may remember where it was yesterday; at such an
Office, at such a Chamber: But yesterdays affections are changed to day, as to
days will be, to morrow. They have despised my judgments; so God complains in
Ezekiel; 20.16.
that is, They are not moved with my punishments; they call all, natural
accidents: and then it follows, They have polluted my sabbaths; they are come
to a more faint, and dilute, and indifferent way, in their Religion. Now what
has occasioned this neglecting of Gods judgments, and this diluteness and
indifferency in the ways of Religion? That that follows there, Their hearts
went after their Idols: Went? Whither? Every whither: for, Hierom.
Quot vitia tot recentes deos; so many habitual Sins, so many Idols: And so,
every man has some Idol, some such Sin; and then, that Idol sends him to a
further Idol, that Sin to another: for, every Sin needs the assistance, and
countenance of another sin, for disguise and palliation. We are not constant in
our Sins, much less in our more holy Purposes. We complain, and justly, of the
Church of Rome, that she would not have us receive in utraque, in both kinds:
But, alas! who amongst us, does receive in utraque, so, as that when he
receives Bread and Wine, he receives with a true sorrow for former, and a true
resolution against future sins? Except the Lord of heaven create new hearts in
us, of our selves, we have Cor nullum, no heart; all vanishes into Incogitancy.
Except the Lord of heaven con-centre our affections, of our selves, we have Cor
and Cor, a cloven, a divided heart, a heart of Irresolution. Except the Lord of
heaven fix our Resolutions, of our selves, we have Cor vagum, a various, a
wandering heart; all smoaks into Inconstancy. And all these three are Enemies
to that firmness, and fixation of the heart, which God loves, and we seek
after. But yet how variously soever the heart do wander, and how little a while
soever it stay upon one Object; yet, that that thy heart does stay upon, Christ
in this place calls thy Treasure: for, the words admit well that inversion;
Where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also, implies this; Where your
Heart is, that is your Treasure. And so we pass from this stem and stalk of
Pythagoras his Symbolical Letter, The firmness and fixation of the Heart, to
the Horns and Beams thereof: A broader, (but on the left hand) and in that, the
corruptible treasures of this world; and a narrower, (but on the right hand)
and in that, the everlasting Treasures of the next. On both sides, that that
you fix your Heart upon, is your Treasure: For, where your Heart is, there is
your Treasure also.

Thesaurus.
Literally, primarily, radically, Thesaurus, Treasure, is no more but Depositum
in Crastinum, Provision for to morrow; to show how little a proportion, a
regulated mind, and a contented heart may make a Treasure. But we have
enlarged the signification of these words, Provision, and, To morrow: for,
Provision must signify all that can any way be compassed; and, To morrow must
signify as long as there shall be a to morrow, till time shall be no more: But
waving these infinite Extensions, and Perpetuities, is there any thing of that
nature, as, (taking the word Treasure in the narrowest signification, to be but
Provision, for to morrow) we are sure shall last till to morrow? Sits any man
here in an assurance, that he shall be the same to morrow, that he is now? You
have your Honors, your Offices, your Possessions, perchance under Seal; a Seal
of Wax; Wax, that has a tenacity, an adhering, a cleaving nature, to show the
Royal Constancy of His Heart, that gives them, and would have them continue
with you, and stick to you. But then, Wax, if it be heat, has a melting, a
fluid, a running nature too: so have these Honors, and Offices, and
Possessions, to them that grow too hot, too confident in them, or too imperious
by them. For these Honors, and Offices, and Possessions, you have a Seal, a
fair and just evidence of assurance; but have they any Seal upon you, any
assurance of you till to morrow? Did our blessed Savior give day, or any hope
of a to morrow, to that man, to whom he said, Fool, this night they fetch away
thy soul? Or is there any of us, that can say, Christ said not that to him?

But yet, a Treasure every man has: An evil man, Thesaurus malorum. Luke 6.45.
out of the evil Treasure of his Heart, brings forth that which is evil, says
our Savior: Every man has some sin upon which his heart is set; and, Where
your Heart is, there is your Treasure also. The treasures of wickedness profit
nothing, says Job; It Is true: But yet, 10.2.
Treasures of wickedness there are. Mic. 6.10.
Are there not yet Treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? consider
the force of that word, yet; yet, though you have the power of a vigilant
Prince executed by just Magistrates; yet, though you have the Piety of a
Religious Prince, seconded by the assiduity of a laborious Clergy; yet, though
you have many helps, which your Fathers did, and your Neighbors do want, and
have (by Gods grace) some fruits of those many helps; yet, for all this, Are
there not yet Treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? No? Are there
not scant measures? which are an abomination to God, says the Prophet there;
which are not only false measures of Merchandise, but false measures of Men:
for, when God says that, he intends all this; Is there not yet supplantation
in Court, and mis-representations of men? When Solomon, who understood
subdordination of places which flowed from him, as well as the highest, which
himself possessed, says, and says experimentally for his own, and prophetically
for future times, If a Ruler (a man in great place) hearken to lies, Prove.
29.22.
all his servants are wicked: Are there not yet mis-representations of men in
Courts? Is there not yet Oppression in the Country? A starving of men, and
pampering of dogs? A swallowing of the needy? Amos 8.5.
A buying of the poor for a pair of shoes, and a selling to the hungry refuse
corn? Is there not yet Oppression in the Country? Is there not yet Extortion in
Westminster? A justifying of the wicked for a reward, Isa. 5.23.
and a taking away of the righteousness of the righteous from him? Is there not
yet Extortion in Westminster? Is there not yet Collusion and Circumvention in
the City? Would they not seem richer then they are, when they deal in private
Bargains with one another? And would they not seem poorer then they are, when
they are called to contribute for the Public? Ezekiel. 28.5.
Have they not increased their riches by Trade, and lifted up their hearts upon
the increase of their riches? Have they not slackened their trade, Amos 2.8.
and layn down upon clothes laid to pledge, and ennobled themselves by an
ignoble and lazy way of gain? Is there not yet Collusion and Circumvention in
the City? Is there not yet Hypocrisy in the Church? In all parts thereof? Half
preachings, and half hearings? Hearings and preachings without practice? Have
we not national sins of our own, and yet exercise the nature of Islanders, in
importing the Sins of foreign Parts? And though we better no foreign
Commodity, nor Manufacture that we bring in, we improve the sins of other
Nations; and, as a weaker Grape growing upon the Rhene, contracts a stronger
nature in the Canaries; so do the sins of other Nations transplanted amongst
us. Have we not secular sins, sins of our own age, our own time, and yet sin by
precedent of former, as well as create precedents for future? And, not only
Silver and Gold, Josh. 6.19.
but Vessels of Iron and Brass, were brought into the Treasury of the Lord; not
only the glorious sins of high places, and National sins, and secular sins;
But the wretchedest Beggar in the street, contributes to this Treasure, the
Treasure of sin; and to this mischievous use, to increase this Treasure, the
Treasure of sin, is a Subsidy man. He begs in Jesus Name, and for Gods sake;
and in the same Name, curses him that does not give. He counterfeits a
lameness, or he loves his lameness, and would not be cured; for, his lameness
is his Stock, it is his Demean, it is (as they call their Occupations in the
City) his Mystery. Are there not yet Treasures of wickedness in the house of
the wicked, when even they, who have no Houses, but lie in the Streets, have
these Treasures?

Thesaurus Dei hic.
There are: And then, as the nature of Treasure is to multiply, so does this
Treasure, this Treasure of sin; It produces another Treasure, Thesaurizamus
iram, We treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath: Romans 2.5.
for, it is of the sins of the people that God speaks, Deuteronomy. 32.34.
when he says, Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up amongst my
treasures? He treasures up the sins of the disobedient: But where? In the
Treasury of his judgments. And then, that Treasury he opens against us in this
world, his Treasures of Snow, Job 38.22.
and Treasures of Hail, that is, Unseasonableness of Weather, Psalm. 135.7.
Barrenness and Famine; and he brings his winds out of his Treasury, contrary
winds, or storms and tempests, to disappoint our purposes; Isa. 45.3.
and, as he says to Cyrus, I will give thee (even thee Cyrus, though God cared
not for Cyrus, otherwise then as he had made Cyrus his scourge) I will give
thee the Treasures of darkness, and the hidden Treasures of secret places. God
will enable Enemies (though he loves not those Enemies) to afflict that people
that love not him. And these, War, and Dearth, and Sickness, are the Weapons of
Gods displeasure; and these he pours out of his Treasury, Thesaurus Dei in
futuro.
in this world. But then, for the world to come, He shall open his treasury,
(for, whatsoever moved our Translators to render that word, Armory, and not
Treasury, in that place, yet evidently it is Treasury, Jer. 50.25.
and in that very word, Otzar, which they translate Treasury, in all those
places of Job, and David, and Isaiah, which we mentioned before, and in all
other places) He shall open that Treasury, (says that Prophet) and bring forth
the weapons, not as before, of Displeasure, but in a far heavier word, the
weapons of his Indignation. And, in the Bowels and Treasury of his Mercy, let
me beseech you, not to call the denouncing of Gods Indignation, a Satyr of a
Poet, or an Invective of an Orator: As Solomon says, There is a time for all
things; there is a time for Consternation of Presumptuous Hearts, as well as
for Redintegration of Broken Hearts; and the time for that, is this time of
Mortification, which we enter into, now. Now therefore, let me have leave to
say, That the Indignation of God is such a thing, as a man would be afraid to
think he can express it, afraid to think he does know it: for the knowledge of
the Indignation of God, implies the sense and feeling thereof: all knowledge of
that, is experimental; and that is a woeful way, and a miserable acquisition, and
purchase of knowledge. To re-collect, Treasure is Provision for the future: No
worldly thing is so; there is no certain future: for the things of this world
pass from us; we pass from them; the world it self passes away to nothing. Yet
a way we have found to make a treasure, a treasure of sin; and we teach God
thrift and providence: for, when we arm, God arms too; when we make a treasure,
God makes a treasure too; a treasure furnished with Weapons of Displeasure for
this World, and Weapons of Indignation for the World to come. But then, As an
evil man, out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that which is
evil; so, (says our Savior) the good man, out of the good treasure of his
heart, Luke 6.45.
brings forth that which is good: Which is the last stroke that makes up
Pythagoras his Symbolical Letter, that Horn, that Beam thereof, which lies on
the right hand; a narrower way, but to a better Land; through Straights; it is
true; but to the Pacifique Sea, The consideration of the treasure of the Godly
Man in this World, and Gods treasure toward him, both in this, and the next.

Things dedicated to God, are called often, The treasures of God; Thesaurus
Bonorum. 1 Chro. 28.12.
Thesauri Dei, and Thesauri sanctorum Dei: the treasures of God, and the
treasures of the servants of God, are, in the Scriptures, the same thing; and
so a man may rob Gods treasury, in robbing an Hospital. Now, though to give a
Talent, or to give a Jewel, or to give a considerable proportion of Plate, be
an addition to a treasury; yet to give a treasury to a treasury, is a more
precious, and a more acceptable present; as to give a Library to a Library, is
more then to give the works of any one Author. A godly man is a Library in
himself, a treasury in himself, and therefore fittest to be dedicated and
appropriated to God. Invest thy self therefore with this treasure of Godliness:
What is Godliness? Take it in the whole compass thereof, and Godliness is
nothing but the fear of God: for, he that says in his first Chapter, Prove. 1.7.
Initium sapientiae, The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom; says also, in
the 22. Finis Modestiae, The fear of God is the end of modesty; 22.4.
the end of humility: No man is bound to direct himself to any lower
humiliation, then to the fear of God. When God promised good Ezekias all those
Blessings, Isa. 33.6.
Wisdom, and Knowledge, and Stability, and Strength of Salvation; that that
was to defray him, and carry him through all, was this, The fear of the Lord
shall be his treasure. 1 Timothy 6.19.
And therefore, Thesaurizate vobis fundamentum, Lay up in store for your selves
a good foundation against the time to come. Do all in the fear of God: In all
warlike preparations, remember the Lord of Hosts, and fear him; In all Treaties
of Peace, remember the Prince of Peace, and fear him; In all Consultations,
remember the Angel of the great Council, and fear him: fear God as much at
Noon, as at Midnight; as much in the Glory and Splendor of his Sunshine, as
in his darkest Eclipses: fear God as much in thy Prosperity, as in thine
Adversity; as much in thy Preferment, as in thy Disgrace. Lay up a thousand
pound to day, in comforting that oppressed soul that sues; and lay up ten
thousand pound to morrow, in paring his Nails that oppresses: Lay up a million
one day, in taking Gods Cause to heart; and lay up ten millions next day, in
taking Gods Cause in hand. Let every soul lay up a penny now, in resisting a
small temptation; and a shilling anon, in resisting a greater; and it will grow
to be a treasure, a treasure of Talents, of so many Talents, as that the
poorest soul in the Congregation, would not change treasure with any
Plate-Fleet, nor Terra-firma Fleet, nor with those three thousand millions,
which (though it be perchance a greater sum then is upon the face of Europe, at
this day, after a hundred years embowelling of the earth for treasure) David is
said to have left for the treasure of the Temple, Villalp. Tom. 2. par. 2. li.
5. Dip. 3. cap. 43. fol. 503. Phil. 3.20. Apoc. 21.2.
only to be laid up in the Treasury thereof, when it was built: for, the
charge of the building thereof, was otherwise defrayed. Let your Conversation
be in heaven: Cannot you get thither? You may see, as S. John did, Heaven come
down to you: Heaven is here; here in Gods Church, in his Word, in his
Sacraments, in his Ordinances; set thy heart upon them, The Promises of the
Gospel, The Seals of Reconciliation, and thou have that treasure which is thy
Viaticum, for thy Transmigration out of this World, and thy Bill of Exchange
for the World thou go to. For, as the wicked make themselves a treasure of
sin and vanity, and then God opens upon them a treasure of his Displeasure
here, and his Indignation hereafter: So the Godly make themselves a treasure of
the fear of God, and he opens unto them a treasure of Grace and Peace here, and
a treasure of Joy and Glory hereafter. And when of each of these treasures,
Here, and Hereafter, I shall have said one word, I have done.

Thesaurus Dei erga Bonos hic. 2 Cor. 4.7.
We have treasure, though in earthen Vessels, says the Apostle. We have; that
is, We have already the treasure of Grace, and Peace, and Faith, and
Justification, and Sanctification: But yet, in earthen Vessels, in Vessels that
may be broken; Peace that may be interrupted, Grace that may be resisted, Faith
that may be enfeebled, Justification that may be suspected, and Sanctification
that may be blemished. But we look for more; for Joy, and Glory; for such a
Justification, and such a Sanctification, as shall be sealed, and riveted in a
Glorification. Manna putrified if it were kept by any man, but a day; but in
the Ark, it never putrified. That treasure, which is as Manna from Heaven,
Grace, and Peace, yet, here, has a brackish taste: when Grace, and Peace,
shall become Joy and Glory in Heaven, there it will be sincere. Sordescit quod
inferiori miscetur naturae, August.
etsi in suo genere non sordidetur: Though in the nature thereof, that with
which a purer Metal is mixed, be not base; yet, it abases the purer Metal. He
puts his Example in Silver and Gold; Though Silver be a precious Metal, yet it
abases Gold. Grace, and Peace, and Faith, are precious parts of our Treasure
here; yet, if we mingle them, that is, compare them with the Joys, and Glory of
Heaven; if we come to think, That our Grace, and Peace, and Faith here, can no
more be lost, then our Joy and Glory there; we abase, and over-allay those
Joys, and that Glory. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to a Treasure, says our
Savior. Matthew. 13.44.
But is that all? Is any Treasure like unto it? None: For, (to end where we
begun) Treasure is Depositum in Crastinum, Provision for to morrow. The
treasure of the worldly man is not so; He is not sure of any thing to morrow.
Nay, the treasure of the Godly man is not so in this world; He is not sure,
that this days Grace, and Peace, and Faith, shall be his to morrow. When I
have Joy and Glory in Heaven, I shall be sure of that, to morrow. And that is a
term long enough: for, before a to morrow, there must be a night; And shall
there ever be a night in Heaven? No more then day in Hell. Apoc. 21.23.
There shall be no Sun in Heaven; therefore no danger of a Sunset. And for the
treasure it self, when the Holy Ghost has told us, 18.
That the Walls and Streets of the City are pure Gold, That the Foundations
thereof are all precious Stones, and every Gate of an entire Pearl; what has
the Holy Ghost himself left to denote unto us, what the treasure it self within
is? The Treasure it self, is the Holy Ghost himself, and Joy in him. As the
Holy Ghost proceeds from Father and Son, but I know not how; so there shall
something proceed from Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and fall upon me, but I
know not what. Nay, not fall upon me neither; but enwrap me, embrace me: for, I
shall not be below them, so as that I shall not to be upon the same seat with
the Son, at the right hand of the Father, in the Union of the Holy Ghost:
Rectified by the Power of the Father, and feel no weakness; Enlightened by the
Wisdom of the Son, and feel no scruple; Established by the Joy of the Holy
Ghost, and feel no jealousy. Where I shall find the Fathers of the first Age,
dead five thousand years before me; Sermon. 6.
and they shall not be able to say they were there a minute before me. Where I
shall find the blessed and glorious Martyrs, who went not per viam lacteam,
but per viam sanguineam; not by the milky way of an Innocent Life, but by the
bloody way of a Violent Death; and they shall not contend with me for
precedence in their own Right, or say, We came in by Purchase, and you but by
Pardon. Where I shall find the Virgins, and not be despised by them, for not
being so; but hear that Redintegration, which I shall receive in Christ Jesus,
called Virginity, and Intireness. Where all tears shall be wiped from mine
Eyes; not only tears of Compunction for my self, and tears of Compassion for
others; but even tears of Joy, too: for, there shall be no sudden joy, no joy
unexperienced there; There I shall have all joys, altogether, always. There
Abraham shall not be gladder of his own Salvation, then of mine; nor I surer of
the Everlastingness of my God, then of my Everlastingness in Him. This is that
Treasure, of which the God of this Treasure, give us those Spangles; and that
single Money, which this Mint can coin, this World can receive, that is,
Prosperity, and a good use thereof, in worldly things; and Grace, and Peace,
and Faith, in spiritual. And then reserve for us the Exaltation of this
Treasure, in the Joy and Glory of Heaven, in the Mediation of his Son Christ
Jesus, and by the Operation of his Blessed Spirit.

AMEN.
A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, April 21. 1616. SERMON VI.
ECCLES. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work, is not executed speedily,
Therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully set in them, to do evil.


WE cannot take into our Meditation, a better Rule, then that of the Stoic,
Nihil infaelicius faelicitate peccantium; Seneca.
There is no such unhappiness to a sinner, as to be happy; no such cross, as to
have no crosses: nor can we take a better Example of that Rule, then
Constantius the Arrian Emperor, in whose time first of all, the Cross of
Christ suffered that profanation, as to be an Ensign of War, between Christian
and Christian: When Magnentius by being an usurping Tyrant, and Constantius by
being an Arrian Heretic, had forfeited their interest in the Cross of Christ,
which is the Ensign of the universal Peace of this world, and the means of the
eternal Peace of the next; both brought the Cross to cross the Cross, to be an
Ensign of War, and of Hostility; both made that Cross, when the Father accepted
for all mankind, the blood of Christ Jesus, to be an instrument for the sinful
effusion of the blood of Christians. But when this Heretical Emperor had a
Victory over this usurping Tyrant, this unhappy happiness transported him to a
greater sin, a greater insolence, to approach so near to God himself, as to
call himself Eternum principem, The eternal Emperor; and to take into his
style, and Rescripts, this addition, Eternitatem nostram, Thus and thus, it
has pleased our Eternity to proceed: Yea, and to bring his Arrian followers,
who would never acknowledge an eternity in Christ, nor confess him to be the
eternal Son of God, to salute himself by that name, Eternum Caesarem, The
eternal Emperor: so venomous, so deadly is the prosperity of the wicked to
their own souls, that even from the mercy of God, they take occasion of
sinning; not only Thereby, but even Therefore; They do not only make that
their excuse, when they do sin, but their Reason why they may sin; as we see in
these words, Because sentence against an evil work, is not excuted speedily,
etc.

Divisio.
In which words, we shall consider, first, The general perverseness of a natural
man, who by custom in sin, comes to assign a Reason why he may sin; intimated
in the first word, Because. And secondly, The particular perverseness of the men
in this Text, who assign the patience of God, to be the Reason of their
continuance in sin, Because sentence is not executed speedily. And then lastly,
The illusion upon this, what a fearful state this shuts them up in, That
therefore their hearts are fully set in them, to do evil. And these three, The
perverseness of coloring sins with Reasons, and the impotency of making Gods
mercy the Reason, and the danger of obduration thereby, will be the three
parts, in which we shall determine this Exercise.

Part I.
First then, in handling the perverseness of assigning Reasons for sins, we
forbid no man the use of Reason in matters of Religion. As S. August. says,
Contra Scriptura, nemo Christianus, No man can pretend to be a Christian, if he
refuse to be tried by the Scriptures: And, as he adds, Contra Ecclesiam nemo
pacificus, No man can pretend to love order and Peace, if he refuse to be tried
by the Church: so he adds also, Contra Rationem nemo sobrius, No man can
pretend to be in his wits, if he refuse to be tried by Reason. He that believes
any thing because the Church presents it, he has Reason to assure him, that
this Authority of the Church is founded in the Scriptures: He that believes
the Scriptures, has Reasons that govern and assure him that those Scriptures
are the Word of God. Mysteries of Religion are not the less believed and
embraced by Faith, because they are presented, and induced, and apprehended by
Reason.

But this must not enthrone, this must not exalt any man's Reason so far, as
that there should lie an Appeal, from Gods Judgments to any man's reason: that
if he see no reason, why God should proceed so, and so, he will not believe
that to be Gods Judgment, or not believe that Judgment of God, to be just:
For, of the secret purposes of God, Mat. 11.26.
we have an Example what to say, given us by Christ himself, Ita est, quia
complacuit; It is so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such: All was in
his own breast and bosom, in his own good will and pleasure, before he Decreed
it; And as his Decree it self, so the ways and Executions of his Decrees, are
often unsearchable, for the purpose, and for the reason thereof, though for the
matter of fact, they may be manifest. They that think themselves sharp-sighted
and wise enough, to search into those unreveal'd Decrees; they who being but
worms, will look into Heaven; and being the last of Creatures, who were made,
will needs enquire, what was done by God, before God did any thing, for
creating the World, In ultimam dementiam reverant, says S. Chrysostom. They are
fallen into a mischievous madness, Et ferrum ignitum, quod forcipe deberent,
digitus accipiunt: They will needs take up red hot Irons, with their bare
fingers, without tongs. That which is in the Center, which should rest, and lie
still, in this peace, That it is so, because it is the will of God, that it
should be so; they think to toss and tumble that up, to the Circumference, to
the Light and Evidence of their Reason, by their wrangling Disputations.

If then it be a presumpteous thing, and a contempt against God, to submit his
Decrees to the Examination of humane reason, it must be a high treason against
the Majesty of God, to find out a reason in him, which should justify our
sins; To conclude out of any thing which he does, or leaves undone, that either
he does not hate, or cannot punish sinners: For this destroys even the Nature
of God, and that which the Apostle lays, for the foundation of all, To believe
that God is, Heb. 11.6.
and that he is a just Rewarder. Adam's quia Mulier, The woman whom thou gave
me, gave me the Apple: And Eve's quia Serpens, Because the Serpent deceived me;
and all such, are poor and unallowable pleas, which God would not admit: For
there is no Quia, no Reason, why any man, at any time, should do any sin. God
never permits any perplexity to fall upon us, so, as that we cannot avoid one
sin, but by doing another: or that we should think our self excusable by
saying, Quia inde minus malum, There is less harm in a Concubine, then in
another wife; Or, Quia inde aliquod bonum, That my incontinence has produced a
profitable man to the State or to the Church, though a bastard; much less to
say, Quia obdormivit Deus, Tush, God sees it not, or cares not for it, though
he see it.

If thou ask then, why thou should be bound to believe the Creation, we say,
Quia unus Deus, Because there can be but one God; and if the World be eternal,
and so no Creature, the World is God. If thou ask why thou should be bound
to believe Providence, we say, Quia Deus remunerator, Because God is to give
every man according to his merits. If thou ask why thou should be bound to
believe that, when thou see he does not give every man according to his
merits, we say, Quia inscrutabilia judicia ejus; O how unsearchable are his
Jugdements, and his ways past finding out! For, thou art yet got no farther, in
measuring God, but by thine own measure; and thou have found no other reason to
lead thee, to think, that God does not govern well, but because he does not
govern so, to thine understanding, as thou should, if thou were God. So that
thou do not only make thy weakness, but thy wickedness, that is, thy hasty
disposition, to come to a present Revenge, when any thing offends thee, the
Measure, and the Model, by which the frame of Gods Government should be
erected; and so thou come to the worst distemper of all, insanire cum
ratione, to go out of thy wits, by having too much, and to be mad with too much
knowledge; not to sin out of infirmity, or tentation, or heat of blood, but to
sin in cold blood, and upon just reason, and mature considerations, and so
deliberately and advisedly to continue to sin.

Part II.
Now the particular reason, which the perverseness of these men produces here,
in this Text, is, Because God is patient and long-suffering. So he is; so he
will be still: Their perverseness shall not pervert his Nature, his goodness. As
God bade the Prophet Osea do, 1.2.
he has done himself: Go, says he, and take to thee, a wife of fornication,
and children of fornication; so has he taken us, guilty of spiritual
fornication. But as in the fleshly fornications of an adulterous wife, the
husband is, for the most part, the last that hears of them: so, for our
spiritual fornications, such is the loathness, the patience, the longanimity of
our good and gracious God, that though he do know our sins, as soon as they
speak, as soon as they are acted, (for that is peccatum cum voco, says S.
Gregory, A speaking sin, when any sinful thought is produced into act) yea,
before they speak, as soon as they are conceived; yet he will not hear of our
sins, he takes no knowledge of them, by punishing them, till our brethren have
been scandalized, and led into tentation by them; till his law have been
evacuated, that that use of the law, which is, to show sin to our consciences,
be annihilated in us; till such a Cry come up to him by our often and professed
sinning, that it concerns him in his Honor, (which he will give to none) and
in his Care of his Churches, which he has promised to be, till the end of all,
to take knowledge of them. Yea, though this Cry be come up to his Ears, though
it be a loud Cry, either by the nature of the sin, (as heavy things make a
great noise in the moving) or by reason of the number of the sins, and the
often doing thereof, (for, as many children, will make as great a noise as a
loud Crier; so will the custom of small sins Cry as loud, as those which are
called peccata clamantia, Crying sins) Though this cry be increased by this
liberty, and professed sinning, that, as the Prophet says, Esa. 3.9.
They declare their sins, and hide them not, as Sodom did; Though the cry of
the sin be increased by the cry of them, that suffer oppression by that sin, as
well as by the sin it self, as the voice of Abel's blood cried from earth to
heaven; yea, Genesis 4.10.
though this cry ring about Gods ears, in his own bedchamber, under the Altar
it self, in that Usquequo Domine? when the Martyrs cry out with a loud voice,
How long, Lord, holy and true, Revel. 6.10.
do thou not judge and avenge our blood! yet God would fain forbear his
Revenge, he would fain have those Martyrs rest for a little space, till their
fellow servants and their brethren were fulfilled. God would try, what Cain
would say to that Interrogatory, Where is thy brother Abel? And though the cry
of Sodom were great, and their sin exceeding grievous, yet, says God, I will go
down, and see, whether they have done altogether according unto that cry; and
if not, I may know: God would have been glad to have found Error in their
Indictment; and when he could not, yet if Fifty, Forty five, Thirty, Twenty,
Ten, had been found righteous, he had pardoned all: Adeo malum, Gregory.
quasi cum difficultate credidit, cum audivit; so loath is God to believe ill of
man, when he does hear it.

This then is his patience: Sententia.
But why is his patience made a reason of their continuance in sins? Is it
because there is no sentence denounced against sin? These busy and subtle
Extractors of Reasons, that can distill, and draw Poison out of Manna, Occasions
of sin, out of Gods Patience, will not say so, That there is no sentence
denounced. The word that is here used, Pithgam, is not truly an Hebrew word:
And though in the Book of Job, and in some other parts of the Hebrew
Scriptures, we find sometimes some foreign and outlandish word, derived from
other Nations; yet, in Solomon's writing very rarely; neither does Solomon
himself, nor any other Author, of any part of the Hebrew Bible, use this word,
in any other place, then this one. The word is a Chaldee word; and has amongst
them, the same signification and largeness, as Dabar in Hebrew; and that
includes all A verbo ad legem; from a word suddenly and slightly spoken, to
words digested and consolidated into a Law. So that, though the Septuagint
translate this place, Quia non est facta contradictio; as though the reason of
this sinners obduration might have been, That God had not forbidden sin; and
though the Chaldee Paraphrast express this place thus, Quia non est factum
verbum ultionis; As though this sinner made himself believe, that God had never
spoken word of revenge against sinners: yet, this sinner makes not that his
reason, That there is no Law, no Judgment, no Sentence given: for, every Book
of the Bible, every Chapter, every Verse almost, is a particular Deuteronomy, a
particular renewing of the Law from Gods mouth, Morte Morieris, Thou shall die
the death; and of that Sentence from Moses mouth, Pereundo peribitis, You shall
surely perish; and of that Judgment from the Prophets mouth, Non est Pax
impiis, There is no peace to the wicked. And if this obdurate sinner could be
such a Goth and Vandal, as to destroy all Records, all written Laws; if he
could evacuate and exterminate the whole Bible, yet he would find this Law in
his own heart, this Sentence pronounced by his own Conscience, Stipendium
peccati Mors est, Treason is Death, and sin is Treason.

His reason is not, That there is no Law; he sees it: nor that he knows no Law;
his heart tells it him: nor that he has kept that Law; his Conscience gives
judgment against him: nor that he has a Pardon for breaking that Law; for he
never asked it: and, besides, those Pardons have in them that clause, Ita quod
se been gerat; Every Pardon binds a man to the good behavior; and by Relapses
into sin, we forfeit our Pardons for former sins. All their Reason, all their
Comfort, is only a Reprieve, and a Respite of Execution: August.
Distulit Securim, attulit Securitatem: God has taken the Ax from their necks,
and they have taken Security into their hearts; Sentence is not executed.

Executed.
Execution is the life of the Law; but then, it is the death of the Man: And
therefore whosoever makes quarrels against God, or arguments of Obduration, out
of this respite of Execution, would he be better pleased with God, if God came
to a speedy Execution? But let that be true, Where there is no Execution, there
is no reverence to the Law; there is truly, and in effect, no Law: The Law is
no more a Law without Execution, then a Carcass is a Man. And so much,
certainly, the word, which is here rendered sententia facta, does properly
signify; A Judgment perfected, executed. Genesis 25.25.
When Esau was born hairy, and so in the likeness of a grown and perfect man,
he was called by the word of this text, Gnesau, Esau, factus, perfectus. And
so, when God had perfected all his works, Genesis 1. ult.
that is, said then, that he saw, that all was good that he had made; where
there is the same word, That he had perfected. So that, if the judgments of
God had been still without execution; if all those Curses, Deuteronomy. 28.15.
Cursed shall thou be in the town, and cursed in the field; cursed in the fruit
of thy body, and in the fruit of thy land, and in the fruit of thy cattle;
cursed when thou come in, and when thou go out. The Lord shall send thee
cursings, and trouble, and shame, in all thou setst thy hand to. The Lord shall
make a pestilence cleave to thee, and a consumption, and a fever. The Lord
shall make the heavens above, as brass, and the earth under thee, as iron; with
all those Curses and Maledictions, which he flings, and slings, and stings the
soul of the sinner, so vehemently, so pathetically, in that catalogue of
Comminations, and Interminations, in that place; if all these were never
brought into execution, we should say, at best, of those Laws, and judgments
of God, as the Roman Lawyer did of that severe Law of the Twelve Tables, by
which Law, he that was indebted to many men, and not able to pay, was to be cut
in pieces, and divided proportionably amongst his Creditors, Eo consilio tanta
immanitas poenae denuatiata est, ne ad eam unquam perveniretur: Therefore so
grievous a punishment was inflicted, that that Law might never come to
execution: for, from the enacting of that Law, to the last times, in that
government, there was never any example, of one execution of that Law: so we
should say, That God laid those severe penalties upon sins, only to deter men
from doing them, and not with any purpose to inflict those penalties. In Laws,
to the making whereof, there concurs, besides the authority of the Prince, the
counsel and the consent of the Subject, there are sometimes Laws made, without
any purpose of ordinary execution; of which, the Civil Wisdom, and the
Religious Conscience, and the godly Moderation of the Prince, is made a
Depository, and a Feoffee in trust; and those Laws are only put into his
hands, as a Bridle, the better to rule and govern that great Charge committed
to him, in emergent necessities, though not in an ordinary execution of those
penal Laws. But who was a counselor to God, or who inserted any Provisoes or
Nonobstante's into his Laws? or who conditioned them, with any such
reservations, that they should have no ordinary execution? And therefore an
ordinary execution they have always had.

The reason why they are sometimes, and why they are not always executed, St.
Chrysostom has assigned; Si nullus puniretur, nemo existimaret Deum pre-esse
rebus humanis; si omnes, nemo expectaret futuram resurrectionem: If God should
punish no sins here, no man would believe a God; and if God should presently
punish all here, no man would be afraid of a future judgment. There the
obdurate man may find a reason of the manner of Gods proceeding, in the
execution of his judgments: And if he dare stand the arguing of this case, out
of Precedent, out of Record, out of the history of God, in his Word, he must
hear heavy judgments denounced, and executed, in cases, where he would hardly
discern any sin to have been committed, at least, no sin proportionable to that
punishment. Act. 5.
If he were in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, of having reserved a little of
their own, whatsoever should befall, he would never see Counsel, nor petition
the judge, never apprehend danger in this case; and yet, God declared by the
mouth of Peter, that Satan had filled their hearts, and that they had lied to
the holy Ghost; and a heavy judgment of present death, was executed upon them
both. If he had been of the Jury, for that man of God, who, 1 Reg. 13.
though God had forbidden him to eat and drink in that place, yet, when an old
Prophet came to him, and told him, that God had spoken to him by an Angel, that
he should go with him, and eat, did go, and eat with him, he would have
acquitted him of any offense herein; and yet Gods judgment overtook him, and he
was slain by a lion. But if he will hear the case of Saul, 1 Samuel 15.
who did but reserve some of the spoil, and that purchased with the blood of
the people, and that pretended to be reserved for Gods service, for sacrifice;
and yet Saul heard that judgment, Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and
transgression is idolatry: because thou have cast away the word of the Lord,
therefore he has cast thee away from being king. Jos. 7.
If he will hear Achan's case, who had taken an excommunicate thing to his own
use, and the heavy judgment thereupon, Inasmuch as thou have troubled us, the
Lord shall trouble thee this day: and so, all Israel stoned him. If he will
hear Helie's case, 1 Samuel 4.
against whom, only for indulgence to his sons, God prepared, and studied, and
meditated judgments, and threatened beforehand, when he said to Samuel, Behold,
I will do a thing in Israel, whereof whosoever shall hear, his two ears shall
tingle: and so, soon after, upon the heavy news, that Israel was discomfited,
that the Ark was taken, 2 Samuel 6.
that his two sons were slain, Heli fell from his seat, and broke his neck, and
died. If he remember Oziah's case, who for putting his hand to the Ark, when it
was ready to fall, felt the wrath of God, and died in the place. If he study
all this Title, of Gods heavy judgments upon sins, not great in the outward
appearance; and then come to them by the consideration of the nature of the
first sin of our first parents, Adam and Eve, and finds there, such a
lightness in that sin of eating forbidden fruit, that he durst do it, if it
were to do again; as though it were no more to disobey God, when he forbade the
eating of fruit, then to disobey his Physician in that point; and yet shall see
the heavy judgment of God upon all posterity for that sin, (which he esteems
so small a one) to extend so far, as that all his particular sins, even this
very sin of undervaluing Adam's sin, and his very sin of obduration, is but a
punishment of Adam's sin. If he shall climb by this ladder, to the highest step
of all, from Adam in paradise, to the Angels in heaven, and see, that in those
Angels, a sin only of Omission, of a not turning toward God, (for there was no
creature then to turn upon) in so pure Natures, and done but once, was so
heavily punished, as that the blood of Christ Jesus has not washed it away;
certainly the hardness, the flintiness of this obdurate sinner, must
necessarily be so much mollified, so much entendred, as to confess, that he can
make no good argument out of that, That the judgments of God are not executed.

Speedily.
But yet, howsoever that be, they are not executed speedily. How desperate a
state art thou in, if nothing will convert thee, but a speedy execution, after
which, there is no possibility, no room left for a Conversion? God is the Lord
of hosts, and he can proceed by Martial Law: he can hang thee upon the next
tree; he can choke thee with a crum, with a drop, at a voluptuous feast; he can
sink down the Stage and the Player; The bed of wantonness, and the wanton
actor, into the jaws of the earth, into the mouth of hell: he can surprise
thee, even in the act of sin; and do thou long for such a speedy execution,
for such an expedition? Thou can not lack Examples, that he has done so upon
others, and will no proof serve thee, but a speedy judgment upon thy self?
Scatter thy thoughts no farther then; contract them in thy self, and consider
Gods speedy execution upon thy soul, and upon thy body, and upon thy soul and
body together. Was not Gods judgment executed speedily enough upon thy soul,
when in the same instant that it was created, and conceived, and infused, it
was put to a necessity of contracting Original sin, and so submitted to the
penalty of Adam's disobedience, the first minute? Was not Gods judgment
speedily enough executed upon thy body, if before it had any temporal life, it
had a spiritual death; a sinful conception, before any inanimation? If
hereditary diseases from thy parents, Gouts and Epilepsies, were in thee,
before the diseases of thine own purchase, the effects of thy licentiousness
and thy riot; and that from the first minute that thou beganst to live, thou
beganst to die too? Are not the judgments of God speedily enough executed upon
thy soul and body together, every day, when as soon as thou commitst a sin,
thou art presently left to thine Impenitence, to thine Insensibleness, and
Obduration? Nay, the judgment is more speedy then so: for, that very sin it
self, was a punishment of thy former sins.

But though God may begin speedily, yet he intermits again, he slacks his pace;
and therefore the execution is not speedy. As it is said of Pharaoh often,
Because the plagues ceased, (though they had been laid upon him) Ingratum est
cor Pharaonis, Pharaoh's heart was hardened. But first we see, by that
punishment which is laid upon Heli, That with God it is all one, to begin, and
to consummate his judgment: (When I begin, I will make an end. 1 Samuel 3.12.
) And when Herod took a delight in that flattery and acclamation of the people,
It is the voice of God, and not of man; Acts 12.22.
the angel of the Lord smote him immediately, and the worms took possession of
him, though (if we take Josephus relation for truth) he died not in five days
after. Howsoever, if we consider the judgments of God in his purpose, and
decree, there they are eternal: And for the execution thereof, though the
wicked sinner dissemble his sense of his torments, and, as Tertullian says of a
persecutor, Herminianus, who being tormented at his death, in his violent
sickness, cried out, Nemo sciat, ne gaudeant Christiani; Let no man know of my
misery, lest the Christians rejoice thereat: so these sinners suppress these
judgments of God, from our knowledge, because they would not have that God,
that inflicts them, glorified therein, by us: Yet they know, their damnation
has never slept, nor let them sleep quietly: and, in Gods purpose, the
judgment has been eternal, and they have been damned as long as the devil;
and that is an execution speedy enough. But because this appears not so
evidently, but that they may disguise it to the world, and (with much ado) to
their own Consciences; Therefore their hearts are fully set in them, to do
evil. And so we pass to our third Part.

Part III.
This is that perverseness, which the Heathen Philosopher Epictetus, apprehends,
and reprehends; That whereas every thing is presented to us, Cum duabus sausis,
with two handles, we take it still, by the wrong handle. This is tortuositas
serpentis, The wryness, the knottiness, the entangling of the Serpent. This is
that which the Apostle takes such direct knowledge of, Romans 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of Gods bountifulness, and long-suffering, not
knowing that it leads thee to repentance? St. Chrysostom's comparison of such
a sinner to a Vulture, that delights only in dead carcases, that is, in
company dead in their sins, holds best, as himself notes, in this particular,
that the Vulture perhorrescit fragrantiam unguenti, He loathes, and is ill
affected with any sweet savor: for so does this sinner find death, in that
sovereign Balm of the patience of God, and he dies of Gods mercy: Et quid
infelicius illis, qui bono odore moriuntur? says S. Augustine: In what worse
state can any man be, then to take harm of a good air? But, as the same Father
adds, Numquid quia mori voluisti, malum fecisti odorem? This indisposition in
that particular man, does not make this air, an ill air; and yet this abuse of
the patience of God, comes to be an infectious poison, and such a poison, as
strikes the heart; and so general, as to strike the heart of the children of
men; and so strongly, as that their hearts should be fully set in them, to do
evil.

First then, what is this setting of the heart upon evil; and then, what is
this fullness, that leaves no room for a Cure? When a man receives figures and
images of sin, into his Fancy and Imagination, and leads them on to his
Understanding and Discourse, to his Will, to his Consent, to his Heart, by a
delightful dwelling upon the meditation of that sin; yet this is not a setting
of the heart upon doing evil. To be surprised by a Tentation, to be overthrown
by it, to be held down by it for a time, is not it. It is not when the devil
looks in at the window to the heart, by presenting occasions of tentations, to
the eye; nor when he comes in at the door, to our heart, at the ear, either in
lascivious discourses, or Satirical and Libellous defamations of other men: It
is not, when the devil is put to his Circuit, to seek whom he may devour, and
how he may corrupt the King by his Council, that is, The Soul by the Senses:
But it is, when by a habitual custom in sin, the sin arises merely and
immediately from my self: It is, when the heart has usurped upon the devil,
and upon the world too, and is able and apt to sin of it self, if there were no
devil, and if there were no outward objects of tentation: when our own heart is
become spontanea insania, and voluntarius demon, Such a wilful Madness,
Chrysostom.
and such a voluntary and natural Devil to it self, as that we should be
ambitious, though we were in an Hospital; and licentious, though we were in a
wilderness; and voluptuous, though in a famine: so that such a man's heart, is
as a land of such Giants, where the Children are born as great, as the Men of
other nations grow to be; for those sins, which in other men have their birth,
and their growth, after their birth, they begin at a Concupiscence, and proceed
to a Consent, and grow up to Actions, and swell up to Habits; In this man, sin
begins at a stature and proportion above all this; he begins at a delight in
the sin, and comes instantly to a defense of it, and to an obduration and
impenitibleness in it: This is the evil of the heart, by the mis-use of Gods
grace, to divest and lose all tenderness and remorse in sin.

Now for the Incurableness of this heart, it consists first in this, that there
is a fullness; It is fully set to do evil: and such a full heart has no room
for a Cure; as a full stomach has no room for Physic. The Mathematician could
have removed the whole world with his Engine, if there had been any place to
have set his Engine in. Any man might be cured of any sin, if his heart were
not full of it, and fully set upon it: which setting, is indeed, in a great
part, an unsetledness, when the heart is in a perpetual motion, and in a
miserable indifferency to all sins: it may be fully set upon sin, though it be
not vehemently affected to any one sin. The reason which is assigned, why the
heart of man, if it receive a wound, is incurable, is the palpitation, and the
continual motion of the heart: for, if the heart could lie still, so that fit
things might be applied to it, and work upon it, all wounds in all parts of the
heart, were not necessarily mortal: So, if our hearts were not distracted, in
so many forms, and so diverse ways of sin, it might the better be cured of any
one. St. Augustine had this apprehension, when he said, Audeo dicere utile esse
cadere in aliquod manifestum peccatum, ut sibi displiceant: It is well for him,
that is indifferent to all sins, if he fall into some such misery by some one
sin, as brings him to a sense of that, and of the rest. St. Augustine, when he
says this, says he speaks boldly in saying so, Audeo dicere: but we may be so
much more bold, as to say further, That that man had been damned, if he had not
sinned that sin: For the heart of the indifferent sinner bayts at all that ever
rises, at all forms and images of sin: when he sees a thief, he runs with him;
Psalm. 50.
and with the adulterer he has his portion: and as soon as it contracts any
spiritual disease, any sin, it is presently, not only in morbo acuto, but in
morbo complicato; in a sharp disease, and in a manifold disease, a disease
multiplied in it self. Therefore it is, as St. Gregory notes, that the Prophet
proposes it, as the hardest thing of all, for a sinner to return to his own
heart, and to find out that, after it is strayed, and scattered upon so
several sins. Redite prevaricatores ad cor, says the Prophet: Esa. 46.
and, says that Father, Long eis mittit, cum ad cor redire compellit: God
knows whither he sends them, when he sends them to their own heart: for, since
it is true which the same Father said, Vix sancti inveniunt cor suum, The
holiest man cannot at all times find his own heart, (his heart may be bent
upon Religion, and yet he cannot tell in which Religion; and upon Preaching,
and yet he cannot tell which Preacher; and upon Prayer, and yet he shall find
strayings and deviations in his Prayer) much more hardly is the various and
vagabond heart of such an indifferent sinner, to be found by any search. If he
enquire for his heart, at that Chamber where he remembers it was yesterday, in
lascivious and lustful purposes, he shall hear that it went from thence to some
riotous Feasting, from thence to some Blasphemous Gaming, after, to some
Malicious Consultation of entangling one, and supplanting another; and he shall
never trace it so close, as to drive it home, that is, to the consideration of
it self, and that God that made it; nay, scarce to make it consist in any one
particular sin. That which St. Bernard feared in Eugenius, when he came to be
Pope, and so to a distraction of many worldly businesses, may much more be
feared in a distraction of many sins, Cave ne te trahant, quo non vis; Take
heed lest these sins carry thee farther, then thou intendest: thou intendest
but Pleasure, or Profit; but the sin will carry thee farther: Quaeris quo? says
that Father; Do thou ask whither? Ad cor durum, To a senslesness, a
remorslesness, a hardness of heart: nec pergas quaerere, (says he) quid illud
sit; Never ask what that hardness of heart is: for, if thou know it not, thou
have it.

This then is the fullness, and so the Incurableness of the heart, by that
reason of perpetual motion; because it is in perpetual progress from sin to
sin, he never considers his state. But there is another fullness intended here,
That he is come to a full point, to a consideration of his sin, and to a
station and setledness in it, out of a foundation of Reason, as though it were,
not only an excusable, but a wise proceeding, Because Gods judgments are not
executed. But when man becomes to be thus fully set, God shall set him faster:
Job 14.17.
Iniquitas tua in sacculo signata; His transgression shall be sealed up in a
bag, and God shall sow up his iniquity: And, Quid cor hominis nisi sacculus
Dei? Gregor.
What is this bag of God, but the heart of that sinner? There, as a bag of a
wretched Misers money, which shall never be opened, never told till his death,
lies this bag of sin, this frozen heart of an impenitent sinner; and his sins
shall never be opened, never told to his own Conscience, till it be done to his
final condemnation. God shall suffer him to settle, where he has chosen to
settle himself, in an unsensibleness, an Inintelligibleness, (to use
Tertullian's word) of his own condition: And, Aug.
Quid miserior misero non miserante seipsum? Who can be more miserable then
that man, who does not commiserate his own misery? How far gone is he into a
pitiful estate, that neither desires to be pitied by others, nor pities
himself, nor discerns that his state needs pity? Invaluerat ira tua super me,
and nesciebam, says blessed St. Augustine: Thy hand lay heavy upon me, and I
found it not to be thy hand: because the Maledictions of God are honeyed and
candied over, with a little crust or sweetness of worldly ease, or reprieve, we
do not apprehend them in their true taste, and right nature. Obsurdueram
stridore catenarum mearum, says the same Father: The jingling and rattling of
our Chains and Fetters, makes us deaf: The weight of the judgment takes away
the sense of the judgment. This is the full setting of the heart to do evil,
when a man fills himself with the liberty of passing into any sin, in an
indifferency; and then finds no reason why he should leave that way, either
by the love, or by the fear of God. If he prosper by his sin, then he finds no
reason; if he do not prosper by it, yet he finds a wrong reason. If
unseasonable floods drown his Harvest, and frustrate all his labors, and his
hopes; he never finds, that his oppressing, and grinding of the Poor, was any
cause of those waters, but he looks only how the Wind sat, and how the
ground lay; and he concludes, that if Noah, and Job, Ezekiel. 14.14.
and Daniel had been there, their labor must have perished, and been drowned,
as well as his. If a vehement Fever take hold of him, he remembers where he
sweat, and when he took cold; where he walked too fast, where his Casement
stood open, and where he was too bold upon Fruit, or meat of hard digestion;
but he never remembers the sinful and naked Wantonnesses, the profuse and
wastful Dilapidations of his own body, that have made him thus obnoxious and
open to all dangerous Distempers. Thunder from heaven burns his Barns, and he
says, What luck was this? if it had fallen but ten foot short or over, my barns
had been safe: whereas his former blasphemings of the Name of God, drew down
that Thunder upon that house, as it was his; and that Lightning could no more
fall short or over, then the Angel which was sent to Sodom, could have burnt
another City, and have spared that; or then the Plagues of Moses and of Aaron
could have fallen upon Goshen, and have spared Egypt. His Gomers abound with
Manna, he overflows with all for necessities, and with all delicacies, in this
life; and yet he finds worms in his Manna, a putrefaction, and a mouldring
away, of this abundant state; but he sees not that that is, because his Manna
was gathered upon the Sabbath, that there were profanations of the Name and
Ordinances of God, mingled in his means of growing rich. To end all, This is
the true Use that we are to make of the long-suffering and patience of God,
That when his patience ends, ours may begin: That if he forbear others rather
then us, 21.7.
we do not expostulate, as in Job, Wherefore do the wicked live, and become
old, and grow mighty in power? but rather, if he chastise us rather then
others, Psalm. 44.18.
say with David, Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy ways, though thou have sore broken us, in the place of dragons, and
covered us with the shadow of death: And that if sentence be executed upon us,
we may make use of his judgment; and if not, we may continue, and enlarge his
mercies toward us.

AMEN.
A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, Sermon. 7.
November. 2. 1617. SERMON VII.
PSALM. 55.19. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God.


IN a Prison, where men withered in a close and perpetual imprisonment; In a
Galley, where men were chained to a laborious and perpetual slavery; In places,
where any change that could come, would put them in a better state, then they
were before, this might seem a fitter Text, then in a Court, where every man
having set his foot, or placed his hopes upon the present happy state, and
blessed Government, every man is rather to be presumed to love God, because
there are no changes, then to take occasion of murmuring at the constancy of
Gods goodness toward us. But because the first murmuring at their present
condition, the first Innovation that ever was, was in Heaven; The Angels kept
not their first Estate: Though as Princes are Gods, so their well-governed
Courts, are Copies, and representations of Heaven; yet the Copy cannot be
better then the Original: And therefore, as Heaven it self had, so all Courts
will ever have, some persons, that are under the Increpation of this Text,
That, Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not God: At least, if I
shall meet with no conscience, that finds in himself a guiltiness of this sin,
if I shall give him no occasion of repentance, yet I shall give him occasion of
praising, and magnifying that gracious God, which has preserved him from such
sins, as other men have fallen into, though he have not: For, I shall let him
see first, The dangerous slipperiness, the concurrence, Divisio.
the co-incidence of sins; that a habit and custom of sin, slips easily into
that dangerous degree of Obduration, that men come to sin upon Reason; they
find a Quia, a Cause, a Reason why they should sin: and then, in a second
place, he shall see, what perverse and frivolous reasons they assign for their
sins, when they are come to that; even that which should avert them, they make
the cause of them, Because they have no changes. And then, lastly, by this
perverse mistaking, they come to that infatuation, that dementation, as that
they loose the principles of all knowledge, and all wisdom: The fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom; and, Because they have no changes, they fear not God.

Part I.
First then, We enter into our first Part, The slipperiness of habitual sin,
with that note of S. Gregory, Peccatum cum voce, est culpa cum action;
peccatum cum clamore, est culpa cum liberate; Sinful thougths produced into
actions, are speaking sins; sinful actions continued into habits, are crying
sins. There is a sin before these; a speechless sin, a whispering sin, which no
body hears, but our own conscience; which is, when a sinful thought or purpose
is born in our hearts, first we rock it, by tossing, and tumbling it in our
fancies, and imaginations, and by entertaining it with delight and consent, and
with remembering, with how much pleasure we did the like sin before, and how
much we should have, if we could bring this to pass; And as we rock it, so we
swathe it, we cover it, with some pretenses, some excuses, some hopes of
coveraling it; and this is that, which we call Morosam delectationem, a delight
to stand in the air and prospect of a sin, and a loathness to let it go out of
our sight. Of this sin S. Gregory says nothing in this place, but only of
actual sins, which he calls speaking; and of habitual, which he calls crying
sins. And this is as far, as the Schools, or the Casuists do ordinarily trace
sin; To find out peccata Infantia, speechless sins, in the heart; peccata
vocatia, speaking sins, in our actions; And peccata clamantia, crying and
importunate sins, which will not suffer God to take his rest, no nor to fulfill
his own Oath, and protestation: He has said, As I live, I would not the death
of a sinner; and they extort a death from him. But besides these, Here is a
farther degree, beyond speaking sins, and crying sins; beyond actual sins and
habitual sins; here are peccata cum ratione, and cum disputatione; we will
reason, we will debate, we will dispute it out with God, and we will conclude
against all his Arguments, that there is a Quia, a Reason, why we should
proceed and go forward in our sin: Et pudet non esse impudentes, as S.
Augustine heightens this sinful disposition; Men grow ashamed of all holy
shamefacedness, and tenderness toward sin; they grow ashamed to be put off, or
frighted from their sinful pleasure, with the ordinary terror of Gods imaginary
judgments; ashamed to be no wiser then S. Paul would have them, to be moved,
or taken hold of, by the foolishness of preaching; or to be no stronger of
themselves then so, 1 Cor. 1.21.
that we should trust to another taking of our infirmities, Matthew. 8.
and bearing of our sicknesses; Or to be no richer, or no more provident then
so, To sell all, and give it away, Luc. 12.
and make a treasure in Heaven, and all this for fear of Thieves, and Rust, and
Canker, and Moths here. That which is not allowable in Courts of Justice, in
criminal Causes, To hear Evidence against the King, we will admit against God;
we will hear Evidence against God; we will hear what man's reason can say in
favor of the Delinquent, why he should be condemned; why God should punish the
soul eternally, for the momentany pleasures of the body: Nay, we suborn
witnesses against God, and we make Philosophy and Reason speak against
Religion, and against God; though indeed, Omne verum, omni vero consentiens;
whatsoever is true in Philosophy, is true in Divinity too; howsoever we distort
it, and wrest it to the contrary. We hear Witnesses, and we suborn Witnesses
against God; and we do more; we proceed by Recriminations, and a cross Bill,
with a Quia Deus, because God does as he does, we may do as we do; Because God
does not punish Sinners, we need not forbear sins; whilst we sin strongly, by
oppressing others, that are weaker, or craftily by circumventing others that
are simple. This is but Leoninum, and Vulpinum, that tincture of the Lion, and
of the Fox, that brutal nature that is in us. But when we come to sin, upon
reason, and upon discourse, upon Meditation, and upon plot, This is Humanum, to
become the Man of Sin, to surrender that, which is the Form, and Essence of
man, Reason, and understanding, to the service of sin. When we come to sin
wisely and learnedly, to sin logically, by a Quia, and an Ergo, that, Because
God does thus, we may do as we do, we shall come to sin through all the Arts,
and all our knowledge, To sin Grammatically, to tie sins together in
construction, in a Syntaxis, in a chain, and dependence, and coherence upon
one another: And to sin Historically, to sin over sins of other men again, to
sin by precedent, and to practice that which we had read: And we come to sin
Rhetorically, perswasively, powerfully; and as we have found examples for our
sins in History, so we become examples to others, by our sins, to lead and
encourage them, in theirs; when we come to employ upon sin, that which is the
essence of man, Reason, and discourse, we will also employ upon it, those which
are the properties of man only, which are, To speak, and to laugh; we will
come to speak, and talk, and to boast of our sins, and at last, to laugh and
jest at our sins; and as we have made sin a Recreation, so we will make a jest
of our condemnation. And this is the dangerous slipperiness of sin, to slide by
Thoughts and Actions, and Habits, to contemptuous obduration.

Part II.
Now amongst the manifold perversnesses and incongruities of this artificial
sinning, of sinning upon Reason, upon a quia, and an ergo, of arguing a cause
for our sin; this is one, That we never assign the right cause: we impute our
sin to our Youth, to our Constitution, to our Complexion; and so we make our
sin our Nature: we impute it to our Station, to our Calling, to our Course of
life; and so we make our sin our Occupation: we impute it to Necessity, to
Perplexity, that we must necessarily do that, or a worse sin; and so we make
our sin our Direction. We see the whole world is Ecclesia malignantium, Psalm.
26.5.
a Synagogue, a Church of wicked men; and we think it a Schismatical thing, to
separate our selves from that Church, and we are loath to be excommunicated in
that Church; and so we apply our selves to that, we do as they do, with the
wicked we are wicked; and so we make our sin our Civility. And though it be
some degree of injustice, to impute all our particular sins, to the devil
himself, after a habit of sin has made us spontaneos daemones, Chrysostom.
devils to our selves; yet we do come too near an imputing our sins to God
himself, when we place such an impossibility in his Commandments, as makes us
lazy, that because we cannot do all, therefore we will do nothing; or such a
manifestation and infallibility in his Decree, as makes us either secure, or
desperate; and say, The Decree has saved me, therefore I can take no harm; or,
The Decree has damned me, therefore I can do no good. No man can assign a
reason in the Sun, why his body casts a shadow: why all the place round about
him, is illumined by the Sun, the reason is in the Sun; but of his shadow,
there is no other reason, but the grosness of his own body: why there is any
beam of light, any spark of life, in my soul, he that is the Lord of light and
life, and would not have me die in darkness, is the only cause; but of the
shadow of death, wherein I sit, there is no cause, but mine own corruption. And
this is the cause, why I do sin; but why I should sin, there is none at all.

Yet in this Text the Sinner assigns a cause; and it is, Quia non mutationes,
Because they have no Changes. God has appointed that earth, which he has
given to the sons of men, to rest, and stand still; and that heaven which he
reserves for those sons of men, who are also the sons of God, he has appointed
to stand still too: All that is between heaven and earth, is in perpetual
motion, and vicissitude; but all that is appointed for man, man's possession
here, man's reversion hereafter, earth and heaven, is appointed for rest, and
stands still; and therefore God proceeds in his own way, and declares his love
most, where there are fewest Changes. This rest of heaven, he has expressed
often, by the name of a Kingdom, as in that Petition, Thy kingdom come: And
that rest which is to be derived upon us, here in earth, he expresses in the
same phrase too, when having presented to the children of Israel, an Inventary
and Catalogue of all his former blessings, he concludes all, includes all in
this one, Et prosperata es in regnum, I have advanced thee to be a kingdom:
which form, God has not only still preserved to us, but has also united
Kingdoms together; and to give us a stronger body, and safer from all Changes,
whereas he has made up other Kingdoms, of Towns and Cities, he has made us a
Kingdom of Kingdoms, and given us as many Kingdoms to our Kingdom, as he has
done Cities to some other. Gods gracious purpose then to man, being Rest, and a
contented Reposedness in the works of their several Callings; and his purpose
being declared upon us, in the establishing and preserving of such a Kingdom,
as has the best Body, (best united in it self, and knit together) and the best
Legs to stand upon, (Peace and Plenty) and the best Soul to inanimate and
direct it, (Truth of Religion) and the best Spirits to make all parts
answerable and useful to one another, (Wisdom and Vigilancie in the Prince,
Gratitude and Cheerfulness in the Subject:) And since God has gone so far,
once in our time already, in expressing his care of our Rest and Quiet, as to
give us a Change without Change, an alteration of Persons, and not of Things,
that we saw old things done away, in the Secession of one, and all things made
new in the Succession of another Sovereign, and all this newness done without
Innovation; so that, Psalm. 76.9.
as David says of the whole earth, we might say again of this Land, Terra
tremuit and quievit, The earth shak'd, and stood still at once; it was all one
act, to have been afraid, and to have been instantly secured again, since
nothing beyond that, nothing equal to that Change, can be imagined by us from
God; may it be ever his gracious pleasure, to continue to us, the enjoying of
our present Rest, without showing us any more Changes. As (to end this Branch)
it were a strange enormity, a strange perverseness in any man, to plant a Garden
in any place, therefore, because he foresaw an Earthquake in that place, that
would disorder and discompose his Garden again; or to build in any place
therefore, because the fire were likeliest to take hold of that street; that
is, to make any thing the cause of an action, which should naturally enforce
the contrary: so is it an irreligious distemper, to be the bolder in sin,
because we have no Changes, or to defer our conversion from sin, till Changes,
till Afflictions come. For, Satan knew the air, and complexion, and disposition
of the world, well enough: he argued not impertinently, nor frivolously, for
the general, though he were deceived in the particular, in Job, when he said to
God, 2.5.
Stretch out thy hand, and touch his bones, and his flesh, and see if he will
not blaspheme thee to thy face. Afflictions, and Changes in this life, do not
always direct us upon God: The displeasure of a Prince may make a harsh person
more supple, more appliable then before; his graces received may make him more
accessible, more equal, more obsequious, then before: and losses and
forfeitures sustained, or threatened, may make him more apt to give, to bleed
out, to redeem his dangers, then before: But these Changes do not always make
him an honester man, nor a better Christian then before. 1 Thessalonians. 4.11.
And therefore, says the Apostle, Study to be quiet; Labor to find a
testimony of Gods love to you, in your present estate, and never put your self,
either for temporal, or spiritual amendment, upon Changes.

To proceed then: This shutting up of themselves against the fear of God, is
not merely quia non mutationes, because there are no changes; but, quia non
illis, because They have no changes. It is a dangerous preterition, not to
bring a man's self into Consideration; but to consider no man but himself, to
make himself the measure of all, is as dangerous a narrowness. The
Epigrammatist describes the Atheist so, That he desires no better argument to
prove that there is no God, but that he sees himself, Dum negat ista beatum,
prosper well enough, though he do not believe this prosperity to proceed from
God. What miseries soever fall upon others, affect not him. He may have seen,
since he was born, the greatest Kingdom in Christendom likely to have been
broken in pieces, and cantoned into petty Seigniories, and so left no Kingdom:
he may have seen such a danger upon our next neighbors, as that, when the
powerfullest Enemy in Christendom hung over their heads, and lay upon their
backs, they bred a more dangerous enemy in their own bosoms, and bowels, by
tearing themselves in pieces, with Differences, in Points of subdivided
Religion, and impertinent Scruples, unjustly called Points of Religion; in
which, men leave Peace, and Unity, and Charity, the true ways of Salvation, and
will enquire nothing, but how soon, how early God damned them: They must know,
sub quibus Consulibus, in whose Reign, in whose Mayoralty, what hour of the
day, and what minute of that hour, Gods eternal Decree of Election or
Reprobation was made. Many, very many of these Changes he may have seen and
heard; but all these he hears, as though he heard them out of Livie, or out of
Berosus, or in Letters from China, or Japan; and not as though they concerned
his Time, or his Place, or his Observation. To contract this: We have all been
either in Wars, and seen men fall at our right hand, and at our left, by the
Bullet; or at Sea, and seen our Consort sunk by Tempest, or taken by Pirates;
or in the City, and seen the Pestilence devour our Parents above us, our
Children below us, our Friends round about us; or in the Court, and seen Gods
judgments overtake the most secure, and confident: we have all seen such
Changes as these everywhere; but quia non nobis, because the Bullet, the
Shipwreck, the Pyrate, the Pestilence, the Judgments have not reached us, in
our particular persons, they have not imprinted the fear of God in us.

And the word of the Text, carries it farther then so: Non habent.
it is not because There are no Changes, for they abound; nor because They have
had none, for none escapes; but it is, Qui a non habent, because they have no
present, nor imminent danger in their contemplation now; because no affliction
lies upon them now, therefore they are secure. It is not Quia non habuerunt;
every person, every State, every Church, has had Changes: Because the Roman
Church will needs be all the world, we may consider all the world in her, so
far; she has had such a Change, as has awakened other Princes to reassume,
and to restore to themselves, and their Crowns, their just Dignities; so she
has had a Change in Honor and Estimation. She has had such a Change, as has
contracted and brought her into a narrower chanel, and called in her
overflowings; so she has had a Change in Power and Jurisdiction. She has had
such a Change, as has lessened her Temporal treasure everywhere, and utterly
abolished her imaginary Spiritual treasure, in many places; she has had a
change in Means, and Profit, and Revenue: she has had such a change, as that
they who by Gods commandment are come out from her, have been equal, even in
number, to them who have adhered to her; such a change, as has made her
Doctrine appear, some to be the doctrines of men, and some the doctrines of
devils: such a change in Reputation, in Jurisdiction, and in Revenue, and in
Power, and in manifestation of her Disguises, she has had: But quia non habet,
because she decays not every day, the Reformation seems to her to be come to a
period, as high as it shall go: Because she has a mis-apprehension of some
faintness, some declinableness toward her again, even in some of our
Professors themselves, who (as she thinks) come as near to her, as they dare:
Because she has gained of late upon many of the weaker sex, women laden with
sin; and of weaker fortunes, men laden with debts; and of weaker consciences,
souls laden with scruples; therefore she imagines that she has seen the worst,
and is at an end of her change; though this be but indeed a running, an ebbing
back of the main River, but only a giddy and circular Eddy, in some shallow
places of the stream, (which stream, God be blessed, runs on still currantly,
and constantly, and purely, and intemerately, as before) yet because her
corrections are not multiplied, because her absolute Ruin is not accelerated,
she has some false conceptions of a general returning toward her, and she
fears up her self against all sense of Truth, and all tenderness of Peace; and
because she has rid out one storm, in Luther and his successors, therefore she
fears not the Lord for any other, Quia non habent, Because she has no changes,
now.

Habuerunt then, They have had changes; and Habebunt, They shall have more, and
greater: Impii non stabunt, says David, The wicked shall not stand: In how low
ground soever they stand, and in how great torment soever they stand, yet they
shall not stand there, but sink to worse; and at last, non stabunt in judicio,
They shall not stand in judgment, but fall there, from whence there is no
rising: Non stabunt: They shall not stand, though they think they shall; they
shall counterfeit the Seals of the Holy Ghost, and delude themselves with
imaginary certitudes of Salvation, and illusory apprehensions of Decrees of
Election: nay, non stabunt, They shall not be able to think that they shall
stand: that which the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall, belongs only to
the godly; only they can think, deliberately, and upon just examination of the
marks and evidences of the Elect, that they shall stand: God shall suffer the
wicked to sink down, not to a godly sense of their infirmity, and holy remorse
of the effects thereof; but yet lower then that, to a diffident jealousy, to a
desperate acknowledgement, that they cannot stand in the sight of God: they
shall have no true rest at last: they shall not stand; nay, they shall not have
that half, that false comfort by the way; they shall not be able to flatter
themselves by the way, with that imagination that they shall stand.

Now, both the ungodly, and godly too, must have Changes: in matter of Fortune,
changes are common to them both: and then, in all, of all conditions,
Mortalitas Mutabilitas, says St. Augustine: even this, That we must die, is a
continual change. The very same word, 14.14.
which is here, kalaph, is in Job also: All the days of my appointed time, till
my changing come. And because this word which we translate changing, is there
spoken in the person of a righteous man, Symma.
some Translators have rendered that place, Donec veniat sancta nativitas mea,
Till I be born again: the change, the death of such men, is a better birth: And
so the Chaldee Paraphrasts, the first Exposition of the Bible, have expressed
it, Quousque rursus fiam, Till I be made up again by death: He does not stay to
call the Resurrection a making up; but this death, this dissolution, this
change, is a new creation; this Divorce is a new Marriage; this very Parting of
the soul, is an Infusion of a soul, and a Transmigration thereof out of my
bosom, into the bosom of Abraham. Bernard.
But yet, though it is all this, yet it is a change; Maxima mutatio est
Mutabilitatis in Immutabilitatem, To be changed so, as that we can never be
changed more, is the greatest change of all. All must be changed so far, as to
die: yea, those who shall, in some sort, escape that death; those whom the last
day shall surprise upon earth, though they shall not die, yet they shall be
changed. Statutum est omnibus, semel mori, All men must die once; Heb. 9.27.
we live all under that Law. But statutum nemini hic mori: since the promise of
a Messiah, there is no Law, no Decree, by which any man must necessarily die
twice; a Temporal death, and a Spiritual death too. It is not the Man, but the
Sinner, that dies the second death: God sees sin in that man, or else that man
had never seen the second death. So we shall all have one change, besides those
which we have all had; good and bad must die: but the men in this text, shall
have two. But whatsoever changes are upon others in the world, whatsoever upon
themselves; whatsoever they have had, whatsoever they are sure to have; yet,
Quia non habent, non timent Deum; Because they have none now, they fear not
God. And so we are come to our third and last Part.

They fear not God: This is such a state, Part III. Non timent.
as if a man who had been a Schoolmaster all his life, and taught others to
read, or had been a Critic all his life, and ingeniosus in alienis, over-witty
in other men's Writings, had read an Author better, then that Author meant, and
should come to have use of his Reading to save his life at the Bar, when he had
his Book, for some petty Felony, and then should be stricken with the spirit of
stupidity, and not be able to read then. Such is the state of the wisest, of
the learnedest, of the mightiest in this world: If they fear not God, they have
forgot their first letters; they have forgot the basis and foundation of all
Power, the reason and the purpose of all Learning, the life and the soul of all
Counsel and Wisdom: for, The fear of God is the beginning of all. They are all
fallen into the danger of the Law; they have all sinned: they are offered their
Book, the merciful promises of God to repentant sinners, in his Word; and they
cannot read, they cannot apply them, to their comfort: There is Scripture, but
not translated, not transferred to them: there is Gospel, but not preached to
them; there are Epistles, but not superscribed to them.

It is an hereditary Sentence, Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 1.7. Ecclus 1.16.
and has passed from David in his Psalms, to Solomon in his Proverbs, and then
to him that gleaned after them both, the Author of Ecclesiasticus, The fear of
the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. All three profess all that, and more then
that. It is Blessedness it self, says the father, David; Blessedness it self,
says the son, Solomon; and Plenitudo Sapientiae, and Omnis Sapientia, says the
other, The fullness of wisdom, and the only wisdom. Job had said it before them
all, Ecce, timor Domini, 28.
ipsa est sapientia; The fear of the Lord, is wisdom it self: And the Prophet
Esai said it after, of Ezechias, 33.6.
There shall be stability of thy times, strength, salvation, wisdom, and
knowledge; for, the fear of the Lord shall be thy treasure. It is our supply,
if we should fear want, and it is our reason that we cannot fear want; for, he
that fears God, fears nothing else. As therefore the Holy Ghost has placed the
beginning of wisdom in this fear; so has he the consummation and perfection of
this wisdom, even in the perfect pattern of all wisdom, Esai. 11.3.
in the person of Christ himself, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon thee,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and of might, the
spirit of knowledge and of the fear of God. For, without this fear, there is no
courage, no confidence, no assurance: And therefore Christ begun his Passion
with a fear, in his Agony, Tristis anima, My soul his heavy; but that fear
delivered him over to a present conformity to the will of God, in his
Veruntamen, Yet not my will, but thine be done: And he ended his Passion with a
fear, Eli, Eli, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and that fear
delivered him over to a present assurance, In manus tuas Domine, confidently to
commend his spirit into his hands, whom he seemed to be afraid of.

Since then the Holy Ghost, whose name is Love; since God, who is Love it self,
disposes us to this fear, we may see in that, That neither God himself, nor
those of whom God said, Ye are gods, that is, all those who have Authority over
others, can be loved so as they should, except they be feared, so as they
should be too: If you take away due Fear, you take away true Love. Even that
fear of God, which we use to call servile fear, which is but an apprehension of
punishment, and is not the noblest, the perfectest kind of fear, yet it is a
fear, which our Savior counsels us to entertain; Matthew. 10.
Fear him that can cast soul and body into hell; even that fear, is some
beginning of wisdom. That fear Job had use of, when he said, 31.
Quid faciam cum surrexerit ad judicandum Deus? Here I may lay hold upon means
of Restitution; but when the Lord shall raise himself to judgment, how shall I
stand? So also had David use of this fear, Psalm. 119.
A judiciis tuis timui: However I was ever confident in thy mercy, yet I was in
fear of thy judgment. It is that fear which St. Basil directs us to, upon
those words, Psalm. 33.
Timorem Domini docebo vos, I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Cogita
profundum barathrum, To learn to fear God, he sends us to the meditation of the
torments of hell. And so it is that fear, which wrought that effect in St.
Hierome: Ego ob Gehennae metum carcere isto me damnavi; For fear of that
execution, I have shut my self up in this prison; for fear of perishing in the
next world, I banish my self from this: There is a beginning, there is a great
degree of wisdom, even in this fear.

Now, as the fear of Gods punishments disposes us to love him, so that fear
which the Magistrate imprints, by the execution of his Laws, establishes that
love which preserves him, from all disestimation and irreverence: for, whom the
Enemy does not fear, the Subject does not love. As no Peace is safe enough,
where there is no thought of War; so the love of man toward God, and those who
represent him, is not permanently settled, if there be not a reverential fear, a
due consideration of greatness, a distance, a distinction, a respect of Rank,
and Order, and Majesty. If there be not a little fear, by Justice at home, and
by power and strength abroad, mingled in it, it is not that love, which God
requires, to be first directed upon himself; and then reflected upon his
Stewards and Vicegerents: for, as every Society is not Friendship, so every
Familiarity is not Love.

But, to conclude: As he will be feared, so he will be feared, no otherwise,
then as he is God: Non timuerunt Deum, is the increpation of the Text, They
feared not God. It is timor Dei, and not timor Jehovae: God is not here
expressed by the name of Jehovah, that unexpressible and unutterable, that
incomprehensible and unimaginable name of Jehovah. God calls not upon us, to be
considered as God in himself, but as God toward us; not as he is in heaven,
but as he works upon earth: And here, not in the School, but in the Pulpit; not
in Disputation, but in Application. It is not timor Jehovae, nor it is not
timor Adonai: God does not call himself in this place, The Lord: for, to be
Lord, to be proprietary of all, this is potestas tam utendi quam abutendi, It
gives the Lord of that thing power, to do, absolutely, what he will with that
which is his: And so, God, as absolute Lord, may damn without respect of sin,
if he will; and save without respect of faith, if he will. But God is pleased
to proceed with us, according to that Contract which he has made with us, and
that Law which he has given to us, in those two Tables, Tantummodo creed,
Only believe, and thy faith shall save thee; and, Fac hoc and vives, Live
well, and thy good works shall make sure thy salvation. Lastly, God does not
call himself here Dominum exercituum, The Lord of hosts; God would not only be
considered, and served by us, when he afflicts us with any of his swords,
Famine, War, Pestilence, Malice, or the like; but the fear required here, is to
fear him as God, and as God presented in this name, Elohim; which, though it be
a name primarily rooted in power and strength, (for El is Deus fortis, The
powerful God; and as there is no love without fear, so there is no fear without
power) yet properly it signifies his Judgment, and Order, and Providence, and
Dispensation, and Government of his creatures. It is that name, which goes
through all Gods whole work of the Creation, and disposition of all creatures,
in the first of Genesis: in all that, he is called by no other name then this,
the name God; not by Jehovah, to present an infinite Majesty; nor by Adonai,
to present an absolute power; nor by Tzebaoth, to present a Force, or Conquest:
but only in the name of God, his name of Government. All ends in this; To fear
God, is to adhere to him, in his way, as he has dispensed and notified himself
to us; that is, as God is manifested in Christ, in the Scriptures, and applied
to us out of those Scriptures, by the Church: not to rest in Nature without
God, nor in God without Christ, nor in Christ without the Scriptures, nor in
our private interpretation of Scripture, without the Church. Almighty God fill
us with these fears, these reverences; that we may reverence him, who shall at
last bring us, where there shall be no more changes; and has already placed us
in such a Government, as being to us a Type and Representation of the Kingdom
of heaven, we humbly beg, may evermore continue with us, without changes, in
Government, or in Religion.

AMEN.
A SERMON Preached to the Household at WHITE HALL, Sermon. 8.
April 30. 1626. SERMON VIII.
MATTHEW. 9.13. I am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.


SOme things the several Evangelists record severally, one, and no more. S.
Matthew, and none but S. Matthew, 1.14.
records Joseph's jealousy and suspicion, that his wife Mary had been in a
fault, before her marriage; And then his temper withal, not frequent in that
distemper of jealousy, not to exhibit her to open infamy for that fault; And
yet his holy discretion too, Not to live with a woman faulty that way, but to
take some other occasion, and to put her away privily: In which, we have three
elements of a wise husband; first, not to be utterly without all jealousy and
providence, and so expose his wife to all trials, and tentations, And yet not
to be too apprehensive and credulous, and so expose her to dishonor and
infamy; but yet not to be so indulgent to her faults, when they were true
faults, as by his connivence, and living with her, to make her faults, his: And
all this we have out of that which S. Matthew records, and none but he. S.
Mark, and none but S. Mark records, that story, 7.31.
of Christ's recovering a dumb man, and almost deaf, of both infirmities: In
which, when we see, that our Savior Christ, though he could have recovered
that man with a word, with a touch, with a thought, yet was pleased to enlarge
himself in all those ceremonial circumstances, of imposition of hands, of
piercing his ears with his fingers, of wetting his tongue with spittle, and
some others, we might thereby be instructed, not to under-value such ceremonies
as have been instituted in the Church, for the awakening of men's consideration,
and the exalting of their devotion; though those ceremonies, primarily,
naturally, originally, fundamentally, and merely in themselves, be not
absolutely and essentially necessary: And this we have from that which is
recorded by S. Mark, 2.42.
and none but him. S. Luke, and none but S. Luke, records the history of Mary
and Joseph's losing of Christ: in which we see, how good and holy persons may
lose Christ; and how long? They had lost him, and were a whole day without
missing him: A man may be without Christ, and his Spirit, and lie long in an
ignorance and senslesness of that loss: And then, where did they lose him? Even
in Jerusalem, in the holy City: even in this holy place, and now in this holy
exercise, you lose Christ, if either any other respect then his glory, brought
you hither; or your minds stray out of these walls, now you are here. But when
they sought him, and sought him sorrowing, and sought him in the Temple, then
they found him: If in a holy sadness and penitence, you seek him here, in his
House, in his Ordinance, here he is always at home, here you may always find
him. And this we have out of that which S. Luke reports, and none but he. S.
John, 2.11.
and none but S. John, records the story of Christ's miraculous changing of
water into wine, at the marriage in Cana: In which, we see, both that Christ
honored the state of Marriage, with his personal presence, and also that he
afforded his servants so plentiful a use of his creatures, as that he was
pleased to come to a miraculous supply of wine, rather then they should want
it. Some things are severally recorded by the several Evangelists, as all
these; and then some things are recorded by all four; as John Baptist's
humility, and low valuation of himself, in respect of Christ; which he
expresses in that phrase, That he was not worthy to carry his shoes. The Holy
Ghost had a care, that this should be repeated to us by all four, That the best
endeavors of Gods best servants, are unprofitable, unavailable in themselves,
otherwise then as Gods gracious acceptance inanimates them, and as he puts his
hand to that plough which they drive or draw. Now our Text has neither this
singularity, nor this universality; it is neither in one only, nor in all the
Evangelists: but it has (as they speak in the Law) an interpretative
universality, a presumptive universality: for that which has a plurality of
voices, is said to have all; and this Text has so; for three of the four
Evangelists have recorded this Text: only S. John, who does especially extend
himself about the divine nature of Christ, pretermits it; but all the rest, who
insist more upon his assuming our nature, and working our salvation in that,
the Holy Ghost has recorded, and repeated this protestation of our Savior's,
I came to call not the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

Which words, being spoken by Christ, Divisio.
upon occasion of the Pharisees murmuring at his admitting of Publicans and
sinners to the Table with him, at that feast which S. Matthew made him, at his
house, soon after his calling to the Apostleship, direct our consideration upon
the whole story, and do, not afford but require, not admit but invite this
Distribution; That, first, we consider the occasion of the words, and then the
words themselves: for of these twins is this Text pregnant, and quick, and
easily delivered. In the first, we shall see the pertinencie of Christ's answer;
and in the second, the doctrine thereof: In the first, how fit it was for them;
in the other, how necessary for us: First, the Historical part, which was
occasional; and then the Catechistical part, which is doctrinal. And in the
first of these, the Historical and Occasional part, we shall see, first, That
Christ by his personal presence justified Feasting, somewhat more then was
merely necessary, for society, and cheerful conversation: He justified
feasting, and feasting in an Apostles house: though a Churchman, and an
Exemplar-man, he was not deprived of a plentiful use of Gods creatures, nor of
the cheerfulness of conversation. And then he justified feasting in the company
of Publicans and sinners; intimating therein, that we must not be in things of
ordinary conversation, overcurious, over-inquisitive of other men's manners:
for whatsoever their manners be, a good man need not take harm by them, and he
may do good amongst them. And then lastly, we shall see the calumny that the
Pharisees cast upon Christ for this, and the iniquity of that calumny, both in
the manner, and in the matter thereof. And in these Branches we shall determine
that first, The Historical, the Occasional part: And in the second, The
Catechistical and Doctrinal, (I came to call not the righteous, but sinners to
repentance) we shall pass by these steps: first, we shall see the Actions;
venit, he came; that is, first, venit actu: whereas he came by promise, even in
Paradise; and by frequent ratification, in all the Prophets; now he is really,
actually come; venit, he is come, we look for no other after him; we join no
other, Angels nor Saints, with him: venit, he is actually come; and then, venit
sponte, he is come freely, and of his good will; we assign, we imagine no
cause in us, that should invite him to come, but humbly acknowledge all to have
proceeded from his own goodness: and that is the Action, He came. And then the
Errand, and purpose for which he came, is vocare, he came to call: It is not,
Occurrere, That he came to meet them, who were upon the way before; for no man
had either disposition in himself, or faculty in himself, neither will nor
power to rise and meet him, no nor so much as to wish that Christ would call
him, till he did call him: He came not occurrere, to meet us; but yet he came
not cogere, to compel us, to force us, but only vocare, to call us, by his
Word, and Sacraments, and Ordinances, and lead us so; and that is his errand,
and purpose in coming. And from that, we shall come to the persons upon whom
his coming works: where we have first a Negative, a fearful thing in Christ's
lips; and then an Affirmative, a blessed seal in his mouth: first, an
Exclusive, a fearful banishment out of his Ark; and then an Inclusive, a
blessed naturalization in his Kingdom: Non justos, I came to call, not the
righteous, but sinners. And then lastly, we have, not as before, his general
intention and purpose, To call; but the particular effect and operation of this
calling upon the godly, it brings them to repentance. Christ does not call us
to a satisfaction of Gods justice, by our selves; that is impossible to us: it
is not ad satisfactionem; but then it is not adgloriam, he does not call us to
an immediate possession of glory, without doing any thing before; but it is ad
Resipiscentiam; I came to call, not the righteous, but sinners, to Repentance.
And so have you the whole frame marked out, which we shall set up; and the
whole compass designed, which we shall walk in: In which, though the pieces may
seem many, yet they do so naturally flow out of one another, that they may
easily enter into your understanding; and so naturally depend upon one another,
that they may easily lay hold upon your memory.

Part I. Ambrose.
First then, our first Branch in the first Part, is, That Christ jufied
Feasting, festival and cheerful conversation. For, as S. Ambrose says, Frustra
fecisset; God, who made the world primarily for his own glory, had made Light
in vain, if he had made no creatures to see, and to be seen by that light,
wherein he might receive glory: so, frustra fecisset, God, who intended
secondarily man's good in the Creation, had made creatures to no purpose, if he
had not allowed Man a use, and an enjoying of those creatures. Our
Mythologists, who think they have conveyed a great deal of Moral doctrine in
their Poetical Fables, (and so, indeed they have) had mistaken the matter much,
when they make it one of the torments of hell, to stand in a fresh River, and
not be permitted to drink; and amongst pleasant fruits, and not to be suffered
to eat; if God required such a forbearing, such an abstemiousness in Man, as
that being set to rule and govern the creatures, he might not use and enjoy
them: Privileges are lost, by abusing; but so they are, by not using too. Of
those three Opinions, which have all passed through good Authors, Whether,
before the Flood had impaired and corrupted the herbs and fruits of the earth,
men did eat flesh or no; of which, the first is absolutely Negative, both in
matter of law, and in matter of fact, No man might, no man did; and the second
is directly contrary to this, Affirmative in both, All men might, all men did;
and the third goes a Middle way, It was always lawful, and all men might, but
sober and temperate men did forbear, and not do it: of these three, though the
later have prevailed with those Authors, and be the common opinion; yet the
later part of that later opinion, would very hardly fall into proof, That all
their sober and temperate men did forbear this eating of flesh, or any lawful
use of Gods creatures. God himself took his portion in this world so, in meat
and drink, in his manifold sacrifices; and God himself gave himself in this
world so, in bread and wine, in the blessed Sacrament of his body and his
blood: And the very joys of heaven after the Resurrection, are conveyed to us
also, in the Marriage-supper of the Lamb. That mensa laqueus, which is in the
Psalm, is a curse: 69.22.
Let their table be made a snare, let their plenty and prosperity be an
occasion of sin to them, that is a malediction: but for that mensa
propositionum, The table of Shewbread, Number. 4.7.
where those blessings which God had given to man, were brought again, and
presented in his sight, upon that table; the loaves were great in quantity, and
many in number, and often renewed: God gives plentifully, richly, and will be
served so himself. In all those festivals, amongst the Jews, which were of Gods
immediate institution, as the Passover, and Pentecost, and the Trumpets, and
Tabernacles, and the rest, you shall often meet in the Scriptures, these two
phrases, Humiliabitis animas; and then, Laetaberis coram Domino: first, upon
that day, you shall humble your souls, (that you have, Levit. 16.29. and very
often) and then, upon that day, You shall rejoice before the Lord; (and that
you have, Deuteronomy. 16.11. and very often besides.) Now some Interpreters have
applied these two phrases to the two days; That upon the Eve we should humble
our souls in Fasting, and upon the Day rejoice before the Lord in a festival
cheerfulness: but both belong to the Day it self; that first we should humble
our souls, as we do now, in these holy Convocations; and then return, and
rejoice before the Lord, in a cheerful use of his creatures, our selves, and
then send out a portion to them that want, as it is expressly enjoined in that
feast, Nehem. 8.10. and in that, Esth. 9.22. where their feasting is as
literally commanded, as their giving to the poor. And besides those Stationary
and Anniversary Feastings, which were of Gods immediate institution, And that
Feast which was of the Churches institution after, in the time of the
Macchabees, which was the Encoenia, The Dedication of the Temple; the Jews at
this day, in their Dispersion, observe a yearly Feast, which they call Festum
Letitiae, The feast of Rejoicing, in a festival thankfulness to God, that he
has brought the year about, and afforded them the use of the Law, another
year. When Christ came to Jairus house, and commanded away the Music, and all
the Funeral-solemnities, it was not because he disallowed those solemnities,
but because he knew there was no Funeral to be solemnized in that place, to
which he came with an infallible purpose to raise that maid which was dead.
Civil recreations, offices of society and mutual entertainment, and cheerful
conversation; and such a use of Gods creatures, as may testify him to be a
God, not of the valleys only, but of the mountains too, not a God of necessity
only, but of plenty too; Christ justified by his personal presence at a Feast;
which was our first: and then, at a Feast in an Apostles house; which is our
second circumstance.

In Domo Apost.
The Apostle then had a house, and means to keep a house, and to make occasional
Feasts in his house, though he had bound himself to serve Christ in so near a
place as an Apostle. The profession of Christ's service, in the Ministry, does
not take from any man, the use of Gods creatures, nor cheerfulness of
conversation. As some of the other Apostles are said to have followed Christ,
relictis retibus, They left their nets, and followed him; and yet upon
occasion, they did at times return to their nets and fishing after that; for
Christ found them at their nets, after his resurrection: so S. Matthew followed
Christ, as S. Luke expresses it; Relictis omnibus, 5.28.
He left all, and followed Christ; but not so absolutely all, Basil.
as S. Basil seems to take it, Adeo ut non solum lucra, sed and ipsa pericula
contempserit, that he did not only neglect the gain of his place, but the
danger of displeasure by such a leaving of his Place: for S. Matthew was a
Publicane, and so a public Officer, and an Accountant to the State: But though
he did so far leave all, as that nothing retarded him from an immediate
following of Christ; yet, no doubt but he returned after, to the settling of his
Office, and the rectifying of his Accounts. When God sees it necessary or
behoveful for a man to leave all his worldly state, that he may follow him, God
tells him so; he gives him such a measure of light by his Spirit, as lets him
see, it is Gods will; and then, to that man, that is a full commandment, and
binds him to do it, and not only an Evangelical counsel, as they call it,
which leaves him at liberty, to do it, or leave it undone: Christ saw how much
was necessary to that young man in the Gospel, and therefore to him he said,
Vade and vende, Go and sell all that thou have, and then follow me: And this
was a commandment to that man, though it be not a general commandment to all;
upon Matthew Christ laid no such commandment, but only said to him, Sequere
me, Follow me; and he did so; but yet not so divest himself of his worldly
estate, as that he had not a house, and means to keep a house, and that
plentifully, after this. When Eliah used that holy fascination upon Elisha, 1
Reg. 19.19.
(we may not, I think, call it a fascination; fascination, I think, has never
a good sense) but when Eliah used that holy Charm and Incantation upon him, to
spread his Mantle over him, and to draw him with that, as with a net, after
him; yet after Elisha had thus received a character of Orders, after this
imposition of hands in the spreading of the Mantle, after he had this new
filiation, by which he was the son of the Prophet, yet Elisha went home, and
feasted his friends after this. So Matthew begun his Apostleship with a feast;
and though he, in modesty forbear saying so, S. Luke, 5.29.
who reports the story, says that it was a great feast. He begun with a great,
but ended with a greater: for, (if we have S. Matthews history rightly
delivered to us) when he was at the greatest feast which this world can
present, when he was receiving and administering the blessed Sacrament, in that
action, was he himself served up as a dish to the table of the Lamb, and added
to the number of the Martyrs then; and died for that Savior of his, whose
death for him, he did then celebrate. This then was festum Ablactationis;
Abraham made a great feast, Genesis 21.8.
that day that Isaac was weaned: Here was Matthew weaned ab uteribus mundi,
from the breasts of this world; and he made a feast, a feast that was a Type of
a Tyye, a prevision of a vision, Act. 10.
of that vision which S. Peter had after, of a sheet, with all kind of meats
clean and unclean in it: for at this Table was the clean and unspotted Lamb,
Christ Jesus himself; and at the same Table, those spotted and unclean Goats,
the Publicans and sinners; which is our third, and next circumstance, He
justified feasting, feasting in an Apostles house, feasting with Publicans and
sinners.

Is there then any conversation with notorious sinners justifiable, excusable?
Cum publicanis.
We see when S. Paul came to be of that High Commission, to judge of notorious
sinners, how he proceeded: he delivered Alexander and Hymenaeus to Satan; and
there, surely, 1 Timothy 1.20.
he did not mean that any man should keep them company. What was their fault?
It was but one Heretical point; a great one indeed; for they denied the
Resurrection; and for this, the Apostle (as it is also said there) sends them
to Satan, that they might learn not to blaspheme: And may there not be thus
much intimated in that, That a man may learn more blasphemy with some men, then
with Satan himself? That may be true: but the sending and delivering to Satan,
is the excluding of that man from the Kingdom, that is, from the visible Church
of Christ, by a just Excommunication: for, all without the Church, is Satan's
jurisdiction. Of which fearful state, Nyssen.
Gregory Nyssene speaks pathetically; Si haberet oculos anima, If thy soul had
eyes, to see souls, Ostenderem tibi, tibi segregato, I would show thee, thee
who have wilfully incurred, and do rebelliously continue under an
Excommunication rightly grounded, duly proceeded in, and justly denounced; I
would show thee the picture of a man burning in Hell, for that is thy picture,
says that Father, to that man; Non Episcopalis arrogantiae existimes, says he,
Think it not a passionate act of an insolent Bishop; Caepit in Lege,
confirmatur in Gratia, God began it in the Law, and confirmed it in the Gospel;
and where it is justly grounded, and duly proceeded in, it is a fearful thing
to be delivered over to Satan by excommunication; and S. Paul is so far from
conversing with an Heretic in one point, as that he proceeds so far with him,
as to deliver him to Satan.

Nay, for a fault much less then this, not opposed against God, as Heresy, but
against Natural Honesty, the Apostle proceeds as far, 1 Cor. 5.5.
in Incest; Gather you, says he, with my spirit, and the power of the Lord
Jesus, to deliver that incestuous man to Satan. Nay, in less faults then that,
v. 11.
he forbids Conversation; If a fornicator, if a drunkard, if a covetous person,
with him eat not. Nay; for that which is less then these, 2 These. 3.6, 14.
he is as severe; We command ye, Brethren, in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw your selves from every brother that walks
disorderly. Where, Calvin thinks, (and, I think, aright, and many others must
think so too; for a Jesuit thinks so, as well as Calvin) that the Apostle by
the word disorderly, Cornel. Lapid.
does not mean persons that live in any course of notorious sin; but by
disorderly, he means Ignavos, Inutiles, idle and unprofitable persons; persons
of no use to the Church, or to the State: that whereas this is Ordo Divinus,
the order that God has established in this world, that every man should
embrace a Calling, and walk therein; they who do not so, pervert Gods order:
and they are S. Paul's disorderly persons.

This then being so, that the Holy Ghost by S. Paul, separates not only from
all spiritual Communion, but from all civil Conversation, all notorious
sinners, and disorderly persons, how descends Christ to this facility, and
easiness of conversation with Publicans and Sinners? For, (to speak a word by
the way, of the Office of a Publican) though Customs, and Tributes, and
Impositions were due to the Kings of Jewry, due in natural right, and due in
legal right, 1.17.
fixed and established by that Law in Samuel; and so the Farmers of those
Customs, and Collectors of those Tributes, in that respect not to be blamed,
or ill thought of; and though in the Roman State, (under whose Government, at
this time the Jews were) the Office of a Publican were an honorable Office,
Cicero.
(for so that great Statesman and Orator tells us, Flos Equitum Romanorum,
Ornamentum Civitatis, Firmamentum Reipub. Men of the best Families and
Extraction in the State, Men of the best Credit and Reputation in the State,
Men of the best Revenues and Possession in the State, were Publicans; yet when
the Romans governed Jewry as a Province, and that these honorable Roman
Publicans forbore to execute that Office in those remote parts, and making
under-Farmers there, for the better advancing of that service, employed the
Jews themselves, who best understood the ways and the persons: these Jews
became more cruel and heavy to their Brethren, in these Exactions, then any
strangers; and so, and justly, the most odious persons amongst them: and then
why would Christ afford this conversation to these, and such as these, to
Publicans and sinners? Christ was in himself a Dispensation upon any Law,
because he was the Lawmakers. But here he proceeded not in that capacity; he
took no benefit of any Dispensation; he fulfilled the intention and purpose of
the Law; for the Laws therefore forbad conversation with sinners, lest a man
should take infection by such conversation: Exodus 34.
so the Jews were forbidden to eat with the Gentiles; but it was, lest in
eating with the Gentiles, they might eat of things sacrificed to Idols: so they
were forbidden conversation with leprous persons, Number. 5.
lest by such conversation the disease should be propagated; but where the
danger of infection ceased, all conversation might be open; and Christ was
always far enough from taking any infection, by any conversation with any
sinner. He might apply himself to them, because he could take no harm by them;
but he did it especially, that he might do good upon them. Some forbear the
company of sinners, out of a singularity, and pride in their own purity, and
say, with those in Esaias, Stand by thy self, come not near me, 65.5.
for I am holyer then thou. But, Bonus non est, qui Malos tolerare non potest,
says S. August. upon those words, Lilium inter spinas, Cant. 2.2.
That Christ was a Lilie, though he grew amongst Thorns. A Lilie is not the
less a Lilie, nor the worse, nor the darker a Lilie, because it grows amongst
Thorns. That man is not so good as he should be, that cannot maintain his own
integrity, and continue good; or that cannot maintain his charity, though
others continue bad. It was S. Paul's way, I am made all things to all men,
that I might save some. 1 Cor. 9.22.
And in that place, which we mentioned before, 1 Cor. 5.11.
where the Apostle names the persons, whom we are to forbear, amongst them, he
names Idolators; and, as he does the rest, he calls even those Idolators,
Brethren; If any that is called a Brother, be an Idolator, etc. In cases where
we are safe from danger of infection, (and it lies much in our selves, to save
our selves from infection) even some kind of Idolators, are left by S. Paul
under the name of Brethren; and some brotherly, and neighbourly, and pious
Offices, belong to them, for all that. These faults must arm me to avoid all
danger from them, but not extinguish all charity toward them. And therefore it
was an unjust calumny in the Pharisees, to impute this for a fault to Christ,
that he applied himself to these men; which is the next and last Circumstance
in this first part, The Calumny of these Pharisees.

Now in the manner of this Calumny, Calumnia.
there was a great deal of iniquity, and a great deal in the matter: For, for
the manner; That which they say of Christ, they say not to Christ himself, but
they whisper it to his servants, to his Disciples. A Legal and Juridical
Accusation, is justifiable, maintainable, because it is the proper way for
remedy: a private reprehension done with discretion, and moderation, should be
acceptable too; but a privy whispering is always Pharisaical. The Devil,
himself, though he be a Lion, yet he is a roaring Lion; a man may hear him: but
for a privy Whisperer, we shall only hear of him. And in their plot there was
more mischief; for, when Christ's Disciples plucked ears of Corn, Matthew. 12.
upon the sabbath, the Pharisees said nothing to those Disciples, but they come
to their Master, to Christ, and they tell him of it: Here, when Christ eats and
drinks with these sinners, they never say any thing to Christ himself, but they
go to his servants, and they tell him of it. By privy whisperings and
calumnies, they would aliene Christ from his Disciples, and his Disciples from
him; the King from his Subjects by some tales, and the Subject from the King by
other: and they took this for the shortest way to disgrace both their
preaching, to discredit both their lives; to defame Christ for a Wine-bibber,
and a loose Companion, and to defame his Disciples for profane men, and
Sabbath Breakers: Gregor.
for, Cujus vita despicitur, restat ut ejus predicatio contemnatur, is an
infallible inference and consequence made by S. Gregory; Discredit a man's life,
and you disgrace his Preaching: Lay imputations upon the person, and that will
evacuate and frustrate all his preaching; for whether it be in the corruption
of our nature, or whether it be in the nature of the thing it self, so it is,
if I believe the Preacher to be an ill man, I shall not be much the better for
his good Sermons.

Thus they were injurious in the manner of their calumny; they were so too in
the matter, to calumniate him therefore, because he applied himself to sinners.
The Wiseman in Ecclesiasticus institutes his meditation thus: 11.12.
There is one that has great need of help, full of poverty, yet the eye of the
Lord looked upon him for good, and set him up from his low estate, so that many
that saw it, marvelled at it. Many marvelled, but none reproached the Lord,
chid the Lord, calumniated the Lord, for doing so. And if the Lord will look
upon a sinner, and raise that bedrid man; if he will look with that eye, that
pierces deeper then the eye of heaven, the Sun, (and yet with a look of that
eye, the womb of the earth conceives) if he will look with that eye, that
conveys more warmth then the eye of the Ostrich, (and yet with a look of that
eye, that Bird is said to hatch her young ones, without sitting) that eye that
melted Peter into water, and made him flow toward Christ; and ratified Matthew
into air, and made him flee toward Christ; if that eye vouchsafe to look upon
a Publican, and redeem a Goshen out of an Egypt, hatch a soul out of a carnal
man, produce a saint out of a sinner, shall we marvel at the matter? marvel so,
as to doubt Gods power? shall any thing be impossible to God? or shall we
marvel at the manner, at any way by which Christ shall be pleased to convey his
mercy? Chrysolog.
Miraris eum peccatorum vinum bibere, qui pro peccatoribus sanguinem fudit?
shall we wonder that Christ would live with sinners, who was content to die for
sinners? Wonder that he would eat the bread and Wine of sinners, that gave
sinners his own flesh to eat, and his own blood to drink? Or if we do wonder at
this, (as, indeed, nothing is more wonderful) yet let us not calumniate, let us
not mis-interpret any way, that he shall be pleased to take, to derive his
mercy to any man: but, Clem. Alex.
(to use Clement of Alexandria's comparison) as we tread upon many herbs
negligently in the field, but when we see them in an Apothecaries shop, we
begin to think that there is some virtue in them; so howsoever we have a
perfect hatred, and a religious despite against a sinner, as a sinner; yet if
Christ Jesus shall have been pleased to have come to his door, and to have
stood, and knocked, and entered, and supped, and brought his dish, and made
himself that dish, and sealed a reconciliation to that sinner, in admitting him
to that Table, to that Communion, let us forget the Name of Publican, the Vices
of any particular profession; and forget the name of sinner, the history of any
man's former life; and be glad to meet that man now in the arms, and to grow up
with that man now in the bowels of Christ Jesus; since Christ does now begin to
make that man his, but now declares to us, that he has been his, from all
eternity: For in the Book of Life, the name of Mary Magdalen was as soon
recorded, for all her incontinency, as the name of the blessed Virgin, for all
her integrity; and the name of St. Paul who drew his sword against Christ, as
soon as St. Peter, who drew his in defense of him: for the Book of life was not
written successively, word after word, line after line, but delivered as a
Print, all together. There the greatest sinners were as soon recorded, as the
most righteous; and here Christ comes to call, not the righteous at all, but
only sinners to repentance. And so we have done with those pieces which
constitute our first part; Christ by his personal presence justified feasting,
and feasting in an Apostles house, and feasting with Publicans and sinners,
though the Pharisees calumniated him, maliciously in the manner, injuriously in
the matter; and we pass to our other part; from the Historical and Occasional,
to the Catechistical, the Doctrinal Part.

The other Part, the Occasion, the Connection was of the Text; Part II.
and we cannot say properly that this Part, the answer is in the Text; for,
indeed, the Text is in it: the Text it self is but a piece of that Answer,
which Christ gives to these Calumniators. First, Christ does afford an Answer
even to Calumniators; for that is very often necessary: Respondet Calumniae.
not only because otherwise a Calumniator would triumph, but because otherwise
a calumny would not appear to be a calumy. A calumny is fixed upon the fame of
a good man; he in a holy scorn, and religious negligence, pretermits it; and
after, long after, the generation of those vipers come to say, In all this
time, who ever denied it? A seasonable and a sober answer interrupts the
prescription of a calumny, discontinues the continual claim of a calumny,
disappoints and avoids that Fine which the calumny levied, to bar all
posterity, if no man arise to make an answer. Truly, there are some passages
in the Legend of Pope Joan, which I am not very apt to believe; yet, it is
shrewd evidence, that in so many hundreds of years, six or seven, no man in
that Church should say any thing against it: I would they had been pleased to
have said something, somewhat sooner: for if there were slander mingled in the
story, (and if there be, it must be their own Authors that have mingled it) yet
slander it self should not be neglected. Christ does not neglect it; he
justifies his conversation with these sinners: and he gives answers
proportionable to the men, with whom he dealt. First, because the Pharisees
pretended a knowledge and zeal to the Scriptures, Ose 6.6.
he answers out of the Scriptures, out of the Prophet, Misericordiam volo,
Mercy is better then sacrifice; and an Evangelical desire to do good upon
sinners, better then a Legal inhibition to come near them. And Christ seems to
have been so full of this saying of Ose, as that he says it here, where the
Pharisees calumniate him to his disciples; and when they calumniate the
disciples about the sabbath, he says it there too. He answers out of
Scriptures, because they pretend a zeal to them; and then because the Pharisees
were learned, and rational men, he answers out of Reason too, The whole have no
need of the Physician: I come in the quality of a Physician, and therefore
apply my self to the sick. For, we read of many blind and lame, and deaf and
dumb, and dead persons, that came or were brought to Christ to be recovered;
but we never read of any man, who being then in a good state of health, came to
Christ to desire that he might be preserved in that state: The whole never
think of a Physician; and therefore Christ, who came in that quality, applied
himself to them that needed. And that he might give full satisfaction, even to
Calumniators, every way, as he answered them out of Scriptures, and out of
Reason; so because the Pharisees were Statesmen too, and led by Precedents and
Records, he answers out of the tenor and letter of his Commission and
Instructions, (which is that part of his answer that falls most directly into
our Text) Veni vocare, I came to call not the righteous, but sinners to
repentance.

First then, venit, he came, he is come: venit actu; he came in promise, often
ratified before: Venit Actu.
now there is no more room for John Baptist's question, Tune ille, Art thou he
that should come, or must we look for another? For another coming of the same
Messiah, we do look, but not for another Messiah; we look for none after him,
no post-Messias; we join none, Saints nor Angels, with him, no sub-Messias, no
vice-Messias. The Jews may as well call the history of the Flood Prophetical,
and ask when the world shall be drowned according to that Prophecy; or the
history of their deliverance from Babylon Prophetical, and ask when they shall
return from thence to Jerusalem, according to that Prophecy, as seek for a
Messiah now amongst their Prophets, so long after all things being performed in
Christ, which were prophesied of the Messiah; Christ has so fully made
Prophecy History.

Venit actu, He is really, personally, actually come; Venit sponte.
and then venit sponte, he is come freely, and of his own mere goodness: How
freely? Come, and not sent? Yes, he was sent: God so loved the world, as that
he gave his only begotten Son for it; There was enough done to magnify the
mercy of the Father, in sending him. How freely then? Come and not brought?
Yes, he was brought: The holy Ghost overshadowed the blessed virgin, and so he
was conceived: there was enough done to magnify the goodness of the holy Ghost
in bringing him. He came to his prison, he abhorred not the Virgins womb; and
not without a Mittimus; he was sent: He came to the Execution; and not without
a desire of Reprieve, in his Transeat Calix, If it be possible, let this cup
pass from me; and yet venit sponte, he came freely, voluntarily, of his own
goodness. No more then he could have been left out at the Creation, and the
world made without him, could he have been sent into this world, without his
own hand to the Warrant, or have been left out at the decree of his sending. As
when he was come, no man could have taken away his soul, if he had not laid it
down; so, (if we might so speak) no God, no person in the Trinity, could have
sent him, if he had not been willing to come. Venit actu, he is come; there is
our comfort: venit sponte, he came freely; there is his goodness. And so you
have the Action, Venit, He came.

The next is his Errand, his Purpose, what he came to do, Vocare.
Venit vocare, He came to call. It is not vocatus, That Christ came, when we
called upon him to come: Man had no power, no will, no not a faculty to wish
that Christ would have come, Non occurrere.
till Christ did come, and call him. For, it is not Veni occurrere, That Christ
came to meet them who were upon the way before: Man had no pre-disposition in
Nature, to invite God to come to him. August.
Quid peto, ut venias in me, qui non essem si non esses in me? How should I
pray at first, that God would come into me, when as I could not only not have
the spirit of prayer, but not the spirit of life, and being, except God were in
me already? Where was I, when Christ called me out of my Rags, nay out of my
Ordure, and washed me in the Sacramental water of Baptism, and made me a
Christian so? Where was I, when in the loins of my sinful parents, and in the
unclean act of generation, Christ called me into the Covenant, and made me the
child of Christian parents? Could I call upon him, to do either of these for
me? Or if I may seem to have made any step toward Baptism, because I was
within the Covenant; or toward the Covenant, because I was of Christian
parents: yet where was I, when God called me, when I was not, as though I had
been, in the Eternal Decree of my Election? What said I for my self, or what
said any other for me then, when neither I, nor they had any being? God is
found of them that sought him not: Non venit occurrere, He came not to meet
them who were, of themselves, set out before.

Non Cogere.
But then, non venit cogere, He came not to force and compel them, who would not
be brought into the way: Christ saves no man against his will. There is a word
crept into the later School, that deludes many a man; they call it
Irresistibility; and they would have it mean, that when God would have a man,
he will lay hold upon him, by such a power of grace, as no perverseness of that
man, can possibly resist. There is some truth in the thing, soberly understood:
for the grace of God is more powerful then any resistance of any man or devil.
But leave the word, where it was hatched, in the School, and bring it not home,
not into practice: for he that stays his conversion upon that, God, at one time
or other, will lay hold upon me by such a power of Grace, as I shall not be
able to resist, may stay, till Christ come again, to preach to the spirits that
are in prison. 1 Pet. 3.19.
Christ beats his Drum, but he does not Press men; Christ is served with
Voluntaries. There is a Compelle intrare, Luke 14.23.
A forcing of men to come in, and fill the house, and furnish the supper: but
that was an extraordinary commission, and in a case of Necessity: Our ordinary
commission is, Ite, praedicate; Go, and preach the Gospel, and bring men in so:
it is not, Compelle intrare, Force men to come in: it is not, Draw the Sword,
kindle the Fire, wind up the Rack: for, when it was come to that, Mat. 22.10.
that men were forced to come in, (as that Parabolical story is reported in
this Evangelist) the house was filled, and the supper was furnished, (the Church
was filled, and the Communion Table frequented) but it was with good and bad
too: for men that are forced to come hither, they are not much the better in
themselves, nor we much the better assured of their Religion, for that: Force
and violence, pecuniary and bloody Laws, are not the right way to bring men to
Religion, in cases where there is nothing in consideration, but Religion
merely. It Is true, there is a Compellite Manner, that has all justice in it;
when men have been baptized, and bred in a Church, and embraced the profession
of a Religion, so as that their allegiance is complicated with their Religion,
then it is proper by such Laws to compel them to remain and continue in that
Religion; for in the Apostasy, and Defection of such men, the State has a
detriment, as well as the Church; and therefore the temporal sword may be drawn
as well as the spiritual; which is the case between those of the Romish
persuasion, and us: their Laws work directly upon our Religion; they draw blood
merely for that, ours work directly upon their allegiance, and punish only
where pretense of Religion colors a Defection in allegiance. But Christ's end
being merely spiritual, to constitute a Church, Non venit Occurrere, as he came
not to meet man, man was not so forward; so he came not to compel man, to deal
upon any that was so backward; for, Venit vocare, He came to call.

Now, this calling, implies a voice, as well as a Word; Veni vocare.
it is by the Word; but nor by the Word read at home, though that be a pious
exercise; nor by the word submitted to private interpretation; but by the Word
preached, according to his Ordinance, and under the Great Seal, of his blessing
upon his Ordinance. So that preaching is this calling; and therefore, as if
Christ do appear to any man, in the power of a miracle, or in a private
inspiration, yet he appears but in weakness, as in an infancy, till he speak,
till he bring a man to the hearing of his voice, in a settled Church, and in the
Ordinance of preaching: so how long soever Christ have dwelt in any State, or
any Church, if he grow speechless, he is departing; if there be a
discontinuing, or slackning of preaching, there is a danger of loosing Christ.
Adam was not made in Paradise, but brought thither, called thither: the sons of
Adam are not born in the Church, but called thither by Baptism; Non Nascimur
sed re-nascimur Christiani; August.
No man is born a Christian, but called into that state by regeneration. And
therefore, as the Consummation of our happiness is in that, that we shall be
called at last, into the Kingdom of Glory, in the Venite Benedicti, Come ye
blessed, and enter into your Masters joy: so is it a blessed Inchoation of that
happiness, that we are called into the Kingdom of Grace, and made partakers of
his Word and Sacraments, and other Ordinances by the way. And so you have his
Action, and Errand, He came, and, came to call.

The next, is the persons upon whom he works, whom he calls; Non Justos.
where we have first the Negative, the Exclusive, Non Justos, Not the
righteous. In which, Grego: Nyssene, is so tender, G. Nyssen.
so compassionate, so loath, that this Negative should fall upon any man, that
any man should be excluded from possibility of salvation, as that he carries it
wholly upon Angels: Christ took not the nature of Angels, Christ came not to
call Angels: But this Exclusion falls upon men; What men? upon the righteous:
Who are they? We have two Expositions, both of Jesuits, both good; I mean the
Expositions, not the Jesuits: they differ somewhat; for, though the Jesuits
agree well enough, too well, in State-business, in Courts, (how Kings shall be
deposed, and how massacred; how Kingdoms shall be deluded with Dispensations,
and how invaded with Forces, they agree well enough) yet in Schools, and in
Expositions, Maldonat. Mat. 18.12.
they differ, as well as others. The first, Maldonat, he says, That as in that
parable, where Christ says, that the good shepherd left the ninety nine sheep,
that had kept their pastures, and went to seek that one, which was strayed, he
did not mean, that there is but one sheep of a hundred, that does go astray;
but that if that were the case, he would go to seek that one: so when Christ
says here, he came not to call the righteous, he does not mean that there were
any righteous; but if the world were full of righteous men, so that he might
make up the number of his Elect, and fill up the rooms of the fallen Angels,
out of them; yet he would come to call sinners too. Barradas.
The other Jesuit Barradas, (not altogether Barrabas) he says, Christ said,
Non Justos, Not the righteous, because if there had been any righteous, he
needed not to have come: according to that of S. Aug. Si homo non periisset,
August.
filius hominis non venisset; If Man had not fallen, and lain irrecoverably
under that fall, the Son of God had not come to suffer the shame, and the pain
of the Cross: so that they differ but in this; If there had been any righteous,
Christ needed not to have come; and though there had been righteous men, yet he
would have come; but in this, they, and all agree, Romans 8.30.
that there were none righteous. None? Why, whom he predestined, those he
called; and were not they whom he predestined, and elected to salvation,
righteous? Even the Elect themselves have not a constant righteousness in this
world: such a righteousness, as does always denominate them, so, as that they
can always say to their own conscience, or so as the Church can always say of
them, This is a righteous man: No, nor so, as that God, who looks upon a sinner
with the eyes of the Church, and considers a sinner, with the heart and sense
of the Church, and speaks of him with the tongue of the Church, can say of him,
then, when he is under unrepented sin, This man is righteous: howsoever, if he
look upon him, in that Decree which lies in his bosom, and by which he has
infallibly ordained him to salvation, he may say so. No man here, though Elect,
has an equal and constant righteousness; nay, no man has any such
righteousness of his own, as can save him; for howsoever it be made his, by
that Application, or Imputation, yet the righteousness that saves him, is the
very righteousness of Christ himself. Hilarie.
S. Hilaries Question then, has a full Answer, Erant quibus non erat necesse
ut ventret? Were there any that needed not Christ's coming? No; there were none;
who then are these righteous? we answer with S. Chrysostom. and S. Hiero. and S.
Ambrose, and all the stream of the Fathers; They are Justi sua Justitia, those
who thought themselves righteous; those who relied upon their own
righteousness; those who mistook their righteousness, as the Laodiceans did
their riches; they said, They were rich, and had need of nothing; Apoc. 3.17.
and they were wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. So,
these men, being ignorant of Gods righteousness, Romans 10.3.
and going about to establish a righteousness of their own, have not submitted
themselves to the righteousness of God; that is, depend wholly upon the
righteousness of Christ. He calls it Suam, their righteousness, because they
thought they had a righteousness of their own; either in the faculties of
Nature, or in the exaltation of those faculties by the help of the Law: And he
calls it Suam, their righteousness, because they thought none had it but they.
And upon this Pelagian righteousness, it thought Nature sufficient without
Grace; or upon this righteousness of the Cathari, the Puritans in the Primitive
Church, that thought the Grace which they had received sufficient, and that
upon that stock they were safe, and become impeccable, and therefore left out
of the Lords Prayer, that Petition, Dimitte nobis, Forgive us our trespasses;
upon this Pelagian righteousness, and this Puritan righteousness, Christ does
not work. He left out the righteous, not that there were any such, but such as
thought themselves so; and he took in sinners, not all effectually, that were
simply so, but such as the sense of their sins, and the miserable state that
that occasioned, brought to an acknowledgement, that they were so; Non Justos,
sed peccatores. Peccatores.


Here then enters our Affirmative, our Inclusive, Who are called; peccatores:
for here no man asks the Question of the former Branch: there we asked, Whether
there were any righteous? and we found none; here we ask not whether there were
any sinners, for we can find no others, no not one. He came to call sinners,
and only sinners; that is, only in that capacity, in that contemplation, as
they were sinners; for of that vain and frivolous opinion, that got in, and got
hold in the later School, That Christ had come in the flesh, though Adam had
stood in his innocence; That though Man had nor needed Christ as a Redeemer,
yet he would have come to have given to man the greatest Dignity that Nature
might possibly receive, which was to be united to the Divine Nature: of this
Opinion, one of those Jesuits whom we named before, Maldonat, who oftentimes
making his use of whole sentences of Calvin's, says in the end, This is a good
Exposition, but that he is an Heretic that makes it. He says also of this
Opinion, That Christ had come, though Adam had stood; this is an ill Opinion,
but that they are Catholics that have said it. He came for sinners; for
sinners only; else he had not come: and then he came for all kind of sinners:
Mat. 21.31.
for, upon those words of our Saviors, to the High Priests and Pharisees,
Publicans and Harlots go into the Kingdom of Heaven before you, good Expositors
note, that in those two Notations, Publicans and Harlots, many sorts of sinners
are employed: in the name of Publicans, all such, as by their very profession
and calling, are led into tentations, and occasions of sin, to which some
Callings are naturally more exposed then other, such as can hardly be exercised
without sin; and then in the Name of Harlots, and prostitute Women, such as
cannot at all be exercised without sin; whose very profession is sin: and yet
for these, for the worst of these, for all these, there is a voice gone out,
Christ is come to call sinners, only sinners, all sinners. Comes he then thus
for sinners? What an advantage had S. Paul then, to be of this Quorum, and the
first of them; Quorum Ego Maximus, That when Christ came to save sinners, he
should be the greatest sinner, the first in that Election? If we should live to
see that acted, Mat. 24.41.
which Christ speaks of at the last day, Two in the field, the one taken, the
other left, should we not wonder to see him that were left, lay hold upon him
that were taken, and offer to go to Heaven before him, therefore, because he
had killed more men in the field, or robbed more men upon the Highway, or
supplanted more in the Court, or oppressed more in the City? to make the
multiplicity of his sins, his title to Heaven? Or, two women grinding at the
Mill, one taken, the other left; to see her that was left, offer to precede the
other into Heaven, therefore, because she had prostituted her self to more men,
then the other had done? Is this S. Paul's Quorum, his Dignity, his Prudency; I
must be saved, because I am the greatest sinner? God forbid: God forbid we
should presume upon salvation, because we are sinners; or sin therefore, that
we may be surer of salvation. S. Paul's title to Heaven, was, not that he was
primus peccator, but primus Confessor, that he first accused himself, and came
to a sense of his miserable estate; for that implies that which is our last
word, and the effect of Christ's calling, That whomsoever he calls, or how, or
whenever, it is ad Resipiscentiam, Non ad satisfactionem.
to repentance. It is not ad satisfactionem, Christ does not come to call us,
to make satisfaction to the justice of God: he called us to a heavy, to an
impossible account, if he called us to that. If the death of Christ Jesus
himself, be but a satisfaction for the punishment for my sins, (for nothing
less then that could have made that satisfaction) what can a temporary
Purgatory of days or hours do toward a satisfaction? And if the torments of
Purgatory it self, sustained by my self, be nothing toward a satisfaction,
what can an Evenings fast, or an Ave Marie, from my Executor, or my Assignee,
after I am dead, do toward such a satisfaction? Can thou satisfy the
justice of God, for all that blood which thou have drawn from his Son, in thy
blasphemous Oaths and Execrations; or for all that blood of his, which thou
have spilt upon the ground, upon the Dunghill, in thy unworthy receiving the
Sacrament? Can thou satisfy his justice, for having made his Blessings the
occasions, and the instruments of thy sins; or for the Dilapidations of his
Temple, in having destroyed thine own body by thine incontinency, and making
that, the same flesh with a Harlot? If he will contend with thee, Job 9.9.
thou can not answer him one of a thousand: Nay, a thousand men could not
answer one sin of one man.

It is not then Ad satisfactionem; but it is not Ad gloriam neither. Non ad
Gloriam.
Christ does not call us to an immediate possession of glory, without doing any
thing between. Our Glorification was in his intention, as soon as our Election:
in God who sees all things at once, both entered at once; but in the Execution
of his Decrees here, God carries us by steps; he calls us to Repentance. The
Farmers of this imaginary satisfaction, they that fell it at their own price,
in their Indulgencies, have done well, to leave out this Repentance, both in
this text in S. Matthew, and where the same is related by S. Mark. In both
places, they tell us, that Christ came to call sinners, but they do not tell us
to what; as though it might be enough to call them to their market, to buy
their Indulgencies. The Holy Ghost tells us; it is to repentance: Are ye to
learn now what that is? He that cannot define Repentance, he that cannot spell
it, may have it; and he that has written whole books, great Volumes of it, may
be without it. In one word, (one word will not do it, but in two words) it is
Aversio, and Conversio; it is a turning from our sins, and a returning to our
God. It is both: for in our Age, in our Sickness, in any impotencie toward a
sin, in any satiety of a sin, we turn from our sin, but we turn not to God; we
turn to a sinful delight in the memory of our sins, and a sinful desire that we
might continue in them. So also in a storm at sea, in any imminent calamity, at
land, we turn to God, to a Lord, Lord; but at the next calm, and at the next
deliverance, we turn to our sin again. He only is the true Israelite, the true
penitent, that has Nathaniel's mark, In quo non est dolus, In whom there is no
deceit: For, to sin, and think God sees it not, because we confess it not; to
confess it as sin, and yet continue the practice of it; to discontinue the
practice of it, and continue the possession of that, which was got by that sin;
all this is deceit, and destroys, evacuates, annihilates all Repentance.

To recollect all, and to end all: Christ justifies feasting; he feasts you
with himself: And feasting in an Apostles house, in his own house; he feasts
you often here: And he admits Publicans to this feast, men whose full and open
life, in Court, must necessarily expose them, to many hazards of sin: and the
Pharisees, our adversaries, calumniate us for this; they say we admit men too
easily to the Sacrament; without confession, without contrition, without
satisfaction. God in heaven knows we do not; less, much less then they. For
Confession, we require public confession in the Congregation: And in time of
Sickness, upon the deathbed, we enjoin private and particular Confession, if
the conscience be oppressed: And if any man do think, that that which is
necessary for him, upon his deathbed, is necessary, every time he comes to the
Communion, and so come to such a confession, if any thing lie upon him, as
often as he comes to the Communion, we blame not, we dissuade not, we
dis-counsel not that tenderness of conscience, and that safe proceeding in that
good soul. For Contrition, we require such a contrition as amounts to a full
detestation of the sin, and a full resolution, not to relapse into that sin:
and this they do not in the Roman Church, where they have soupled and
mollified their Contrition into an Attrition. For Satisfaction, we require such
a satisfaction as Man can make to Man, in goods or fame: and for the
satisfaction due to God, we require that every man, with a sober and modest,
but yet with a confident and infallible assurance believe, the satisfaction
given to God, by Christ, for all mankind, to have been given and accepted for
him in particular. This Christ, with joy and thanksgiving we acknowledge to be
come; to be come actually; we expect no other after him, we join no other to
him: And come freely, without any necessity imposed by any above him, and
without any invitation from us here: Come, not to meet us, who were not able to
rise, without him; but yet not to force us, to save us against our wills, but
come to call us, by his Ordinances in his Church; us, not as we pretend any
righteousness of our own, but as we confess our selves to be sinners, and
sinners led by this call, to Repentance; which Repentance, is an everlasting
Divorce from our beloved sin, and an everlasting Marriage and super-induction
of our ever-living God.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL April 2. 1620. Sermon. 10.
SERMON X.
ECCLES. 5. There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the Sun: Riches
reserved to the owners thereof, for their evil. And these riches perish by
evil travail: and he begets a son, and in his hand is nothing.

Ver. 12. and 13. in Edit. 1. In alia 13. and 14.
THe kingdom of heaven is a feast; to get you a Stomach to that, we have
preached abstinence. The kingdom of heaven is a treasure too, and to make you
capable of that, we would bring you to a just valuation of this world. He that
has his hands full of dirt, cannot take up Amber; if they be full of Counters,
he cannot take up gold. This is the Book, Hierm.
which St. Hierome chose to expound to Blesilla at Rome, when his purpose was
to draw her to heaven, by making her to understand this world; It was the book
fittest for that particular way: and it is the Book which St. Ambrose calls
Bonum ad omnia magistrum; Ambros.
A good Master to correct us in this world, a good Master to direct us to the
next. For though Solomon had asked at Gods hand, only the wisdom fit for
Government, yet since he had bent his wishes, upon so good a thing as wisdom,
and in his wishes, even of the best thing, had been so moderate, God abounded
in his grant, and gave him all kinds, Natural and Civil, and heavenly wisdom.
And therefore when the Fathers and the latter Authors in the Roman Church,
exercise their considerations, August.
whether Solomon were wiser, then Adam, then Moses, then the Prophets, then the
Apostles, they needed not to have been so tender, as to except only the Virgin
Mary, for though she had such a fullness of heavenly wisdom, as brought her to
rest in his bosom, in heaven, who had rested in hers upon earth, yet she was
never proposed for an example of natural, or of civil knowledge. Solomon was of
all; and therefore St. Austin says of him; Prophetavit in omnibus Libris suis,
Solomon prophesied in all his books; and though in this book his principal
scope be moral, and practique wisdom, yet in this there are also mysteries, and
prophecies, and many places concerning our eternal happiness, after this life.

But because there is no third object for man's love. This world, and the next,
are all that he can consider, as he has but two eyes, so he has but two
objects, and then Primus actus voluntatis est Amor, Aquinas.
Man's love is never idle, it is ever directed upon something, if our love might
be drawn from this world, Solomon thought it a direct way to convay it upon the
next: And therefore consider Solomon's method, and wisdom in pursuing this way:
because all the world together, has amazing greatness, and an amazing glory in
it, for the order and harmony, and continuance of it (for if a man have many
Manors, he thinks himself a great Lord, and if a Man have many Lords under him,
he is a great King, and if he have Kings under him, he is a great Emperor: and
yet what profit were it, to get all the world and loose thy soul; Therefore
Solomon shakes the world in pieces, he dissects it, and cuts it up before thee,
that so thou may the better see, how poor a thing, that particular is,
whatsoever it be, that thou sets thy love upon in this world. He threads a
string of the best stones, of the best Jewels in this world, knowledge in the
first Chapter, delicacies in the second, long life in the third, Ambition,
Riches; Fame, strength in the rest, and then he shows you an Ice, a flaw, a
cloud in all these stones? he lays this infamy upon them all, vanity, and
vexation of spirit.

Vanitas.
Which two words, vanity and vexation, because they go through all, to every
thing Solomon applies one of them; they are the inseparable Laeven, that sowers
all, and therefore are intended as well of this Text, as of the other text; we
shall by the way make a little stop upon those two words, first how could the
wisdom of Solomon and of the Holy Ghost, avile and abase this world more,
then by this annihilating of it in the name of vanity, for what is that? It is
not enough to receive a definition; it is so absolutely nothing, as that we
cannot tell you, what it is. Let Saint Bernard do it; vanum est, quod nec
confert plenitudinem continenti; for who amongst you has not room for another
bagg, or amongst us for another benefice; nec fulcimentum innitenti, for who
stands fast upon that, which is not fast it self? and the world passes, and
the lusts thereof; Nec fructum laboranti, for you have sown much, and bring in
little, ye eat, but have not enough, ye drink but are not filled, ye are
clothed, but wax not warm, Agg. 1.16.
and he that earneth wages, puts it into a bagg with holes, midsummer runs out
at Michalmas, and at years end he has nothing.

And such a vanity is this world, least it were not enough, to call it vanity
alone, simply vanity, though that language in which Solomon, and the Holy Ghost
spoke, have no degrees of comparison, no superlative, (they cannot say
vanissimum, the greatest vanity,) yet Solomon has sound a way to express the
height of it, another way conformable to that language, when he calls it,
vanitatem vanitatum, for so does it; Canticum Canticorum; The Song of Songs,
Deus Deorum, the God of gods, Dominus dominantium, The Lord of Lords; Coeli
Coelorum, The Heaven of Heavens, always signify the superlative, and highest
degree of those things; vanity of vanities is the deepest vanity, the emptiest
vanity, the veriest vanity that can be conceived. Saint Augustine apprehended
somewhat more in it, but upon a mistaking; Aug. Retract.
for accustoming himself to a Latin copy of the Scriptures, and so lighting
upon copies, that had been miswritten, he reads that, vanitas vani antum: O the
vanity of those men that delight in vanity; he puts this lowness, this
annihilation not only in the thing, but in the Men themselves too. And so
certainly he might safely do; (for though, as he says, in his Retractations,
his Copies milled him,) yet that which he collected even by that error, was
true, they that trust in vain things are as vain, as the things themselves. If
Saint Augustine had not his warrant to say so from Solomon here, yet he had it
from his Father before, who did not stop at that, when he had said Man is like
to vanity, Psalm. 144.4.39.5.
but proceeeds farther; surely that is without all contradiction every Man,
that is without all exception; in his best state, that is, without any
declination, is altogether vanity. Let no man grudge to acknowledge it of
himself; The second man that ever was begot and born into this world, (and then
there was world enough before him to make him great) and the first good man,
had his name from vanity; Cain, the first man, had his name from possession;
but the second, Habel, had his name from vacuity, from vanity, from vanishing;
for it is the very word, that Solomon uses here still for vanity. Because his
parents repose no confidence in Habel, for they thought that Cain was the
Messiah, they called him vanity. Because God knew that Habel had no long term
in this world, he directed them, he suffered them to call him vanity. But
therefore principally was he and so may we, be content with the name of vanity,
that so acknowledging our selves to be but vanity, we may turn, for all our
being, and all our well being, for our essence, and existence, and subsistence,
upon God in whom only we live and move and have our being; for take us at our
best, make every one an Abel, and yet that is but Evanescentia in nihilum, a
vanishing, an evapourating. When the Prophets are said to speak the motions,
Jer. 23.16.
and notions, the visions of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the
Lord, then because that was indeed nothing, (for a lie is nothing) they are
said (in this very word) to speak vanity. And still, 1 Cor. 8.4.
where the Prophets have that phrase, in the person of God, provocaverunt me
vanitatibus, They have provoked God with their vanities, the Chaldee Paraphrase
ever expresses it, Idolis, with their Idols; and Idolum nihil est, an Idol, 1
Cor. 8.4.
that is vanity, is nothing. Man therefore can have no deeper discouragement,
from enclining to the things of this world, then to be taught that they are
nothing, nor higher encouragement, to cleave to God for the next, then to know
that himself is nothing too. This last of our selves, is St. Paul's humility, 2
Cor. 12.11. Esa. 40.15.
I am nothing; The first of other Creatures, is the Prophet Isaiahs
instruction, The nations are as a drop of the bucket, as the dust of the
balance, the Isles are as a little dust: This was little enough; but, all
nations are before him as nothing; that was much less; for the disproportion
between the least thing, and nothing, is more infinite then between the least
thing, and the whole world. But there is a diminution of that too, they are all
less then nothing; and what is that, vanity; in that place, Nihilum, and in ane,
and that's as low as Solomon carries them.

Vexatio. Genesis 6.5.
But because all the imaginations of the thoughts of man's heart, are only evil
continually, as Moses heightens the Corruption of man, and therefore men are
not so much affrighted with this returning to nothing, for they could be
content to vanish at last and turn to nothing, there appears no harm to them in
that, that the world comes to nothing; what care they, when they have no more
use of it? and there appears an ease to them, if their souls might come to
nothing too; therefore Solomon calls this world not only nothing, vanity, but
affliction, and vexation of spirit. Tell a natural voluptuous man, of two sorts
of torments in hell, Poena damni, and Poena sensus, one of privation, he shall
not see God, and the other of real Torments, he shall be actually tormented;
the loss of the sight of God will not so much affect him, for he never saw him
in his life; not in the marking of his grace, not in the glass of his
creatures, and he thinks it will not much trouble him there to lack his sight,
whom he never saw here; But when he comes to think of real Torments, he sees
some examples of them here in this life upon himself. And if he have but the
toothach, he will think, that if that were to last eternally, it were an
unsufferable thing. And therefore Solomon affects us with that sensible
addition, love not this world; why? It is vanity, it will come to nothing: I
care not for that; I will love it, as long as it is something; do not so, for
it is not only vanity, but affliction, vexation too. It will be nothing at
last, it ends; but it is vexation too, that shall never end. The love of the
world, is but a smoke, there is the vanity; but such a one, as putts out our
eyes, there is the vexation; we do not see God here, we shall not see God
hereafter.

These two words then, Divisio.
as to all the other parts in Solomon's Anatomy, and cutting up of the world, so
they do belong to that particular disposition, in this Text; This reserving of
Riches to the owner, for his evil, and that which follows, is vanity, and
vexation; But now we have passed that general consideration, there is thus
much more to be considered. First an imputation laid upon the reserving, the
gathering of Riches: though Riches be not in themselves ill, yet we are to be
abstinent from an over-studious heaping of them, because naturally they are
mingled with that danger, that they may be for the owners evil: And therefore
because it may come to that, It is a sickness to gather Riches; and it is an
evil sickness, for all sickness is not so: and it was no imaginary, but a true
sickness, it was seen, it was under the sun; for that death it self, which is
not seen, spiritual death in the torments of hell, is not so much thought of;
this is seen; but it was the part of a wise man to see it, Solomon saw it,
there is an evil sickness, that I have seen under the Sun: Riches reserved to
the owners thereof, for their evil. And those riches perish by evil travail:
and he begets a son; and in his hand is nothing.

There follows a dangerous, and deadly Symptom of this sickness, that the
riches perish. There is an evil sickness that I have seen under the Sun: Riches
reserved to the owners thereof for their evil. And those Riches perish by evil
travail: And he begets a son; and in his hand is nothing.

But that will not fall into this exercise.

Imputatio.
First then, the imputation that is generally laid upon riches, appears most in
those difficulties, which in the Gospels are so often said to lie in the rich
man's way to heaven: Particularly, where it is said to be, as hard for a rich
man to enter into heaven, as for a Camel to pass a needels eye; God can do
this; but if a rich man shall stay for his salvation, till God do draw a Camel
through a needels eye, he may perchance stay, Epist. 160.7.1.
till all be served, and all the places of the Angels filled. St. Hierom made
it not a proverb, but he found it one, and so he cites it, Dives, aut iniquus
est, aut iniqui haeres: A rich man is dishonest himself, or, at least he
succeeds a dishonest predecessor: Proverbs have their limits, and rules have
exceptions; but yet the proverb, and the rule lays a shrewd imputation, ut
plurimum, for the most part it is so. It is not always so; we have a better
proverb, Prove. 22.4.
against that proverb, The reward of humility, and the fear of God is Riches,
and glory, and life; If we were able to digest, and concoct these temporal
things into good nourishment; Gods natural way is, and would be, to convay to
us the testimony of his spiritual graces in outward and temporal benefits; as
he did to the Jews in abundance of wine, and honey, and milk, and oil, and the
like. He had rather we were Rich, because we might advance his glory the more:
At least they are equal: and any great measure of either, either of Riches, or
of Poverty, are equal in their danger too. Bernard.
Et quae mulcent, et quae molestant, timeo; Poverty, as well as Riches, may put
us from our Christian constancy; Prove. 30.
and therefore they are both prayed against, Divitias et paupertates ne
dederis; How Riches are to be esteemed when they are compared with Poverty, is
another question; but how compared with heaven, is no question: We may see that
by the place from whence they are said to come.

Christ is presented there in the person of wisdom; and there it is said,
length of days, that is Eternity, in her right hand, and in her left hand
Riches, and Glory: Nolite sitire sinistram; press not too much upon Gods left
hand for Riches here, Bernard.
least that custom imprint a Bias in you, and turn you on the left hand here,
and bring thee to Gods left hand in heaven too. Briefly they have an imputation
upon them, they have an ill name, as hindrances to the next life, and they have
it also as Traitors to their Masters, That they are reserved to the hurt of
their owners in this life; And then, if that Vae, be well placed, Woe be unto
you, that are rich, for you have received your consolation, Luke 26.24.
what a woeful thing is it, to have received no consolation in them, but to
have had harm here by them?

To proceed then, riches may do harm to their owners. Owners.
It is no easy matter for a rich man, to find out the true owners of all his
riches. Thou art not owner of all, that the right owner cannot recover of thee;
that all that is his by law, should be his. Certainly no rich Man has dealt
much in this world, but he has something, of which himself knows not the right
owner, when he receives usury for his money, that interest is not his money,
but when he receives usury again for that, there neither the interest, nor
principal was his own money; he takes usury for that money of which himself was
not the owner, because it was ill gotten: If thou do truly know the owner,
restore it to him; if after a diligent examination of thy self, thou do not
know the particular owner, yet thou know it is none of thine, and therefore
give it him, whose it was at first; both before thou had it, and before he
from whom thou gottest it corruptly, had it; give it to God, in giving it to
his poor, and afflicted members; give it him, and give it willingly, and give
it now, for that that thou give at thy death thou do but leave by thy last
will, thou do not give; he only gives that might keep, thou give
unwillingly; howsoever they have it, by thy will, yet it is against thy will
that they have it, thou give then, but art sorry, that they to whom thou
give, that which thou give, came so soon to it. And then saepe infirmitatis
servi efficimur, we become slaves to our last sickness often; Bernard.
oftentimes Apoplexies stupifie us and we are dull, and Fevers enrage us and we
are mad; we are in a slavery to the disease, Et servi non testantur, says the
law, slaves have no power to make a Will; Testare Liber, Idem.
make thy Will, and make it to be thy Will, give it the effect, and execute thy
Will whilst thou art a free man, in state of health; restore that which is not
thine; for even that of which thou art true owner may be reserved to thy harm,
much more that, Harm.
which is none of thine.

Every man may find in himself, that he has done some sins, which he would
not have done, if he had not been so rich: for there goes some cost to the most
sins; his wantonness in wealth makes him do some; his wealth has given him a
confidence, that that fault would not be looked into, or that it would be bought
out, if it were. Some sins we have done, because we are rich; but many more
because we would be rich; And this is a spiritual harm, the riches do their
owners. And for temporal harm, if it were hard to find in our own times,
examples of men, which have incurred great displeasure, undergone heavy
calamities, perished in unrecoverable shipwreck, all which they had escaped, if
they had not been eminently, and enormously rich; we might in ancient history
both profane and holy, find such precedents enough, as Naboth was; who if he
had had no such vineyard, as lay convenient for so much greater a person, might
have passed for an honest and religious Man to God, and a good subject to the
King, without any indictment of blasphemy against either, and never have been
stoned to death. 1 Reg. 21.
The rich Merchant at Sea, is afraid that every fisherman is a Pyrat, and the
fisherman fears not him. And if we should survay the body of our penal Laws,
whenever the abuse of them, makes them snares and springes to entangle men,
we should see that they were principally directed upon rich men; neither can
rich men comfort themselves in it, that though they be subject to more storms
then other men, yet they have better ground tackling, they are better able to
ride it out then other men; for it goes more to the heart of that rich
Merchant, which we spoke of, to cast his goods over board, then it does to the
fisherman to loose his boat: Bernard. Idem.
and perchance his life. Sudat pauper foris; It is true the poor man's brow
sweats without; Laborat intus dives, the rich man's heart bleeds within; and the
poor man can sooner wipe his face, then the rich man his heart, Gravius
fastidio, quam ille inedia cruciatur; the rich man is worse troubled to get a
stomach, then the poor man to satisfy his: and his loathing of meat, is more
wearisome, then the others desire of it. Sum up the diseases that
voluptuousness by the ministry of riches imprints in the body; the battery
that malice, by the provocation of riches, lays to the fortune; the sins that
confidence in our riches; heaps upon our souls; and we shall see, that though
riches be reserved to their owners, yet it is to their harm.

Sickness.
As then the burden of that song in the furnace, where all creatures were called
upon to bless the Lord, was still, praise the Lord, ver. 36.
and magnify him for ever; And as the burden of that Psalm of thanksgiving,
where so many of Gods miracles are recorded, is this, for his mercy endures
for ever; so the burden of Solomon's exclamation against worldly things, is
still in all these Chapters, vanity, and vanity of vanities, and vexation of
spirit; so he adds thus much more to this particular distemper of reserving
Riches, naturally disposed to do us harm. That it is a sickness; Mow, Sanitas
naturalis; Bernard.
Nature abhors sickness, and therefore this is an unnatural desire. For whether
we take this phrase of Solomon, for a Metaphor and comparison, that this desire
of Riches, is like a sickness, that it has the pains, and the discomforts, and
the dangers of a sickness, or whether we take it literally, that it is a
disordering, a discomposing, a distemper of the mind, and so truly, and really
a sickness, and that this sickness induces nothing but eternal death, nothing
should make us more afraid then this sickness, (for, the root of all evil is
the desire of money.) And then if it be truly a sickness all the way, and
Morbus complicatus, (a dropsy, and a consumption too) we seem great, but it is
but a swelling, for our soul is lean; what a sad condition will there be, when
their last bodily sickness, and this spiritual sickness meet together; a sick
body, and a sick soul, will be but ignorant Physicians, and miserable
comforters to one another.

It is a sickness, and an evil sickness; Evil.
and there is a weight added in that addition; for though all sickness have
rationem mali, some degrees of the evil of punishment in it, yet sometimes the
good purpose of God, in inflicting a sickness, and the good use of man, in
mending by a sickness, overcome and weigh down that little dram, and washes
away the pale tincture of evil, which is in it. There is a wholesome sickness,
Et est sanitas, quae viaticum ad peccatum, health sometimes victuals us, Basil.
and fuels us, and arms us for a sin, and we do those sins, which, Bernard.
if we were sick, we could not do: And then, Mala sanitas carnis, quae ducit ad
infirmitatem animae. It is an unwholesome health of the body, that occasions the
sickness of the soul.

It is true, that in bodily Sickness, Tua dimicant contra te arma. Bernard.
It is a discomfortable war, when thou fightest against thy self; In ipso
gemis, in quo peccasti, that that flesh in which thou have sinned, comes to
vex, and anguish thee; that thy body is become but a bottle of rheum: Thy
Sinews but a bundle of thorns, and thy bones but a furnace of vehement ashes.
But it thou can hear God, as St. Augustine did. Ego novi unde aegrotes, Ego
novi u^de saneris, I know thy disease, Augustine.
and I know thy cure. Gratia mea sufficit, my grace shall serve thy turn. Thou
shall come to that disposition of the Apostle too; Therefore I take pleasure in
infirmities, because when I am weak, 2. Cor. 12.10.
then am I strong: when thou art come to an apprehension of thy own weakness,
thou come also to a recourse to him, in whom only is thy saving healthand
recovery. But this Sickness of gathering those riches which are reserved for
our evil, comes not to that; it comes to the Sickness, but not to the physic.
In small diseases (says St. Basil,) we go to the Physicians house; in greater
diseases, we send for the Physician to our house; but in violent diseases, in
the stupefaction of an Apoplexy, in the damp of a leturgy, in the furnace of a
Pleurisy; we have no sense, no desire of a Physician at all. When this
inordinate love of Riches begins in us, we have some tenderness of Conscience,
and we consult with Gods Ministers: After we admit the reprehensions of Gods
Ministers when they speak to our Consciences; but at last, the habit of our sin
has seared us up, and we never find that it is we, that the Preacher means; we
find that he touches others, but not us. Our wit, and our malice is awake, but
our conscience is asleep; we can make a Sermon a libel against others, and
cannot find a Sermon in a Sermon, to our selves. It is a sickness, and an evil
sickness.

Visibilis.
Now this is not such a sickness, as we have only read of, and no more. It
concerns us not only so, as the memory of the sweat, of which we do rather
wounder at the report, then consider the manner, or the remedies against it.
Those diverse plagues which God inflicted upon Pharaoh, for withholding his
people. That devouring Pestilence, which God stroke David's kingdom with for
numbering his people. That destruction which God kindled in Sennacheribs army
for oppressing his people. These, because God has represented them, in so
clear, and so true a glass as his word, we do in a manner see them. Things in
other stories we do but hear; things in the Scriptures we see: The Scriptures
are as a room wainscotted with lookingglass, we see all at once. But this evil
sickness of reserving riches to our own evil, is plainer to be seen; because it
is daily round about us, daily within us, and in our consciences, and
experiences. There are sins, that are not evident, not easily discerned; and
therefore David annexes a Scedule to his prayer after all, Ab occultis meis
mundame, says David. There are sins, which the difference of religion, makes a
sin, or no sin; we know it to be a sin, to abstain from coming to Church, our
adversaries are made believe it is a time to come. There are middle-men, that
when our Church appoints coming, and receiving, and anoother Church forbids
both, they will do half of both; they will come, and not receive: and so be
friends with both. There are sins recorded in the Scriptures, in which it is
hard, for any to find the name, and the nature, what the sin was; how does the
School vex it self, to find out what was the nature of the sin of the Angels,
or what was the name, of the sin of Adam? There are actions recorded in the
Scriptures, in which by Gods subsequent punishment, there appears sin to have
been committed, and yet to have considered the action alone, without the
testimony of Gods displeasure upon it; a natural man would not easily find out
a sin. Numb. 22.
Balaam was solicited to come, and curse Gods people; he refused, he consulted
with God: God bids him go, but follow such instructions as he should give him
after; And yet the wrath of God was kindled, because he went. Numb. 20.
Moses seems to have pursued Gods commandment exactly, in drawing water out of
the Rock, and yet God says, Because you believed me not, you shall not bring
this congregation into that land of promise. There are sins hard to be seen,
out of the nature of Man, because Man naturally is not watchful upon his
particular actions, for if he were so, he would escape great sins; when we see
sand, we are not much afraid of a stone; when a Man sees his small sins, there
is not so much danger of great. But some sins we see not out of a natural
blindness in our selves, some we see not out of a natural dimness in the sin it
self. But this sickly sin, this sinful sickness, of gathering Riches, is so
obvious, so manifest to every man's apprehension, as that the books of Moral
men, and Philosophers are as full of it as the Bible. But yet the Holy Ghost,
(as he does always, even in moral Counsels) exceeds the Philosophers; for
whereas they place this sickness in gathering unnecessary riches injuriously;
the Holy Ghost in this place extends i^ further, to a reserving of those
riches; that when we have sinned in the getting of them, we sin still in the
not restoring of them. But to thee, who should repent the ill getting;
Veniet tempus, quo non dispensasse, poenetebit, there will come a time when
thou shall repent the having kept them: Hoc certum est, Ego sum sponsor, Basil.
of this I dare be the surety (says St. Basil) But we can leave St, Basil out
of the bond; we have a better surety and undertaker, the Holy Ghost in Solomon;
So that this evil sickness may be easily seen, it is made manifest enough to us
all, by precedent from God, by example of others, by experience in our selves.
Solomon.


To see this then, is an easy, a natural thing; but to see it so, as to
condemn it, and avoid it, this is a wisemans slight; this was Solomon's slight.
The wiseman sees the plague, Psalm. 50.18.
and shunneth it; therein consists the wisdom. But for the fool when he sees
a theif, he runs with him; when he sees others thrive by ill getting, and
ill keeping, he runs with them, he takes the same course as they do. Beloved,
It is not intended, that true and heavenly wisdom may not consist with
riches: Job, and the Patriarchs abounded with both; And our pattern in this
place, Solomon himself, says of himself; That he was great, Eccles. 2.9.
and increased above all that were before him in Jerusalem, and yet his wisdom
remained with him. The poor man and the rich are in heaven together; and to
show us how the rich should use the poor; Lazarus is in Abraham's bosom; The
rich should succor and relieve, and defend the poor in their bosoms. But when
our Savior declares, a wisdom belonging to Riches, (as in the parable of the
unjust Steward) he places not this wisdom, Luke 16.
in the getting, nor in the holding of Riches, but only in the using of them;
make you friends of your Riches, that they may receive you into everlasting
habitations. There Is no Simony in heaven, that a man can buy so much as a
door-keepers place in the Triumphant Church: There Is no bribery there, to see
Ushers for access; Genesis 28.
But God holds that ladder there, whose foot stands upon the earth here, and
all those good works, which are put upon the lowest step of that Ladder here,
that is, that are done in contemplation of him, they ascend to him, and descend
again to us. Heaven and earth are as a musical Instrument; if you touch a
string below, the motion goes to the top: any good done to Christ's poor members
upon earth, affects him in heaven; And as he said, Quid me per sequeris. Saul
Saul why, persecutest thou me? So he will say, Veni^e benedicti, pavistis me,
visitastis me. This is the wisdom of their use; but the wisdom of their
getting and keeping, is to see, that it is an evil sickness to get too
laboriously, or to reserve too gripingly, things which tend naturally to the
owners evil: For, therefore in that parable does Christ call all their Riches
generaly, universally, Mammonas iniquitatis, Riches of iniquity, not that all
that they had was ill got (that is not likely in so great a company) but that
whatsoever, and howsoever they had got it, and were become true owners of it,
yet they were Riches of iniquity; because that is one iniquity to possess much,
and not distribute to the poor; and it is another iniquity to call those things
riches, which are only temporal, and so to defraud heavenly graces, and
spiritual treasure of that name, that belongs only to them; And the greatest
iniquity of all is toward our selves. To take those riches to our heart, which
Christ calls the thorns that choke the good seeds; Mat. 13.22.
and the Apostles calls tentations, and snares, and foolish, and noisome lusts,
which drown men in perdition, and in destruction, 1. Tim. 6.9.
and which the wise man has seen, and has showed us here, to be reserved to
the owners for their evil. To return to our beginning, and make an end; Heaven
is a feast, and Heaven is a treasure: If ye prepare not for his feast, by being
worthy guests at his table, if you embrace not his treasure, by being such
Merchants as give all for his pearl; another feast, and another treasure are
expressed, and heightened in two such words, as never any tongue of any Author,
but the Holy Ghost himself spoke; Inebriabit absinthio, there is the feast, you
shall be drunk with wormwood, you shall taste nothing but bitter affliction, and
that shall make you reel, for you shall find in your affliction no rest for
your souls. And for the treasure, Thesaurizabis iram dei; you shall treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath; Romans 2.5.
and this will be an exchequor ever open, and never exhausted. But use the
creatures of God, as creatures, and not as God, with a confidence in them, and
you shall find juge convivium, in a good conscience, and Thesauros absconditos,
all the hid treasures of wisdom and knowledge; Col. 29.3.
you shall know how to be rich in this world by an honest getting of riches,
and how to be rich in the next world by a christianly use of those riches here.

THE SECOND SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL
Upon ECCLES. 5.12, and 13. There is an evil sickness that I have seen under
the Sun: Riches reserved to the owners thereof, for their evil. And these
riches perish by evil travail: and he begets a son, and in his hand is
nothing.


THat then which was intended in the former verse, That Riches were hurtful
even to the owners, St. Augustine has well and fully expressed, Aug. in Psalm.
131.
Eris proeda hominum, qui jam es diaboli; The devil has preyed upon thee
already, by knowing what thou would have, and great Men will prey upon thee
hereafter, by knowing what thou have. But because the rich man thinks himself
hard enough for both, for the devil, and for great men, if he may keep his
riches; therefore here is that, which seems to him a greater calamity
inflicted; first, his riches shall perish; Divisio.
and secondly those riches, those which he has labored and travailed for; And
thirdly, they shall perish in travail, and labor, and affliction. And then not
only all his present comfort shall perish, but that which was his future hope:
The son, which he has begot, shall have nothing in his hand.

2 Part. Perish. Prove. 28.8.
He that increases his riches by usury and interest, gathers them for him
that will be merciful to the poor, says Solomon. Is there a discomfort in this?
There is. It is presented there for an affliction, and vexation to a rich Man,
to be told, that his money shall be employed in any other way, not only then
he gathered it for, but then he gathered it by. It would grieve him to know,
that his heir would purchase land, or buy an office with his money; for all
other means of profit then himself has tried, he esteems unthriftiness,
casual, and hazardous; difference of seasons may change the value of his land,
affections of Men may change the value of an office; but whether the year be
good or bad, a year it must be, and nothing can lengthen, or shorten his two
harvests in the year, from six months to six. Always, but his own, displease
him in his heir; but if his heir will be giving to the poor (as Solomon says)
then here are two mischiefs met together, that he could never abide the poor,
and giving; and therefore such a contemplation is a double vexation to him; but
much more must it be so, to hear that his riches shall perish; that they shall
come to nothing, for though, if we consider it aright, it is truly all one,
whether a covetous man's wealth do perish, or no, for so much, as he hoards up,
and hides, and puts to no use; it is all one whether that thousand pound be in
his chest or no, if he never see it, yet since he has made his gold his God,
he has so much devilish Religion in him as to be loath that his God should
perish. And this, that is threatened here is an absolute perishing, an absolute
annihilation; It is the same word, by which David expresses the abolition, and
perishing of the wicked. The way of the wicked shall perish; Psalm. 1.6.
and which Moses repeats with vehemence twice together pereunao peribitis; I
pronounce unto you this day you shall surly perish. So Judas, Deuteronomy. 30.18
and his money perished. The money that Judas had taken; he was weary of keeping
it, and they who had given it, would none of it neither. Se primum mulctavit
pecunia, deinde vita. Aug.
First he fined himself, and then he hanged himself; first he cast back the
money, and then he cast himself headlong and burst: often times the money
perishes, and the man too: yea it is not here only that they shall perish, in
the future; that were a repreive; it were a stalling of a debt; but (as both
our Translations have it) they do perish, they are always melting; yea as the
Original has it, vadit et periit, They are already perished, they were born
dead; ill gotten riches, bring with them from the beginning a Contagion that
works upon themselves, and their Masters.

The riches shall perish, though they be his, though his title to them be good,
if he put his trust in them; And those riches, those which he has got by his
travail, Those which he has reserved by his parsimony, and frugallity. There
is sometimes a greater reverence in us, toward our ancient inheritance toward
those goods, which are devolved upon us, by succession; There is another
affection expressed toward those things, which dying friends have left us, for
they preserve their memories; another toward Jewels, or other Testimonies of
an acceptance of our services from the Prince: but still we love those things
most, which we have got with our own labor, and industrey. When a man comes to
say with Jacob, Genesis 32.10.
with my staff came I over Jordan, and now have I gotten two bands, with this
staff came I to London, with this staff came I to Court, and now am thus and
thus increased, a man loves those addisions, which his own Industry has made
to his fortune. There are some ungrateful Natures that love other men the
worse, for having bound them by benefits, and good turns to them: but that were
a new ingratitude, not to be thankful to our selves, not to love those things,
which we our selves have compassed. We have our reason to do so, in our great
example, Christ Jesus, who loves us most, as we are his purchase, as he has
bought us with his blood; And therefore, though he has expressed a love too,
to the Angels, in their confirmation, yet he cannot be said to love the Angels,
as he does us, because his death has wrought nothing upon them, which were
fallen before; and for us, so he came principally to save sinners: the whole
body and band of Angels, are not his purchase, as all mankind is. This
affection is in worldly men too; they love their own gettings; and those shall
perish. They have given their pleasant things for meat, Chron. 1.11.
to refresh their souls: whatsoever they placed their heart upon, whatsoever
they delighted in most, whatsoever they were loath to part withal, it shall
perish; and the measure of their love to it and the desire of it shall be the
measure of Gods judgment upon it; that which they love most, shall perish
first.

In occupatione.
Those riches then, those best beloved riches shall perish, and that, says the
text, by evil travail,; which is a word, that in the original signifies both
Occupationem, Negotiationem, labor and Travail, and afflictionem, vexationem;
affliction, and vexation: They shall perish in occupatione, then when thou art
laboring, and travailing in thy calling, then when thou art harkening after a
purchase, and a bargain, then when thy neighbors can impute no negligence, thou
wast not negligent in gathering, nay no vice to thee, thou wast not dissolute
in scattering, then when thou risest early, lie down late, and eatest the
bread of sorrow, then shall thou find, not only that that prospers not, which
thou go about, and pretendest to, but that that which thou had before,
decaies, and molders away. If we consider well in what abundance God satisfied
the children of Israel with Quails, and how that ended, we shall see example
enough of this: You shall eat, says God, Number. 11.19.
not one nor two days, nor five, nor ten, nor twenty, but a whole month,
until it come out at your nostrils, and be loathsome unto you; here was the
promise, and it was performed for the plenty, ver. 31.
that quails fell a days journey round about the Camp, and they were two
cubits thick upon the earth; The people fell to their labor, and they arose,
and gathered all that day, and all that night, and all the next day, says the
Text; 32.
and he that gathered least, gathered ten Gomers full; But as the promise was
performed in the plenty, so it was in the course too; whilst the flesh was yet
between their teeth before it was chewed, even the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against the people, and he smote them with an exceeding great plague.
ver. 33.
Even whilst your money is under your fingers, whilst it is in your purposes
determined, and digested for such, and such a purpose, whilst you have put it
in a ship in Merchandice, to win more to it; whilst you have sowed it in the
land of borrowers, to multiply, and grow upon Mortgages, and usury, even when
you are in the midst of your travail, storms at Sea, thieves at land, enviers
at court, informations at Westminster, whilst the meat is in your mouths,
shall cast the wrath of God upon your riches, and they shall perish, In
occupatione, then, when you travail to increase them. The Children of Israel
are said in that place, only to have wept to Moses, out of a lust, and a
grief, for want of flesh. God punished not that weeping; it is a tenderness, a
disposition, that God loves; but a weeping for worldly things, and things not
necessary to them (for Manna might have served them) a weeping for not having,
or for loosing such things of this world, is always accompanied with a
murmuring; God shall cause thy riches to perish in thy travail, not because he
denies thee riches, nor because he would not have thee travail, but because an
inordinate love, an overstudious, and an intemperate,, and overlaborious
pursuit of riches, is always accompanied with a diffidence, in Gods
providence, and a confidence in our own riches.

To give the wicked a better sense of this, God proceeds often the same way,
with the righteous too; but with the wicked, because they do with the
righteous, least they should trust in their own riches. We see in Jobs case, It
was not only his Sons, and daughters, who were banqueting, nor only his
asses, and sheep, and camels that were feeding, that were destroyed; but upon
his Oxen, that were ploughing, upon his servants, which were doing rheir
particular duties, the Sabaeans came, and destruction in their sword; His Oxen,
and his servants perished, in occupatione, in their labor, in their travail,
when they were doing that, which they should do. And if God do thus to his
children, to humble them beforehand, that they do not sacrifice to their own
nets, not trust in their own industry, nor in their own riches, how much more
vehemently shall his judgments burn upon them, whose purpose in gathering
Riches, was pricipally, that they might stand of themselves, and not need God.
There are beasts that labor not, but yet furnish us, with their wool alive,
and with their flesh, when they are dead; as sheep; there are men, that desire
riches, and though they do no other good, they are content to keep good houses,
and that their Heir should do so, when they are dead; There are beasts that
labor, and are meat at their death, but yield no other help in their life, and
these are Oxen; there are men that labor to be rich, and do no good with it,
till their death; There are beasts that only labor, and yield nothing else in
life, nor death, as horses: and there are some, that do neither, but only prey
upon others, as Lions, and others such; we need not apply particularly; there
are all bestial natures in rich men; and God knows how to meet with them all;
and much more will he punish them, which do no good, in life, nor death, nay
that labor not for their riches, but surfeit upon the sweat of other men, since
even the riches of those, that trust in riches, shall perish in Occupatione, in
the very labor, and in the very travail, which (if it were not done with a
confidence in the riches, when they, are got,) were allowable, and acceptable
to God.

You may have a good Emblem of such a rich man, whose riches perish in his
travail, if you take into your memory, and thoughts, a Sponge that is
overfilled; If you press it down with your little finger, the water comes out
of it; Nay, if you lift it up, there comes water out of it; If you remove it
out of his place, though to the right hand as well as to the left, it poures
out water; Nay if it lie still quiet in his place, yet it wets the place, and
drops out his moisture. Such is an overfull, and spungy covetous person: he
must pour out, as well as he has sucked in; if the least weight of disgrace,
or danger lie upon him, he bleeds out his money; Nay, if he be raised up, if he
be preferred, he has no way to it, but by money, and he shall be raised,
whether he will or no, for it. If he be stirred from one place to another, if
he be suffered to settle where he is, and would be, still these two
incommodities lie upon him; that he is loathest to part with his money, of any
thing, and yet he can do nothing without it. He labors for riches, and still
he is but a bagg, for other men: Pereunt in occupatione, as fast as he gather
by labor, God raises some occasion of drawing them from him again, It is not
then with Riches in a family, as it is with a nail in a wall, that the hard
beating of it in, makes it the faster. It is not the hard and laborious getting
of money, the fixing of that in a strong wall, the laying it upon lands, and
such things as are vulgarly distinguished from movables, (as though the world,
and we were not movables) nor the beating that nail hard, the binding it with
Entailes, of Iron, and Adamant, and perpetuities of eternity, that makes riches
permanent, and sure; but it is the good purpose in the getting, and the good
use in the having. And this good use is not, when thou make good use of thy
Money, but when the Commonwealth, where God has given thee thy station, makes
use of it: The Commonwealth must suck upon it, by trade, not it upon the
Commonwealth, by usury. Nurses that give such to children, maintaint hemselves
by it too; but both must be done; thou must be enriched so, by thy money, as
that the state be not impoverished. This is the good use in having it; and the
good purpose in getting it, is, that God may be glorified in it; some errors
in using of Riches, are not so dangerous; for some employing of them in
excesses, and superfluities, this is a rust, without, it will be filled of with
good counsel, or it will be worn of in time; in time we come to see the vanity
of it: and when we leave looking at other men's clothes, or thinking them the
better men for their clothes, why should we think, that others like us the
better for our clothes; those desires will decay in us. But an ill purpose in
getting of them, that we might stand of our selves, and rely upon our Riches,
this is a rust, a cancer at the heart, and is incurable. And therefore, if as
the course, and progress of money has been in the world from the beginning.
(The observation is St. Augustins, but it is obvious to every man acquainted
with history.) That first the world used Iron money, and then Silver money, and
last of all, Gold; If thy first purpose in getting, have been for Iron, (that
thou have intended thy money to be thy strength, and defense in all
calamities.) And then for silver (to provide thee abundance, and ornaments, and
excesses.) And then for gold, to hord, and treasure up in a little room. Romans
2.5.
Thesaurisasti iram. Thou have treasured up the anger of God, against the day
of anger.

Go the same way still; account Riches Iron, (naturally apt to receive those
rusts which we spoke of, in getting, and using) account them silver, (naturally
intended to provide thee of things necessary) but at last come to account them
gold, naturally disposed to make thee a treasure in heaven, in the right use of
them.

This is the true value of them; and except thou value them thus, Nisi Dominus
edificaverit insi Dominius custodierit. Psalm. 127.
Except the Lord build, except the Lord watch, the house, and city perish; so
except the Lord and his glory, be in thy travail, it is not said thou shall not
get by thy travail. Sed pereunt in occupatione. Even in the midst of thy
travail, that which thou gettest, shall perish.

And then that which makes this loss the more insupportable is, (as we noted
the words to signify too) pereunt in afflictione, they shall perish then, when
thou art in affliction, and should have most use of them, most benefit by
them, most content in them. If the disfavour of great persons lie heavy upon me
abroad, mihi plaudo domi, I may have health, and wealth, and I can enjoy those
at home, and make my self happy in them; if I have not all that, but that
sickness lie heavy upon me, yet gold is cordial: that can provide all helps,
that may be had, for my recovery, and it gives me that comfort to my mind, that
I shall lack no attendance, no means of reparation. But if I suffer, under the
judgment of the Law, under the anger of the Prince, under the vehemence of
sickness, and then hear, that I am begged for, some offense, hear of fines, and
confiscations, and extents, hear of tempests and ship-wracks, hear of Men's
breaking, in whose hands my estate was, This is the wrath of Gods anger, in
this signifigation o^ the word, percunt in afflictione. Those riches perish
then, when nothing, but they, could be of use to thee.

Mala.
And all this has one step lower yet, They perish in evil Travail, and in evil
affliction. Now travail, did not begin in that curse, In Sudore vultus; for
Adam was appointed to dress paradise, and to keep paradise before; and that
implied a travail. But then became his travail to be evil travail, when seeing
that he could not get bread without travail; still that refreshed to him the
guiltiness of that sin, which had dejected him, to that misery. Then does the
rich Man see, That his riches perish by evil travail, when he calls himself to
account, and finds that he trusted wholly to his own travail, and not to the
blessings of God. So also every affliction is not evil: it is rather evil to
have none; if ye be without correction, you are bastards, and not sons. Gods
own and only essential Son, Christ Jesus, suffered most; and his adopted sons,
must fulfill his sufferings in their flesh, we are born Gods sons, and heirs,
in his purpose at first; and we are declared to be so, in our second birth of
Baptism, but yet we are not come to years, not come to a trial, how we can
govern our selves, till we suffer afflictions, but then does this affliction
become evil, when that which God intended for physic, we turn into poison:
when God hearkens after this affliction, to hear what voice it produces, and
when he looks for repentance, he hears a murmuring, and repining, when he bends
down his ear, for a Tibi peccavi, he hears a Quare non mortuus? Why dyed I not
in my birth? Job. 3.11. Act. 7. Jam. 3.64.
When he hearkens after: a domine ne statuas, Lord lay not this sin to their
charge, a prayer for our persecutors, he hears a Red eis vicem, Give them a
recompense O Lord, according to their work, Give them a sorrow of heart, thy
curse to them; as it is there,) (though there, not by way of murmuring, but by
way of foresight, and Prophecy, that God would do so.) But to end this part,
then when the Rich man can make no good use of his affliction, when he finds,
Nullam ansam, no handle in it, to take hold of God by, when he can find no
comfort in the next world, he shall loose all here too. And his Riches, Those
Riches, which his labor has made dear unto him, shall not only be taken from
him, and he put to his recovery, but they shall perish, and they shall perish
in the amidst of those labors, which are evil, and eat him up, and macerate
him. And they shall perish in these afflictions which are evil too, which shall
not work, nor conduce to his good.

We come now to the second part: 2. Part.
which respects more the future; He begotteth a Son; first that may seem to
give him some ease; every body desires it. And secondly, It may seem to give
him some excuse of his gathering, because having children, he was bound to
provide for them. But such is Gods indignation for the getting of Riches with a
confidence in them, that he looses all, all comfort in his Son, all excuse in
himself, for in the hands of his Son shall be nothing. First then, for the
having of children, and the testimony of Gods love in that blessing, this
diminishes Nothing, the honor due to the first chastity, the chastity of
virginity. There is a chastity in Marriage: But the chastity of virginity, is
the proper, and principal chastity. Barcenus, amongst the Jews was an
ignominious thing; but it was considered only in them which did marry, and
were barren: God has given us Marriage for Physic; but it is an unwholsom
wantonness to take Physic before we need it: Marriage, In Gods institution at
first, had but two ends; In prolem, and in adjutorium; After man was fallen
sick, then another was added, In remedium. Marriage is properly according to
Gods institution, when all these concur: where none do it is scarce a
Marriage. When we have taken the Physic, yet we are not come to the state of
strength, and health, which is intended in Marriage, Psalm. 12.7.3.
till we have Children to be the staff of our age; Behold Children are the
inheritance of the Lord, and the fruit of the womb his reward; He gives
Marriage for Physic; but Children are a real blessing, in it self, and
reserved to him. And therefore, when God has given us that use of Marriage,
(we are married) he is at an end of his Physic; he does not appoint us to take
Physic again for children: he does not forbid us to take physic, to preserve
our bodies in a good, and healthy costitution; but drugs, and broths, and
baths, purposely for children, come not out of his shop; they are not his
ingredien^s. It is his own work, the gift of children: And therefore when
Rachel came to say to Jacob; Genesis 30.1.
Give me children, or else I die, Jacobs anger was kindled against her, Anne
ego pro Deo: Am I a God to do this. And therefore it is not inconveniently
noted, that as the first man Cain, was called Acquisitus a domino, he was
possessed from the Lord; so after, so very many names in the Scriptures, held
that way of testifying the gift to come from God, that as Samuel, which is,
postulatus a deo, so all the names that have that termination, El, have such a
signification in them; And so in the declining of the Jews state, Matheus, is
Domini Dei, and Johanes, is gratia Dei; and in the beginning of the Christian
Church, every where they abounded with, Deo date, Deus dedit, and quod vult
Deus, and such names, as were acknowledgments, that children were the immediate
gift of God. Genesis 15.1.
And therefore when God said to Abraham; I will be thine exceeding great
reward, and Abraham said, O Lord God what will thou give me, seeing I am
childlesse? God comes to particulars with him first in that, that he would give
him children: And therefore, as to all men, so to this rich man; in our text,
it may be naturally admitted for a comfort, that he had a Son.

Now as it was a just comfort, to have children, so it was a just excuse, 1.
Tim. 5.8.
a just encouragement to provide for them; If there be any that provideth not
for his own, he denies the faith; (that is, in his actions, and works of
faith,) and he is worse then an Infidel; for Infidels do provide for their own.
Christianismi famam negligit, Chrysostom.
he betraies the honor, and dignity of the Christian Religion; if he neglect
his children, and he has opened a large gate of Scandal to the Gentiles. And
therefore says St. Augustine, quicunque vult: Whosoever will disinherit his
Sons, Augu.
though it be upon pretext of doing good service, by building, or endowing a
Church, or making the Church his heir. Quaerat alterum qui suscipiat, non
Augustinum Immo, deo propitio, neminem inveniet: Let him find another that will
accept his offer; for Augustine will not; nor, by Gods grace any other. Hier.
epist. 47.
The tie, the obligation of providing for our Children, binds us strictly; for
it is, secunda, post Deum faederatio; next to the band of Religion, next to our
service to God, our first duty is to provide for them.

Chrysostom.
But yet, Dic obsecro, cum liberos a Deo petiisti; when thou did pray to God
to give thee Children, did thou add this clause to thy prayer, Da liberos,
give me Children, that I may thereby have an excuse, of my covetousness, of my
breach of thy Commandment, of my profaning thy Sabaths, of my usu^y, of my
perjury; was this in thy prayer, says he. If it were, the Child shall surely
dye, as Nathan said to David: God will panish thee, in taking those children
from thee, which were the colors of thy sin: Eccles. 40.13.
The children of the ungodly, shall not obtain many branches; not extend to
many generations; If they do, if his children be in great number, the sword
shall destroy them; His remnant shall be buried in death, and his widows shall
not weep. Howsoever, as the words of the text stand, Job. 27.14.
the Holy Ghost has left us at our liberty, to observe one degree of misery
more in this corrupt man. That he is said, to have begot his Son, after those
Riches are perished. He had a discomfort in evil travail, and in evil
affliction before; he has another now, that when all is gone, then he has
children, the foresight of whose misery must needs be a continual affliction
unto him. Augustine.
For St. Augustine reports it, not as a leading Case, likely to be followed, but
as a singular Case, likely to stand alone; that when a rich man, who had no
child, nor hope of any, had given his Estate to Auretius Bishop of Carthage,
and after, beyond all expectation came to have children, that good Bishop
unconstrained by any law, or intent in the donor, gave him back his Estate
again. God, when he will punish ill getting, will take to himself that which
was robbed from him, and then, if he give Children, he will not be bound to
restitution.

But if this rich man have his riches, and his Son together, the Son may have
come from God, and the riches from the devil, and God will not join them
together. Howsoever, he may in his mercy provide for the son otherwise, yet he
will not make him heir of his fathers estate. The substance of the ungodly
shall be dried up like a river; Eccles. 40.
and they shall make a sound like a thunder, in rain. It shall perish, and it
shall be in Parabolam, it shall be the wonder, and the discourse of the time.
If they be not wasted in his own time, yet he shall be an ill, but a true
prophet upon himself; he shall have impressions, and sensible apprehensions of
a future wast, as soon, as he is gone: he shall hear, or he shall whisper to
himself that voice: O fool, This night they will fetch away thy soul; he must
go under the imputation of a fool, where the wisdom of this generation, (which
was all the wisdom he had, Luke 12.20.
) will do him no good; he must go like a fool. His soul must be fetched away;
he has not his, In manus tuas, his willing surrender of his soul ready; It
must be fetched in the night of ignorance, when he knows not his own spiritual
state; It must be fetched in the night of darkness, in the night of solitude,
no sense of the assistance of the communion of Saints in the Triumphant, nor in
the Militant Church; in the night of disconsolatenes; no comfort in that sea.
Absolution, which by by the power committed to them, Gods Ministers came to the
penitent, In the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; and it must
be fetched this night, the night is already upon him, before he thought of it.
All this, that the soul of this fool, shall be fetched away this night, is
presented for certain, and inevitable; all this admits no question; but the,
Qua perasti, cujus erunt, there is the doubt; Then, whose shall those things be,
which thou have provided? If he say, they shall be his Sons, God says here, In
his hand shall be nothing; for, though God may spare him, that his riches be
not perished before his death, though God have not discovered his iniquity, by
that manner of punishment, yet, Quod in radice celatur, in ramis declara^ur;
God will show that in the bough which was hid in the root, the iniquity of the
father in the penury of the son. And therefore, To conclude all, since riches
are naturally conditioned so, as that they are to the owners harm, either
testimonies of his former hard dealing in the world, or tentation to future
sins, or provocations to other men's malice, since that though, thou may have
repented the ill getting of those riches, yet, thou may have omitted
restitution, and so there hovers an invisible owner over thy riches, which may
carry them away at last, since though, thou may have repented, and restored,
and possess thy riches, that are left, with a good Conscience; yet as we said
before, from Nathans mouth, the Child may die, God, that has many ways of
expressing his mercies, may take this one way of expressing his judgment, that
yet thy son shall have nothing of all that in his hand, put something else into
his hand; put a book, put a sword, put a ship, put a plough, put a trade, put a
course of life, a calling, into his hand; And put something into his head, the
wisdom, and discretion, and understanding of a serpent, necessary for those
courses, and callings. But principally, put something into his heart, a
religious fear, and reverence of his Maker; a religious apprehension, and
application of his Savior, a religious sense, and acceptance of the comforts
of the Holy Spirit; that so, if he feel, that for his fathers hard dealing, God
has removed the possession from him, he does not doubt therefore of Gods mercy
to his father, nor dishonor his fathers memory, but behave himself so in his
course, as that the like judgment may not fall upon his son; but that his
riches increasing, by his good travail, they may still remain in the hands of
his son, whom he has begotten.

A Sermon. 11.
SERMON PREACHED AT GREENVVICH April 30. 1615. SERMON. XI.
Esaias 52.3. Ye have sold your selves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed
without money.


IT is evident in it self, and agreed by all, that this is a prophecy of a
deliverance; but from what calamity it is a deliverance, or when this prophecy
was accomplished, is not so evident, nor so constantly agreed upon. All the
expositions may well be reduced to three; first, that it is a deliverance from
the captivity of Babylon, and then the benefit appertains only to the Jews,
and their deliverer, and Redeemer is Cyrus; Secondly, that it is a deliverance
from persecutions in the primitive Church, and so it appertains only to
Christians, and their Redeemer, from those persecutions is Constantine; And
thirdly that it is a deliverance from the sting and bondage of death by sin;
and so it appertains to the whole world, and the Redeemer of the whole world is
Christ Jesus: For the first, since both the Chaldee Paraphrase, and the Jewish
Rabbis themselves, do interpret this to be a prophecy of the Messiah, because
they labor ever more, as strongly as they can, to wring our weapons out of our
hands, and to take from us, many of those arguments, which we take from the
Prophets, for the proof of the Messiah: it concerns us therefore to hold fast,
as much as they grant us, and not to interpret this place of a temporal
deliverance from Babylon, but of the deliverance by the Messiah. And for the
second, which is the deliverance of the christians, from the persecutions in
the primitive times, though the Christians did then with a holy cheerfulness
suffer those persecutions, when they could not avoid them, without
prevaricating, and betraying the hour of Christ Jesus, yet they did not
wilfully thrust themselves into those dangers, they did not provoke the
Magistrate; And the word which is here translated, ye sold your selves,
vendictistis vos, implies actionem spontaneam, a free and voluntary action,
done by themselves, and therefore cannot well be understood of the persecutions
in the Primitive Church. The third therefore, as yet is the most useful, and
most received, so it is the most proper acceptance of the word, that it is a
deliverance from the bondage of sin, to be wrought by Christ: for as Saint
Hierome says, this Prophet Esaias, is rather an Evangelist, than a Prophet,
because almost all that Christ did, and said, and suffered, is foretold, and
prophetically antidated in his prophecy, and almost all his prophecy has some
relation (at least in a secondary sense of accommodation, (where it is not so
primarily) and literally) to the words and actions, and passions of Christ.

Following then this interpretation in general of the word, that it is a
deliverance from the wages of sin, Death, by Christ we may take, in passing a
short view, of the miserable condition of man, wherein he enwraped himself, and
of the abundant mercy of Christ Jesus in withdrawing him from that universal
calamity, by considering only the sense, and largeness, and extention of those
words, in which the holy Ghost has been pleased to express both these in this
Text. For first, the word in which our action is expressed, which is Machar
verdidistis, ye have sold, signifies in many places of Scripture, dare
proreatia, a permutation, an exchange of one thing for another; and in other
places it signifies Dedere, upon any little attempt to forsake and abandon our
defenses, and to suffer the enemy easily to prevail upon us; so also it
signifies Tradere, not only to forsake our selves, but to concur actually to
the delivering up of our selves; and lastly, it signifies Repellere, to join
with our enemies in beating back any that should come to our relief, and
rescue. And then, as we have so sold our selves, for the substance of the Act,
as is expressed in that word Machar, we have exchanged our selves at an
undervalue, and worse than that, we have yielded up our selves upon easy
tentations, and worse than that, we have offered our selves, exposed our
selves, invited the devil, and tempted temptations, and worse than that, we
have Rejected the succors and the supplies which have been offered us in the
means and conduits, and seals of his Graces. As it stands thus with us, for the
matter, so for the manner, how we have done this, that is expressed in that
other word, kinnan which signifies fecit, as it is here, Gratis, for naught.
And in another place, Frustra, to no purpose; for it is a void bargain, because
we had no title, no interest in our selves, when we sold our selves; and it
signifies, temere, rashly, without consideration of our own value, upon whom
God had stamped his Image; And then again it signifies, Immerito, undeservedly,
before God, in whose jurisdiction we were by many titles, had forsaken us, or
done any thing to make us forsake him. So that our action in selling our selves
for nothing, has this latitude, That man whom God has dignified so much, as
that in the Creation he imprinted his Image in him, and in the Redemption he
assumed not the Image, but the very nature of man, That man whom God still
preserved as the Aple of his Eye, and (as he expresses himself often in the
Prophets) is content to reason, and to dispute with man, and to submit himself
to any trial whither he have not been a gracious God unto him: That this man
should thus abandon this God, and exchange his soul for any thing in this
world, when as it can profit nothing, to gain the whole world and loose our own
soul, and not exchange it, but give it away, thrust it off, and be a devil to
the devil, to tempt the tempter himself to take it. But then, as the word
aggravates our condemnation, so it implies a consolation too; for it is
fructra, That is unprovidently, unthriftily, inconsideratly, vainly, and that
multiplies our fault, but then it is invalidly, and uneffectually too; that is,
it is a void bargain; and when our powerful Redeemer, is pleased to come, and
claim his right, and set on foot his title, all this improvident bargain of
ours is voided, and reversed, and not though, but because we have sold our
selves, for naught, we shall be redeemed without money.

For the other word, in which the action of our Redeemer is expressed, though
it have somewhat different uses in the Scriptures, yet it is evermore spoken of
him, Qui habet jus re dimendi, no man, by the Law could redeem a thing, but he
who had a title to that thing. So the word is used, where there are given
Cities of refuge from the avenge^.. There the word is, a redemptor, from him
that has right to redeem his kinsmans blood, to bring an Appeal, and to
prosecute for the death of his kinsman, who was slain. So is the word used
also, where that Law is given, etc. If thy brother be impoverished, and he sell
his possession then his redeemer etc. That is, he that is next to that land;
And so also, when a man dyed without issue, he who had the right, and the
obligation, to raise seed to the dead man, he was the redeemer: I am thy
kinsman, says Booz to Ruth, but says he, Alius Redemptor magis propinquus.
Thou have another Redeemer, nearer in blood then I am. How ill a bargain soever
we made for our selves, Christ Jesus has not lost his right in us, but is our
Redeemer in all these acceptations of the world: He is our sanctuary and
refuge; when we have committed spiritual murder upon our own Souls, he preserves
us, and delivers us to the redemption ordained for us: when we have sold our
possessions, our natural faculties, He supplies us with grace, and feeds us
with his Word, and clothes us with his Sacraments, and warms us with his
Absolutions, against all diffidence, which had formerly frozen us up: and in
our barrenness, he raises up seed unto our dead souls, thoughts, and works,
worthy of repentance. All this, thy Redeemer has right to do; and, when it
pleases him to do it, he does it, sine argento, without money; when the now
Cas^ph, signifies not only money, but, Omne appe^ibile, any thing that we can
place our desires, or cast our thougths, upon. This Redemption of ours, is
wrought by such means, as the desire of man could never have fortuned upon; The
Incarnation of God, and then the death and Crucifying of that God, so
Incarnate, could never have fallen within the desire, nor wish of any man;
neither would any man o^ himself ever have conceived, That the Sacraments of
the Church, poor and naked things of themselves, (for all that the wit of man
could imagine in them, or allow to them) should be such means to s^al, and
convey the graces, which accompany this Redemption of our souls, to our souls.

Divisio.
So then, Having thus represented unto you, a model, and design, of the
miserable condition of man, and the abundant mercy of our Redeemer, so far, as
those words which the Holy Ghost has chosen in this text, has invited and led
us, That we may look better upon some pieces of it, that we may take such a
sight of this Redeemer here, as that we may know Him, when we meet Him at home,
at our house, in our private meditations, at His house, in the last judgment. I
shall only offer you two considerations; Exprobrationem, and Consola^ionem:
First, an exprobration, or increpation from God to us, And then a consolation,
or consolidation of the same God upon us; And in the exprobration, God
reproaches to us, first, our Prodigality, that we would sell a reversion, our
possibility, our expectance of an inheritance in heaven; And then, our
cheapness, that we would sell that, for nothing.

Prodigality
First then, Prodigality is a sin, that destroys even the means of liberality.
If a man wast so as that he becomes unable to relieve others; by this wast,
this is a sinful prodigality; but much more if he wast so, as that he is not
able to subsist, and maintain himself: and this is our case, who have even
annihilated our selves, by our pro^useness; For, it is his mercy that we are
not consumed. It is a sin, and a viperous sin; it eats out his own womb; The
Prodigal consumes that that should maintain his Prodigality: It is peccatum
Biathana ton, a sin that murders it self,

Now, as in civil Prodigalities, in a wastfulness of our temporal estate, the
Laws inflicts three kinds of punishment, three incommodities upon him that is a
Prodigal, so have the same punishments a proportion, and somethings that answer
them, in this spiritual prodigality of the soul by sin. The first is, bonis
suis interdicitur; He that is a Prodigal, in the Law, cannot dispose of his
own Estate; whatsoever he gives, or sells, or leases, all is void, as of a
madman, or of an Infant. And such is the condition of a man in sin; He has no
interest in his own natural faculties; He cannot think, he cannot wish, he
cannot do any thing of himself; the venem and the malignity of his sin goes
through all his actions, and he cannot purge it.

The second incommodity is, Testamentum non facit, The Prodigal person has no
power allowed him by the Law, to make a will, at his death: And this also does
an habitual sinner suffer: For, when he comes to his end, he may dictate to a
Notary, and he may bid him write, Imprimis, I give my Soul to God, my Body to
such a Church, my Goods to such, and such persons: But if those Goods be l^able
to other debts, ^he Leg^tarie; shall have no profit; If the person be under
excommunication, he shall not lie in that Church; If his soul be under the
weight of unrepented sins, God will do the devil no wrong, he will not take a
soul, that is sold to him before.

The third Incommodity that a Prodigal incurrs by the Law, is, Exhaeredatus
creditur, He is presumed to be disinherited by his father; that whereas, by
that Law, if the father, in his Will, leave out any of his childrens names, and
never mention him, yet that child which is pretermitted, shall come in for a
child's part, except the father have assigned a particular reason why he left
him out; If this child were a Prodigal, there needs no other reason to be
assigned, but Exhaeredatus Creditur, He is presumed to be disinherited. And so
also, if we have seen a man prodigal of his own soul, and run on in a course of
sin, all his life, except there appear very evident signs of resumption into
Gods grace, at his end, Exhaeredatus Creditur, we have just reason to be
afraid, that he is disinherited. If any such sinner seem to thee to repent at
his end, Fa^eor vobis non negamus, quod petit, says St. Augustine: I confess,
we ought not to deny him, any help that he desires in that late extremity? Sed
non praesumimus quia been exit, I dare not assure you, that that man dies in a
good state; he adds that vehemence, non praesumo, non vos fallo, non praesumo:
I should but deceive you, if I should assure you, that such a man dyed well.
There was one good and happy Thief, that stole a Salvation, at the crucifying
of Christ; but in him, that was thoroughly true, which is proverbially spoken,
Occasio facit furem, the oppotunity made him a thief: and when there is such
another opportunity, there may be such another theif; when Christ is to dye
again, we may presume of mercy, upon such a late repentance at our death. The
preventing grace of God, made him lay violent hands upon heaven. But when thou
art a Prodigal of thy soul, will God be a prodigal too, for thy sake, and
betray and prostitute the kingdom of Heaven for a sigh, or a groan, in which
thy pain may have a greater part than thy repentance. God can raise up children
out of the stones of the street, and therefore he might be as liberal as he
would of his people, and suffer them to be sold for old shoes; but Christ will
not sell his birthright for a mess or pottage, the kingdom of Heaven, for
the dole at a Funeral. Heaven is not to be had in exchange for an Hospital, or
a Chantry, or a College erected in thy last will: It is not only the selling
all we have that must buy that pearl, which represents the kingdom of Heaven;
The giving of all that we have to the poor, at our death, will not do it; the
pearl must be sought, and found before, in an even and constant course of
Sanctification; we must be thrifty all our life, or we shall be to poor for
that purchase.

It is then an unthrifty, a perplexed bargain, when both the buyer, and the
seller loose; our loss is plain enough, for we loose our souls: And certainly,
howsoever the devil be expressed to take some joy at the winning of a sinner,
howsoever his kingdom be thereby enlarged, yet Almighty God suffers not his
treason, his undermining of man, to be unpunished, but afflicts him with more
and more accidental torments, even for that; as a licencious man takes pleasure
in the victory of having corrupted a woman, by his solicitation, but yet
insensibly overthrows his constitution by his sin; so the withdrawing of Gods
Subjects, from his alleigance, induces an addition of punishment upon the devil
himself.

Consider a little further, our wretchedness, in this prodigality; we think,
those Laws barbarous and inhumane, which permit the suit of men in debt, for
the satisfaction of Creditors; but we sell our selves, and grow the farther in
debt, by being sold; we are sold, and to even rate our debts, and to aggravate
our condemnation. We find in the history of the Muscovits, that it is an
ordinary detainder amongst them, to sell themselves, and their posterity, into
everlasting bondage, for hot drink: In one winter, a wretched man will drink
himself, and his posterity, into perpetual slavery. But we sell our selves, not
for drink, but for thirst: we are sorry when our appetite too soon decaies, and
we would fain sin more than we do. At what a high rate did the blessed Martyrs
sell their bodies; They built up Gods Church with their blood: They sowed his
field, and prepared his harvest with their blood: they got heaven for their
bodies, and we give bodies, and souls for hell.

In a right inventary, every man that ascends to a true value of himself,
considers it thus; First, His Soul, then His life; after his fame and good
name: And lastly, his goods and estate; for thus their own nature has ranked
them, and thus they are (as in nature) so ordinarily in legal consideration
preferred before one another. But for our souls, because we know not, how they
came into us, we care not how they go out; because, if I ask a Philosopher,
whither my soul came in, by propagation from my parents, or by an immediate
infusion from God, perchance he cannot tell, so I think, a divine can no more
tell me, whither, when my soul goes out of me, it be likely to turn on the
right, or on the left hand, if I continue in this course of sin. And then, for
the second thing in this inventary, Life; the Devil himself said true, skin for
skin, and all that a man has, will he give for his life; Indeed we do not
easily give away our lives expressly, and at once; but we do very easily suffer
our selves to be cousened of our lives: we pour in death in drink, and we call
that health, we know our life to be but a span, and yet we can wash away one
inche in riot, we can burn away one inch in lust, we can bleed away one inch in
quarrels, we have not an inch for every sin; and if we do not pour out our
lives, yet we drop them away. For the third piece of our self, our fame and
reputation, who had not rather be thought an usurer, then a beggar? who had not
rather be the object of envy, by being great, than of scorn and contempt, by
being poor, upon any conditions? And for the last of all which is our goods,
Seneca.
though our coveteousness appears most, in the love of them, in that lowest
thing of all ( Adeo omnia homini cariora seipso, so much does every man think
every inferior thing better than himself, than his fame, than his body, than
his soul; which is a most perverse undervaluing of himself, and a damnable
humility) yet even with these goods also, (as highly as he values them) a man
will past if to fuel, and foment, and maintain that sin, that he delights in:
that which is the most precious, our souls, we undervalue most; and that which
we do esteem most, (though naturally it should be lowest) our estate, we are
content to wast, and dissipate for our sins: And whereas the Heathens needed
laws to restrain them, from an expensive, and wastful worship of their Gods,
every man was so apt to exceed in sacrifices and such other religious duties,
til that law, Deus frugi Colunto Let men be thrifty and moderate in religious
expenses, was enacted, (which law was a kind of mortmain, and inhibition, That
every man might not bestow what he would, upon the service of those Gods) we
have turned our prodigality the other way, upon the devil, whom we have made
Haeredem in esse and our sole executor, and sacrificed soul, and life, and
fame, and fortune, all the gifts of God, and God himself, by making his
religion, and his Sacraments, and the profession of his name, in an
hypocritical use of them, to be the devils instruments, to draw us the
easilyer, and hold us the faster; and what prodigality can be conceived to
exceed this, in which we do not only mispend our selves, Nihil.
but mispend our God.

The other point in this exprobration is, that, as we have prodigally sold our
selves, so we have inconsiderately sold our selves for nothing; we have in our
bargain, diseases, and we have poverty, and we have unsensibleness of our
miseries; but diseases are but privations of health, and poverty but a
privation of wealth, and unsensibleness but a privation of tenderness of
Conscience; all are privations, and privations are nothing. if a man had got
nothing by a bargain but repentance, he would think, and justly, he had got
little: but if thou had repentance in this bargain, thy bargain were the
better; if thou could come to think thy bargain bad, it were a good bargain;
but the height of the misery is in this, that one of those nothings, for which
we have sold our selves is a stupidity, an unsensibleness of our own
wretchedness.

The Laws do annull, and make void fraudulent conveyances; and then the laws
presume fraud in the conveyance, if at least half the value of the thing be not
given: now if the whole world be not worth one soul, who can say, that he has
half his value? it were not merely nothing, if (considering that inventary,
which we spoke of before) we had the worse for the better; that were but an ill
exchange, but yet it were not nothing. If we had bodies for our souls, it were
not merely nothing; but we find, that sin that sells our souls, decays and
withers our bodies; our bodies grow incapable of that sin, unable to commit
that sin, which we sold our souls for. If we had fame and reputation for out
bodies, it were not nothing: but we see, that Heretics, that give their
bodies to the fire, are by the very law, infamous, and they are infamous in
every man's apprehension. If we had worldly goods for loss of fame, and of our
good name, yet still it were not nothing; but we see that witches, who are
infamous persons, for the most part, live in extreme beggary too. So that the
exprobration is just, we have sold our selves for nothing; and however the
ordinary murmuring may be true, in other things, that all things are grown
dearer, our souls are still cheap enough, which at first were all sold in
gross, for (perchance) an Apple, and are now retailed every day for nothing.

Joseph was sold underfoot by his brethren; but it is hard to say, for how
much; some Copies have that he was sold for 20 pieces, and some for 25, and
some for 30: and S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, collects arguments, at least,
allusions, from this variety of Copies: but all these say, it was but so many
pieces of silver. The Septuagints, in their translation, extend them to gold,
to so many crowns, or such: Josephus multiplies them to pounds, so many pounds:
all think it too low a price for Joseph, to be sold for twenty pieces of
silver. But yet if it were so, this was not for nothing; and for this selling,
his brethren had some pretense of excuse ne polluantur manus, they would but
sell him, least their hands should be defiled with blood: but we sell our
selves, ut polluantur manus, therefore, that our hands may be defiled with
blood, even with our own blood, with the loss of our bodies, which we consume
by sin, and of our souls, which perish eternally by it.

Our Savior Christ, every drop of whose blood was of infinite value (for one
of our souls is more worth than the whole world, and one drop of his blood had
been sufficient for all the souls of 1000 worlds, if it had been applied unto
them) was sold scornfully and basely, at a low price; at most, not above six
pound of our money; but we sell our selves, and him too, we crucify him again
every day, for nothing: and when our sin is the very crucifying of him, that
should save us, who shall save us? Earthly Princes have been so jealous of
their honors, as that they have made it Treason, to carry their pictures into
any low Office, or into any irreverend place. Beloved, whenever we commit any
sin, upon discourse, upon consideration, upon purpose, and plot, the image of
God which is engraved and imprinted in us, and lodged in our understanding, and
in that reason which we employ in that sin, is mingled with that sin; we draw
the image of God into all our incontinencies, into all our oppressions, into
all our extortions, and supplantations: we carry his image, into all soul
places, which we haunt upon earth; yea we carry his image down with us, to
eternal condemnation: for, even in Hell, uri potest, non exuri Imago Dei, says
S. Bernard; The image of God burns in us in hell, but can never be burnt out of
us: as long as the understanding soul remains, the Image of God remains in it,
and so we have used the image of God, as witches are said to do the images of
men; by wounding or melting the image, they destroy the person: and we by
defacing the image of God in our selves by sin, to the painful and shameful
death of the Cross.

Genesis 31.
Rachel and Lea complained of their father Laban, thus, He has sold us, and
has eat, and consumed the money; they lamented it much, to see themselves
sold, and by their father, and their father never the better for the bargain.
But still our case is worse than any; the devil has bought us, and he, he who
has bought us, has eaten and consumed the money: he pretends to buy us, by
giving us pleasure, or profit for our selves, and then those very pleasures,
and those riches, which he pretends to give us, are his food, and his
instruments, to effect his mischievous, and tyrannous purposes upon us. And
therefore let no man think himself exempt from this challenge, that he has
sold himself for nothing. Let no man present his Dutals, his Court-rolls, his
Bacus, his good Debts, his titles of honor, his Maces, or his Staves, or his
Ensigns of power and Office, and say, call you all this nothing? Compare all
these with thy soul, and they are nothing. Now, whilst thou wallowest in all
these here, thou may hear God say, Quid habes, quod non accepisti, What have
thou of all this, which thou have not received; but when the Bell tols, then he
shall say, in the voice of that Bell, Quid habes quod accepisti, What have thou
of all that thou have received? Is not all that come to nothing? and then thou
that thoughtest thy self strong enough in purse, in power, in favor, to
compass any thing, and to embrace many things, shall not find thy self able to
attain to a door-keepers place in the kingdom of heaven.

Let no man therefore take too much joy, to apply to himself those words of the
parable, Filii saeculi, The children of this world (which grow rich) are wiser
than the children of light; for it is but, In generatione sua, Wiser in their
generation; and how little a while that generation shall last, God knows; and
what fools they shall appear to be, for all generations after, we know. They
are called the wisest amongst men, as the Serpent was called the wisest amongst
Beasts, that is, still, the fittest for the devil to work in, to make his
instruments, and engines to desire a curse upon themselves, and their
posterity. Let no man wrest Gods example to his purpose, and say, if he do sell
himself for nothing, he does but as God himself did, and as David told him he
did, Psalm. 44.
Thou sellest thy people without gain, and do not increase their price. That
was not for nothing; God had his end in that: neither was it an absolute sale;
but a short term: God sels us over to sickness, to tribulations, to
afflictions, for sometime; perchance for the whole term, of this short life;
but all this is but to improve us, and that we may be the fitter for him when
he Takes us into his own hand again, in that surrender of our self, In manus
tuas, when we shall deliver up our souls: to him, that gave them: for here no
propriety is Destroyed, still here is meum and tuum between God and me; It is
still my soul, and still his soul; and when God looked mercyfully toward Job
then Satan's lease expired. God does not give his saints ^or Nothing; for
sanguis Semen, The blood of the Martyrs was the seed of the Church and ye are
bought with a price says the Apostle; 1. Cor. 6.
It is pretiore ye are pretiously bought, even with the precious blood, of the
only Sone of God. And for our temporal and secular value, in Gods account, we
see how God expressed his care of the people, when he diverted Sennachrib, from
afflicting them, Esa. 43.
by turning him upon other wars. I gave Egypt for thy ransom, Ethiopia, and
seba for the, because thou wast precious in my sight, and thou wast honorable,
and I loved the; therefore will I give man for the, and people for thy sake. And
this leads us in to the second part, The Consolation, that Though, nay, because
we have sold our selves for nothing, we shall be Redeemed with out money.

Into this part then, there is at first a strange Entrance; 2 Part.
Therefore, That therefore, because we have sold our selves we should be
redeemed; Therefore because we have been prodigal, we should be made rich. But,
this Therefore, this reason, relates to the prise, not to the work of the
Redemption, Because it was for nothing, that we were sold, it is without money,
that we are Redeemed: for, for that, there is reason in Equity: but for the
Redemption itself, there is no therefore, no reason at all: to be assigned, but
onley the Eternal goodness of God himself, and the Eternal purpose of his
will: Of which will of God, whosoever seeks a reason, Aliquid majus Deo
quaerit, says S. Augustine, he that seeks what persuaded or inclind the will of
God, seeks for something wiser, and greater than God himself.

In this redemption then God pursues the devil, in all those steps, by which he
had made his profit, of a prodigality; for, first, as we gave away our selves,
so he restores us to our selves again. It is well expresed in the parable of
the prodigal; Luc. 15.
and his case is ours. The portion which he asked of his father, was the use of
his free will. God gave it him; Adams first Immortality was, posse non mori he
needed not to have died: It was in his own power whether he would keep a
free will, or, no, and he spent that stock, he lost that free will. He spent
not his free will so as Bellarmin understands this spending, that that man may
be said to spend his life ill, that misimployes it, but yet he has this life
in him still: But the prodigal, Adam, spent is utterly: he spent it so, that
he and we have no freewill at all left. But yet; even the prodigal said, that
he would return to his father, and he came; He had not only some sudden
thoughts of Repentance, but he put himself actually in the way: cum long
abesset, says that parable, when he was a great way off, yet because he was in
the way, his father met him and kissed him, and put that Robe upon him, which
was not only Dignitas, quam perdidit Adam, as S. Austin qualifies it, a
restitution to the same integrity, which Adam had and had lost, but that was
Amictus sapientiae, (so S. Ambrose calls it) it was an ability to preserve
himself in that integrity, to which he was restored. It was a Robe that was put
upon him; it was none of his own; but when it was put upon him, it
rectified and restored those faculties, which were his own: as the eye sees in
a man restored to life, though the soul enable the eye and not the eye it self,
so the faculty of free will works in us as well as it did in Adam though only
the grace of God enable that faculty.

When God has wrought that first cure (which he does by incorporating us, in
the Church by baptism) that we are our selves again, then (as in the case of
prodigals in the law) as they had Tutors, and Curators appointed them, so he
sends the Holy Ghost, to be our Guardian our Curator: and as the office of that
person, in that law, was double, first to reverse all contracts and bargains,
which that prodigal person, in that state, had made, and secondly to inhibit,
and hinder him, from making new contracts, so this blessed Spirit of
consolation, by his sanctification, seals to our consciences a Quietus est, a
discharge of all former spiritual debts, he cancells all them, he nails them to
the cross of Christ, and then he strengthens us against relapses into the same
sins again.

He proceds farther than this; beyond restering us, beyond preserving us; for
he betters us, he improves us, to a better condition, than we were in, at
first. And this he does, first by purging and purifying us, and then by
changing, and transmuting us. He purges us by his sunshine, by his temporal
blessings; for, as the greatest globes of gold lie nearest the face and top of
the earth, where they have received the best concoction from the heat of the
sun; so certainly, in reason, they who have had Gods continual sunshine upon
them, in a prosperous fortune, should have received the best concoction, the
best digestion of the testimonies of his love, and consequently be the purer,
and the more refined metal. If this purging prevail not, then he comes to
purge those whom he means to lay up in his treasure, with tribulation; he
carries them from the sunshine into the fire, and therefore, if those
tribulations fall upon thee in a great and heavy measure, think thy dross
needed this vehemence, and do not make afflictions, Arguments of God neglecting
thee, for he that is presented to have suffered very much, is also presented to
have been very righteous, that is Job; And he that was the most innocent of
all, suffered most of all, Christ Jesus thy Savior.

From this purifying comes our transmutation, that we are changed in semen Dei,
made the seed of God: for, so God calls children that are derived from honest,
and godly parents, Mal. 2.
The seed of God, in the Prophet: but more fully in the Apostle, whosoever is
born of God sins not, for his seed remains in him: 1 Ioh. 3.
for this generation, is our regeneration, Jacob. 1.
of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth: this grace makes us as
properly the seed of God, as sin makes us the seed of the Devil, of the
Serpent, 3.
and so we are expressly called in Genesis and so also in the Apostles, you are of
your father the devil, Io. 8.
and the lusts of your father, you will do. So we are changed in naturam Dei,
as S. Peter expresses: 2.1.
it By his precious promises we are made partakers of the divine nature: not Ab
anteriori, nor a posteriori; not that we are so derived from the nature and
essence of God, as that our souls should be of his very substance, as the
Manichees imagined, nor, as Origin mistook, upon misinterpreting these words to
the Corinthians, ut Deus sit omnia in omnibus, 1.15.
That God should be all in all, so as that at last, the whole nature of
mankind, and indeed, all other natures and substances (if Origin have been
rightly understood by some men near his own times) should be swallowed up, and
drowned in the very substance of God himself. But this transmutation is a
glorious restoring of Gods image in us, and it is our conformity to him; and
when either his temporal blessings, or his afflictions, his sun, or his fire,
has tried us up to that height, to a conformity to him, then come we to that
transmutation, which admits no re-transmutation, which is a modest, but
infalible assurance of a final perseverance, so to be joined to the Lord, as to
be one spirit with him; for as a spirit cannot be divided, so they who are thus
changed into him, are so much His, so much He, as that nothing can separate
them from him; and this is the ladder, by which we may try, how far we are in
the way to heaven.

And when we are come to this, then we are able to see, and to consider, the
poverty, and the value of him, who had before bought us, for nothing, and
enthraled us. 2 Cor. 4.
The Devil is called the Lord of the world; but that is, in the person of
Infidells; and we are none of that world. Though we have to do with
Principallities, and spiritual wickedness, Ephesians.
yet St: Paul motions it thus much, Est nobis Colluctatio, He arms us at all
points, in that chapter, fit to endure any violent, or any long attempt, and
yet he tells us, that all that we have to do with the Devil, is but
Colluctatio, but a wrestling; we may be thrown, but we cannot be slain. So
also is the same state of the saints of Gods described. That the Devil labors
to Devour, That he walks about, and seeks, Those who are without the pale,
without the Church, and these that are Rebellious and refractary within it,
these he may devour without any resistance: they fall into his mouth; but for
us, who are embraced by thy Redemtion, he is put to his labor, and to lose his
labor too; He is put to seek, and put to miss too. He was put to sue out a
Commission, for Jobs good; till then he con^essed to God, Thou have put a hedge
about him. He was put to renew this commision, for his person; Touch his bones?
but further he durst not ask. He has a Kingdom, but no body knows where: I
would we might still dispute, whether it were in the Earth, or in the Air, and
not find this Kingdom in our own hearts. Expel him thence; and Gods spirit
is as the Air, that admits no vacuity, no emptiness: destroy this kingdom of
Satan in your selves, and God will establish his, God will be content with his
place. Himself you cannot see; that's one degree of his tyranny, to Reserve him
self, and not be seen; for his deformities would make ye hate him: but in his
glases in the riches, and in the vanities of this world, you see him and know
him not; you see him, and know him, and embrace him, St. Chrysostom. has
convinced you, in all that can be said, for the love of this world; If thou will (says he) that I must therefore look after worldly things, because they are
necessary, E regione respendeo, says he: Therefore thou need not look after
them, because they are necessary: Si essent superflua, non deberes confidere
quia sunt necessaria, non debes ambigere: for that which is more than
necessary, thou should not labor, and for that which is necessary thou
shoudst not doubt, for, whatsoever God does not give thee, he knows was not
necessary for thee, for he can make thee happy without these temporal things,
as his way in this text is, to redeem without money, which is our last
circumstance.

Sine Argento.
In delivering his people out of Egypt, he gave no money for them; nay, he made
them get money and Jewels at their coming away. In delivering them out of
Babylon, he brought them away rich; Here, in this redemption, it had been
bribery to have given, in so good a cause: and it had been a new kind of
Simony, never heard of, to give money for the exercise of their own grace. He
gave no money then; not because he had it not; Amos 3.
for Domini est terra, The earth and all in it, is his: ye have taken my
silver, and my gold, says God in one Prophet; Agg. 2.
and he makes his continual claim, in another, The silver is mine, and the gold
is mine. But it was God and not the devil, that was to be satisfied. In
devilish trading there is no passing without money: in the Temple it self
there were, In the Church, and Church affairs there are buyers, and sellers
too; if there were no buyers there would be no sellers; but there was a third
sort that was whiped out too; which were Changers. But in our case it was God,
that was to be satisfied; and therefore we were not redeemed with corruptable
things, as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1.
but with the precious blood of Christ.

Now this blood of Christ Jesus was not within the Compass of this word, which
is here translated Money: though, as I noted at the beginning, this word Casaph
includes all that the heart can wish, or desire: for though the Application of
the blood of Christ, now that is shed is to be wished by every sinner to his
own soul, Though the sheding of that blood might have been wished by the
patriarchs, to whom God had revealed, that in the fullness of time it should be
shed, at the second coming of Christ, and the Resurrection may be wished for,
by us now, yet, if we take Rem integram, if we take the matter at first,
without any such revealing of Gods purpose as he in his Scripture has afforded
us; so no man might have wished, or prayed, without a greater sin in that wish
and in that prayer than all his former sins, that the Son of God might come
down and dye for his sins: If it could possibly have fallen into his
imagination, that this might have been a way for his redemption; yet he ought
not to have wished that way: neither might it, neither certainly did it ever
fall within the desire of any desparing sinner, that thought, that the death of
Christ appertaind not to him, to wish that God the father, or God the Holy
Ghost, would come down, and become man and shed his blood for him. Th blood of
Christ by which we are redeemed was not this Casaph it was not Res appetibilis,
a thing that a sinner might, or could desire to be shed for him, though being
shed, he must desire, that it may be applied to him. And hence it is that some
of the fathers argue, that when the Devil began to tempt Christ, he knew him
not to be the Son of God: for even to the devil himself, the blood of Christ;
could not be Res appetibilis, a thing that deliberately he could have desired
should have been shed. If the devil had considered, that the shedding of that
blood, would have redeemed us, would he have hastened the shedding of that blood?

He redeemed us then without money; And as he bought so he sells: He paid no
money, he asks no money: but he proclaims freely to all, Esa. 55.
Ho every one that thirsts come to the waters, and ye that have no silver,
come, buy, and eat; come, I say, buy wine, and milk, without silver, and
without money. But you must come; and you must come to the market; to the
Magazine of his graces, his Church; And you must buy, though you have no money:
he paid obedience, and he asks obedience to himself, and his Church, at your
hands. And then, as Joseph did to his brethren, he will give you your corn, and
your money again; he will give you grace, and temporal blessings too: he will
refresh and re-establish your natural faculties, and give you supernatural. He
has already done enough for all, even in his mercy, he was just; just to the
Devil himself: for as we had done, so he did; he gave himself; both to the
first death, as long as it could hold him, and to the second death, as far as
it could reach him. But though all this be already done, yet, to conclude,
there is a particular circumstance of Comfort, in this word, you shall be: that
though the act of our redemption be past the Application is future: and in the
elect and regenerate child of God, though his conscience tells him every day,
that he sels away himself, yet his conscience shall tell him too, he shall be
redeemed without money, he shall not perish finally: as we cannot carry our
thoughts to so high a time, but that God elected us, before that, so we cannot
continue our sins of infirmity so long, but that God will have mercy upon us
after that: I cannot name a time, when Gods love began, it is eternal, I cannot
imagine a time, when his mercy will end, it is perpetual.

A SERMON PREACHED AT WHITE HALL April 12. 1618. Sermon. 12.
SERMON. XII.
Genesis 32.10. I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies, and of all the
truth which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over
this Jordan and now I am become two bands.


THis text is in the midst of Jacobs prayer; and this prayer is in the midst of
Jacobs preparation in the time of danger. His dangers were from persons near
him, from his Alliance, by marriage, and from his nearest kindred by blood.
Laban, into whose house he had married, made advantages upon him, deluded him,
oppressed him, pursued him. And Esau his own brother lay how in his way, when
he was returning from Mesopotamia to Canaan, from his father-in-law, to his
natural father, from Laban, to Isaac. He had sent messengers to try his
brothers disposition toward him; they returned with relation of great
preparation that Esau made to come forth toward him, but whether in hostile or
friendly manner, they could inform nothing. Then was Jacob greatly afraid, and
sore troubled, but not so afraid, nor so troubled, as that he was stupefied, or
negligent in providing against the imminent dangers. First then he makes as
sure as he can at home; ver. 7.
He disposes his troops, and his cattle so, as that, if his brother should come
hostilly, he might do least harm. And he provides as well as he could that he
should not come hostilly, he sends him presents, and he sends him respective
and ceremonious messages. He neglects not the strengthening of him self, that
so he might make his peace when he were able to sustein a war; he neglects not
the removing of all occasions, that might submit him to a war: And in the midst
of these two important and necessary cares, love of peace, and provision for
war, his chief recourse is to God; to him he prays; and he prays to him first,
as he was (as we may say) Deus familiaris, a God to his family, and race O God
of my father Abraham, ver. 9.
and God of my father Isaac; and as a God, from whom this familiarity did not
take away the reverence; for he adds there presently the great name of Jehova,
the Lord he present to him his obedience to his commandment, Thou said unto
me, Return unto thy Country, and to thy kindred, he presents to him his
confidence in his promises, Thou said, I will surely do thee good, and make
thy seed, as the sand of the sea; and upon these grounds and inducements, he
comes to the formal prayer, Erue me, I pray thee deliver me from the hand of my
brother; and he prays for others as well as himself; for I fear he will smite
me, and the Mothers upon the Children: He solicites God for all that are
committed to him. And as in the Midst of danger, he came to preparation, and in
the midst of his preparations, he came to this prayer, so in the midst of this
prayer, he comes to this humble and gratfull consideration, that God had been
already more bountiful unto him than he could have proposed to his hopes or to
his wishes, I am not worthy of the least of all thy Mercyes and of all the
Truth which thou have showed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over
this Jordan; and now I am become two bands.

Divisio.
First then this part of the prayer, has in it, that which is the Center and
Basis, and establish-ment of all true prayers A disclaiming of Merit; for when
a man pretends Merit, it is so far from a prayer, as that it is rather a
challenge, an increpation, an exprobration of his slacknes, to whom we speak
that he gives us not with out asking: I am not worthy says Jacob. But yet
though Jacob confess humbly this unworthyness in himself, yet he does not say
that he is, or was Nothing at all, in respect of these benefits It is not Nihil
sam, but katon, parvus sum Impar Sum; Man is no such thing as can invite God to
work upon him, but he is such a thing, as nothing else is capable of his
working but man. It is not much that he is; Sermon. 11.
but something he is: But parvus sum, prae omnibus, prae singulis; whether I
take my self altogether, thus grown up in honor, in office, in estate, or
whether I take my self in pieces, and consider every step, that thy mighty hand
has led me; I am not worthy of all these, nor of any of these degrees; not of
the least of these. Not whether I consider thy mercies, which are the promises
that God makes to us at first, out of his mere gracious goodness, or whether I
consider thy truth, the assuredness of those promises, to which he has been
pleased to bind himself; non sum dignus, not whether we consider this Truth,
and fidelity of God in Spe, in our own hope, and confident, and patient
expectation, that they shall be performed unto us, or whether we consider them
in Re, in our thankfulness, and experience, as truths already performed unto
us; the truth which thou have showed, for all these mercies, and all these
truths, all these promises, and all these performances, as they found no title
at all in me to them at first, so they imprint no other title in me by being
come, but to make me his servant, to use them to his glory. I am not worthy of
the least of all thy mercies, and of all the truth, which thou have showed unto
thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan; and now I am become
two bands. And then for a second part, all this consideration Jacob seals with
a reason, for; it is not a fashional complement with God, it is not a sad and
melancholique dejection, and undervaluing of himself; but he assigns his
particular reason, and that is, what his former state was, what his present
state is. I came over Jordan, he was forced to leave his Country; and he came
over it but with a staff, in a poor and ill provided manner; and with his
staff, no assistance but his own. And he returns again, there is his first
comfort; and he returns now; now that God had spoken to him before he set out,
and now that God had revealed to him an army of Angels in his assistance, and
now that God had increased his temporal state so far, as that he was become two
bands, so that though he should loose much, yet he had much left.

In benefits that pass from men of higher rank, to persons of lower condition,
it is not the way to get them, to ground the request upon our own merit; Merit
implies an obligation, that we have laid upon them; and that implies a debt.
And a Petition for a due debt is an affront; it is not so much a Petition
delivered as a writ served upon him, to call him to answer his injust deteining
of a just debt. Thus it is amongst men between whom their may be true merit;
but toward God there can be none; and therefore much more there boldness to
proceed with him upon pretense of merit. Et de Deo, no tuanquam de benefico
largitore, sed tanquam de tardo debitore cogitare; That if we come not to our
ends, and preferment quickly, we should give over considering God as a
gracious, and free giver in his time, and begin to consider him as a slack pay
master, and ill debtor, because he pays not at our time. No Man was worthy to
be biden to the supper; Mat. 22.8.
But those that were biden, were not worthy; that invitation made them not
worthy. No spark of worth in us, before God call us; but that first grace of
his, does not presently make us worthy. If we love Christ a little and allow
him his share, Mat. 13.37.
but love father and mother more, if we renounce all other love, we are not
ambitious, but yet would live quiet, without troubles, without crosses, if we
take not up our cross, or if we take it, and sink under it, if we do not follow
or if we take it, and sink under it, if we do not follow, or if we follow a
wrong guide, bear our afflictions with the stupidity of a Stoique, or with the
pertinacy of an Heretic, If we love not Christ, more then all, and take our
cross, and follow, and follow him, non digni sumus we are not worthy of him.
Nay all this does not make us worthy really, Luke 23.25.
but imputatively; they shall be counted worthy to enjoy the next world, and
the resurrection, says Christ. We are not worthy as to profess our
unworthiness; It is a degree of spiritual exaltation, to be sensible of our
lowness; Mar. 1 7.
I am not worthy to stoop down, and unloose his shoe latchet, says John
Baptist; even humility it self is a pride, if we think it to be our own. Only
say thus to Christ with the Centurion, non dignus ut venirem, I was not worthy
to come to thee, Luke 7.7.
non dignus ut intres, I was not worthy, that thou should come to me, and
let others say of thee, as those Elders, whom the Centurion sent, said of him,
dignus est, he is worthy, that Christ should do for him. Be thou humble in thy
self, and thou shall be worthy of a double honor; thou shall be truly worthy
in the sight of man, and thou shall be counted worthy in the sight of God.

Parvus.
Now for all this unworthiness, Jacob does not so much extenuate himself, as to
annihilate himself. The word is Katon; it is not Elil, it is parvus sum not
nihil sum. It is but little; that man is, proportioned to the working of God;
but yet man is that creature, who only of all other creatures can answer the
inspiration of God, when his grace comes, and exhibites acceptable service to
him, and cooperate with him. No other creature is capable of grace, if it could
be offered to them. It is true and useful, Cyp.
that Cyprian presses, nihil est nostrum; nam quid habes quod non accepisti,
What have thou that thou have not received? Here Is a Nihil nostrum; but he does
not press it so far as to say nihil nos; here is a nihil habemus, we have
nothing, but not a nihil sumus; that we are nothing; it is true, and useful,
that Hierom says, ipsum meum, Hier. Epist. 1. ad.
sine Dei semper auxilio non erit meum, without the continual concurrence o^
Gods grace, that which is mine now, would be lost, and be none of mine; but it
is as true, that Augustine says too, Cer^um est nos velle and facere ^um volumus
and facimus, It is we our selves, that choose, and perform those spiritual
actions, which the grace of God only enables us to choose and perform. It is
truly and elegantly said by Ambrose, of our power, and out will, Ei committi,
nihil aliud quam dimitti, to be delivered to our own will, is to be delivered
to the executioner, for nihil habet in suis vicibus, nisi periculi facilitatem,
it has nothing in it, but a nearness or danger; but yet, God has made a
natural man only capable of his grace; and in those men, in whom he has begun
a regeneration, by his first grace, his grace proceeds not, without a
cooperation of those men. This humility then is safely limited in Jacobs
bounds, parvus sum, it is no great matter that I am; but yet come not to such a
nihil sum, such an extenuation of thy self, as to think, that grace works upon
thee, as the sun does upon gold, or precious stones, to purify them to that
concoction, without any sense in themselves.

Now this littleness, how poor, and small a thing Man is, Proe omnibus.
appears to him, whether he consider himself in omnibus, or in singulis, as the
word imports here, as he is altogether, or as he is taken a sunder. Take man at
his best, and greatest growth as he is honorable, for, as there is a stamp,
that gives values to gold, so does honor, and estimation to the temporal
blessings of this lif. Honor is that which God esteems most, and is most
jealous of in himself, his honor he will give to none, and it is the broadest,
and apparantest outward seal, by which he testifies his love to man, but yet
what greatness is this, in which David repeats that infirmity twice in one
Psalm, Psalm. 49.12.20.
Man shall not continue in honor, but is like the beast that dye: Man is in
honor, and understands not; he is like to the beasts that perish. In nature
things that are above us, show as little, as things below us; men upon a hill
are as little to them in the valley, as they in the valley to them that are
raised. It is so in nature; but we have forced an unnatural perverseness in our
selves, to think nothing great but that which is a great way above us; whereas
if we will look downvvards, and see above how many better deservers God has
raised us, we shall find at least such a greatness in our selves, as deserves
a great thanksgiving, but yet take thy self altogether at thy greatest, and say
with Jacob, parvus sun^, all this is but a little greatness, but a poor riches,
but an ignoble honor. In all this, thou do but wrap up a snow-ball upon a
coal of fire; there is that within thee that melts thee, as fast, as thou
growest: thou buildest in Marble, and thy soul dwells in those mud-walls, that
have moldred away, ever since they were made. Take thy self altogether, and
thou art but a man; and what is that: ask Aristotle, says S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom.
and he will tell thee, Animal rationale, man is a reasonable Creature; but ask
God and he will tell thee, Animal irreprehensible; a man is a good man. There
was a man in the land of H^z, called Job; an upright and just man that feared
God; All men, truly men are Copies of this man. And sine hac humanitate,
without being such a man as he, whose man soever thou be, and whose master,
whosoever thou be, parvus es, all is but a small matter, considered
together, and at best.

Proe singulis.
But we may better discern our selves in singulis, then in omnibus; better by
taking ourselves in pieces, then altogether, we understand the frame of man's
body, better when we see him naked, than apparrelled, howsoever; and better by
seeing him cut up, than by seeing him do any exercise alive; one desection, one
Anatomy teaches more of that, than the marching, or drilling of a whole army of
living men. Let every one of us therefore dissect and cut up himself, and
consider what he was before God raised him friends to bring those abilities,
and good parts, which he had, into knowledge, and into use, and into
employment; what he was before he had by education, and study, and industry,
imprinted those abilities in his soul; what he was before that soul was infused
into him, capable of such education; what he was, when he was but in the list,
and catalogue of creatures, and might have been left in the state of a worm, or
a plant, or a stone; what he was, when he was not so far, but only in the vast
and unexpressible, and unimaginable depth, of nothing at all. But especially
let him consider, what he was when he lay smothered up in massa damnata, in
that leavened lap of Adam, where he was wrapped up in damnation. And then let
him consider forward again, that God in his decree severed him out, in that
lump, and ordained him to a particular salvation; that he provided him parents,
that were within the Covenant, that should prepare, and pour out a body for
him; that he himself created, and infused an immortal soul into him; that then
he put a care in his parents, perchance in strangers, to breed him to a
capableness of some course. That then God took him by the hand, and led him
into the Court; that there he held him by the hand, and defended him against
envy, and practice; that he has clothed him with the opinions of good men;
that he has adorned him with riches, and with titles; let a man stand thus,
and ruminate, and spell over Gods several blessings to him, sylable by sylable,
and he shall not only say, parvus sum, when he considers himself at his growth
and altogether, but parvus eram I was too mean a subject for thee to look or
work upon in the least of these expressings of thy goodness.

And thus it is whether we consider this goodness of God, in miserationibus, In
his mercies, or in veritate, in his truth. Miserationis
Not that Gods mercy and truth are ever severed; But we take his mercy to be
that promise, that covenant, which out of his own free goodness he was pleased
to make to man and which is grounded upon nothing, but his own pleasure, and we
take truth, and fidelity, to be the performance, and execution of those
merciful promises, which truth is grounded upon his promise. Now for his
mercies, first, though we say as truly as School terms can reach too,
Miserecordia presumit miseriam, we can consider no mercy, till something be
miserable, upon whom mercy may work, and so cannot properly place mercy in God,
before the fall of man in such a respect, yet though the work of creation, were
not a work of mercy, being intended only and wholly to his glory, yet to
create man, in an ability to glorify him in that way, and that measure as he
did, this was a work of mercy, because man had been less happy without that
ability. So that of this mercy to man, of being dignified above all other
creatures, in the contributing to the glory of the Creator, but especially of
that mercy of electing certain men, in whom he would preserve that dignity,
which others should forfeit, of this general mercy, mankind was not worthy, of
this particular mercy these particular men were not worthy, for neither these
men, nor this mankind was then at all, when God had this mercy upon them.

But for our understanding the goodness of God, Veritates.
and thereby our own unworthiness, it appears best in the consideration of his
truth, of the performance of these his promises for, by the strength of his
truth, and fidelity in God, is my soul raised to that, that that which is
ordinarily, and naturally the terror of the conscience of a sinner, is the
peace of mine, that which is naturally a tempest, is my calm, that which is
naturally a rock to shipwreck at, is my Anchor to ride out all foul weather:
and that is, the justice of God; that which would shake, and shiver my
conscience, if there were no mercy nor promise, settles it now because there is
a truth, that that promise shall be performed to me.

Briefly, God was merciful, it was mere mercy in him, to promise a Messiah
Christ Jesus, when Adam was fallen; but to give him when he had promised him,
was justice, and truth, and fidelity. So that he applies Christ Jesus to me by
the working of his blessed Spirit, this is mere mercy; but that when Christ is
thus applied to me, I have peace of conscience and an inchoation of the kingdom
of heaven here, this is his Justice, and Truth, and fidelity: So that the next,
and immediate resting place for my salvation, and my peace, is the Justice of
God. Now, for the expressing of his Largeness, in exhibiting to us those
blessings, which belong to this promise, It is an useful consideration, Numb.
17.
which arises out of that miraculous budding of the rodds of the Twelve tribes:
Gods promise goes no farther but that, for that Man whom he would choose virga
germinabit: His rod should bud forth, but when Moses; on the morrow went to
loock how his promise was performed, Levies rod had budded, and blossomed, and
born perfect fruit; In his mercys, he exceeds his promises; In his judgments he
contracts them; as we see he contracted David's pestilence of three days, into
less than one. He punishes to the third, and forth generation; but he shows
mercy unto thousands. Exodus 20.
He gives more than he promises; and he does it sooner; Chrysostom.
as St Chrysostom observes: That whereas man's fashion is to demolish and pull
down that in one day, which spent many months in the setting up, God
dispatches faster in his building, and reparation, than in his ruin and
destruction; He built all the world in six days, (says he) and when he would
destroy but one Town, Jerico, he imployd Eight; Consider him then in
Miserationibus, in his mercies, or in veritate in his truth, and wherein were
we worthy of the least of these promises, or performances.

Expectatio.
Now, of these mercies grounded upon Gods will, and of these truths grounded
upon his word, we must necessarily acknowledge an unworthyness in our selves,
if they were proposed to us, but as expectancies, but as reversions, that
should be had; nay but as possibilities, that they might be had: Aug.
for Perdidimus possibilitatem boni; that is our case now; that we have lost all
possibility of doing, or receiving any good of our selves. In decimations upon
popular rebellions, when they tithe men for execution, every man conceives a
just hope; for it is ten to one he may escape with his life. In Lotteries,
though the odds be great on the other side, every man hopes, he that is never
so far off in a remainder for land, would be loath to have his name expunged,
Joh. 5.
and raced out. He that had been sick thirty eight years, and could never get
into the pool, yet he came still in hope that he should get in at last: It is
thus in civil and moral things; it is much more so in divine; even expectation
from God is a degree of fruition. There is no pain in David's expectance
expectam Dominum, Psalm. 40.2.3.
in waiting patiently for the Lord, as long as we know, Habakkuks veniens
veniet Dominus, because the Lord will surely come, says he, therefore he does
not tarry. It is no loss to stay Gods coming, because God will stay when he
comes: when we are sure that God will come to succor us, to weaken our
enemies, That Is a mercy, and that is a truth, which we are not worthy of though
he be not come yet.

But Jacob considers here, Experientia.
and every man may in his particular, the mercys, and truths which God had
showed him already; neither does the word which both our translations have
accepted here, answer the original nor reach home. It is not only, showing;
God may show mercy, and truth, by way of offering it, and withdraw it again, as
he does from unworthy receivers of the Sacrament; he may show it, by way of
example; and encourage us by seeing how he has dealt with others; he may show
it, and exclude us from it; as he showed Moses the land of promise. But there
it is only Videre fecit, Deuteronomy. ult.
but here it is fecit it self; there it was a land which God showed, here it is
Mercies, and Truths, quas fecisti, which thou have done, and performed toward
me; and then comes David especially to his quid retribuam tibi, when he
considers omnia quae tribuisti mihi. Psalm. 116.
Thine O Lord, says he, is greatness, and power, and glory and victory and
praise; all that is in heaven, and earth is thine; thine is the kingdom,
riches, and honor come of thee, in thy hand it is to make great, 1 Cro. 29.14.
and to give strength: But who am I said David, and what is my people, that we
should be able to offer willingly, after this sort: all things came from thee;
and of thine own hand, have we given thee. Why thus much was David, thus much
was his people, thus much are all they, to whom God has done so, in mercy, and
in truth, and has made gracious promises, and performed them, that they are
thereby become debtors to God, his stewards, his servants; which is Jacobs last
step in this part, mercies and truths which thou have showed, to thy servant.

All this greatness, makes him not proud: for all this, Servus.
he is not the less his servant, whose service is perfect freedom. Here men
that serve inferior masters, when they mend in their estate, or in their
capacity, they affect higher services, and at last the Kings; when they are
there, they can serve no better master, but they may serve him, in a better,
and better place; if thou have served the world, and Mammon, all this while,
yet now that thou have wherewithal, come into Gods service; show thy love to
God, in employing that which thou have, to his glory; if thou gottest that
which thou have, in his service (as if thou gottest it by honest ways, in thy
calling, thou have done so) yet come to serve him in a better place; in
gathering, thou have but served him in his mines, Aug.
in distributing thou shall serve him in his treasury. If thou have served him
in fetters, Noli timere serve compedite, sed confitere, Domino and vertentur in
ornamenta; let not thy fetters, thy narrow fortune, terrify thee; thy fetters,
thy low estate, shall be rings, and collars, and garters, not only
sufficiencies, but abundance, and ornaments to thee: what dishes soever he set
before thee, still let this be thy grace, Parvus sum, I am not worthy of the
least of all thy mercies, and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy
servant; for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
bands.

2. Part Quia.
We have passed through all the branches, of that which we proposed for the
first part, the confession of his own unworthiness. We found a second part
implied in this word, for; which was, that this acknowledgement of his
proceeded not out of formality and custom, or stupidity, and dejection, but
out of debatement, and consideration and reason; and then we found that reason
deduced and derived into these two great branches, what his former state had
been, With my staff I passed over this Jordan, and what his present state was,
I am become two bands. For the reason in general, he that does any spiritual
duty even toward God, in praising, and magnifying him, and not upon good,
reason, this man flatters God; not that he can say more good, than is always
true of God; but toward God, as well as toward man, it is true, that he that
speaks more good than himself believes to be true, he flatters, how true soever
it be that he speaks. Pro. 27.14.
Such praise shall be counted as a curse; and such oil breaks a man's head.
Those Sceptique philosophers, that doubted of all, though they affirmed
nothing, yet they denied nothing neither, but they saw no reason in the
opinions of others.

Those Sceptique Christians, that doubt whether God have any particular
providence, any care of particular actions; those which doubt, whether the
history of Christ be true, or no; those doubting men, that conform themselves
outwardly with us, because that may be true, that we profess, for any thing
they know, there may be a Christ, and they might be the worse, for any thing
they know, if they left him out, they might prove worse, and in the mean time
they enjoy temporal peace, and benefit of the Laws by this outward profession
of theirs; those men that sacrifice to Christ Jesus only, ne noceat, least if
there be such a God, they should lose him for want of a sacrifice, that worship
Christ Jesus with a reservation of the pretended God, that if he prove God at
last, they have done their part, if he do not, yet they are never the worse;
these men, who if they come to Church, think themselves safe enough, but they
are deceived; The Militant, and the Triumphant Church is all one Church, but
above in the triumphant Church, there are other Churchwardens, than here, and
though he come to do the outward acts of religion, if he do it without a
religious heart, they know him to be a Recusant, for all his coming to Church
here, he shall be excommunicate in the triumphant there. He praises not God, he
prays not to God, he worships him not, whatsoever he does, if he have not
considered it, debated it, concluded it, to be rightly done, and necessarily
done. If he think any thing else better done, this is not well done.

Jacob had concluded it out of the contemplation of his former, and present
state; Exul.
first he had been banished from his Country; I came over Jordan, Herein he
was a figure of Christ; he received a blessing from his father, and presently
he must go into banishment; Christ received presents and adoration from the
Magi of the east, and presently he submits himself to a banishment in Egypt,
for the danger that Herod intended. Christ's Banishment, as it could not be less
then four years, so it could not be more then seven; Jacobs was twenty, a
banishment, and a long banishment. Banishment is the first punishment executed
upon man; he was banished out of Paradise; and it is the last punishment, that
we shall be redeemed from, when we shall be received entirely body and soul,
into our Country, into heaven. It is true our life in this world is not called
a banishment any where in the Scripture: but a pilgrimage, a peregrination, a
travel; but peregrinatio cum ignominia conjunctu, exilium; he that leaves his
Country because he was ashamed, or afraid to return to it, or to stay in it,
is a banished man. Briefly for Jacobs case here, S. Bernard expresses it well
in his own, est commune exilium, there is one banishment common to us all, in
corpore peregrinamur a duo, we travel out of our Country at least; but,
Accessit and speciale, quod me pene inpatientem reddit quod cogarvicere sine
vohis. This was a particular misery, in his banishment, that Jacob must live
from his father, and mother, and from that Country, where he was to have the
fruits, and effects of that blessing which he had got.

He came away then, and he came away poor: Baculus.
in baculo with a staff; God expresses sometimes abundance, and strength, in
baculo, in that word. Oftentimes he calls plenty, by that name, the staff of
bread. But Jacobs is no Metaphorical staff, it is a real staff, the companion,
and the support of a poor traveling man. When Christ enjoins his Apostles to
an exact poverty, for one journey, which they were to dispatch quickly, S.
Matthew expresses his commandment thus, possess no moneys, nor two coats nor a
shoe, nor a staff; S. Mark expresses the same commandment thus, take none of
those with you, except a staff only. The fathers go about to reconcile this,
by taking staff in both places figuratively; that the staff forbidden in
Matthew, should be potestas puniendi, the power of correcting which the Apostle
speaks of, Number quid vultis vemam in virga? 1 Cor. 4.21.
shall I come to you with a rod, or in love? And that the staff allowed in
Mark, is potestas consolandi, Psalm. 25.4.
the power of comforting which David speaks of, Virga tua, and baculus tuus,
ipsa me consolata sunt, Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Christ spoke
this but once, but in his language, the Syriack, he spoke it in a word that
has two significations. Shebat, is both Baculus defensorius, and Baculus
sustentatorius. A staff of sustentation, and a staff of defense; God that spoke
in Christ's Syriack, spoke in the Evangelists Greek too; and both belong to us;
and both the Evangelists intending the use of the staff, and not the staff it
self, 3. Matthew in that word forbids any staff, of violence or defense, S.
Mark allows a staff of sustentation, and support; and such a staff, and no more
had Jacob, a staff to sustain him upon his way. Has this then been thy state
with Jacob, that thou have not only been without the staff of bread, plenty,
and abundance of temporal blessings, but without the staff of defense, that
when the world has snarl'd and barked at thee, and that thou would justly
have beaten a dog, yet thou could not find a staff, thou had no means to
right thy self? yet he has not left thee without a staff of support, a staff
to try how deep the waters be, that thou art to wade through, that is thy
Christian constancy, and thy Christian discretion: use that staff aright, and
as Christ, who sent his Apostles without any staff of defense once, Luke 22.36
afterward gave them leave to carry swords, so at his pleasure, and in his
measure, he will make thy staff, a sword, by giving thee means to defend thy
self, and others over whom he will give thee charge, and jurisdiction in
exalting thee.

Suus.
But herein in doing so, God assists thee with the staff of others; with the
favor and support of other men; Jacob was first in Baculo, and in suo, nothing
but a staff; no staff but his own; truly his own for we call other staffes
ours, Hos. 4.12.
which are not ours, My people ask counsel of their stocks, and their staff
teaches them; that is, they have made their own wisdom, their own plots, their
own industry, their staff; upon which they should not rely, and so we trust to
a broken staff of reed, 2 Reg. 18.21.
on which, if a man lean, it will go into his hand, and pierce it, when God
has given thee a staff of thine own, a leading staff, a competency, a
convenience to lead thee through the difficulties, and encombrances of this
world, if thou put a pike into thy staff, murmuring at thine own, envying
superiors, oppressing inferiors, then this piked staff is not thy staff, nor
Gods staff, but it is Baculus inimici hominis; and the envious man in the
Gospel, is the devil. If God have made thy staff to blossom, and bear ripe
fruit in a night, enriched thee, preferred thee a pace, this is not thy staff;
it is a Mace, and a mark of thy office, that he has made thee his Steward of
those blessings. To end this, a man's own staff, truly, properly, is nothing but
his own natural faculties: nature is ours, but grace is not ours; and he that
is left to this staff of his own, for heaven, is as ill provided, as Jacob was,
for this world, when he was left to his own staff at Jordan, when he was
banished; and banished in poverty, and banished alone.

Thus far we have seen Jacob in his low estate; Revertitur.
now we bring him to his happyness: in which it is always one degree to make
have; and so we will; all is comprised in this that is, was present. Now I am
two bands, now; it was first now, quando revertitur, now when he returned to
his Country, for he was come very near it, when he speaks of Jordan, as though
he stood by it, I came over this Jordan. It is hard to say, whether the
returning to a blessing, formerly possessed, and lost for a while, be not a
greater pleasure, then the coming to a new one. It is S. Augustins observation,
that that land, Aug.
which is so often called the land of promise, was their land from the
beginning, from the beginning Sem, of whom they came dwelt there: and though
God restored them by a miraculous power, to their possession, yet still it was
a returning: and so the blessing is ever more expressed; a return from Egypt, a
return from Babylon; and a return from their present dispersion is that, which
comforts them still, Christ himself had this apprehension, clarifica me,
Glorify me, thou father, Joh. 17.5.
with that glory, which I had with thee before the world was. Certainly our
best assurance of salvation, is but a returning to our first state, in the
decree of God for our election; when we can consider, our interest, in that
decree we return. Our best state in this life, is but a returning, to the
purity, which we had in our baptism; whosoever surprises himself in the act or
in the remorse of any sin that he is fallen into, would think himself in a
blessed state, if he could bring his conscience to that peace again, which he
remembers, he had the last time he made up his accounts to God, and had his
discharge sealed in the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ Jesus.
Cleanse thy self often therefore, and accustom thy soul to that peace, that
thou may still, when thou fallest into sin, have such a state in thy memory,
as thou may have a desire to return to: and the Spirit of God shall still
return to thee, Eccles. 12.7.
who love to receive it, and at last thy spirit, shall return to him that
gave it, and gave his own spirit for it.

Jacobs happiness appears first now, quando revertitur; Jubenr^ Domino.
and now, quando jubente Domino, now, when he returned, and now when he
returned upon Gods bidding, God had said unto him, Genesis 31.3.
turn again into the land of thy fathers, and I will be with thee, Think no
step to be directly made toward preferment, if thou have not heard Gods voice
directing the way. Stre in usque; stand upon the ways, and inquire not of thy
fathers, but of the God of thy fathers, which way thou shall go: for Gods voice
may be heard in every action, if we will stand still a little, and hearken to
it. Remember ever more, that Applica Ephod; 1 Samuel 30.7.
where David comes to ask counsel of the Lord, he said to Abiathar, Applica
Ephod; bring the Ephod; and there David asks, Shall I follow this company,
shall I overtake them? when thou doubtest of any thing, Applica Ephod, take
this book of God: if, to thine understanding, that reach not home punctually to
thy particular case, thou have an Ephod in thy self; God is not departed from
thee; thou know by thy self, it is a vain complaint that Plutrarch makes,
desectu oraculorum, that oracles are ceased; there is no defect of oracles in
thine own bosom; as soon as thou ask thy self, how may I corrupt the
integrity of such a Judge, undermine the strength of such a great person, shake
the chastity of such a woman, thou have an answer quickly it must be done by
bribing, it must be done by swearing, it must be done by calumniating. Here is
no defectus Oraculorum no ceasing of Oracles, there is a present answer from
the Devil. There is no defect of the Vrim, and Thummim of God neither, If thou will look into it, for as it is well said of the Moral Man, Sua cuique
providentia Deus every man's Diligence, and discretion, is a God to himself so
it is well said, of the Christian Father Augustine Rectaratio Verbum Dei a
rectified Conscience is the word of God. Applica Ephod, bring thine Actions to
the question of the Ephod, to the debatment of thy conscience rectified, and
still shall hear, Jubentem Dominus or duni Revocantem, God will bid thee stop,
or God will bid thee go forwards in that way.

Angeli.
But herein had Jacob another degree of happiness, That the Commandment of God,
was persued with the Testimony of Angels. Not that the voice of God needs
strength; Test me ipso witness my self, was always witness enough; and Quia
os Domini Locutum. The Mouth of the Lord: has spoken it was always seal
enough. But that has been Gods abundant, And overflowing goodness ever to
succor the infirmity of Man, with sensible and visible things; unto the pillars
in the Wilderness; with the Tabarnacle after; and with the temple and all the
Misterious, and significative furniture thereof after all. So God leaves not
Jacob to the general knowledge, that the Angels of God protect Gods Children,
but he manifested those Angels unto him, Occurrerunt ei. the Angels of God met
him. The word of God is an infalible guide to thee, But God has provided thee
also visible, and manifest assistants, the Pillar, his Church and the Angels
his Ministers in the Church. The Scripture is thine only Ephod, but Applica
Ephod, apply it to thee by his Church, and by his visible Angels, and not by
thine own private interpretation.

This was Jacobs nunc; now, when he was returned, 2. Turmae.
returned upon Gods Commandment; upon Gods Commandment pursued, and testified
by Angels, and Angels visibly manifested; now, he could take a comfort in the
contemplation of his fortune, of his estate, to see, that he was two bands.
Here Is a great change; we see his vow; and we see how far his wishes extended
at his going out; Genesis 28.20
If God will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I come
again unto my fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God, In which
vow is included all the service that he could exhibit, or retribute to God.
Now his staff is become a sword; a strong Army; his one staff now is
multiplied; his wives are given for staffes to assist him, and his children
given also for staffes to his age. His own staff is become the greatest, and
best part of Labans wealth; In such plenty, as that he could spare a present to
Esau, of at least five hundred head of cattle. The fathers make Moral
expositions of this; That his two bands are his Temporal blessings and his
spiritual: And St. Augustine finds a tipicall allusion in it of Christ, Aug.
Baculo Crucis Christus apprehendit mundum; and cum duabus turmis duobus
populis, ad patrem rediit: Christ by his staff, his Cross, mustered two bands,
that is Jews, and Gentiles. We find enough for our purpose, in taking it
literally, as we see it in the Text; That he divided all his company, and all
his cattle into two troops, that if Esau come, and smite one, the other might
escape. For then only is a fortune full, when there is something for Leakage,
for wast; when a Man, though he may justly fear, that this shall be taken from
him, yet he may justly presume, that this shall be left to him; though he lose
much, yet he shall have enough. And this was Jacobs increase and height; and
from this lowness; from one staff, to two bands. And therefore, since in God we
can consider but one state Semper idem immutable; since in the Devil, we can
consider but two states Quomodo cecidit filius Orientis, that he was the son of
the Morning, but is, and shall ever be for ever the child of everlasting death;
since in Jacob and in our selves we can consider first, that God made man
righteous, secondly that man betook himself to his one staff, and his own
staff, The imaginations of his own heart, Thirdly; That by the word of God
manifested by his Angels, he returns with two bands, Body and Soul, to his
heavenly father again, let us attribute all to his goodness, and confess to
him and the world, That we are not worthy of the least of all his Mercies, and
of all the Truth which he has showed unto his Servant, for with my staff I
passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two bands.

A SERMON Preached at White Hall. Sermon. 13.
April 19. 1618. SERMON XIII.
1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That
Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners; of which I am the chiefest.


THE greatest part of the body of the Old Testament is Prophecy, and that is
especially of future things: The greatest part of the New Testament, if we
number the pieces, is Epistles, Relations of things past, for instruction of
the present. They err not much, that call the whole New Testament Epistle: For,
even the Gospells are Evangelia, good Messages, and that is proper to an
Epistle, and the book of the Acts of the Apostles is superscrib'd, by Saint
Luke, to one Person, to Theophilus, and that is proper to an Epistle; and so is
the last book, the book of Revelation, to the several Churches; and of the
rest there is no question, An Epistle is collucutio scripta, says Saint
Ambrose, Though it be written far off, and sent, yet it is a Conference, and
seperatos copulat, says he; by this means we overcome distances, we deceive
absences, and we are together even then when we are asunder: And therefore,
in this kind of conveying spiritual comfort to their friends, have the
ancient Fathers been more exercised then in any other former, almost all of
them have written Epistles: One of them, Isidorus, him whom we call
Peluciotes, Saint Chrysostom's scholar is noted to have written Myriades,
Nicephor.
and in those Epistles, to have interpreted the whole Scriptures: St. Paul gave
them the example, he writ nothing but in this kind, and in this exceeded all
his fellow Apostles, and pateretur Paulus, quod Saulus seceret, says St.
Austin, That as he had asked Letters of Commission of the State to persecute
Christians, so by these Letters of Consolation, he might recompense that
Church again, which he had so much damnified before: As the Hebrew Rabbis
say, That Rahab did let down Jofuah's spies, out of her house, with the same
cord, with which she had used formerly to draw up her adultrous lovers, into
her house. Now the Holy Ghost was in all the Authors, of all the books of the
Bible, but in Saint Paul's Epistles, there is, says Irenaeus, Impetus Spiritus
Sancti, The vehemence, the force of the Holy Ghost; And as that vehemence is in
all his Epistles, so amplius habent, quae e vinculis (as Saint Chrysostom
makes the observation) Those Epistles which were written in Prison, have most
of this holy vehemence, and this (as that Father notes also) is one of them;
And of all them, we may justly conceive this to be the most vehement and
forcible, in which he undertakes to instruct a Bishop in his Episcopal
function, which is, to propagate the Gospel; for, he is but an ill Bishop that
leaves Christ where he found him, in whose time the Gospel is yet no farther
then it was; how much worse is he, in whose time the Gospel loses ground? who
leaves not the Gospel in so good state as he found it. Now of this Gospel,
here recommended by Paul to Timothy, this is the Sum; That Christ Jesus came
into the World to save Sinners, etc.

Division.
Here then we shall have these three Parts; First Radicem, The Root of the
Gospel, from whence it springs; it is fidelis sermo, a faithful Word, which
cannot err: And secondly, we have Arborem, Corpus; the Tree, the Body, the
substance of the Gospel, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners; And then lastly, fructum Evangelii, the fruit of the Gospel,
Humility, that it brings them who embrace it, to acknowledge themselves to be
the greatest sinners, And in the first of these, the Root it self, we shall
pass by these steps: First, that it is Sermo, the Word; That the Gospel has
as good a ground as the Law; the New Testament as well founded as the Old; It
is the word of God: And then it is fidelis Sermo, a faithful Word: now both
Old and New are so, and equally so; but in this, the Gospel is fidelior, the
more faithful, and the more sure, because that word, the Law, has had a
determination, an expiration, but the Gospel shall never have that. And
again, It is Sermo omni acceptatione dignus, Worthy of all acceptance; not
only worthy to be received by our Faith, but even by our Reason too; our
Reason cannot hold out against the proofs of Christians for their Gospel: And
as the word imports it deserves omnem acceptationem, and omnem approbationem,
all approbation, and therefore, as we should not dispute against it, and so
are bound to accept it, to receive it, not to speak against it; so neither
should we do any thing against it; as we are bound to receive it by
acknowledgment, so we are bound to approve it, by conforming our selves unto
it; our consent to it shows our acceptance, our life our approbation; and so
much is in the first Part, the Root; This is a faithful Word, and worthy of
all acceptance. And in the Second, the Tree, the Body, the substance of the
Gospel; That Jesus Christ is come into the World to save Sinners; First, here
is an Advent, a coming of a new Person into the World who was not here before,
venit in mundum, he came into the World; And secondly, he that came, is first
Christ, a mixed Person, God and Man, and thereby capable of that Office, able to
reconcile God and Man; And Christus so to, a person anointed, appointed, and
sent for that purpose, to reconcile God and Man; And then he is Jesus, one did
actually and really do the office of a Savior, he did reconcile God and Man;
for, there we see also the Reason why he came; He came to Save, and whom he
came to Save; to save Sinners: And these will be the branches and lymbs of
this Body. And then lastly, when we come to consider the fruit, which is
indeed the seed, and kernel, and soul of all virtues Humility; then we
shall meet the Apostle confessing himself to be the greatest Sinner, not
only with a fui, that he was so whilst he was a Persecutor, but with a
present sum, that even now, after he had received the faithful Word, the
light of the Gospel, yet he was still the greatest Sinner; of which (Sinners)
I (though an Apostle) am (am still) the chiefest,

First then, the Gospel is founded and rooted in sermon, Part 1.
in verbo, in the Word; it cannot deserve omnem acceptationem, if it be not
Gospel, and it is not Gospel, if it be not in sermon, rooted in the Word:
Christ himself, as he has an eternal Generation, is verbum Dei, Himself is
the Word of God; And as he has a humane Generation, he is subjectum verbi Dei,
the subject of the Word of God, of all the Scriptures, of all that was shadowed
in the Types, and figured in the Ceremonies, and prepared in the preventions of
the Law, of all that was foretold by the Prophets, of all that the Soul of man
rejoiced in, and congratulated with the Spirit of God, in the Psalms, and in
the Canticles, and in the cheerful parts of spiritual joy and exultation,
which we have in the Scriptures; Christ is the foundation of all those
Scriptures, Christ is the burden of all those Songs; Christ was in sermon
then, then he was in the Word. The joy of those holy Persons which are noted in
the Scriptures, to have expressed their joy at the birth of Christ, in such
spiritual Hymns and Songs, is expressed so, as that we may see their joy was
in this, That that was now in actu, that was performed, that was done which was
before in sermon, in the Promise, in the Word, in the Covenant of God. They
rejoiced that Christ was borne; but principally that all was done so, sicut
locutus, as God had spoken before, that all should be done; done of the seed
of a Woman, as God had said in Paradise, done by a Virgin, as God had said by
Esai, done at Bethlehem, as he had said by Micheas; and done at that time, as
he had said by Daniel; Sicut locutus est, says Zachary, in his exultation,
All is performed as he has spoke by the mouth of the Prophets, which have
been since the World began. There in the Word, the Gospel begins, and there,
and there only, it shall continue for ever, as long as there is any spiritual
seed of Abraham, any men willing to embrace it, and apply it, as the blessed
Virgin expresses it, when her Soul magnifies the Lord, and her Spirit rejoices
in God her Savior; sicut locutus, as God has spoken to our Fathers, to
Abraham and his seed for ever: so then there never was, there never must be any
other Gospel then is in sermon, in the written word of God in the Scriptures.
The particular comfort that a Christian conceives, as it is determined and
contracted in himself, is principally in this, that Christ is come; his comfort
is in this, that he is now saved by him; and he might have this comfort, though
Christ had never been in sermon, though he had never been prophesied, never
spoken of before: But yet the proof and ground of this comfort to himself, that
is, the assurance that he has, That this was that Christ that was to save us;
and then, the munition and artillery by which he is to overthrow the forces of
the enemy, the arguments and objections of Jews, Gentiles and Heretics, who
deny this Christ in whose salvation he trusts, to have then any such Savior:
And then the Band of the Church, the Communion of Saints, by which we should
prove, That the Patriarchs and the Apostles, our Fathers in the old and new
Testament, do belong all to one Church; this assurance in our self; this
ability to prove it to others; this joining of these two walls, to make up the
household of the faithful: This is not only that, that the sum of the Gospel
is risen, in that Christ is come, but in this, that he is come sicut locutus
est, as God had spoken of him, and promised him by the mouth of his Prophets
from the beginning, as he was in sermon, in the word.

In the first Creation, when God made heaven and earth, that making was not in
sermon, for that could not be prophesied before, because there was no being
before; neither is it said, that at that Creation God said any thing, but only
creavit, God made heaven and earth, and no men; so that that which was made
sine sermon, without speaking, was only matter without form, heaven without
light, and earth without any productive virtue or disposition, to bring forth,
and to nourish creatures. But when God came to those specifique forms, and to
those creatures wherein he would be sensibly glorified after, they were made in
sermon, by his word; Dixit and facta sunt, God spoke, and so all things were
made; Light and Firmament, Land and Sea, Plants and Beasts, and Fishes and
Fowls were made all in sermon, by his word. But when God came to the best of
his creatures, to Man, Man was not only made in verbo, as the rest were, by
speaking a word, but by a Consultation, by a Conference, by a Counsel,
faciamus hominem, let us make Man; there is a more express manifestation of
diverse persons speaking together, of a concurrence of the Trinity; and not of a
saying only, but a mutual saying; not of a Proposition only, but of a Dialogue
in the making of Man: The making of matter alone was sine verbo, without any
word at all; the making of lesser creatures was in verbo, by saying, by
speaking; the making of Man was in in sermon, in a consultation. In this first
Creation thus presented there is a shadow, a representation of our second
Creation, our Regeneration in Christ, and of the saving knowledge of God; for
first there is in Man a knowledge of God, sine sermon, without his word, in
the book of Creatures: Non sunt loquelae, says David, Psalm. 19.
They have no language, they have no speech, and yet they declare the glory of
God. The correspondence and relation of all parts of Nature to one Author, the
consinuity and dependence of every piece and joint of this frame of the world,
the admirable order, the immutable succession, the lively and certain
generation, and birth of effects from their Parents, the causes: in all these,
though there be no sound, no voice, yet we may even see that it is an excellent
song, an admirable piece of music and harmony; and that God does (as it were)
play upon this Organ in his administration and providence by natural means and
instruments; and so there is some kind of creation in us, some knowledge of God
imprinted, sine sermon, without any relation to his word. But this is a
Creation as of heaven and earth, which were dark and empty, and without form,
till the Spirit of God moved, and till God spoke: Till there came the Spirit,
the breath of Gods mouth, the word of God, it is but a faint twilight, it is
but an uncertain glimmering which we have of God in the Creature: But in
sermon, in his word, when we come to him in his Scriptures, we find better
and nobler Creatures produced in us, clearer notions of God, and more evident
manifestations of his power, and of his goodness toward us: for if we consider
him in his first word, sicut locutus ab initio, as he spoke from the beginning
in the Old Testament, from thence we cannot only see, but feel and apply a
Dixit, fiat lux, that God has said, let there be light; and that there is a
light produced in us, by which we see, that this world was not made by chance,
for then it could not consist in this order and regularity; and we see that it
was not eternal, for if it were eternal as God, and so no Creature, then it
must be God too; we see it had a beginning, a beginning of nothing, and all
from God. So we find in our self a fiat lux, that there is such a light
produced: And there we may find a fiat firmamentum, that there is a kind of
firmament produced in us, a knowledge of a difference between Heaven and Earth;
and that there is in our constitutions an earthly part, a body, and a heavenly
part, a soul, and an understanding as a firmament, to separate, distinguish and
discern between these. So also may we find a congregenter aquae, that God has
said, Let there be a sea, a gathering, a confluence of all such means as are
necessary for the attaining of salvation; that is, that God from the beginning
settled and established a Church, in which he was always careful to minister
to man means of eternal happiness: The Church is that Sea, and into that Sea
we launched the water of Baptism. To contract this sine sermon, till God
spoke, in his Creatures only, we have but a faint and uncertain, and general
knowledge of God: in sermon, when God comes to speak at first in the Old
Testament, though he come to more particulars, yet it was in dark speeches, and
in vails, and to them who understood best, and saw clearest into Gods word;
still it was but de futuro, by way of promise, and of a future thing. But when
God comes to his last work, to make Man, to make up Man, that is, to make Man a
Christian by the Gospel, when he comes not to a fiat homo, Let there be a Man
(as he proceeded in the rest) but to a faciamus hominem, Let us make Man: Then
he calls his Son to him, and sends him into the world to suffer death, the
death of the Cross for our salvation: And he calls the Holy Ghost to him, and
sends him to teach us all truth, and apply that which Christ suffered for our
souls, to our souls. God leaves the Nations, the Gentiles, under the non
locutus est; he speaks not at all to them, but in the speechless creatures: He
leaves the Jews under the locutus est, under the killing letter of the Law,
and their stubborn perverting thereof: And he comes to us, sicut locutus est,
in manifesting to us that our Messiah, Christ Jesus, is come, and come
according to the promise of God, and the foretelling of all his Prophets; for
that is our safe anchorage in all storms, that our Gospel is in sermon that
all things are done, so as God had foretold they should be done; that we have
infallible marks given us before, by which we may try all that is done after.

All the word of God then conduces to the Gospel; the Old Testament is a
preparation and a poedagogie to the New. All the word belongs to the Gospel,
and all the Gospel is in the word; nothing is to be obtruded to our faith as
necessary to salvation, except it be rooted in the Word. And as the locutus
est, that is, the promises that God has made to us in the Old Testament; and
the sicut locutus est, that is, the accomplishing of those promises to us in
the New Testament, are thus applyable to us; so is this especially, Quod adhuc
loquitur, that God continues his speech, and speaks to us every day; still we
must hear Evangelium in sermon, the Gospel in the Word, in the Word so as we
may hear it, that is, the Word preached; for howsoever it be Gospel in it self,
it is not Gospel to us if it be not preached in the Congregation; neither,
though it be preached to the Congregation, is it Gospel to me, except I find it
work upon my understanding and my faith, and my conscience: A man may believe
that there shall be a Redeemer, and he may give an Historical assent, that
there has been a Redeemer, that that Redeemer is come, he may have heard
utrumque sermonem, both Gods ways of speaking, both his voices, both his
languages; his promises in the Old Testament, his performances in the New
Testament, and yet not hear him speak to his own soul: Ferme Apostoli plus
laborarunt, says S. Chrysostom. It cost the Apostles, and their Successors, the
preachers of the Gospel, more pains and more labor, ut persuaderent
hominibus, dona Dei iis indulta, To persuade men that this mercy of God, and
these merits of Christ Jesus were intended to them, and directed upon them, in
particular, then to persuade them that such things were done: they can believe
the promise, and the performance in the general, but they cannot find the
application thereof in particular; the voice that is nearest us we least hear,
not because God speaks not loud enough, but because we stop our ears; nor that
neither; for we do hear, but because we do not hearken then, nor consider; no
nor that neither, but because we do not answer, nor cooperate, nor assist
God, in doing that which he has made us able to do, by his grace toward our
own Salvation. For (not to judge De iis qui foris sunt) of those whom God has
left (fot any thing we know) in the dark, and without means of Salvation,
because without manifestation of Christ; we are Christians incorporated in
Christ in his Church; and thereby, by that Title, we have a new Creation, and
are new creatures; and as we shall have a new Jerusalem hereafter, so we have
a new Paradise already, which is the Christian Church. In this Paradise says
St. Augustine, Quatuor Evangelia ligna fructifera; In the books of the Gospel,
as they grow, and as they are suplicated in the Church, grows every Tree
pleasant for the sight, and good for meat: And there, says that Father, lignum
vitae Christus, Christ Jesus himself (as he is taught he that gives life to
all our actions; and even so our faith it self, which faith qualifies and
dignifies those actions: And then, says from the Scriptures, in the Church) is
the Tree of Life, for it is he, As Christ alone, in this Paradise, that is, the
christian Church, is this Tree of life, so lignum scientiae boni and mali, The
Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, is Proprium voluntatis arbitrium, the good
use of our own Will, after God has enlightened us in this Paradise, in the
Christian Church, and so restored our dead will again, by his Grace precedent
and subsequent, and concommitant: for, without such Grace and such succession
of Grace, our Will is so far unable to pre-dispose it self to any good, as
that nec scipso, homo, nisi perniciose uti potest (says he still) we have no
interest in our selves no power to do any thing of, or with our selves, but to
our destruction. Miserable man! a Toad is a bag of Poison, and a Spider is a
blister of Poison, and yet a Toad and a Spider cannot poison themselves; Man
has a dram of poison, originall-Sin, in an invisible corner, we know not
where, and he cannot choose but poison himself and all his actions with that;
we are so far from being able to begin without Grace, as then where we have the
first Grace, we cannot proceed to the use of that, without more. But yet, says
Saint Augustine; The Will of a Christian so rectified and so assisted, the
lignum scientiae, the Tree of knowledge, and he shall be the worse for knowing,
if he live not according to that knowledge; we were all wrapped up in the first
Adam, all Mankind; and we are wrapped up in the second Adam, in Christ, all
Mankind too; but not in both alike; for we are so in the first Adam, as that
we inherit death from him, and incur death whether we will or no; before any
consent of ours be actually given to any Sin, we are the children of wrath, and
of death; but we are not so in the second Adam, as that we are made possessors
of eternal life, without the concurrence of our own Will; not that our will
pays one penny toward this purchase, but our own will may forfeit it; it
cannot adopt us, but it may disinherit us. Now, by being planted in this
Paradise, and received into the Christian Church, we are the adopted sons of
God, and therefore, as it is in Christ, who is the natural Son of God, Qui non
nascitur and desinit, as Origin expresses it, He was not born once and no more,
but has a continual, because an eternal generation, and is as much begotten
to day, as he was 100. 1000. 1000 millions of generations passed; so since we
are the generation and offspring of God, since Grace is our Father, that Parent
that begets all goodness in us, In similitudine ejus, says Origin, conformable
to the Pattern Christ himself, Qui non nascitur and desinit, who has a
continual generation, Generemur Domino per singulos intellectus, and singula
opera, in all the acts of our understanding, and in a ready concurrence of our
Will, let us every day, every minute feel this new generation of spiritual
children; for it is a miserable short life, to have been borne when the glass
was turned, and dyed before it was run out: to have conceived some good Motions
at the beginning, and to have given over all purpose of practice at the end of
a Sermon. Let us present our own will as a mother to the father of light, and
the father of life, and the father of love, that we may be willing to conceive
by the overshadowing of the Holy Ghost, and not resist his working upon our
Souls; but with the obedience of the blessed Virgin, may say, Ecce ancilla,
Behold the servant of the Lord, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, Be it done unto
me according to thy Word; I will not stop mine ears to thy Word, my heart
shall not doubt of thy word, my life shall express my having heard and
harkened to thy word, that word which is the Gospel, that Gospel which is
peace to my Conscience, and reconciliation to my God, and Salvation to my Soul;
for, hearing is but the conception, meditation is but the quickening, purposing
is but the birth, but practicing is the growth of this blessed child.

Fidelis.
The Gospel then, that which is the Gospel to thee, that is, the assurance of
the peace of Conscience, is grounded in sermon, upon the word; not upon
imaginations of thine own, not upon fancies of others, nor pretended
inspirations, nor obtruded Miracles, but upon the word; and not upon a
suspicious and questionable, not upon an uncertain or variable word, but upon
this, that is fidelis sermo, This is a faithful saying. It is true, that this
Apostle seems to use this phrase of speech, as an earnest asseveration, and a
band for diverse truths in other places: He says sometimes, This is a true
saying, and This is a faithful saying, when he does not mean, that it is the
word of God, but only intends to induce a moral certitude, when he would have
good credit to be given to that which follows, he uses to say so, fidelis
sermo, it is a true, it is a faithful saying: But in all those other places
where he uses this phrase, he speaks only of some particular duties, or of some
particular point of Religion; but here he speaks of the whole body of Divinity,
of the whole Gospel, That Christ is come to save Sinners, and therefore more
may be intended by this phrase here, then in other places: When he speaks of
that particular point, The Resurrection, he uses this phrase, It is a true
saying; If we be dead with him we shall also live with him; 2 Timothy 2.11.
when he would invite men to godliness, even by the reward which accompany it
in this life, he uses this addition, this confirmation, For this is a true
saying, and worthy to be received; 1 Timothy 4 9.
when he gives a dignity to the function and office of the Ministry, he
proposes it so, It is a true saying; If any man desire the Office of a Bishop,
1 Timothy 3.5.
he desires a good work; it is a work, not an occasion and opportunity of
ease. And lastly, when he provokes men to glorify God, by good works, he labors
to be believed, by the same phrase still, This is a true saying, and these
things I would thou should affirm, Tit. 3.8.
That they which have believed in God, might be careful to show forth good
works. Till he have found faith, and belief in God, he never calls upon good
works, he never calls them good; but when we have Faith, he would not have us
stop nor determine there, but proceed to works too. It is a phrase which the
Apostle does frequently, and almost proverbially use in these many places, but
in all these places, upon particular and lesser occasions; but here, preparing
the doctrine of the whole Gospel, this phrase admits a larger extent, That as
it is grounded upon the Word, that is, we must have something to show for it; so
it is upon a faithful word, upon that which is clearly, and without the
encumbrance of disputation, the infallible word of God; no traditionall word,
no apocryphal word, but the clear and faithful word. Now of all the
attributes, of all the qualities that can be ascribed to the word of God, this
is most proper to it self, and most available, and most comfortable to us,
that it is fidelis, a faithful word; For, this being a word that has
principally respect and relation to the fidelity of God, it implies necessarily
a Covenant, a Contract with us, which God has bound himself faithfully to
perform unto us; and therefore God calls his Covenant with David by this name,
fideles miserecordias David, An everlasting Covenant, Esai. 55.3 15.11.
even the sure mercies of David. And when the Prophet Jeremy apprehended a
fear that God would break that Covenant which he had made with that Nation,
which had broken with him, he expresses that passion in a word, contrary to
this, and imputes out of his hasty fear, even infidelity to God, Why art thou
unto me (says he there) as a Liar, and sicut aquae infideles, as unfaithful
water, that I cannot trust to; or Aquae mendaces, as it is in the Original,
lying waters, deceitful waters, that promise a continuance and do not perform
it? Why do thou pretend to make a Covenant with thy people and wilt not
perform it faithfully? Most of Gods other attributes are accompanied with this
in the Scriptures, whatsoever God is called besides, he is called fidelis,
faithful too. In one place he is fortis and fidelis, Deuteronomy. 7 9.
he is powerful; but if he turn his power vindicatively upon me, I were
better if he were less powerful; but he has made a Covenant with me, that he
will turn his power upon those whom he has called his Enemies, because they
are mine, and therein lies my comfort, that he is a powerful and a faithful
God. In another place, Esaias. 49 7.
he is fidelis and sanctus; he is a holy God; but if he be so, and but so, how
shall I, who am unholy, stand in his sight? He has made a Covenant with me,
that as they who looked upon the Serpent in the Wilderness, shed and cast out
the venom of that serpent who had stung them before; so when I looked
faithfully upon my Savior, all my unholinesse falls off as rags, and I shall
be invested in his Righteousness, in his Holiness; and so in that lies my
comfort, that he is a Holy and a Faithful God. Howsoever we consider God in
the Schools, in his other attributes, yet here is my University and my Chair,
here I must take my Degree, in my Heart, in my Conscience; and this is that
that brings God home, and applies him closs to me, that he is fidelis, a
faithful God; that in his mercy he has made a Covenant with us, and in his
faithfulness he will perform it. And therefore consider God in his first
great work, 1 Pet. 4.19.
his Creation, so he is fidelis Creator, let them that suffer according to the
will of God, commit their Souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful
Creator. He had gracious purposes upon us in our Creation, and he is faithful
to his purposes; and so this faithful God is God the Father. Consider God in
his next great work, the Redemption, Heb. 2.17.
and so he is fidelis Pontifex, a faithful High Priest, in things concerning
God, that he might make reconciliation for the sins of the People, and so this
faithful God is God the Son. Consider God in his continuance and dwelling in
the Church, usque ad consummationem, Apocal. 1.5.
till the end of the world, so he is fidelis Testis, He shall be evermore
presenting to God, and testifying in our behalf, the Covenant which he has
sealed to the Church in his blood, and testifying to our spirit, that that
seal belongs unto us; and so this faithful God is God the Holy Ghost; so that
when we consider our Creation, we are not to consider a Creation to
condemnation; God forbid: When we consider a Redemption, we are not to consider
it exclusively, as not intended to us; God forbid: And when we consider Gods
presence and government in the Church, we are not to consider it in a Church
whose doors are shut up against any of us, so as that we can have no
Repentance, no absolution; God forbid, we are not to consider God in those
Decrees, wherein we cannot consider him as fidelem Deum; In those Decrees,
which are not revealed to us, we know not whether he be faithful, or no; for
we know not what his promise, what his purpose was: But as he has manifested
himself in his Word, as he has made a conditional contract with us, so as
that if we perform our part, he will perform his, and not otherwise; so we
may be sure that he is fidelis Deus, a God that will stand to his word, a God
that will perform his promises faithfully; for, though it were merely his
Mercy, that made those promises, yet it is his fidelity, his Truth, his
faithfulness, that binds him to the performance of them. Psalm. 31.4. Romans 3.9.
The faithful word of God has said it; in the Old Testament, and in the New
too; Let God be true, and every man a Liar. The word of the man of Sin, the
God of Rome, is a ly; Pope Stephen abrogates all the Decrees of Pope Formosus,
and so gives that ly to him: Next year Pope Romanus abrogates all his, and so
gives that ly to him; and within seven years, Servius all his; and where was
fidelis sermo, the faithful word all this while? When they send forth Bulls
and Dispensations to take effect occasionally, and upon emergencies, That rebus
sic stantibus; If you find matter in this State, this shall be Catholic
Divinity; if not, then it shall be Heresy; where is this fidelis sermo, this
faithful word amongst them? If for the space of a 1500 years, the twelve
Articles of the Apostles Creed might have saved any man, but since as many
more, Trent Articles must be as necessary; still where is that fidelis sermo,
that faithful word which we may rely upon? God has not bound himself, and
therefore neither has he bound us to any word but his own; In that only, and
in all that we shall be sure to find him, Fidelem Deum, A faithful God.

Now the Truth and Faithfulness of the Word, Acceptatio.
consists not only in this, quod verax, that it is true in it self, but in
this also, quod testificatus, that it is established by good testimony to be
so. It is therefore faithful because it is the word of God, and therefore also
because it may be proved to be the word of God by humane testimonies; which is
that which is especially intended in this clause, Omni acceptatione dignus, It
is worthy of all acceptance; worthy to be received by our Faith, and by our
Reason too: Our Reason tells us, that Gods will is revealed to Man somewhere,
else man could not know how God would be worshipped; and our Reason tells us,
that this is that Word in which that Will is revealed. And therefore the
greatest part of the Latine-Fathers, particularly Ambrose and Augustine, read
these words otherwise; not fideliter, no, but Humanus sermo; and so many Greek
Copies have it too, That it is a speech which man, not as he is a faithful
man, but even as he is a reasonable man may comprehend, not as Saint Hierom
will needs understand those words: Si Humanus and non Divinus, non esset omni
acceptatione dignus; for that is undenyably true; if it came merely from man,
and not from God, it were not worthy to be received by faith; but as S.
Augustine expresses that which himself and S. Ambrose meant, sic Humanus and
Divinus, quomodo Christus Deus and homo, as Christ is God too, so as that he is
Man too; so the Scriptures are from God so, as that they are from Man too: the
Gospel is a faithful word essentially, as it is the word of God, derived from
him, and it is a faithful word too, declaratively, as it is presented by such
light and evidence of Reason, and such testimonies of the Church, as even the
reason of Man cannot refuse it: So that the reason of man accepts the Gospel,
first out of a general notion, That the will of God must be revealed
somewhere, and then he receives this for that Gospel, rather then the Alcoran
of the Turks, rather then the Talmud of the Jews, out of those infinite and
clear arguments which even his reason presents to him for that. And then, as
when he compares Scripture with the book of Creatures and Nature, he finds
that evidence more forcible then the other; and when he finds this Scripture
compared with other pretended Scriptures, Alcaron or Talmud, he finds it to be
of infinite power above them; so when he comes to the true Scriptures, and
compares the New Testament with the Old, the Gospel with the Law, he finds this
to be a performance of those promises, a fullfiling of those Prophecies, a
revelation of those Types and Figures and an accomplishment, and a possession
of those hopes and those reversions; And when he comes to that argument which
works most forcibly, and most worthily upon man's reason, which is
Antiquistrum, That Is best in matter of Religion that was first, there he sees
the Gospel was before the Law: Gal. 3.17.
This I say, says the Apostle, that the Law, which was four hundred thirty
years after, cannot disannull the Covenant, which was confirmed of God in
respect of Christ; so shall always in respect of faith and in respect of
Reason, It is worthy of acceptance; for, would thy Soul expatiate in that
large contemplation of God in general? Romans 1.1.
It is Evangelium Dei, the Gospel of God: would thou contract this God into
a narrower and more discernable station? Mar. 1.1.
It is Evangelium Jesu Christi, the Gospel of Jesus Christ: would thou draw
it nearer to the consideration of the effects? It is Evangelium pacis, Ephesians.
6.15. Mar. 1.14. Revel. 14.6.
the Gospel of peace,; would thou consider it here? Here it is Evangelium
Regni, the Gospel of the kingdom, would thou consider it hereafter? It is
Evangelium aternum, the eternal Gospel, Act. 20.24.
would thou see the way by it? it is Evangelium Gratiae, the Gospel of
Grace; would thou see the end of it? it is Evangelium gloriae, 1 Timothy 1.11.
the Gospel of glory: It is worthy of all acceptance from thee, Gal. 1.
for the Angels of heaven can preach no other Gospel, without being accursed
themselves.

But the best and fullest acceptance is that which we called at first an
Approbation, to prove that thou have accepted it by thy life and conversation:
That as thy faith makes no staggering at it, Approbatio.
nor thy Reason no argument against it, so thy actions may be arguments for it
to others, to convince them that do not, and confirm them that do believe in
it; for this word, which signifies in our ordinary use; the Gospel,
Evangelium, was verbum civil, verbum forense a word of civil and secular use,
before it was made Ecclesiastical; and as it had before in civil use, so it
retains still, three significations: First it signified Bonum nuntium, a good
and a gracious Message: And so, in spiritual use, it is the Message of God,
who sent his Son; and it is the message of the Son, who sent the Holy Ghost.
Secondly it signified Donum offerenti datum, the reward that was given to him
that brought the good news: and so in our spiritual use, it is that spiritual
tenderness that Religious good nature of the Soul (as we may have leave to
call it) that appliablenesse, that Ductilenesse, that holy credulity which your
bring to the hearing of the word, and that respect which you give to Christ, in
his Ministers, who brings this Gospel unto you. And then Thirdly, it signifies
Sacrificium Datori Immolatam, the Sacrifice which was offered to that God who
sent this good Message; which in our spiritual use, is that which the Apostle
exhorts the Romans to with the most earnestness, Romans 1.12.
(and so do I you) I beseech you brethern by the mercies of God, that ye give
up your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy acceptable to God, which is your
reasonable serving of God: Now a reasonable service is that which in reason we
are bound to do, and which in reason we think would most glorify him, in
contemplation of whom that service is done; and that is done especially, when
by a holy and exemplar life, we draw others to the love and obedience of the
same Gospel which we profess: for then have we declared this true and
faithful saying, this Gospel to have been worthy of all acceptance, when we
have looked upon it by our reason, embraced it by our Faith, and declared it by
our good works; and all these considerations arose out of that which at the
beginning we called Radicem, the Root of this Gospel, the Word, the
Scripture, the Tree it self, the Body of the Gospel, that is The coming of
Christ, and the Reason of his coming, To save Sinners; And then the fruit of
this Gospel, that Humility, by which the Apostle confesses himself to be the
greatest Sinner, we reserve for another exercise.

Sermon. 14.
A Second SERMON Preached at Whitehall. April 2. 1621. SERMON XIV.
1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, That
Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners; of which I am the chiefest.


WE have considered heretofore that which appertained to the Root, and all the
circumstances thereof. That which belongs to the Tree it self, what this
acceptable Gospel is, That Christ Jesus came into the World, to save Sinners;
and then, that which appertains to the fruit of this Gospel, the Humility of
the Apostle, in applying it to himself, Quorum ego, Of which Sinners I am the
chiefest, were reserved for this time. In the first of these, that which we
call the Tree, the Body of this Gospel, there are three branches; first an
Advent, A coming; and secondly, the Person that came; and Lastly, the work for
which he came. And in the first of these, we shall make these steps; First,
that it is a new coming of a Person who was not here before, at least, not in
that manner as he comes now, venit, He came; And Secondly, that this coming is
in Act, not only in Decree; so he was come and slain ab initio, from all
eternity, in God's purpose of our Salvation; nor come only in promise, so he
came wrapped up in the first promise of a Messiah; in Paradise, in that ipse
conteret, He shall bruise the Serpents head; nor come only in the often renewing
of that promise to Abraham, in semine tuo, In thy seed shall all Nations be
blessed, nor only in the ratification and refreshing of that promise to Judah,
Donec Silo, Till Silo come; and to David, in Solio tuo, The Scepter shall not
depart; nor as he came in the Prophets, in I says virgo concipiet, That he
should come of a virgin, nor in Michaeas, Et tu Bethlem, That he should come
out of that Town; but this is a Historical, not a Prophetical, an Actual
not a Promissary coming; it is a coming already executed; venit, he came, he is
come. And then Thirdly, venit in mundum, He came into the World, into the whole
World, so that by his purpose first extends to all the Nations of the World,
and then it shall extend to thee in particular, who art a part of this world;
He is come into the world, and into thee. From hence, we shall descend to our
second branch, to the considerations of the person that comes; and he is, first
Christus, in which one name we find first his capacity to reconcile God and
man, because he is a mixed person, uniting both in himself; and we find also his
Commission to work this Reconciliation, because he is Christus, an anointed
person, appointed by that unction, to that purpose; And thirdly, we find him to
be Jesus, that is, actually a Savior; that as we had first his capacity and
his Commission in the name of Christ, so we might have the execution of this
Commission in the name of Jesus. And then lastly, in the last branch of this
part, we shall see the work it self, Venit salvare, He came to save; It is not
offerre, to offer it to them whom he did intend it to, but he came really and
truly to save; It was not to show a land of promise to Moses, and then say,
there it is, but thou shall never come at it; It was not to show us salvation,
and then say there it is, in Baptism it is, in Preaching, and in the other
Sacrament, it is; but soft, there is a Decree of predestination against thee,
and thou shall have none of it; But venit salvare, He came to save; And whom?
Sinners. Those, who the more they ackowledg themselves to be so, the nearer
they are to this salvation.

First then for the Advent, this coming of Christ, Part 1.
we have a Rule reasonable general in the school, Missio in divinis est novo
modo operatio, Then is any person of the Trinity said to be sent, or to come,
when they work in any place, or in any person in another manner or measure then
they did before; yet that Rule does not reach home, to the expressing of all
commings of the persons of the Trinity: The second person came more
pretentially then so, more then in an extraordinary working and Energie, and
execution of his power, if it be rightly apprehended by those Fathers, who in
many of those Angels which appeared to the Patriarcks, and whose service God
used in delivering Israel out of Egypt, and in giving them the Law in Sinai, to
be the son of God himself to have been present, and many things to have been
attributed to the Angels in those histories, which were done by the son of God,
not only working, but present in that place, at that time. So also the Holy
Ghost came more presentially then so, more then by an extraordinary extention
of his power, when he came presentially and personally in the Dove, to seal
John's Baptism upon Christ. But yet, though those pretential commings of Christ
as an Angel in the old Testament, and this coming of the Holy Ghost in a Dove
in the New, were more then ordinary commings, and more then extraordinary
workings too, yet they were all far short of this coming of the son of God in
this Text: for it could never be said properly in any of those cases, That that
or that Angel, was the son of God, the second person, or that that Dove was the
Holy Ghost, or the third person of the Trinity; but in this Advent, which we
have in hand here, it is truly and properly said, this man is God, this son of
Mary is the son of God, this Carpenters son, is that very God that made the
world. He came so to us, as that he became us, not only by a new and more
powerful working in us, but by assuming our nature upon himself.

It is a perplex't question in the School, (and truly the Balance in those of
the middle age, very even) whether if Adam had not sinned, the son of God had
come into the world, and taken our nature and our flesh upon him. Out of the
infinite testimonies of the abundant love of God to man many concluded, that
howsoever, though Adam had not sinned, God would have dignified the nature of
man in the highest degree, that that nature was any ways capable off: and since
it appears now, (because that has been done) that the nature of man was
capable of such assuming, by the Son of God, they argue, that God would have
done this though Adam had not sinned. He had not come, say they, ut medicus, if
man had not contracted that infections sickness by Adams sin; Christ had not
come in the nature of a Physician, to recover him; non ut Redemptor say they,
If man had not forfeited his interest and state in heaven by Adams sin; Christ
had not come in the nature of a Redeemer, but ut frater, ut Dominus, ad
nobilitandum genus humanus, out of a brotherly love, and out of a royal favor,
to exalt that nature which he did love, to impart and convey to us a greater
and nobler state, then we had in our Creation: in such a respect, and to such a
purpose, he should have come. But since they themselves who follow that opinion
come to say, That that is the more subtle opinion, and the more agreeable to
man's reason, (because man willingly embraces, and pursues any thing that
conduces to the dignifying of his own nature) but that the other opinion, that
Christ had not come, if our sins had not occasioned his coming, is magis
conformis scripturis and magis honorat Deum, is more agreeable to the
Scriptures, and derives more honor upon God: we cannot err, if we keep with the
Scriptures, and in the way that leads to Gods glory, and so say with St.
August. Si homo non periisset, filius hominis non venisset, If man could have
been saved otherwise, the son of God had not come in this manner: ot if that
may be interpreted of his coming to suffer only, we may enlarge it with Leo,
Creatura non fieret qui Creator mundi, He who was Creator of the world, had
never become a Creature in the world, if our sins had not drawn him to it. It
is usefully said by Aquinus, Deus ordinavit futura, ut futura erant: God has
appointed all future things to be, but to be so as they are, that is, necessary
things necessarily, and contingent things contingently; absolute things
absolutely, and conditional things conditionally; He has decreed my salvation,
but that salvation in Christ; He had decreed Christ's coming into this world,
but a coming to save sinners. And therefore it is a frivolous interogatory, a
lost question, an impertinent article, to enquire what God would have done if
Adam had stood. But Adam is fallen, and we in him; and therefore though we may
piously wish what St. Augustine, utinam non fuisset miseria ne iste
misericordia esset necessaria, I would man had not been so miserable, as to put
God to this way of mercy; yet since our sins had induced this misery upon us,
and this necessity (if we may so say) upon God, let us change all our
disputation into thanksgiving, and all our utrums, and quaeres, and quando's of
the school, to the Benedictus, and Alelujahs and Osanna's of the Church;
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, who has visited and redeemed his people;
blessed that he would come at all, which was our first, and blessed that he is
come already, which is our second consideration; venit, He came, He is come.
Venit.


As in the former branch the Gentiles the Heathens are our adversaries, they
deny the venit, that a Messiah is to come at all; so in this, the Jews are our
enemies, they confess the veniet, a future coming, but they deny the venit
that this Messiah come yet. In that language in which God spoke to man there is
such assurance intimated, that whatsoever God promises shall be performed; that
in that language ordinarily in the Prophets, the times are confounded, and when
God is intended to purpose or to promise any thing in the future, it is very
often expressed in the time past; that which God means to do, he is said to
have done; future, and present, and past is all one with God: But yet to man it
is much more, that Christ is come, then that he would come; not but that they
who apprehended faithfully his future coming, had the same salvation as we,
but they could not so easily apprehend it as we: God did not present so many
handles to take hold of him in that promise, that he would come, as in the
performance, that he was come. They had most of these handles that lived with
him, and saw him, and heard him; but we that come after, have more then they
which were before them, we have more in the history then they had in the
Prophets.

It was time for him to come in the beginning of the world, for the Devil was a
murderer from the beginning. Joh. 8 44.
As the Devil was felo de se, a murderer of himself; as he killed himself
Christ gave him over; he never came to him in that line, he never pardoned him
that sin: but as he practiced upon man, Christ met with him from the beginning:
He saved us from his killing, by dying himself for us; for being dead, and
having taken us into his wounds, and being risen, and having taken us into his
glory; if we be dead in Christ already, the Devil cannot kill us, if we be
risen in Christ the Devil cannot hold us: And so he was Agnus occisus ab
origin mundi, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, that is, as soon
as the world had any beginning in the purpose of God. God saw from all eternity
that man would need Christ, and as soon as there was conceived an ego occido, I
will kill, in the Devils mouth, then was an ego vivificabo, I will raise from
death in Gods mouth; and so, there was an early coming from all eternity; for
he is the Ruler of Israel, says the Prophet, Much. 5.2.
and his goings forth have been from the beginning, and from everlasting: it is
goings in the plural; Christ has diverse goings forth, diverse commings, and all
from the beginning; not only from Moses his In principio, which was the
beginning of the Creation, (for then also Christ came in the promise of a
Messiah) but from St. John's In principio, that beginning which was without
beginning, the eternal beginning, for there Christ came in that eternal decree,
that he should come. Neither is this only as he is Germen Jehovae, the bud of
Jehovah, issuing from him as his eternal Son, Esa. 4 2.
but as the Prophet Michaeas says in that place, cited before, it is, as he
shall come out of Bethlem, and as he shall be a Ruler of Israel: so as he came
in our humane nature, as he came to dye for us, as he came to establish a
Church, so his coming is from all eternity for all this was wrapped up in a
decree of his coming: And therefore we are not carried upon the consideration
of any decree, or if any means of salvation higher or precedent to the coming
of Christ, for that were to antidate eternity it self.

So then this coming in the Text, is the execution of that coming in the
decree, which is involved in St. John's In principio, and it is the performance
of it coming, which was enwrapped in the promise, in Moses In principio, 10.24.
it is his actual coming in our flesh: that coming of which Christ said in St.
Luke many Prophets and Kings; 13.17.
and in St. Matthew. many Prophets and righteous men, desired to see these things
which you see, and have not seen them: the prophets who in their very name were
videntes, seen, saw not this comining thus; Joh. 8.56.
your Father Abraham, rejoiced to see my day says Christ, and he saw it, and
was glad. All times and all Generations before time was were Christ's day; but
yet he calls this coming in the flesh especially his day, because this day was a
holy Equinoctial, and made the day of the Jews and the day of the Gentiles
equal; and Testamenta copulat, says St. Chrysostom, it binds up the two
Testaments into one Bible; for if the Partriarks had not desired to see this
day, and had not seen it in the strength of faith, they and we had not been of
one communion. We have a most sure word of the Prophet, 2 Pet. 1.19.
says the Apostle, and to that we do well that we take heed; but how far? As
unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star
arise in your hearts. But now since this coming, 1 John 1.2.
This light has appeared, and we have seen it, and bear witness and show it
unto you. Simon had an assurance in the Prophets, and more immediately then so
in the vision; but herein was his assurance and his peace established, Lord now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, Luke 2.19.
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. The kingdom of Heaven was but a
reversion to them, and it is no more to us; but to them it was a reversion, as
after a Grandfather, and father; two lives, two comings of Christ before they
would come to their state; Christ must come first in the flesh, and he must
come again to Judgment. To us, and in our case one of these lives is spent;
Christ is come in the flesh: and therefore as the earth is warmer an hour after
the sun sets, then it was an hour before the sun rose, so let our faith and
zeal be warmer now after Christ departing out of this world, then theirs was
before his coming into it: and let us so rejoice at this Ecce venit Rex tuus,
that our King our Missias is already come, as that we may cherefully say, veni
Domine Jesu, come Lord Jesu come quickly, and be glad if at the going out of
these doors, we might meet him coming in the clouds. In Mundum


Thus far then he has proceeded already, venit He came, and venit in mundum,
He came into the world; it is not in mundam, into so clean a woman as had no
sin at all, none contracted from her Parents, no original sin; for so Christ
had placed his favors and his honors ill, if he had favored her most who had
no need of him: to dye for all the world, and not for his mother, or to dye for
her, when she needed not that hell, is a strange imagination: she was not
without sin; for then why should she have died? for even a natural death in all
that come by natural generation, is of sin: But certainly as she was a vessel
reserved to receive Christ Jesus, so she was preserved according to the best
capacity of that nature, from great and infections sins. Mary Magdalen was a
holy vessel after Christ had thrown the Devil out of her; the Virgin Mary was
much more so, into whom no reigning power of the Devil ever entered; in such an
acceptance then Christ came per mundam in mundum, by a clean woman into an
unclean world. And he came in a purpose, as we do piously believe) to manifest
himself in the Christian Religion to all the nations of the world; and
therefore, laetentur Insulae, says David, The Lord reigns let the Island
rejoice the Island who by reason of their situation, provision and trading,
have most means of conveying Christ Jesus over the world. He has ca^ried us up
to heaven and set us at the right hand of God, and shall not we endeavor to
carry him to those nations, who have not yet heard of his name? shall we still
brag that we have brought our clothes, and our hatchets, and our knives, and
bread to this and this value and estimation amongst those poor ignorant Souls,
and shall we never glory that we have brought the name, and Religion of Christ
Jesus in estimation amongst them? shall we stay till other nations have planted
a falls Christ among them? and then either continue in our sloth, or take more
pains in rooting out a false Christ then would have planted the true? Christ is
come into the world; we will do little, if we will not ferry him over, and
propagate his name, as well as our own to other Nations.

At least be sure that he is so far come into the world, as that he become into
thee. Thou art but a little world, a world but of a few spanns in length; (...).
and yet Christ was sooner carried from east to west, from Jerusalem to these
parts, then thou can carry him over the faculties of thy Soul and Body; He
has been in a pilgrimage toward thee long, coming toward thee, perchance 50,
perchance 60 years; and how far is he got into thee yet? Is he yet come to
thine eye? Have they made Jobs Covenant, that they will not look upon a Maid;
yet he is not come into thine ear? still thou have an itching ear, delighting
in the libellous defamation of other men. Is he come to thine ear? Art thou
rectified in that sense? yet voluptousness in thy taste, or inordinateness in
thy other senses keep him out in those. He is come into thy mouth, to thy
tongue; but he is come thither as a diseased person, is taken into a spittle to
have his blood drawn, to have his flesh cauterized, to have his bones sawd;
Christ Jesus is in thy mouth, but in such exrecations, in such blasphemies, as
would he Earthquaks to us if we were earth; but we are all stones, and rock,
obdurate in a senselesnes of those wounds which are inflicted upon our God. He
may be come to the skirts, to the borders, to an outward show in thine actions,
and yet not be come into the land, into thy heart. He entered into thee, at
baptism; He has crept farther and farther into thee, in catechisms and other
infusions of his doctrine into thee; He has pierced into thee deeper by the
powerful threatenings of his Judgments, in the mouths of his messengers; He has
made some survey over thee, in bringing thee to call thy self to an account of
some sinful actions; and yet Christ is not come into thee; either thou make
some new discoveries, and fallest into some new ways of sin; and art loath that
Christ should come thither yet, that he should trouble thy conscience in that
sin, till thou had made some convenient profit of it; thou have studied and
must gain, thou have bought and must sell, and therefore art loath to be
troubled yet; or else thou have some land in thee, which thou thy self have
never discovered, some ways of sin which thou have never apprehended, nor
considered to be sin; and thither Christ is not come yet: He is not come into
thee with that comfort which belongs to his coming in this Text, except he had
overshadowed thee all, and be in thee entirely.

Person.
We have done with his coming; we come next to the person; in which we consider
first, that he was capable of this great employment to reconcile God to man, as
he was a mixed person of God and man; and then, that he had a Commission for
this service, as he was Christus, anointed, sealed to that office; and then,
that he did actually execute this commission, as he was Jesus. Now when we
consider his capacity and fitness, to save the would this capacity and fitness
must have relation to that way, which God had chosen; which was by Justice. For
God could have saved the world by his word, as well as he had made it so.
Adetur venia now had bin as easy to him, as a fiat lux at the beginning; a
general pardon and a light of grace, as easy as the spreading of the light of
nature. but God having purposed to himself the way of Justice, then could none
be capable of that Employment but a mixed person; for God could not dye, nor man
could not satisfy by death; and both these were required in the way of
Justice, a satisfaction that by death. Now as this unexpressible mixture and
union of God and man made him capable of this employment, Christi.
so he had a particular Commission for it, employed in the same name too; for
every capable person is not always employed; and this was his unct^on as he is
Christus, anointed, severd, sealed for that purpose, for that office. Now
whether this unction, that is, this power, to ^atisfie Gods Justice for all the
sins of all mankind, were ex ratione sua formali intrinsica, that is, whether
the merit of Christ were therefore infinite in it self, because an infinite
Godhead resided in his person, or whether this power and ability by one act, to
satisfy for all sins arose ex pacto and acceptatione, by the contract they had
past between the Father and Him, that it was so because it was covenanted
between them that it should be so; this has divided the School into that great
opposition which is well known by the name of Thomist and Scottish. The safest
way is to place it in pacto, in the contract, in the covenant; for if we place
it absolutely in the person, and cause the infiniteness of the merit from that,
then any act of that person, the very incarnation it self had been enough to
save us; but his unction, his Commission was to proceed thus and thus, and no
otherwise then be did in the work of our Redemption. His unction was his
qualification; He was anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows,
else the season of his enduring the cross, Ps. 45.7.
could nor have been joy: He was anointed liberally by that woman, when he
himself was sold for 30 pieces of silver, Mar. 14.3.
beyond the value of 300 pieces in ointment upon him: He was honorably embalmed
by Joseph, and Nicodemus, who brought an 100 pound weight of Myrrh and Aloes
to bury him: every way anointed more then others, by others. All his garment
smell of Myrrh, Job. 19.
and Aloes, and Cassia, as it is in the Canticles; even in the garments of
Religion, the Ceremonies of the Church, there is a sweet savor of life: Oleum
effusum nomen ejus, even in the outward profession of the name of Christ there
is a savor of life, an assistance to salvation; for even in taking upon us
this name Christ, we acknowledge, both that he was able to reconcile, and sent
purposely to reconcile God and man.

But then, the strength of our consolation lies in the other name; Jesus.
as he was Jesus, actually he executed that Commission, to which, as he was
Christ he was fitted and anointed. Now this is a name, which though the Greeks
have translated it into soter, yet the great Master of Latin language, Cicero,
professes that there is no word, which expresses it; and that great Minter of
Latin words Tertullian does so often call by the name of salutificator: for
Jesus is so; not only a bringer, an applier, a worker of our salvation, but he
is the author of the very decree of our salvation, as well as of the execution
of that Decree: there was no salvation before him, there was no salvation
intended in the book of Life, but in him; yea, no Grammarian can clear it,
whether this name Jesus signify salvatorem or salutem, the Instrument that
saves us, or the salvation that is afforded us; for it is not only his person,
but it is his very righteousness that saves us. It was therefore upon that
ground that this name was given him, Matthew. 1.21.
thou shall call his name Jesus, says the Angel at his conception: why? for he
shall save his people from their sins: not only that he shall be able to do it,
nor only that he shall be sent to do it: so far he is but Christus a mixed
person, and an anointed person; but he shall actually do it, and so he is
Jesus. Names of children are not always answered in their manners, and in the
effects: Non omnes Joannes qui vocantur Joannes, says St. Chrisost. every
nominal John is not a real John: Absolons name was Patris pax, his Fathers
peace, but he was his Fathers affliction; but the name of Jesus had the effect,
He was called a Savior, and he was one.

1.21.
It may seem strange that when St. Matthew says, That Mary was to bring forth a
child and call his name Jesus, He says also that this was done that the
Prophecy of Esai might be fulfilled, who said, That a virgin shall bring forth
a child, and who shall be called Emanuel; to fulfill a prophecy, of being called
Emanuel, he must be called Jesus. Indeed, to be Jesus is a fulfilling of his
being Emanuel: Emanuel is God with us, a mixed person, God and man; but Jesus is
a Savior the performer of that salvation, which only he who was God and man
could accomplish. He was Emanuel, as soon as he was conceived, but not Jesus
till he began to submit himself to the Law for us; which was first in his
circumcision, when he took the name of, Jesus, and began to shed some drops of
blood for us. The name of Jesus was no new name when he took it; we find some
of that name in the Scriptures, and in Josephus, we find one officer, that was
his enemy, and another a great robber, who lighted upon Josephus more then
once, of that name and yet the Prophet Esai says of Christ, (and St. Cyril.
62.2.
interprets those words of this particular man Jesus) thou shall be called by a
new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name: And how was this a new name,
by which so many had been called before? The newness was not in that, that none
other had had that name, but that the Son of God, had not that name, till he
began to execute the office of a Savior. Esa. 4.2.^.
He was called Germen Jehovae, the bud of Jehova, before; and he was called the
Counselor, and the wonderful, and the Prince of peace, by the same Prophet. But
it is the observation of Origin, and of Lactantius after, (and it appears in
the text it self) That Moses never calls Oshea the son of Nun, Joshuah, (which
is the very name of Jesus) till he was made General, Number. 13.17.
to deliver and save his people, so what names soever were attribu- to the Son
of God before; the name of Jesus was a new name, to him then, when he began the
work of salvation in his circumcision. Take hold therefore of his name Emanuel,
as God is with us, as there is a person fit to reconcile God and man; and take
hold of him as he is Christus, a person sealed and anointed for that
reconciliation: But above all, be sure of thy hold upon the name Jesus thy
Savior. This was his name, when he was carried to the Altar to circumcision,
and this was his name when he carried his Altar the Cross; this was his style
there, Jesus Nazarenus, Jesus of Nazareth: and in the virtue of that name, he
shall give thee a circumcised heart, and circumcised lips in the course of thy
life; and in the virtue of that name he shall give thee a joyful consummatum
est, when thou come to finish all upon thy last Altar, thy deathbed. Servare.


Now from this consideration of the person, so far as arose out of his several
names, we pass to his action, He was able to redeem man, He was sent to redeem
man, He did redeem man; How? Servavit, He came to save. And here also is that
word, which as we said before, is above expressing; for the word which we
content our selves with, To save, implies but a preserving from falling into
ruin; but we were absolutely fallen before. The word signifies salutem dare,
medici, and it signifies salutem esse; and Christ is truly both, both the
Physician and the Physic. 9. 13.
But how is it ministered? we see his method is in St. Matthew. veni vocare, I
came to call: his way is a voice now, vocat non cogit; God does but call us he
does not constrain us, He does not drive us into a pound; He calls us as Birds
do their young, and he would gather us as a Hen does her Chickins. It is true
there is a Trahit, but there is no cogit; no man comes to me, says Christ,
except the Father draw him, But, Joh 6 44.
non inviti trahimur, non inviti credimus, says St. Augustine, God draws no
man against his will, no man believes in God against his will, non adhibitus
violentia sed voluntas exitatur, says the same Father, God only excites and
exalts our will, but he does not force it: He makes use of that of the Poet,
Trahit sua quemque voluptas, our carnal desires draw us, but this drawing is
not a constraining; for then we should not be commanded to resist them, nor to
fight against them, for no man will bid me do so against a Cannon bullet that
comes with an inevitable, and irresistible violence now, August.
habet sensus suas voluptates, and animus deseritur a suis? shall our carnal
affections draw us, though they do not force us, and shall not Grace do the
same office too? shall we still trust to such a power, or such a measure of
that Grace, at last, as that we shall not be able to resist, but shall convert
us whether we will or no, and never concur willingly with Gods present grace?
Draw me, and I will run after thee, says the Spouse: Cant. 1.4.
she was called before, now she awakens; and she does not say draw me, and so I
shall be screwd up unto thee, and lay all upon the force of grace, but draw me
and I will run; she promises an application and concurrence on her part. So
then venit salvare, is venit vocare, He came to save by calling us, as an
eloquent and a persuasive man draws his Auditory, but yet imprints no necessity
upon the faculty of the will; so works Gods calling of us in his word. God
expresses it fully in the Prophet, Hose. 11.3.
I sought Ephraim to go,; we are not able to go, to rise, to move without him;
But how did he teach him? I took them by their arms; God made use of their
faculties, which faculties are the limbs of the Soul: so he enlightened their
understanding, and he rectified their will; but still their underding, and
their will I draw them says God their; But how, and with what? With cords of
man says he, and with bands of love; with the cords of man, the voice of the
Minister, and the power which Gods Ordinance has infused into that, and with
the band of love, that is, of the Gospel so proposed unto us: and as it is
added there, I took off the yoke from their jaws, and I laid meat before them:
God takes off our yoke, the weight of our sins, and the indisposition of our
natural infirmities, and he lays meat before us, the Word and the Sacraments
in his Church. So that his venit salvare, is venit solvere; solvere, that is,
to pay our debt, in his death, and solvere, that is, to unty our bands, and by
his grace to make our natural faculties, formerly bound up in a corrupt
inhability, to do so, now able to concur with him, and cooperate to good
actions. He prepared and he prescribed this physic for man, August.
when he was upon earth; etiam cum occideretur medicus erat, then when he died,
he became our physician; medici sanguinem fundunt, ille de ipso sanguine
medicamenta facit: other Physicians draw our blood, He makes physic of blood,
and of his own blood. So he came to save, in preparing and prescribing, and he
came to save in applying, when by the preaching of his word, Joseph who is in
the well, and Jeremy who is in the Dungeon, do as much as they can, for the
tying and fitting of that rope which is offered and let down to them, to draw
them. God saves us by a calling, and he saves us by drawing; but he calls them
that hearken to him, and he draws them that follow upon his drawing; He saves
us who acknowledge that we could not be saved without him, and desire, and that
with a faithful assurance to be saved by him; which is that which is intended
in the next word, peccatores, he came to savesinners.

Peccatores.
He came not to call the righteous, but sinners: Is that intended of all
effectually? all have sinned, and all are deprived of the glory of God; Romans
2.23.
But sinners here are those sinners, who ackowledg themselves to be sinners;
for says he, I came to call them to repentance: and that's the meaning of that
exclusion of the righteous; He came not to call the Righteous; not to call them
who call themselves Righteous, and thought themselves so, but sinners; not all
whom he knew to be sinners, but all who would be brought to know themselves to
be so. Them he came to call by the power of Miracles when he lived upon earth,
and them he stays to call by the power of his word, now he is ascended into
heaven; for as a furnace needs not the same measure and proportion of fire to
keep it boiling, as it did to heat it; but yet it does need the same fire, that
is, fire of the same nature, (for the heat of the Sun will not keep it boiling
how hot soever,) so the Church of God needs not miracles now it is established;
but still there is the same fire, the working of the same spirit to save
sinners: for that was the end of miracles, and it is the end of preaching, to
make men capable of salvation by acknowledging themselves to be sinners. And
this has brought us to the last part of this text, that which at first we
called the fruit of the Gospel, Humility. Third part.


This brought St. Paul to be of that Quorum, Quorum ego maximus, not only to
discern and confess himself to be a sinner, but the chiefest and greatest
sinner of all. Nihil humilitate sublimius; it is excellently, but strangely
said by St. Hierome; He might rather and more credibly have used any word then
that: He might have been easily believed if he had said, nihil sapientius,
there is no wiser thing then humility, for he that is low in his own, shall be
high in the eyes of others; and to have said nihil perfective, there is not so
direct a way to perfection as humility: But nihil sublimius, must needs seem
strangely said, there is nothing higher then lowness; no such exaltation as
dejection; no such revenge as patience; and yet all this is truly and safely
said, with that limitation which St. Hierome gives it there, apud Deum, in the
sight of God, there is no such exaltation as humiliation. We must not coast and
cross the nearest way, and so think to meet Christ in his end, which was glory,
but we must go after him in all his steps, in the way of humiliation; for
Christ's very descent was a degree of exaltation; and by that name he called his
crucifying a lifting up, an exaltation. The Doctrine of this world goes for the
most part otherwise; here we say, lay hold, upon something, get up one step; in
all want of sufficiency, in all defection of friends, in all changes, yet the
place which you hold which raise you to better. In the way to heaven, the lower
you go, the nearer the highest and best end you are. Duo nobis necessaria says
St. August. Ut cognoscamus quales ad malum, quales ad bonum: There are but two
things necessary to us to know, how ill we are, and how good we may be; where
nature has left us, and whether Grace would carry us. And Abraham, (says that
Father.) expresses this two fold knowledge, when he said to God, Loquar ad
Dominum, qui pulvis sum and cinis, I know I am but dust and ashes, Genesis 18.
says Abraham, and there is his first knowledge Qualis ad molum, how ill a
condition naturally he is in: but then, Loquar ad Dominum, for all this, though
I be but dust and ashes, I have access to my God, and may speak to him; there is
his improvement and his dignity. Vere pulvis omnis homo; says he; truly every
man is truly dust; for as dust is blown from one to another corner by the wind,
and lies dead there till another wind remove it from that corners; so are we
hurried from sin to sin, and have no motion in our selves, but as a new sin
imprints it in us: so vere pulvis, for our disposition to evil we are truly
dust; and vere cinis, we are truly dry ashes; for ashes produces no seed of it
self, nor gives growth to any seed that is cast into it; so we have no good in
us naturally, neither can we nourish any good that is insus'd by God into us,
except the same Grace that sowed it; water it, and weed it, and cherish it, and
so meant it after. To know that we have no strength of our selves, and to know
that we can lack none if we ask it of God, these are St. Augustines two Arts
and Sciences, and this is the humility of the Gospel in general.

Quo umprimus
To come to St. Paul's more particular expressing of his humility here, Quorum
ego primus, of which sinners I am the chiefest, as it is true veritas non
nititur mendatio, no truth needs the support or assistance of any lie; a man
must not belie himself, nor accuse himself against his own conscience, so also,
Humilitas non nititur stupiditati, An undiscerning stupidity is not humility,
for humility it self implies and requires discretion, for humiliation is not
precipitation when the Devil enticed the Jesuit at his midnight studies, and
the Jesuit rose and offered him his chair, because howsoever he were a Devil,
yet he was his better; this was no regulated humility: and therefore this which
St. Paul says of himself, that he was the greatest sinner was true in his own
heart, and true in a convenient sense, and so neither falsely nor
inconsiderately spoken. How then was this true? As there is nothing so
fantastical and so absurd, but that some Heretics have held it Dogmatically;
so Aquinas notes here, that there were Heretics that held, that the very soul
of Adam was by a long circuit and transmigration come at last into Paul, and so
Paul was the same man (in his principal part, in the soul) as Adam was; and in
that sense it was literally true that he said, he was primus peccatorum the
first of all sinners, because he was the first man Adam: but this is an
heretical fancy, ^^ a Pythagorean bubble. Great Divines have referred this
Quorum ad salvandos, that Christ came to save sinners; of which sinners that
are saved say they, S. Paul acknowledges himself to be the greatest; not the
greatest sinner in the world, but the greatest of them upon whom the grace of
God has wrought effectually. St. Augustines interpretation is for one half
thereof, for the negative part sake; primus says he, non tempore; He says he
was the first sinner, but he does not mean the first that sinned, the first in
time; but then for the affirmative part, which follows in Augustine, that he
was primus malignitate, the first, the highest, the greatest sinner, why should
we, or how can we charge the Apostle so heavily? Beloved, to maintain the truth
of this which St. Paul says, we need not say that it was materially true, that
it was indeed so; it is enough to defend it from falsehood, that it was formally
true, that is, that it appeard to him to be true, and not out of a sudden and
stupid inconsideration but deliberately: First, he respected his own natural
disposition, and proclivity to great sins, and out of that evidence condemned
himself: As when a man who professed an art of judging the disposition of a man
by his face, had pronounced of Socrates, (whose virtue all the world admired)
that he was the most incontinent and licentious man, the greatest theif and
extortioner of any man in the world; the people despised and scorned the
Physiognomer and his art, and were ready to offer violence unto him: Socrates
himself corrected their distemper again, and said, It is true that he says,
and his Judgment is well grounded, for by nature no man is more inclined to
these vices then I am. And this disposition to the greatest sins, St. Paul knew
in himself. He that has these natural dispositions is likely to be the
greatest sinner, except he have some strong assistance to restrain him: and
then, he that has the offer of such helps, and abuses them, is in a farther
step of being the greatest sinner: And this also St. Paul had respect to now,
that he had had a good and learned education, a good understanding of the law
and the Prophets, a good mortification, by being of the strict sect of the
Pharisees; and yet he had turned all the wrong way, and was therefore in this
abuse of these manifold graces the greater sinner. He looked farther then into
his own nature, or into his resistance of asistances; he looked into those
actions which these had produced in him, and there he saw his breathing of
threatenings and slaugher against the Disciples of the Lord, his hunger and
thirst of christian blood: and so says St. Augustine, Nemo acrior inter
persecutores, ergo nemo prior inter peccatores, as he found himself the
greatest persecutor, so he condemns himself for the greatest sinner. But all
these natural dispositions to great sins, negliences, of helps offered, sinful
actions produced out of these two, might be greater in many others, then in St.
Paul; and it is likely, and it may be certain to us, that they were so; but it
was not certain to him, he knew not so much ill by any other man, as by
himself. Consider those words in the Proverbs, 30.2.
Surely I am more foolish then any man, and have not the understanding of a man
in me: for though they be not the words of Solomon, yet they are the words of a
Prophet, and a Prophet who surely was not really more foolish then any man,
then in consideration of something which he found in himself, says so: he that
considers himself, shall find such degrees of sin, as that he cannot see than
any man has gone lower: Or if he have in some particular and notorious sin,
yet in quovis alio, quid occultum esse potest; quo nobis superior sit: August.
He that is fallen lower then thus in some sin, yet may be above thee in Grace;
he may have done a greater sin, and yet not be the greater sinner: another has
killed a man, and thou have not; thon may have drawn and drunk the blood of
many by usury, by extortion, by oppression. Another in fury of intemperance,
has ravished and thou have not; thou may have corrupted many by thy
deceitful solicitations; and then in thy self art as ill as the ravisher, and
thou have made them worse whom thou have corrupted. Cast up thine own account,
Inventary thine own goods; Romans 2.5.
for sin is the wrath of the sinner, and he treasures up the wrath of God)
reckon thine own sins, and thou will find thy self rich in that wealth, and
find thy self of that Quorum, that the highest place in that company and
mystery of sinners belongs to thee.

Sum.
St. Paul does so here; yea then, when he saw his own case, and saw it by the
light of the spirit of God; when he took knowledge that Christ was come, and had
saved sinners, had saved him; yet still he says sum primus, still he remains
in his accusation of himself that he was still the greatest sinner, because he
remained still in his infirmity, and aptness to relapse into former sins. As
long as we are, we are subject to be worse then we are; and those sins which we
apprehend even with horror and amazement, when we hear that others have done
them, we may come to do them with an earnestness, with a delight, with a
defense, with a glory, if God leaves us to our selves. As long as that is true
of us, sum prmus homo, I am no better then the first man, then Adam was, (and
none of us are in any proportion so good) that is true also, Quorum primus sum
ego, I am still in a slippery state, and in an evident danger of being the
greatest sinner. This is the conclusion for every humble christian, no man is a
greater sinner then I was, and I am not sure but that I may fall to be worse
then ever I was, except I husband and employ the Talents of Gods Graces better
then I have done.

A SERMON Preached at White Hall. Sermon. 15.
February 29. 1627. SERMON XV.
Acts 7.60. And when he had said this, he fell a sleep.


HE that will die with Christ upon Good Friday, must hear his own bell toll all
Lent; he that will be partaker of his passion at last, must conform himself to
his discipline of prayer and fasting before. Is there any man, that in his
chamber hears a bell toll for another man, and does not kneel down to pray for
that dying man? and then when his charity breaths out upon another man, does he
not also reflect upon himself, and dispose himself as if he were in the state
of that dying man? We begin to hear Christ's bell toll now, and is not our bell
in the chime? We must be in his grave, before we come to his resurrection, and
we must be in his deathbed before we come to his grave: we must do as he did,
fast and pray, before we can say as he said, that In manus tuas, Into thy hands
O Lord I commend my Spirit. You would not go into a Medicinal Bath without some
preparatives; presume not upon that Bath, the blood of Christ Jesus, in the
Sacrament then, without preparatives neither. Neither say to your selves, we
shall have preparatives enough, warnings enough, many more Sermons before it
come to that, and so it is too soon yet; you are not sure you shall have more;
not sure you shall have all this; not sure you shall be affected with any. If
you be, when you are, remember that as in that good Custom in these Cities,
you hear cheerful street music in the winter mornings, but yet there was a sad
and doleful bel-man, that waked you, and called upon you two or three hours
before that music came; so for all that blessed music which the servants of
God shall present to you in this place, it may be of use, that a poor bell-man
waked you before, and though but by his noise, prepared you for their music.
And for this early office I take Christ's earliest witness, his Proto-Martyr,
his first witness St. Stephen, and in him that which especially made him his
witness, and our example, his his death, and our preparation to death, what he
suffered, what he did, what he said, so far as is knit up in those words, When
he had said this, he fell a sleep. Divisio.


From which example, I humbly offer to you these two general considerations;
first, that every man is bound to do something before he dye; and then to that
man who has done those things which the duties of his calling bind him to,
death is but a sleep. In the first, we shall stop upon each of those steps;
first there is a sis aliquid, every man is bound to be something, to take some
calling upon him. Secondly there is a hoc age; every man is bound to do
seriously and scedulously, and sincerely the duties of that calling. And
Thirdly there is a sis aliquis; the better to perform those duties, every man
shall do well to propose to himself some person, some pattern, some example
whom he will follow and imitate in that calling. In which third branch of this
first part we shall have just occasion to consider some particulars in him who
is here proposed for our Example, St. Stephen; and in these three, sis aliquid,
be something, profess something; and then hoc age, do truly the duties of that
profession; and lastly, sis aliquis, propose some good man, in that profession
to to follow, and in the things intended in this text, propose St. Stephen, we
shall determine our first part. And in the other we shall see that to them that
do not this, that do not settle their consciences so, death is a bloody
conflict, and no victory at last, a tempestuous sea, and do harbor at last, a
slippery height, and no footing, a desperate fall and no bottom. But then to
them that have done it, their pill is gilded, and the body of the pill honey
too; mors lucrum, death is a gain, a treasure, and this treasure brought some
in a calm too; they do not only go to heaven by death, but heaven comes to them
in death; their very manner of dying is an inchoative act of their glorified
state: therefore it is not called a dying but asseeping; which one metaphor
intimates two blessings, that because it is a sleep it gives a present rest,
and because it is a sleep, it promises a future waking in the resurrection.

First part. Sis aliquid.
First, Then for our first branch of our first part, we begin with our
beginning, our birth; man is born to trouble; so we read it, to trouble. The
original is a little milder then so; yet there it is, Man is born unto labor,
Job. 5 7.
God never meant less then labor to any man. Put us upon that which we esteem
the honorablest of labors, the duties of martial discipline, yet where it is
said, that man is appointed to a warfare upon earth, it is seconded with that,
His days are like the days of an hireling. 7.1.
How honorable soever his station be, he must do his days labor in the day,
the duties of the place in the place. How far is he from doing so, that never
so much as considers why he was sent into this world; who is so sar from having
done his errand here, that he knows not, considers not what his errand was; nay
knows not, considers not, whether he had any errand hither or no. But as though
that God, who for infinite millions of millions of generations, before any
creation, any world, contented himself with himself, satisfied, delighted
himself with himself in heaven, without any creatures, yet at last did bestow
six days labor upon the Creation and accommodation of man, as though that God
who when man was sour'd in the whole lump, poisoned in the fountain, perished
at the chore, withered in the root, in the fall of Adam, would them in that
dejection; that exainantion, that evacuation of the dignity of man, and not in
his sormer better estate, engage his own Son, his only, his beloved Son, to
become man by a temporary life, and then to become no man by a violent, and yet
a voluntary death; as though that God who he was pleased to come to a creation,
might yet have left thee where thou wast before, amongst privations, a nothing;
or if he would have made thee something, a creature, yet he might have shut
thee up in the closs prison of a bare being and no more, without life or sense,
as he has done earth and stones; or if he would have given thee life and
sense, he might have left thee a toad, without the comeliness of shape, without
that reasonable and immortal Soul, which makes thee a man; or if he had made
thee a man, yet he might have lost thee upon the common amongst the Heathen,
and not have taken thee into his enclosures, by giving the a particular form of
religion; or if he would have given thee a religion, He might have left thee a
Jew; or if he would have given thee Christianity, He might have left thee a
Papist, as though this God who had done so much more for thee, by breeding thee
in a true Church, had done all this for nothing; thou pussest through this
world as a flash, as a lightning or which no man knows the beginning or the
ending, as an ignis fatuus in the air, which does not only not give light for
any use, but does not so much as portend or signify any thing; and thou
passest out of the world, as a hand passes out of a basin, or a body out of a
bath, where the water may be the fouler for thy having washed in it, else the
water retains no impression of thy hand or body, so the world may be the worse
for thy having lived in it, else the world retains no marks of thy having been
there. When God placed Adam in the world, God enjoined Adam to fill the world,
to subdue the world, and to rule the world; when God placed him in (...)
Paradise, He commanded him to dress Paradise, and to keep Paradise; when God
placed him children in the land of promise, he enjoined them to fight his
battails against Idolatry, and to destroy Idolators; to every body some errand,
some task for his glory; and thou come from him into this world, as though
he had said nothing to thee at parting, but go and do as thou shall see cause,
go and do as thou see other men do, and serve me so far, and save thine own
Soul so far, as the times, and the places, and the persons, with whom thou
do converse, will conveniently admit. Gods way is positive, and thine is
privative: God made every thing something, and thou make the best of things,
man, nothing; and because thou can not annihilate the world altogether, as
though thou had God at an advantage, in having made an abridgment of the
world in man, there in that abridgment thou will undermine him, and make man,
man, as far as thou can, man in thy self nothing. He that qualifies himself
for nothing, does so; He whom we can call nothing, is nothing: this whole world
is one entire creature, one body; and he that is nothing may be excremental
nails, to scratch and gripe others, he may be excremental hairs for ornament,
or pleasurableness of meeting; but he is no limb of this entire body, no part
of Gods universal creature, the world. Gods own name is I am: Being, is Gods
name, and nothing, is so contrary to God as to be nothing. Be something, or
else thou can do nothing; and till thou have said this, says our text, that
is, done something in a lawful calling, thou can not sleep Stephens sleep,
not die in peace. Sis aliquid, propose something, determine thy self upon
somehing, be, profess something, that was our first; and then our second
consideration is, hoc age, do seriously, do scedulously, do sincerely the
duties of that calling.

Hoc Age.
He that stands in a place and does not the duty of that place, is but a statue
in that place; and but a statue without an inscription; Posterity shall not
know him, nor read who he was. In nature the body frames and forms the place;
for the place of the natural body is that proxima arcis superficies, that
inward superficies of the air, that invests and clothes, and apparals that
body, and obeys, and follows, and succeeds to the dimensions thereof. In
naturet he body makes the place, but in grace the place makes the body: The
person must actuate it self, dilate, extend and propagate it self according to
the dimensions of the place, by filling it in the execution of the duties of
it. Pliny delivers us the history of all the great Masters in the art of
painting: L. 35. C. 3.
He tells us who began with the extremities and the out lines at first, who
induced colors after that, and who after super-induc'd shadows; who brought in
Argutias vultus as he calls them, not only the countenance, but the meaning of
the countenance, and all that so exquisitely, that (as he says there)
Divinantes diem mortis dixerunt, Physiognomers would tell a man's fortune as
well by the picture as by the life; he tells us, quis pinxit quae pingi non
possunt, who first adventured to express inexpressible things; Tonitrua,
perturbationes animas; they would paint thunder which was not to be seen, but
heard: and affections, and the mind, the Soul which produced those affections.
But for the most part he tells us all the way, in what places there remained
some of their pieces to be seen, and copied in his time. This is still that
that dignifies all their works, that they wrought so, as that posterity was not
only delighted, but improved and bettered in that art by their works: For truly
that's one great benefit that arises out of our doing the duties of our own
places, in our own time, that as a perfume intended only for that room, where
the entertainment is to be made breaths, upward and downward, and round about
it; so the doing of the duties of the place, by men that move in middle
Spears, breath upwards and downwards, and about too, that is, cast a little
shame upon inferiors if they do not so, and a little remembrance upon
Superiors that they should do so, and a thanksgiving to Almighty God for them
that do so: And so it is an improvement of the present, and an Instruction and
a Catechism to future times. The duty in this Text is expressed and limited in
speaking. Cum dixisset, When he had said this he fell a sleep, and truly so,
literally so, in speaking, and no more, it stretches far: Many duties, in many
great places consist in speaking; Ours do so: And therefore, when Vices abound
in matter of Manners, and Schisms abound in matter of Opinions, Antequam
dixerimus hoc, till we have said this, that is, that that belongs to that
duty, we cannot sleep Stephen's sleep, we cannot die in peace. The Judges
duty lies much in this too, for he is bound not only to give a hearing to a
Cause, but to give an End, a Judgment in the Cause too: And so, for all them
whose duty lies in speaking, from him who is to counsel his friend, to him who
is to counsel his Master in the family (for Job professes that he never
refused the counsel of his Servant) Antequam dixerint, till they have said
this, that is still, that that belongs to that duty, they cannot sleep
Stephen's sleep, they cannot die in peace: and when we ascend to the
consideration of higher Persons, they and we speak not one language, for our
speaking is but speaking but with great Persons, Acta Apothegmata, their
Apothegms are their Actions, and we hear their words in their deeds. God,
whose Image and Name they bear does so: If we consider God; as a second
Person in the Godhead, the Son of God, God of God, so God is Logos, Sermo,
Verbum, Oration; The Word, Saying, Speaking; But God considered primarily and in
himself so, is Actus purus, all Action, all doing. In the Creation there is a
Dixit in Gods mouth, still God says something; but evermore the Dixit is
accompanied with a Fiat, Something was to be done, as well as said. The Apostles
are Apostles in that capacity as they were sent to preach that is Speaking; But,
when we come to see their proceeding, it is in Praxi, in the Acts of the
Apostles. In those Persons whose duty lies in speaking, there is an Antequam
dixerint; in those where it lies in Action, there is an Antequam fecerint; till
that be said, and done, which belongs to their particular callings, they cannot
sleep Stephen's sleep, they cannot die in peace; and therefore, Non dicas de
Deo tuo gravis mihi est, Ambro. Ep. 17.
say not of thy God, that he lies heavy upon thee, if he exact the duties of
thy plaat thy hands; Nec dicas de loco tuo, inutilis mihi est, say not of thy
place, that it is good for nothing, if thou must be put to do the duties of
the place, in the place; for it is good for this, that when thou have done that
thou may sleep Stephen's sleep, die in Peace. Sis aliquid, Be something,
that was our first, and then hoc age, do truly the duties of that place
without pretermitting thine own, without intermedling with others, which was
our second; and then our third consideration is, Sis aliquis, Be sombody, be
like sombody, propose some good example in thy calling and profession to
imitate.

Sis aliquis.
It was the counsel of that great little Philosopher Epictetus, whenever thou
undertakest any action, to consider what a Socrates, or a Plato; what a good
and a wise man would do in that Case, and to do conformably to that. One
great Orator, Latinus Rufus, proposed to himself Cicero for his example, and
Cicero propounded Demosthenes, and he Pericles, and Pericles Pisistratus; and
so there was a concatenation, a genealogy, a pedigree of a good Orator; Hieron.
Habet unumquodque propositum principes suos: In every Calling, in every
Profession, a man may find some exemplar, some leading men to follow. The King
has a Josias, and the beggar has a Job, and every man has some: But here we
must not pursue particulars, but propose to all, him whom our Text proposes,
Saint Stephen; Stephanus.
and in him we offer you first his name, Stephen. Stephen, Stephanos is a
leading, an exemplar name, a Significative, a Prophetical, a Sacramental, a
Catechisticall name; a Name that carries much instruction with it. Our
Countryman Bid takes it to be an Hebrew name, and it signifies (says he)
Normam vestram, Your Rule, Your Law: To obey the Law, to follow, to embrace the
Law is an acceptable service to God, especially the invariable Law, the Law of
God himself: But we are sure that this name Stephen, Stephanos signifies a
Crown; to obey the Crown, to follow, to serve the Crown, is an acceptable
service to God, especially the immarcessible Crown, the Crown of Glory. Nomen
Omen; scarce any man has a name, but that name is Legal and Historical to
him: His very name remembers him of some rules, and laws of his actions; So
his name is legal, and his name remembers him of some good men of the same
name; and so his name is historical. Nomina Debita: In the old formularies of
the Civil Law, if a man left so many names to his Executors, they were so many
specialties for debts. Our Names are Debts, every man owes the world the
signification of his name, and of all his names; every addition of honor, or
of office, lays a new Debt, a new Obligation upon him; and his first name, his
Christian-Name above all. For, when new names are given to men in the
Scriptures, that does not abolish or extinguish the old: Jacob was called Jacob
after God had called him Israel; and Gedeon Gedeon after he was called Jerubaal
and Simon when he was Peter too, was called Simon. Changes of Office and
additions of Honor must not extinguish our Christian, Name; The duties of our
Christianity, and our Religion must preponderate and weigh down the duties of
all other places, and for all together. Saint Gregory presents us a good use of
this diligence to answer our Names, Quo quis timet magis, ne quod dicitur non
esset, eo plus quam dicitur erit; The more a man is afraid that he is not
worthy of the name he bears, whether the name of office or his
Christian-Name, the better Officer and the better Christian he will be for that
fear, and that solicitude; and therefore it is an useful and an applyable
Prayer for great Persons, which that Father makes in their behalf, Praesta,
quaesumus Domine, ut quod in ore hominum sumus, in conspectu tuo esse valeamus:
Grant, O Lord, that we may always be such in thine eyes, as we are in their
tongues that depend upon us, and justify their acclamations with thy
approbations. And so far Stephens name, as his name signifies the Law, and as
his name signifies the reward of fulfilling the Law; a Crown has carried us to
the consideration of the duty of answering the signification of our names; But
then there are other passages in his History and Actions that carries us
farther.

First then we receive Saint Stephen to have been Saint Paul's kinsman in the
flesh, and to have been his fellow pupil under Gamaliel, Discipulus.
and to have been equal to him, at least in the foundations, in natural
faculties, and in the super-edifications too, in learnings of acquisition and
study; And then to have had this great advantage above him, That he applied
himself as a Disciple to Christ before Saint Paul did; and in that profession
became so eminent (for all the Sects, the Libertines themselves taking the
liberty to dispute against him, Act. 6.9.
they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke)
as that his Cousin Paul, then but Saul, envied him most, and promov'd and
assisted at his execution: For upon those words but two verses before our Text,
That they that stoned Stephen, laid down their clothes at Saul 's feet, Saint
Augustine says, 7.58.
In manu omnium eum lapidavit, That it was Saul that stoned Stephen, though by
the hands of other executioners. Men of the best extraction and families, Men
of the best parts and faculties, Men of the best education and proficiencies,
owe themselves to God by most obligations. Him that dies to day, God shall not
only ask, where is that Soul? Is it as clean as I made it at first? No stayn
of Sin? or is it as clean as I washed it in Baptism? No sting? No venom of
original sin in it? Or is it as clean as I left it when we met last at the
Sacrament? No guiltiness of actual sin in it? God shall not only ask this,
Where is that Soul? Nor only ask where is that Body? Is it come back in that
Virginal integrity in which I made it? Or is it no farther departed from that
then Marriage, which I made for it, has made it? Are those Maritales ineptiae
(that we may put Luther's words into God's mouth) the worst that is fallen upon
that body? God shall not only ask for that Soul and that Body but ask also,
Where is that Wit, that Learning, those Arts, those languages which by so good
education I afforded thee? Truly when a weak and ignorant man departs into any
vicious way, though in that case he do adhere to the Enemy, and do serve the
Devil against God, yet he carries away but a single Man, and serves but as a
common Soldier: But he that has good parts, and good education, carries a
Regiment in his person, and Armies and munition for a thousand in himself.
Though then thy kinsmen in the flesh, and thy fellow pupils under Gamaliel, men
whom thou have accompanied heretofore in other ways, think thy present fear of
God, but a childishness and pusilanimity, and thy present zeal to his service
but an infatuation, and a melancholy and thy present application of thy self to
God in prayer, but an argument of thy Court-dispaire, and of thy falling from
former hopes there; yet come thou early, if it be early yet; and if it be not
early, come apace to Christ Jesus: how learned soever thou art, thou art yet to
learn thy first letters, if thou know not that Christ Jesus is Alpha and Omega,
he in whom thou must begin and determine every purpose: Thou have studied thy
self but into a dark and damnable ignorance, if thou have labored for much
learning only to prove that thou can not be saved, only to dispute against
the person and the Gospel of Christ Jesus. But propose to thine imitation
Stephen, who though enriched with great parts, and formerly accustomed to the
conversation of others of a different persuasion, applied himself early to
Christ as a Disciple, v. 5.
and more then in that general application, in a particular function and office
as a Deacon, as is expressed in the former Chapter.

Diaconus.
The Roman Church that delights in irresolutions and gains, and makes profit in
holding things in suspense, holds up this question undetermind, whether that
office and function which Stephen too of Deacon, be so e sacris, a part of holy
Orders, as that it is a Sacrament, or any part of the Sacrament of Orders.
Durand. a man great in matter of Ceremony, Cajetan, a man great in matter of
substance, do both deny it; and diverse, many, very many besides them; and they
are let alone, and their Church says nothing against them, or in determination
of the opinion. But yet howsoever the stronger opinion even in that Church lead
the other way, and the form of giving that office by imposition of hands, and
the many and great capacities that they receive, that they receive it, carry it
to a great height, yet the use that we make of it here shall be but this, that
even Stephen, who might have been inter Doctores, Doctor, (as Chrysologus says
of him) a Doctor to teach Doctors; and inter Apostolos Apostolus, an Apostole
to lead Apostles, contented himself with a lower degree in the service of
Christ in his Church, the service of a Deacon, which very name signifies
service, and ministation. It is a diminution of regal dignity, that the Roman
Church accounts the greatest Kings, but as Deacons, and assigns them that rank
and place in all their Ecclesiastical Solemnities, in their Ceremonials. But
Constantine knew his own place without their marshalling: In the midst of
Bishops, and Bishops met in Council, he calls himself Bishop, and Bishop of
Bishops: and the greatest Bishop of this land, St. Dunst^n.
in his time, professed his Master the King, to be Pastor Pastorum, a Shepherd
of Shepherds. It is a name due to the King, for it signifies inspection and
superintendency; as the name of Priest is also given to secular Magistrates
that had no part in Ecclesiastical function in the Scriptures; particularly, in
Putipher, Genesis 41.45.
and to diverse others in diverse other places. But yet though that name of
super-intendancy be due unto him, let him who is crowned in his office as
Stephen was in his name, accept this name and office of ministration of Deacon,
since the holy Ghost himself has given him that name, The Minister of God for
good, Romans 13.4
(there is the word of ministration, the name Diaconos imprinted upon the King)
and since our Super-Supream Ordinary, our Super-Soveraign head of the Church,
Christ Jesus himself calls himself, by that name, The Son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to minister; Mar. 10.45.
there is this word of ministration, the office, the name of Deacon imprinted
upon Christ himself. And though in our interest, in him who is also a King and
a Priest; we are all regale Sacerdotium, 1 Pet. 2.9.
Kings and Priests too, yet let us accept the name, and execute the office of
Deacon, of ministration, especially upon our selves: for as every man is a
world in himself, so every man is a Church in himself too: and in the ancient
Church, it was a part of the Deacons office, to call out to the Church, to the
Congregation, Nequis contra aliquem, nequis in Hipocrisi; let no man come
hither to Church, (indeed no whether, for every place, because God is present
in every place, is a Church,) either in uncharitableness toward others, or in
Hypocrisy and in dissimulation in himself: Bring always a charitable opinion
toward other men, and sincere affections in thy self, and thou have done the
right office of a Deacon, upon the right subject thou had ministered to thine
own Soul. But then the height of Stephens exemplariness, (which is the
consideration that we pursue in this branch of this first part) is not so much
in his active as in his passive part; not so much in that he did, as in that he
suffered; not as he answered and discharged the duties of his name; so we have
proposed him to you; nor as he was an early Disciple, and came to Christ
betimes, we have proposed him so too; nor as he made his ambition only to serve
Christ, and not to serve him in a high place, but only as a Deacon; for in that
line also we have proposed him to you; But as he was a constant and cheerful
Martyr, and laid down his life for Christ, and in that qualification propose
him to your selves, and follow him as a Martyr.

Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea, Martyr.
was so in love with Pamphilus the Martyr, as a Martyr, that he would needs
take his name, before he could get his addition; and though he could not be
called Martyr then, yet he would be called Pamphilus and not Eusebius. The name
of Stephen has enough in it to serve not only the vehementest affection, but
the highest ambition; for there is a Coronation in the Name as we told you
before. And therefore in the Ecclesiastical story and Martyrologes of the
Church, there are (I think) more Martyrs of this name, Stephen, then of any
other Name; indeed they have all that Name, for the Name is a Coronation. And
therefore the Kingdom of heaven, which is expressed by many precious Metaphors
in the Gospel, is never called a Crown, till after Stephens death, till our
Coronation was begun in his Martyrdom, but after in the Epistles often, and in
the Revelation very often. For to suffer for God, man to suffer for God, I to
suffer for my Maker, for my Redeemer is such a thing, as no such thing,
excepting only Gods sufferings for man can fall into the consideration of man.
Gods suffering for man was the Nadir the lowest point of Gods humiliation, man's
suffering for God is the Zenith, the highest point of man's exaltation: That as
man needed God, and God would suffer for man, so God should need man, and man
should suffer for God; that after Gods general Commission, fac hoc and vives,
do this and thou shall live, I should receive and execute a new Commission,
Patere hoc and vives abundantius, suffer this and you shall have life, and life
more abundantly; Joh. 10.10.
as our Savior speaks in the Gospel, that when I shall ask my soul David's
question, Psalm. 116.12.
Quid retribuam, what shall I render to the Lord, I shall not rest in David's
answer, Accipiam Calicem, I will take the cup of salvation, in applying his
blood to my soul, but proceed to an Effundam Calicem, I will give God a Cup, a
cup of my blood, that whereas to me the meanest of Gods servants it is honor
enough to be believed for Gods sake: God should be believed for my sake, and
his Gospel the better accepted, because the feal of my blood is set to it; that
that dew which should water his plants, the plants of his Paradise, his Church,
should drop from my veins, and that sea that red sea, which should carry up
his bark, his Ark, to the heavenly Jerusalem, should flow from me: This is that
that poures joy even into my gladness, and glory even into mine honor, and
peace even into my security; that exaltes and improves every good thing, Colos.
1 24. Phil 2.17.
every blessing that was in me before, and makes even my creation glorious, and
my redemption precious; and puts a farther value upon things inestimable
before, that I shall fulfill the sufferings of Christ in my flesh, and that I
shall be offered up for his Church, 1 Pet. 2.21
though not for the purchasing of it, yet for the fencing of it, though not by
way of satisfaction as he was, but by way of example and imitation as he was
too. Whether that be absolutely true or no, which an Author of much curiosity
in the Roman Church says, P^rrecta in legem. Not itio ultima.
that Inter tot millia millium, amongst so many thousand thousands of Martyrs
in the Primitive Church, it cannot be said that ever one lacked burial, (I know
not whence he raises that) certainly no Martyr ever lacked a grave in the
wounds of his Savior, no nor a tomb, a monument, a memorial in this life, in
that sense wherein our Savior speaks in the Gospel, That no man shall leave
house, Mar. 10.30
or Brother, or wife for him, but he shall receive an hundred fold in this
life; Christ does not mean he shall have a hundred houses, or a hundred wives,
or a hundred Brethren; but that that comfort which he lost in losing those
things shall be multiplied to him in that proportion even in this life. In
which words of our Savior, as we see the dignity and reward of Martyrdom, so
we see the extent and latitude, and compass of Martyrdom too; that not only
loss of life, but loss of that which we love in this life; not only the
suffering of death, but the suffering of Crosses in our life, contracts the
Name, and entitles us to the reward of Martyrdom. All Martyrdom is not a
Smithfeild Martyrdom, to burn for religion. To suffer injuries, and upon
advantages offered, not to revenge those injuries is a Court Martyrdom. To
resist outward tentations from power, and inward tentations from affections; in
matter of Judicature, between party and party, is a Westminster Martyrdom. To
seem no richer then they are, not to make their states better, when they make
their private bargains with one another, and to seem so rich, as they are, and
not to make their states worse, when they are called upon to contribute to
public services, this is an Exchange-Martyrdome. And there is a
Chamber-Martyrdome, a Bosome-Martyrdome too; Habet pudicitia servata Martyrium
suum, Hierome.
Chastity is a daily Martyrdom; and so all fighting of the Lords battails, all
victory over the Lords Enemies, in our own bowels, all cheerful bearing of Gods
Crosses, and all watchful crossing of our own immoderate desires is a
Martyrdom acceptable to God, and a true copy of our pattern Stephen, so it be
inanimated with that which was even the life and soul and price of all Stephens
actions and passions, that is, fervent charity, which is the last
contemplation; in which we propose him for your Example; that as he, you also
may be just paymasters in discharging the debt, which you owe the world in the
signification of your Names; and early Disciples and appliers of your selves to
Christ Jesus, and humble servants of his, without inordinate ambition of high
places; and constant Martyrs, 1 Cor. 15.31
in dying every day as the Apostles speaks, and charitable intercessors, and
Advocates and Mediators to God, even for your heaviest Enemies.

We have a story in the Ecclesiastical story of Nicephorus and Sapricius,
formerly great friends, and after as great Enemies: Charitas
Nicephorus relented first, and sued often for reconciliation to Sapricius, but
was still refused: he was refused even upon that day, when Sapricius being led
out to execution, as a Martyr for the Christian religion, Nicephorus upon the
way, put himself in his way, and upon his knees begged a reconciliation, and
obtained it not. The effect of his uncharitableness was this Sapricius, when he
came to the stake recanted, and renounced the christian religion, and lost the
crown of Martyrdom, and Nicephorus who came forth upon another ocasion
professed Christ, and was received to the Coronation of Martyrdom. Though I
give my body to be burned and have not charity, it profits me nothing says
the Apostle; but if I have not charity I shall not be admitted to that
Sacrifice, to give my body to be burnt. St. Augustine seems to have delighted
himself with that saying (for he says it more then once) Si Stephanus non
orasset, if St. Stephen had not praid for Saul, the Church had had no Paul: and
may we not justly add to that, If Stephen had not praid for Saul, Heaven had
had no Stephen, or Stephen had had no Heaven: suffering it self is but a
stubborness, and a rigid and stupid standing under an affliction; it is not a
humiliation, a bending under Gods hand, if it be not done in charity. Stephen
had a pattern, and he is a pattern; Christ was his, and he is our Example; ut
hoc dicam tibi, at te primo audivi, says St. Augustine in Stephen's person to
Christ, Lord thou taughtest me this prayer upon the cross; receive it now from
me, as the Father received it from thee then. He prayed for his enemies as for
himself; and thus much more earnestly for them then for himself, that he prayed
for himself standing, and kneeling for them. Stephen was the Plantiff, and when
he comes to his Nolo prosequi, and to release, what has the Judge to say to the
Defendant. If a potent adversary oppress thee to ruin, to death, if thou pass
away uncharitably toward him, thou raisest an everlasting Trophee for thine
enemy, and prepar'st him a greater triumph then he proposed to himself; he
meant to triumph over thy body, and thy fortune, and thou have provided him a
triumph over thy Soul too by thy uncharitableness; and he may survive to
repent, and to be pardoned at Gods hands and thou who art departed in
uncharitableness can not; he shall be saved that ruind thee unjustly, and
thou who wast unjustly ruind by him, shall perish irrecoverably. And so we have
done with all those pieces which constitute our first part, Sis aliquid,
profess something, Hoc age, do seriously the duties of that profession, and
then Sis aliquis, propose some good man in that profession for thine
immitation; as we have proposed Stephen for general duties, falling upon all
professions. And we shall pass now to our other part, which we must all play,
and play in earnest, that conclusion in which we shall but begin our
everlasting state, our death, When he had said this he fell asleep.

Second part. Mors impti.
Here I shall only present to you two Pictures, two pictures in little: two
pictures of dying men; and every man is like one of these, and may know himself
by it; he that dies in the Bath of a peaceable, and he that dies upon the wrack
of a distracted conscience. When the devil imprints in a man, a mortuum me esse
non curo, I care not though I were dead, it were but a candle blown out, and
there were an end of all, where the Devil imprints that imagination: God will
imprint an Emori nolo, a loathness to die, and fearful apprehension at his
transmigration: As God expresses the bitterness of death, in an ingemination,
morte morietur, in a conduplication of deaths, he shall die, and die, die twice
over; So aegrotando aegrotabit, in sickness he shall be sick, twice sick,
body-sick and soul-sick too, sense-sick and conscience-sick together; when, as
the sins of his body have cast sicknesses and death upon his Soul, so the
inordinate sadness of his Soul, shall aggravate and actuate the sickness of
his body. His Physician ministers, and wonders it works not; He imputes that to
phlegm, and ministers against that, and wonders again that it works not: He
goes over all the humors, and all his Medicines, and nothing works, for there
lies at his Patients heart a dampe that hinders the concurrence of all his
faculties, to the intention of the Physician, or the virtue of the Physic.
Loose not, O blessed Apostle, thy question upon this Man. 1 Cor. 15.55
O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? for the sting of
Death is in every limb of his body, and his very body, is a victorious grave
upon his Soul: And as his Carcas and his Coffin shall lie equally insensible
in his grave, so his Soul, which is but a Carcas, and his body, which is but a
Coffin of that Carcas, shall be equally miserable upon his Deathbed; And
Satan's Commissions upon him shall not be signed by Succession, as upon Job,
first against his goods, and then his Servants, and then his children, and then
himself; but not at all upon his life; but he shall apprehend all at once,
Ruin upon himself and all his, ruin upon himself and all him, even upon his
life; both his lives, the life of this, and the life of the next world too. Yet
a drop would redeem a shoure, and a Sigh now a Storm then: Yet a tear from
the eye, would save the bleeding of the heart, and a word from the mouth now, a
roaring, or (which may be worse) a silence of consternation, of stupefaction,
of obduration at that last hour. Truly, if the death of the wicked ended in
Death, yet to escape that manner of death were worthy a Religious life. To see
the house fall, and yet be afraid to go out of it; To leave an injured world,
and meet an incensed God; To see oppression and wrong in all thy professions,
and to foresee ruin and wastefulnesse in all thy Posterity; and Lands gotten
by one sin in the Father, molder away by another in the Son; To see true
figures of horror, and ly, and fancy worse; To begin to see thy sins but then,
and find every sin (at first sight) in the proportion of a Giant, able to
crush thee into despair; To see the Blood of Christ, imputed, not to thee, but
to thy Sins; To see Christ crucified, and not crucified for thee, but
crucified by thee; To hear this blood speak, not better things, then the
blood of Abel, but louder for vengeance then the blood of Abel did; This is his
picture that has been Nothing, that has done nothing, that has proposed no
Stephen, No Law to regulate, No example to certify his Conscience: But to him
that has done this, Death is but a Sleep.

Many have wondered at that note of Saint Chrysostom's, Mors Piorum.
That till Christ's time death was called death, plainly, literally death, but
after Christ, death was called but sleep; for, indeed, in the Old Testament
before Christ, I think there is no one metaphor so often used, as Sleep for
Death, and that the Dead are said to Sleep: Therefore we wonder sometimes,
that Saint Chrysostom should say so: But this may be that which that holy
Father intended in that Note, that they in the Old Testament, who are said to
have slept in Death, are such as then, by Faith, did apprehend, and were fixed
upon Christ; such as were all the good men of the Old Testament, and so there
will not be many instances against Saint Chrysostom's note, That to those
that die in Christ, Death is but a Sleep; to all others, Death is Death,
literally Death. Now of this dying Man, that dies in Christ, that dies the
Death of the Righteous, that embraces Death as a Sleep, must we give you a
Picture too.

These is not a minute left to do it; not a minutes sand; Is there a minutes
patience? Be pleased to remember that those Pictures which are delivered in a
minute, from a print upon a paper, had many days, weeks, Months time for the
graving of those Pictures in the Copper; So this Picture of that dying Man,
that dies in Christ, that dies the death of the Righteous, that embraces Death
as a Sleep, was graving all his life; All his public actions were the
lights, and all his private the shadows of this Picture. And when this Picture
comes to the Press, this Man to the streights and agonies of Death, thus he
lies, thus he looks, this he is. His understanding and his will is all one
faculty; He understands Gods purpose upon him, and he would not have God's
purpose turned any other way; he sees God will dissolve him, and he would
feign be dissolved, to be with Christ; His understanding and his will is all
one faculty; His memory and his foresight ate fixed, and concentred upon one
object, upon goodness; He remembers that he has proceeded in the sincerity
of a good Conscience in all the ways of his calling, and he foresees that his
good name shall have the Testimony, and his Posterity the support of the good
men of this world; His sickness shall be but a fomentation to supple and open
his Body for the issuing of his Soul; and his Soul shall go forth, not as
one that gave over his house, but as one that traveled to see and learn
better Architecture, and meant to return and re-edifie that house, according
to those better Rules: And as those thoughts which possess us most awake,
meet us again when we are asleep; So his holy-thoughts, having been always
conversant upon the directing of his family, the education of his Children, the
discharge of his place, the safety of the State, the happiness of the King all
his life; when he is fallen a sleep in Death, all his Dreams in that blessed
Sleep, all his devotions in heaven shall be upon the same Subjects, and he
shall solicit him that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb, God for Christ Jesus
sake, to bless all these with his particular blessings: for, so God gives his
beloved sleep, so as that they enjoy the next world and assist this.

So then, the Death of the Righteous is a sleep; first, Ps. 127.2. Somnus.
as it delivers them to a present rest. Now men sleep not well fasting; Nor
does a fasting Conscience, a Conscience that is not nourished with a Testimony
of having done well, come to this Sleep; Eccles. 5.11.
but dulcis somnus operanti, The sleep of a laboring man is sweet. To him
that labors in his calling, even this sleep of Death is welcome. When thou
lie down thou shall not be afraid, says Solomon; Pro. 3.24.
when thy Physician says, Sir, you must keep your bed, thou shall not be
afraid of that sickbed; And then it follows, And thy sleep shall be sweet
unto thee; Thy sickness welcome, and thy death too; for, in those two David
seems to involve all, Ps. 4.8.
I will both lay me down in Peace, and sleep; embrace patiently my deathbed
and Death it self.

So then this death is a sleep, as it delivers us to a present Rest;
Expergesacti^.
And then, lastly, it is so also as it promises a future waiting in a glorious
Resurrection. To the wicked it is far from both: Of them God says, I will make
them drunk, Jer. 51.39.
and they shall sleep a perpetual sleep and not awake; They shall have no
part in the Second Resurrection. But for them rhat have slept in Christ, as
Christ said of Lazarus, Lazarus Sleeps, but I go that I may wake him out of
sleep, Jo. 11.11.
he shall say to his father; Let me go that I may wake them who have slept so
long in expectation of my coming: 1 These. 4.14.
And Those that sleep in Jesus Christ (says the Apostle) will God bring with
him; not only fetch them out of the dust when he comes, but bring them with
him, that is, declare that they have been in his hands ever since they
departed out of this world. They shall awake as Jacob did, and say as Jacob
said, Surely the Lord is in this place, and this is no other but the house of
God, and the gate of heaven, And into that gate they shall enter, and in that
house they shall dwell, where there shall be no Cloud nor Sun, no darkness
nor dazzling, but one equal light, no noise nor silence, but one equal music,
no fears nor hopes, but one equal possession, no foes nor friends, but and
equal communion and Identity, no ends nor beginnings; but one equal eternity.
Keep us Lord so awake in the duties of our Callings, that we may thus sleep
in thy Peace, and wake in thy glory, and change that infallibility which thou
affordest us here, to an Actual and undeterminable possession of that Kingdom
which thy Son our Savior Christ Jesus has purchased for us, with the
in-estimable price of his incorruptible Blood.

Amen.
Sermon. 16.
A SERMON Preached at White Hall. February 22. 1629. SERMON XVI.
Matthew. 6.21. For where your Treasure is, there will your heart be also.


I Have seen minute glasses; glasses so short lived: if I were to preach upon
this text to such a glass, it were enough for half the Sermon; enough to show
the worldly man his Treasure, and the object of his heart, (For where your
Treasure is, there will your heart be also) to call his eye to that minute
glass, and to tell him there flows, there flies your treasure and your heart
with it; but if I had a secular glass, a glass that would run an age; if the
two Hemesphears of the world were composed in the form of such a glass, and all
the world calcined and burnt to ashes, and all the ashes and sands, and atoms
of the world put into that glass, it would not be enough to tell the godly man
who this treasure and the object of his heart is, a Parot or a Stare, docil a
birds, and of pregnant imitation, will sooner be brought to relate to us the
wisdom of a Council table, then any Ambrose or any Chrysostom, men that have
gold and honey in their Names, shall tell us what the sweetness, what the
treasure of heaven is, and what that man's peace that has set his heart upon
that treasure. As nature has given us certain Elements, and all bodies are
composed of them, and art has given us a certain Alphabet of letters, and all
words are composed of them, so our blessed Savior in these three Chapters of
this Gospel has given us a Sermon of texts, of which all our Sermons may be
composed, all the Articles of our Religion, all the Canons of our Church, all
the injunctions of our Princes, all the Homilies of our Fathers, all the body
of Divinity is in these three Chapters, in this one Sermon in the mount; where,
as the Preacher concludes his Sermon with exhortations to practice, 7.24.
(whosoever hears these sayings of mine and does them,) so he fortifies his
Sermon with his own practice (which is a blessed and powerful method,) for as
soon as he came out of the pulpit, 8.1.
as soon as he came down from the mount, he cured the first Leper he saw, and
that without all vain glory, for he forbad him to tell any man of it.

Of this noble body of Divinity one fair limb is in this text; where your
treasure is there will your heart be also. Imediately before our blessed
Savior had forbidden us the laying up of treasure in this world, upon this
reason, that here moths and rust corrupt, Divisio.
and thieves break in and steal, there the reason is, because the money may be
lost; but here in our text it is, because the man may be lost, for where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also; so that this is equivalent to that,
Mat. 15.26.
what profit to gain the whole world and lose a man's own soul. Our text
therefore stands as that proverbial, that Hieroglifical letter Pithagoras his
(y) that has first a stalk, a stem to fix it self, and then spreads into two
beams. The stem, the stalk of this letter, this (y) is in the first word of the
text, that particle of argumentation, for take heed where you place your
treasure; for it concerns you much where your heart be placed; and where your
treasure is, there your heart will be also; and then opens this Symbolical,
this Catechistical letter, this (y) into two horns, two beams, two branches:
One broader, but on the left hand denoting the treasures of this world; the
other narrower, but on the right hand, treasure laid up for the world co come,
be sure ye turn the right way, for where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also;

First we bind our selves to the stake, to the stalk, to the staff, Cor fixum.
the stem of this Simbolical letter, and consider in it, that firmness and
fixation of the heart which God requires; God requires no unatural thing at
man's hand; whatsoever God requires of man, man may find imprinted in his own
nature, written in his own heart. This firmness then, this fixation of the
heart is natural to man; every man does set his heart upon something, and
Christ in this place does not so much call upon him that he would do so, set
his heart upon something, as to be sure he set it upon the right object; and
yet truly even this first work to recollect our selves, to recapitulate our
selves, to assemble and muster our selves, and to bend our hearts entirely and
intensly, directly, earnestly, emphatically, energetically upon something, is
by reason of the various fluctuation of our corrupt nature, and the infinite
multiplicity of objects, such a work as man needs to be called upon and excited
to do it; therefore is there no words in the Scripture so often added to the
heart, as that of Intireness, Toto cord, omni cord, pleno cord, do this
withal thy heart, with a whole heart, with a full heart; for whatsoever is
indivisible, is immovable; a Point, because it cannot be denied, cannot be
moved; the Center, the Poles, God himself, because he is indivisible is
therefore immovable; and when the heart of man is knit up in such an intirenes
upon one object, as that it does not flatter nor subdivide it self, then, and
then only is it fixed. And that's the happiness in which David fixes himself;
not in his Cor paratim, my heart is preparad O God, my heart is prepared, Psalm.
57 7.
(for so it may be prepared even by God himself, and yet scattered and
subdivided by us) But in his Cor fixum; My heart is fixed O God my heart is
fixed, awake my glory, awake my Psaltery and Harp, I my self will awake early,
Psalm 108 1.
and praise thee O Lord among the people: A triumph that David returned to more
then once, for he repeats the same words, with the same pathetical earnestness
again; so that his glory, his victory, his triumph, his peace, his
acquiescence, his al-sufficiency in himself, consisted in this, that his heart
was fixed; for this fixation of the heart argued and testified an intireness in
it; when God says, sili da mihi Cor, my Son give me thy heart, God means the
whole man; 1 Cor. 12.17.
though the Apostle says, The eye is not the man, nor the ear is not the man;
he does not say the heart is not the man; the heart is the man; the heart is
all. And as Moses was not satisfied with that Commission that Pharaoh offered
him, Exodus 10 8.
that all the men might go to offer Sacrifice; but Moses would have all their
young and all their old, all their Sons and all their Daughters, all their
flocks and all their herds, he would have all; so when God says, Fili da mihi
cor, my Son give me thy heart, God will not be satisfied with the eye, if I
contemplate him in his works, (for that's but the godliness of the natural man)
nor satisfied with the ear, with hearing many Sermons; (for that's but a new
invention, a new way of making beads, as if the Papist think all done if he
have said so many Aves, I think all done, If I have heard so many Sermons) But
God requires the heart, the whole man, all the faculties of that man; for only
that that is entire, and indivisible is immovable; and that that God calls for
and we seek for, in this stem of Pithagoras his Symbolical letter, is this
immoveableness, this fixation of the heart; and yet even against this, though
it be natural, there are many impediments; we shall reduce them to a few; to
three; these three, First, there is Cor nullum, a mere heartlesness, no heart
at all, incogitancy, inconsideration; and then there is, Cor and cor, Cor
duplex, a double heart, a doubtful, a distracted heart, which is not
incogitancy, nor inconsideration, but purplexity and irresolution; and lastly
Cor vagum, a wandering, a wayfaring, a weary heart, which is neither,
inconsideration, nor irresolution, but inconstancy; and this is a trinity
against our unity, three enemies to that fixation and intireness of the heart,
which God loves; inconsideration when we do not debate, irresolution when we do
not determine, inconstancy when we do not persevere; and upon each of these,
Cor nullum.
be pleased to stop your devotion a few minutes.

This first is, Cor nullum, no heart at all, incogitancy, thoughtlesness. An
idle body is a disease in a state; an idle soul is a monster in a man; That
body that will not work must not eat, 2 These. 3.10.
but starve; that soul that does not think nor consider, cannot be said to
Actuate (which is the proper operation of the Soul) but to Evaporate; not to
work in the body, but to breath and smoke through the body. We have seen
estates of private men wasted by inconsideration, as well as by riot, and a
soul may perish by a thoughtlesness, as well as by ill thoughts; God takes it
as ill to be slighted as to be injured; and God is as much slighted, in Cord
nullo in our thoughtlesness and inconsideration, as he is opposed and provoked
in Cord maligno in a rebellious heart: There is a good nullification of the
heart, a good bringing of the heart to nothing, for the fire of Gods spirit may
take hold of me, and (as the Disciples that went with Christ to Emaus, Luke 24.
were affected) my heart may burn within me, when the Scriptures are opened,
that is, when Gods Judgments are denounced against my sin; and this heat may
overcome my former frigidity and coldness, and overcome my succeeding tepidity
and lukewarmness, and may bring my heart to a mollification, to a tenderness,
as Job found it, The Almighty has troubled me, and made my heart soft; for
there are hearts of clay as well as hearts of wax; hearts whom these fires of
God, 23.16.
his corrections, harden: but if these fires of his, these denuntiations of his
Judgments, have overcome first my coldness, and then my lukewarmness, and made
my heart soft for better impressions, the work is well advanced, but it is not
all done; for mettle may be soft and yet not fusil; iron may be red hot, and
yet not apt to run into an other mold. Therefore there is a liquefaction, a
melting, a powering out of the heart, such as Rahab speaks of Joshuahs spies:
2.11. and 5.1.
as soon as we heard how miraculously God had proceeded in your behalf, in
drying up Jurdan, all our hearts melted within us, and no man had any spirit
left in him; and when upon the consideration of Gods miraculous Judgments or
mercies, I come to such a melting and pouring out of my heart, that there be no
spirit that is, none of my one spirit left in me, when I have so exhausted, so
evacuated my self, that is; all confidence in my self, that I come into the
hands of my God as pliably as ductily, as that first clod of earth of which he
made me in Adam, was in his hands, in which clod of earth, there was a kind of
reluctation against Gods purpose; this is a blessed nullification of the heart.
When I said to my self as the Apostle professed of himself, I am nothing, and
then say to God, 2 Cor. 12.11.
Lord though I be nothing, yet behold I present thee, as much as thou had to
make the whole world of; O thou that madst the whole world of nothing, make me,
that am nothing in my own eyes, a new creature in Christ Jesus; this is a
blessed nullification, a glorious annihillation of the heart. So is there also
a blessed nullification thereof in the contrition of the heart, in the sense of
my sins; when as a sharp wind may have worn out a marble Statue, or a continual
spout worn out a marble Pavement; so my holy tears made holy in his blood,
that gives them a tincture, and my holy sighs made holy in that spirit that
breaths them in me, have worn out my marble heart, that is, the marbleness of
my heart, and emptied the room of that former heart, and so given God a
vacuity, a new place to create a new heart in: but when God has thus created a
new heart, that is, re-enabled me, by his ordinance to some holy function, then
to put this heart to nothing, to think nothing, to consider nothing, not to
know our age, but by the Church-book, and not by any action done in the course
of our lives, for our God, for our Prince, for our Country, for our Neighbor,
for our selves, (our selves are our Souls,) not to know the seasons of the year
but by the fruits; which we eat, and not by observation of the public and
national blessings which he has successively given us; not to know religion
but by the convenience and the preferments to he had in this, or in the other
side; to sit here and not to know if we be asked upon a surprise, whether it
were a prayer or a Sermon, or an Antheme that we heard last, this is such a
nullification of the heart, such an annihillation, such an exinanition thereof
as reflects upon God himself; for Respuit datorem, Turtullian.
qui datum deserit, he that makes no use of a benefit, despises the benefactor,
Pro. 10.13.
and therefore a rod for his back, Qui indiget cord that is, without a heart,
without consideration what he should do, nay what he does; for this is the
first enemy of this firmness and fixation of the heart, without which we have
no treasure; and we have done with that, Cor nullum, and pass to the second,
Cor and cor, Cor duplex, Cor duplex.
the double, the divided, the distracted heart, which is not inconsideration
but irresolution. This irresolution, this perplexity is intended in that
comination from God, The Lord shall give them a trembling heart; Deuteronomy. 28.65.
this is not that Cor nullum, that melted heart in which there was no spirit
left in them, as in Joshuahs time, but Cor pavidum, a heart that should not
know where to settle, nor what to wish, but as it follows there, in the morning
he shall say, would God it were evening, and in the evening would God it were
morning; and this is that which Solomon may have intended in his prayer: 1 Reg.
3.9.
Give thy servant an understanding heart; Cor docile; So St. Hierome reads it,
a heart able to conceive counsel; for that's a good disposition, but it is not
all; for the original is, lcb. shemeany, that is, Cor audiens, a heart willing
to hearken to counsel; but all that is, not all that is asked: Solomon asks
there a heart to discern between good and evil; so that it is a prayer for the
spirit of discretion, of conclusion, of resolution; that God would give him a
heart willing to receive counsel, and a heart capable to conceive and digest
counsel, and a heart able to discern between counsel and counsel, and to
resolve, conclude, determine. It were a strange ambitious patience in any man,
to be content to be racked every day in hope to be an inch or two taller at
last; so is it for me to think to be a dram or two wiser, by harkning to all
jealousies and doubts, and distractions and perplexities that arise in my
bosom, or in my family, which is the rack and torture of the soul: A spirit of
contradiction may be of use in the greatest Councellers, because thereby matter
may be brought into further debatement; but a spirit of contradiction in mine
own bosom, to be able to conclude nothing, resolve nothing, determine nothing,
not in my religion, not in my manners, but occasionally and upon emergencies;
this is a sickly complexion of the Soul, a dangerous impotency, and a shrewd
and ill presaging Crisis. If Josuah had suspended his assent of serving the
Lord, till all his neighbors and their families, all the Kings and Kingdoms
about him had declared theirs the same way, when would Josuah have come to that
protestation, I and my house will serve the Lord? If Esther had forborne to
press for an audience to the King, in the behalf and for the life of her
Nation, till nothing could have been said against it, when would Esther have
come to that protestation, I will go, and if I perish, I perish? If one
Millstone fell from the North Pole, and another from the South, they would meet,
and they would rest in the Center; nature would con-center them; not to be able
to con-center those doubts which arise in my self, in a resolution at last,
whether in moral or in religious actions, is rather a vertiginous giddiness,
than a wise circumspection or wariness: when God prepared great Armies it is
expressed always so, Tanquam unus vir, Israel went out as one man; 1 Samuel 11.7.
when God established his beloved David to be King, it is expressed so, Uno
cord, 1 Cor. 12.3, 8.
He sent them out with one heart to make David King; when God accelerated the
propagation of his Church it is expressed so, Una anima, The multitude of them
that believed were of one heart and one soul; Act. 4.32.
Since God makes Nations, and Armies, and Churches one heart, let not us make
one heart two in our selves, a divided, a distracted, a perplexed, an
irresolved heart; but in all cases let us be able to say to our selves, this we
should do. God asks the heart, a single heart, an entire heart, for whilst it
is so, God may have some hope of it; but when it is a heart, and a heart, a
heart for God and a heart for Mammon; howsoever it may seem to be even; the
odds will seem to be on Mammons side against God, because he presents
possessions, and God but reversions; he the present and possessory things of
this world, God but the future and speratory things of the next: so then the
Cornullum, no heart, thoughtlesness, incogitancy, inconsideration, and the Cor
duplex, the perplexed, and irresolv'd and inconclusive heart, do equally oppose
this firmness and fixation of the heart which God loves, and which we consider
in this stem and stalk of Pithagoras his Symbolical letter; and so does that
which we proposed for the third, the Cor vagum, the wandering the way faring,
the inconstant heart.

Many times in our private actions, Cor vagum.
and in the cribration and sifting of our Consciences (for thas's the Sphere I
move in, and no higher) we do overcome the first difficulty, in consideration,
we consider seriously; And sometimes the second irresolution we resolve
confidently, But never the Third, In constancy; if so far as to bring holy
resolutions into actions, yet never so far as to bring holy actions into
Habits. Jer. 17.9.
That word which we read Deceitful (The heart is deceitful above all things,
who can know it?) is in the Original Gnacob; and that is not only
fraudulentum, but versipelle, deceitful, because it varies it self into
diverse forms; so that it does not only deceive others (others find not our
heart the same toward them to day, that it was yesterday) but it deceives our
selves, we know not what, nor where our heart will be hereafter. Upon those
words of Esai Redite praevaricatores ad Cor; 46.8.
Return O sinner to thy heart, Long eos mittit, says Saint Gregory, God
knows whether that sinner is sent (that is) sent to his own heart; for where
is thy heart? Thou may remember where it was yesterday; at such an office; at
such a Chamber; but yesterdaies affections are changed to day, as to days will
be to morrow, They have despised my Judgments, so God complains in Ezechiel;
20.16.
that is, They are not moved with my punishments, they call all: natural
accidents; And then it follows; They have polluted my Sabaths, they are come
to a more faint, and dilute, and indifferent way in their Religion; now what
has occasioned this neglecting of God's Judgments, and this diluteness and
indifferency in the ways of Religion? That that follows there; Their hearts
went after their Idols: Went? Whether? every whither; for, Quot vitia tot
recentes Deos; Hier.
so many habitual sins; so many Idols; and so every man has some Idol,
some such sin; and then that Idol sends him to a further Idol; that sin
to another; for every sin needs the assistance and countenance of another
sin, for disguise and palliation. We are not constant in our sins, much
less in our more holy purposes; we complain (and justly) of the Church of
Rome, that she would not have us receive in utraque in both kinds; but alas,
who amongst us does receive in utraque so, as that when he receives bread and
wine, he receives with a true sorrow for former, and a true resolution against
future sins; Except the Lord of heaven create new hearts in us, of our selves
we have (Cor nullum) no heart; all vanishes into incogitancies except, the Lord
of heaven can center our affections, of our selves we have Cor and Cor, a
cloven, a divided heart, a heart of irresolution; except the Lord of heaven fix
our Resolutions, of our selves we have Cor vagum, a various, a wandering heart,
all smoaks into inconstancy; and all these three are enemies to that firmness
and fixation of the heart, which God loves and we seek after; but yet, how
variously soever the heart does wander, and how little a while soever it stay
upon one object; yet, that that thy heart does stay upon, Christ (in this
place) calls thy Treasure; for the words admit well that inversion, Where your
Treasure is there will your heart be also, implies this, where your heart is,
that is your Treasure: And so we pass from this Stem and Stalk of Pythagoras
his Symbolicall letter, the firmness and fixation of the heart, to the horns
and beams thereof; a broader (but on the left hand) and in that, the
corruptible Treasures of this world, and a narrower (but on the right hand) and
in that the everlasting Treasures of the next. On both sides, that that you fix
your heart upon is your Treasure; for, where your heart is, there is your
Treasure also.

Literally, primarily, radically; Thesaurus, treasure is no more, Thesaurus.
but Depositum in Crastinum, provision for to morrow; to show how little a
proportion a regulated mind and a contented heart may make a Treasure: but we
have enlarged the signification of these words, Provision and to Morrow; for,
provision must signify all that can any way be compassed; and to morrow must
signify as long as there shall be a to morrow, till Time shall be no more: but
waiving these infinite extensions and perpetuities, is there any thing of that
nature as (taking the word Treasure in the narrowest signification to be but
provision for to morrow) we are sure shall last till to morrow? Sits any man
here in an assurance that he shall be the same to morrow that he is now: you
have your Honors, your Offices, your Possessions, perchance under Seal, a Seal
of Wax; Wax that has a tenacity, an adhering, a cleaving nature to show the
royal constancy of his heart that gives them; and would have them continue
with you and stick to you: but then, Wax, if it be heat has a melting, a
fluid, a running nature to; so have these Honors, and Offices, and Possessions
to them that grow too hot, too confident in them or too imperious by them; for
these Honors, and Offices, and Possessions you have a Seal, a fair and just
evidence of assurance; but have they any Seal upon you? any assurance of you
till to morrow? Did our blessed Savior give day or any hope of a to morrow to
that man to whom he said, Fool this night they fetch away thy soul? or is there
any of us that can say, Christ said not that to him?

But yet a Treasure every man has, Thesaurus malorum. Luc. 6.
An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is
evil, says our Savior, every man has some sin upon which his heart is set,
and where your heart is, there is your treasure also: The Treasures of
wickedness profit nothing, says Job: it is true, but yet treasures of
wickedness there are: 10.2. Mich. 6.10.
Are there not yet Treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? consider
the force of that word, yet, yet, though you have the power of a vigilant
Prince executed by just Magistrates, yet, though you have the piety of a
religious Prince seconded by the assiduity of a laborious Clergy, yet, though
you have many helps which your Fathers did, and your neighbors do want, and
have (by Gods grace) some fruits of those many helps; yet, for all this, Are
there not yet Treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked? No, Are there
not scant measures which are an abomination to God, says the Prophet there;
which are not only false measures of merchantdize, but false measures of men;
for, when God says that he intends all this, Is there not yet supplantation in
Court and misre-presentations of men? When Solomon who understood subordination
of places, which flowed from him as well as the highest, which himself possessed,
says, and says experimentally for his own, and prophetically for future
times, If a Ruler (a man in great place) hearken to lies, all his servants are
wicked, Are there not yet misrepresentations of men in Courts? Is there not yet
oppression in the Country; Prove. 29.12. Amos 8.5.
a starving of men and pampering of dogs, A swallowing of the needy, a buying
of the poor for a pair of shoes, and a selling to the hungry refuse corn? Esai.
5.23.
Is there not yet oppression in the Country? Is there not yet extortion in
Westminster? A justifying of the wicked for a reward, and a taking away of the
righteousness of the righteous from him? Is there not yet extortion in
Westminster? Is there not yet Collusion and Circumvention in the City? would
they not seem richer than they are when they deal in private bargains with one
another, and would they not seem poorer than they are, when they are called to
contribute for the Public? Exech. 28.5.
have they not increased their riches by Trade, and lifted up their hearts upon
the increase of their riches? Amos 2 8.
have they not slackned their Trade, and lain down upon clothes laid to pledge,
and ennobled themselves by an ignoble and lazy way of gain? Is there not yet
collusion and circumvention in the City? Is there not yet Hypocrisy in the
Church? In all parts thereof; half-preachings and half-hearings, hearings and
preachings without practice? have we not national sins of our own, and yet
exercise the nature of Islanders in importing the sins of foraign parts? And
though we better no foragin commodity, nor manufactures that we bring in, we
improve the sins of other Nations: And as a weaker grape growing upon the Rhene
contracts a stronger nature in the Canaries, so do the sins of other Nations
transplanted amongst us. Have we not secular sins, sins of our own age, our own
time, and yet sin by precedent of former, as well as create precedents for
future? Jos. 6.19.
and not only Silver and gold, but vessels of iron and brass were brought into
the Treasury of the Lord, not only the glorious sins of high places and
national sins, and secular sins, but the wretchedest beggar in the street
contributes to this Treasure, the Treasure of sin, and to this mischievous use,
to increase this Treasure. The Treasure of sin is a subsidieman, he begs in
Jesus name, and for Gods sake, and in the same name curses him that does not
give: he counterfeits a lameness, or he loves his lameness and would not be
cured; for his lameness is his stock, it is his demean, it is (as they call
their occupations in the City) his mystery: Are there not yet Treasures of
wickedness in the house of the wicked? when even they who have no houses, but
lie in the streets have these Treasures?

Thesaurus Dei hic.
There are, and then as the nature of treasure is, to multiply; so does this
treasure, this treasure of sin, it produces another treasure, Thesaurizamus
iram, To. 2.5.
We treasure up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath. Deuteronomy. 32.34.
For it is of the sins of the people that God speaks, when he says; Is not
this laid up in store with me, and sealed up amongst my treasures? He treasures
up the sins of the disobedient; but where? In the treasury of his Judgments.
And then that treasury he opens against us in this world, his treasure of snow,
and treasures of hail; that is, unseasonableness of weather, barrenness and
famine; and he brings his winds out of his treasury; contrary winds or
storms, and tempests to disappoint our purposes: Job 38.22.
And as he says to Cyrus, I will give thee (even thee Cyrus, though God cared
not for Cyrus, Psalm. 135.7.
otherwise then as he had made Cyrus his scourge) I will give thee the
treasures of darkness, Esa. 45.3.
and the hidden treasures of secret places; God will enable enemies, (though he
loves not those enemies) to afflict that people that love not him. And these,
war, and dearth, and sickness, are the weapons of Gods displeasure; and these
he poures out of his treasury in this world. Thesaur. Dei in ^^tu^o.
But then for the world to come, he shall open our treasury, (for whatsoever
moved our translators to render that word Armory, and not Treasury in that
place, yet evidently it is Treasury, and in that very word Otzar, which they
translate Treasury, Jer. 50.25.
in all those places of Job and David, and Esai, which we mentioned before, and
in all other places,) he shall open that treasury, (says that Prophet) and
bring forth the weapons, not as before of displeasure, but in a far heavier
word, the weapons of his indignation. And in the bowels and treasure of his
mercy, let me beseech you not to call the denouncing of Gods indignation, a
Satyr of a Poet, or an invective of an Orator; as Solomon says, there is a
time for all things, there is a time for consternation of presumptuous hearts,
as well as for redintegration of broken hearts, and the time for that, is this
time of mortification which we enter into now. Now therefore let me have leave
to say, that the indignation of God is such a thing as a man would be afraid to
think he can express it, afraid to think he does know it; for the knowledge of
the indignation of God imples the sense and feeling thereof? all knowledge of
that is experimental, and that's a woeful way, and a miserable acquisition and
purchase of knowledge. To recollect treasure is provision for the future; no
worldly thing is so; there is no certain future, for the things of this world
pass from us; we pass from them; the world it self passes away to nothing. Yet
a way we have found to make a treasure, a treasure of sin; and we teach God
thrift, and providence; for when we arm, God arms too; a treasure furnished
with weapons of displeasure for this world, and weapons of indignation for the
world to come. But then, Luc. 6.45.
as an evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth that
which is evil, (so says our Savior) the good man out of the good treasure of
his heart brings forth that which is good; which is the last stroke that
makes up Pithagoras his Symbolical letter, that horn, that beam thereof, which
lies on the right hand; a narrow way, but to a better land; through straights:
It Is true, but to the Pacifique sea; the consideration of the treasure of the
godly man in this world, and Gods treasure toward him, both in this and the
next. Things dedicated to God are called often the treasure of God; Thesauri
Dei, and Thesauri sanctorum Dei, Thesaur. bonorum.
The treasure of God and the treasures of the servants of God, are in the
Scriptures the same things; and so a man may rob Gods treasury, in robbing an
Hospital. 1 Cor. 28.12.
Now though to give a Talent, or to give a Jewel, or to give a considerable
proportion of plate, be an addition to a treasury, yet to give a treasury to a
treasury, is a more precious and a more acceptable present; as to give a
library to a library, is more then to give the work of any one Author. A godly
man is a library in himself, a treasury in himself, and therefore fittest to be
dedicated and appropriated to God. Invest thy self therefore with this treasure
of godliness: what is godliness, take it in the whole compass thereof; and
godliness is nothing but the fear of God; Pro. 1.7.
for he that says in his first Chapter Initium sapientiae, The fear of God is
the beginning of wisdom, 22.4.
says also in the 22th. Finis modestiae, The fear of God is the end of
modesty, the end of humility; no man is bound to deject himself to any lower
humiliation then to the fear of God. When God promised good Ezekiah all those
blessings, Esaias. 33.6.
wisdom, and knowledge, and stability, and strength of salvation; that that was
to defray him and carry him through all, 1 Timothy 6.19.
was this, The fear of the Lord shall be his treasure. And therefore
Thesaurizate vobis fundamentum, Lay up in store for your selves a good
foundation against the time to come, do all in the fear of God; in all warlike
preparations remember the Lord of Hosts, and fear him; in all treaties of
peace; remember the Prince of peace, and fear him; in all consultations
remember the Angel of the great counsel and fear him; fear God as much at noon
as at midnight, as much in the glory and splendour of his Sunshine, as in his
darkest Eclipses; fear God as much in thy prosperity as in thine adversity, as
much in thy preferment, as in thy disgrace. Lay up a thousand pound to day in
comforting that oppressed soul that sues, and lay up ten thousand pound to
morrow, in pairing his nails that oppresses; lay up a million one day in taking
Gods cause to heart, and lay up ten millions next day in taking Gods cause in
hand: Let every soul lay up a penny now in resisting a small tentation, and a
shilling anon in resisting a greater; and it will grow to be a treasure, a
treasure of talents, of so many talents, as that the poorest soul in the
congregation will not change treasure with any Place-Fleets, nor Terra firma
fleet, nor with those three thousand millions, which (though it be perchance a
greater sum then is upon the face of Europe at this day, after a hundred years
embowelling of the earth for treasure,) David is said to have left for the
treasure of the Temple, Villalp. To. 2. par. li. 5. Disp. 3. cap. 43. so. 503.
Phil. 3.20. Apoc. 21.2.
only to be laid up in the treasury thereof when it was built; for the charge
of the building thereof was otherwise defraid. Let your conversation be in
heaven; cannot you get thither? you may see, as St. John did, heaven come down
to you; heaven is here; here in Gods Church, in his word, in his Sacraments, in
his Ordinances; set thy heart upon them, (the promises of the Gospel, the seals
of reconciliation) and thou have that treasure which is thy viaticum, for thy
transmigration out of this world, and the bill of exchange for the world thou
go, to; for as the wicked make themselves a treasure of sin and vanity, and
then God opens upon them a treasure of his displeasure here, and his
indignation hereafter; so the godly make themselves a treasure of the fear of
God, and he opens unto them a treasure of grace and peace here, and a treasure
of joy and glory hereafter. And when of each of these treasures here and
hereafter; I shall have said one word, I have done.

We have treasure though in earthen vessels, says the Apostle, Thesaurus Dei
Erga bonos hic. 2 Cor 4.7.
we have, that is, we have already the treasure of grace and peace, and faith,
and justification, and sanctification; but yet in earthen vessels, in vessels
that may be broken; peace that may be interrupted, grace that may be resisted,
faith that may be enfeebled, justification that may be suspected, and
sanctification that may be blemished; but we look for more; for joy and glory,
for such a justification, and such a sanctification as shall be sealed and
riveted in a glorification. Manna putrified, if it were kept by any man but a
day; but in the Ark it never putrified. That treasure which is as Manna from
heaven, grace and peace; yet here has a brackish taste, when grace and peace
shall become joy and glory in heaven, there it will be sincere. Sordescit quod
inferiori miscetur nature, August.
and si in suo genere non sordidetur; though in the nature thereof, that with
which a purer mettle is mixed be not base, yet it abases the purer mettle: he
puts his example in silver and gold: though silver be a precious mettle, yet it
abases gold, grace and peace and faith are precious parts of our treasure here;
yet if we mingle them, that is, compare them with the joys and glory of
heaven, if we come to think that our grace and peace and faith here, can no
more be lost, then our joy and glory there, we abase and we over-allay those,
joys and that glory. The Kingdom of heaven is like to a treasure, says our
Savior, Mar. 13.44.
but is it all? is any treasure like unto it? none; for (to end where we begun)
treasure is depositum in crastinum, provision for to morrow: the treasure of
the worldly man is not so; he is not sure of any thing to morrow. Nay the
treasure of the godly man is not so in this world; he is not sure that this
days grace and peace and faith shall be his to morrow; when I have joy and
glory in heaven, I shall be sure of that to morrow. And that's a term long
enough; for before to morrow there must be a night; and shall there ever be
night in heaven, no more then day in hell, there shall be no Sun in heaven,
Apoc 21.23.
therefore no danger of Sunset. And for the treasure it self, when the holy
Ghost has told us that the walls and streets of that City are pure gold, that
the foundations thereof are all precious stones, and every gate of an entire
pearl, what has the Holy Ghost himself left to denote unto us? what the
treasure it self within is? the treasure it self is the Holy Ghost himself and
joy in him, As the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, (but I
know not how) so there shall something proceed from Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, and fall upon me, but I know not what: nay not fall upon me neither, but
enwrap me, embrace me; for I shall be below them, so as that I shall not be
upon the same seat with the Son, at the right hand of the Father, in the union
of the holy Ghost; rectified by the power of the Father, and feel no weakness;
enlightened by the wisdom of the Son, and feel no scruple; established by the
joy of the holy Ghost, and feel no jealousy. Where I shall find the Fathers of
the first ages, dead 5000 years before me, and they shall not be able to say
they were there a minute before me. Where I shall find the blessed and glorious
Martyrs, who went not Per viam lacteam, but per viam sanguineam, not by the
milky way of an innocent life, but by the bloody way of a violent death, and
they shall not contend with me for precedence in their own right, or say, we
came in by Purchase, and you but by pardon. Where I shall find the Virgins, and
not be despised by them for not being so; but hear that redintegration which I
shall receive in Jesus Christ, called Virginity and Intireness. Where all tears
shall be wiped from my eyes; not only tears of compunction for my self, and
tears of compassion for others, but even tears of joy too, for there shall be
no sudden joy, no joy unexperienced there; there I shall have all joys
altogether, always. There Abraham shall not be gladder of his own salvation
then of mine, nor I surer of the everlastingness of my God, then of my
everlastingness in him. This is that treasure, of which the God of this
treasure gives us, those spangles and that single money which this minute can
coin, this world can receive, that is, Prosperity and a good use thereof in
worldly things, and grace and peace, and faith in spiritual, and then reserve
for us the exaltation of this treasure, in the joy and glory of heaven, in the
mediation of his Son Christ Jesus, and by the operation of his blessed Spirit.

Amen.
A SERMON. Sermon. 17.
SERMON XVII.
James 2.12. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the Law
of Liberty.


THis is one of those seven Epistles, which Athanasius and Origin called
Catholic; that is, universal, perchance because they are not directed to any
one Church, as some others are, but to all the Christian World: and Saint
Hierome called them Canonical; perchance because all Rules, all Canons of holy
conversation are comprised in these Epistles; and Epiphanius and Oecumenius
called them circular, perchance because as in a circle, you cannot discern
which was the first point, nor in which the compass began the circle; so
neither can we discern in these Epistles, whom the Holy Ghost begins withal,
whom he means principally, King or Subject, Priest or People, single or
married, Husband or Wife, Fathers or Children, Masters or Servants, but
universally, promiscuously, indifferently, they give all rules, for all
actions, to all persons, at all times and in all places; as in this Text in
particular, which is not by any precedent or subsequent relation, by any
connection or coherence, directed upon any company or any degree of men; for the
Apostle does not say, ye Princes, nor ye People, but ye, ye in general to all,
So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty: so
these Epistles are Catholic, so they are canonical, and they are circular
too. But yet though in a circle we know not where the compass began, we know
not which was the first point yet we know that the last point of the circle
returns to the first and so becomes all one, and as much as we know the last,
we know the first point. Since then the last point of that circle, in which God
has created us to move is a Kingdom (for it is the Kingdom of Heaven) and it
is a Court, (for it is that glorious Court which is the presence of God in the
Communion of his Saints) it is a fair and a pious conception; for this
congregation, here present now in this place, to believe that the first point
of this circle of our Apostle here is a Court too, and that the Holy Ghost in
proposing these duties in his general ye, does principally intend, ye that live
in Court, ye whom God brings so near to the sight of himself, and of his Court
in heaven, as that you have always the picture of himself, and the portracture
of his Court in your eyes; for a religious King is the Image of God, and a
religious Court is a copy of the Communion of Saints: And therefore be you
content to think, that to you especially our Apostle says here, ye, ye who
have a nearer propinquity to God, and more assiduous conversation with God, by
having better helps then other inferior stations do afford, (for though God be
seen in a weed, in a worm, yet he is seen more clearly in the Sun) so speak ye,
and so do, as they that shall be Judged by the law of liberty.

Divisio.
Now as the first Devils were in heaven, (for it was not the punishment which
they feel in hell, but the sin which they committed in heaven, which made them
devils) and yet the falt was not in God, nor in the place; so if the greatest
sins be committed in Courts, (as even in Rome, where thy will needs have an
innocent Church, yet they cause a guilty Court,) the faults are personal,
theirs that do them; and there is no higher Author of their sin. The Apostle
does not bid us say; that it is so in Courts, but least it should come to be
so, he bids us give these rules to Courts, so speak ye, and so do, as they that
shall be Judged by the law of liberty. First then, here is no express precept
given, no direct commandment to speak; the holy Ghost saw there would be
speaking enough in Courts; for though there may be a great sin in silence, a
great prevarication in not speaking in a good cause, or for an oppressed
person, yet the lowest voice in a Court, wispering it self, speaks aloud, and
reaches far; and therefore, hear is only a rule to regulate our speech, Sic
loquimini, so speak ye. And then, as here is no express precept for speaking,
so here is no express precept for doing: The holy Ghost saw there would be
doing enough, business enough in Court; for as silence, and half-silence;
whispering may have a loud voice, so, even undoing may be a busy doing, and
therefore, here is only a rule, to regulate our doing to, Sic facite, So do ye:
And lastly, as there is speaking enough, even in silence, and doing enough,
even in undoing, in Court, so the Court is always under Judgment enough. Every
discontented person that has missed his preferment, though he have not merited
it; every drunkard, that is over-heat, though not with his own wine; every
conjecturing person, that is not within the distance to know the ends or the
ways of great actions, will Judge the highest counsels, and execution of those
counsels. The Court is under Judgment enough, and they take liberty enough; and
therefore here is a rule to regulate our liberty, a law of liberty: so speak
ye, and etc. But though for the more benefit of the present Congregation, we
fix the first point of this Circle, that is, the principal purpose of the holy
Ghost upon the Court, yet our text is an Amphitheater; an Amphitheater consists
of two Theaters: our text has two parts, in which all men, all may sit and see
themselves acted first in the obligation that is laid upon us, upon us all, Sic
loquimini, Sic facite, and then in the reason of this holy diligence, and
religious cautelousness, quia Judicandi; because you are all to be Judged, by
etc. which two general parts, the obligation, and the reason, flowing into many
sub-divided branches, I shall, I think, do better service, both to your
understanding and to your memory, and to your affections and consciences, to
present them, as they shall arise anon in their order, then to pour them out
all at once now.

First then, in our first part, we look to our rule in the first duty, First
part. Loquimini.
our speaking, Sic loquimini, so speak ye. The Comic Poet gives us a good
caution, Si servus semper consuescat silentio, fiat nequam; that servant that
says nothing, thinks ill. As our nullifidians, men that put all upon works,
and no faith, and our solifidians, men that put all upon, faith and no works,
are both in the wrong; so there is a danger in multiloquio, and another in
nulliloquio; he that speaks over-freely to me, may be a man of dangerous
conversation, and the silent and reserved man, that makes no play, but observes
and says nothing, may be more dangerous then he: As the Roman Emperor
professed to stand more in fear of one pale man, and lean man, then of twenty
that studied, and pursued their pleasures, and loved there ease, because such
would be glad to keep things in the state they then were, but the other sort
affected changes, so for the most part, he that will speak, lies as open to me
as I to him; speech is the balance of conversation. Therefore as gold is not
merx, but pretium, Gold is not ware, but the price of all ware, so speaking is
not doing; but yet fair speaking prepares an acceptance before, and puts a
value after, upon the best actions. God has made other creatutes Gregalia,
sociable, besides man; sheep, and deer, and pigeons will flock, and heard, and
troop and meet together; but when they are met, they are not able to tell one
another why they met. Man only can speak; silence makes it but a hearding; that
that makes conversation, is speech. Qui datum deserit, respuit datorem, says
Tertullian; He that uses not a benefit, reproaches his benefactor. To declare
Gods goodness that has enabled us to speak, we are bound to speak: speech is
the glue, the ciment, the soul of conversation, and of religion too.

Now, your conversation is in heaven; and therefore loquimini Deo, Deo.
first speak to him that is in heaven, speak to God. Some of the Platonic
Philosophers thought it a profanation of God, to speak to God; they thought
that when our thoughts were made prayers, and that the heart slow'd into the
tongue, and that we had invested, and apparall'd our meditations with words,
this was a kind of painting and dressing, and a superfluous diligence, that
rather tasted of humane affections, then such a sincere service, as was fit for
the presence of God; only the first conception, the first ebullitions and
emanations of the Soul, in the heart, they thought to be a fit sacrifice to
God, and all verbal prayer to be too homely for him. But God himself who is
all spirit, has yet put on bodily lineaments, head, and hands, and feet, yea,
and garments too, in many places of scripture to appear, that is, to manifest
himself to us; and when we appear to God, though our devotion be all spiritual,
as he is all spirit, yet let us put on lineaments and apparel upon our
devotions, and digest the meditations of the heart into words of the mouth. God
came to us, in verbo, in the word, for Christ is the word that was make flesh:
let us that are Christians go to God so too, that the words of our mouth as
well as the meditations of our heart, may be acceptable to him. Surely, God
loves the service of prayer, or he would never have built a house for prayer;
and therefore we justly call public prayer, the liturgy, service: love that
place, and love that service in that place: prayer, They will needs make us
believe that St. Francis preached to birds, and beasts, and stones; but they
will not go about to make us believe that those birds, and beasts, and stones
joined with St. Francis in prayer. God can speak to all things; that's the
office of preaching to speak to others; but of all, only man can speak to God,
and that's the office of prayer. It is a blessed conversation to spend time in
discourse in communication with God. Genesis 18. ult.
God went his way as soon as he had left communing with Abraham: When we leave
praying, God leaves us; but God left not Abraham, as long as he had any thing
to say to God; and we have always something to say unto him; he loves to hear
us tell him even those things which he knew before; His benefits in our
thankfulness, and our sins in our confessions, and our necessities in our
petitions: And therefore having so many occasions to speak to God, and to speak
of God, David ingeminates that (and his ingemination implies a wonder) O that
men would (and it is strange if men will not) O that men would, says he, more
than once or twice, O that men would praise the Lord, and tell the wondrous
works that he has done for the sons of men; for David determines not his
precept in that, Ps. 100 4.
Be thankful unto him; for a thankfulness may pass in private, but, Be
thankful unto him and speak good of his name: Glorify him in speaking to him,
in speaking of him, in speaking for him.

Diis.
Loquimini Deo, speak to God and loquimini Diis, speak to them, whom God has
called Gods. As religious Kings are bound to speak to God by way of prayer; so
those who have that sacred office, and those that have that honorable office
to do so, are bound to speak to Kings by way of Counsil. God has made all good
men partakers of the divine nature; they are the sons of God, the seed of God;
but God has made kings partakers of his office and administration. And as
between man and himself God has put a Mediator, that consists of God and Man;
so between Princes and People, God has put Mediators too, who considered in
themselves retain the nature of the people, (so Christ did of man) but
considered in their places, have fair and venerable beams of his power and
influences of him upon them. And as our Mediator, Christ Jesus, found always
his Fathers ears open to him; so do the Church and State enter blessedly and
succesfully by these Mediators into the ears of the King. Of our Mediator
Christ himself it is said, that he offered up prayers, Heb. 5.7.
and strong cries, and tears; even Christ was put to some difficulties in his
mediation for those that were his: but he was heard, says that Text, in that
he feared: Even in those things wherein, in some emergent difficulties, they
may be afraid they shall not, these mediators are graciously and opportunely
heard too in their due discharge of their offices. That which was David's
prayer, is our possession, our happiness; Let not the foot of pride come
against us; Ps. 36.11.
we know there is no pride in the head; and because there is no fault in the
hands neither, that is, in them into whose hands this blessed Mediatorship is
committed, by the great places of power and counsel which they worthily hold,
the foot of pride, foreign or home oppression does not, shall not tread us down.
And for the continuation of this happiness, let me have leave to say with
Mordechais humility and earnestness too, to all such mediators, that which he
said to Esther, 4.14.
Who knows, whether thou be not brought to this place for this purpose? to
speak that which his sacred and gracious ears, to whom thou speak, will
always be well pleased to hear when it is delivered by them, to whom it
belongs to speak it, and in such humble and reserved manner as such sovereign
persons as owe no account but to God, should be spoke too? Sic loquimini Deo,
so let Kings speak to God, (that was our first,) Sic loquimini Diis, so let
them whom Kings trust speak to Kings, whom God has called Gods, (that was our
second) and then a third branch in this rule of our first duty, is, Sic
loquimini imaginibus Dei, so speak you to Gods Images, to men of condition
inferior to your selves, for they also are Images of God, as you are.

And this is truly, most literally the purpose of the Apostle here, Imaginibus
Dei
that you undervalue no man for his outward appearance; v. 2.
that you overvalue no man for his goodly apparel or gold rings; that you
say not to a poor man stand thou here, or if you admit him to sit, sit here
under my footstool: v. 3.
but it is a precept of accessibleness and of affability; affability, that is,
a civility of the City of God and a courtship of the Court of Heaven to receive
other men, the images of God, with the same easiness that God received you. God
stands at the door and knocks, and stays our leisure to see if we will open
and let him in: even at the door of his beloved he stood and knocked, till his
head was filled mith dew, and his locks with the drops of the night: Apoc. 3.20.
Cant. 5.2.
But God puts none of us to that which he puts himself and his Christ; but,
knock, says he, and it shall be opened unto you; Mat. 7.7.
no staying at the door, opened as soon as you knock. The nearest that our
Expositors can come to find what it was that offended God, Number. 20.10.
in Moses striking of the Rock for water, is, that he struck it twice; that he
did not believe that God would answer his expectation at one striking; God is
no inaccessible God, that he may not be come to, nor inexorable, that he will
not be moved if he be spoken to, nor dilatory, that he does not that he does
seasonably. Daniel presents God Antiquum Dierum, as an old man; but that is as
a reverend not as a froward person, Ambro.
Men's in Sermonibus nostris habitat, et gubernat verba: The soul of a man is
incorporate in his words; as he speaks, we think he thinks: Et bonus pater
familias in illo primo vestibulo aestimatur, says the same Father; as we
believe that to be a free house where there is an easy entrance, so we doubt
the less of a good heart if we find charitable and courteous language. But yet
there is an excess in this too, in this self-effusion, this pouring of a man's
self out in fair and promising language: In accessibleness is the fault which
the Apostle aims at here: and truly the most inaccessible man that is, is the
over-liberal and profuse promiser: he is therefore the most inaccessible,
because he is absent, when I am come to him, and when I do speak with him: to a
retired, to a reserved man we do not easily get; but when we are there he is
there too: to an open and liberal promiser we get easily, but when we are with
him he is away, because his heart, his purpose is not there; but Sic loquimini
Deo, so speak ye to God (that is a remembrance to Kings) Sic loquimini Diis, so
speak ye to them whom God has called Gods, (that is a remembrance to Mediators
between Kings and Subjects,) Sic loquimini imaginibus Dei, so speak ye to Gods
images, to all men (that is a remembrance to all that possess any superiority
over others) as that your loquimini may be accompanied with a facite, your
saying with doing, your good words with good actions; for so our Apostle joins
them here, so speak ye, and so do ye; and so we are come to our second rule;
from the rule of our words to the rule of our actions.

Facite.
John Baptist was all voice, yet John Baptist was a forerunner of Christ; the
best words are but words; but they are the forerunners of deeds. But Christ
himself, as he was God himself, is purus actus, all action, all doing:
comfortable words are good cordials; they revive the spirits, and they have the
nature of such occasional physic: but deeds are our food, our diet, and that
that constantly nourishes us. 1 Jo. 3.18.
Non verbo, says the Apostle, Let us not love in word, nor in tongue, but in
deed, and in truth; Not that we may not love in words, but that our deeds are
the true seals of that love, which was also love when it was in words: Ambro.
But, Ne quod luxuriat in flore, attenuetur and habetetur in fructu, Least that
tree, that blew early and plentifully, blast before it knit: Second your good
words with actions too; It is the husbandry and the harvest of the righteous
man, (as it is gathered in David) The mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom:
Ps. 37.30.
So we read it; there it is in the tongue, in words only; the vulgar has it
Meditatur, he meditates it; so the heart is got in; But the original Hagah, is
noted to signify fructificavit, he brings forth fruits thereof, and so the
hand is got in too; And, when that which is well spoken, was well meant, and
has been well expressed in action, that's the husbandry of the righteous man;
then his harvest is all in; It is the way of God himself. Philo Judaeus notes,
Exo 20.10.
That the people are said to have seen the noise and the voice of God, because,
whatsoever God says, it determines in action; If we may hear God we may see
God; what he says he does too: Therefore from that example of God himself,
Saint Gregory directs us; we must, says he, show our love, Et vaneratione
sermonis, et ministerio largitatis, with a fair respect in words, and with a
real supply in deeds: Nay, when we look upon our pattern, that is, God,
Tertullian notes well, That God prevented his own speaking by doing;
Benedicebat, quae benefaciebat, first he made all things good, and then he
blessed them that they might be better; first he wrought and then he spoke: And
so Christ's way and proceeding is presented to us too; so far from not doing
when he speaks, as that he does before he speaks. Christ began to do and to
teach, Act. 1.1. Luke ult. 19.
says St. Luke, but first to do; And he was mighty in deeds and in words; but
first in deeds. We cannot write so well as our copy, to begin always at deeds,
as God and his Christ; but yet let us labor to write so fair after it, as first
to afford comfortable words, and though our deeds come after, yet to have them
from the beginning in our intention, and that we do them, not because we
promised, but promise because we love to do good, and love to lay upon our
selves the obligation of a promise. The instrument and organ of nature was the
eye; the natural man finds God in that he sees; in the creature. The organ of
the Law which exalted and erectified nature was the hand; Fac hoc et vives,
perform the law and thou shall live: So also, the organ of the Gospel is the
ear, for faith comes by hearing; but then the organ of faith it self is the
hand too; a hand that lays hold upon the merits of Christ for my self, and a
hand that delivers me over to the Church of God in a holy life, and exemplary
actions, for the edification of others: So that all, all from nature to grace
determines in action, in doing good; Sic facite Deo, so do good to God, in
real assisting his cause, Sic facite Diis, so do good to them, whom God has
called Gods, in real seconding their religious purposes, Sic facite imaginibus
Dei, So do good to the images of God, in real relieving his distressed
members, as that you do all this upon that which is made the reason of all, in
the second part of this Text, Because you are to be judged by the law of
liberty.

Timor futuri judicii hujus vitae paedagogus: 2. Part. Basil. judicium.
Our Schoolmaster to teach us to stand upright in the last judgment, is the
meditation and the fear of that judgment in this life. It is our schoolmaster,
and schoolmaster enough, I said unto the fool, thus and thus, says David, Ps.
75.5.
And I said unto the wicked, thus and thus, says he: for, says he, God is the
Judge; He thought it enough to enlighten the understanding of the fool, enough
to rectify the perverseness of the wicked, if he could set God before them, in
that notion, as a Judge. For this is one great benefit from the present
contemplation of the future Judgment, that whosoever does truly and advisedly
believe, that ever he will come to that Judgment, is at it now; he that
believes that God will judge him, is Gods Commissioner, Gods delegate, and in
his name Judges himself now. Therefore it is a useful mistaking, which the
Roman translator is fallen into in this text; in reading it thus, Sicut
incepientes Judicari, so speak ye, and so do, as they upon whom the Judgment
were already begun; for qui timet ante Christi tribunal praesentari, August.
he that is afraid to be brought to the last Judgment, has but one refuge, but
one Sanctuary; Ascendat tribunal mentis suae, et constituat se ante seipsum,
let him cite himself before himself, give evidence himself, against himself;
and so guilty as he is found here, so innocent he shall stand there. Let him
proceed upon himself, 9.28.
as Job did, and he is safe; I am afraid of all my sorrows, says he, afraid
that I have not said enough against my self, nor repented enough; afraid that
my sorrows have not been sincere, but mingled with circumstances of loss of
health, or honor, or fortune, occasioned by my sins, and not only, not
principally for the sin it self; I am afraid of all my sorrows says he, but
how much more then, of my mirths and pleasures? to judge our selves by the
Judgment of flatterers, that depend upon us; to judge our selves by the event
and success of things, (I am enriched, I am preferred by this course, and
therefore all is well) to judge our selves by example of others, (others do thus,
and why not I?) all these proceedings are Coram non Judice, all these are
literally praemunire cases, for they are appellations into faraign
Jurisdictions, and foraign Judicatures. Only our own conscience rectified, is a
competent Judge; and they that have passed the trial of that Judgment, do not so
much rise to Judgment at last, as stand and continue in Judgment: their
Judgment, that is, their trial is passed here; and there they shall only
receive sentence, and that sentence shall be, Euge bone serve, well done good
and faithful servant, since thou did enter into Judgment in the other world,
enter into thy Masters joy in this. But howsoever we be prepared for that
Judgment, well or not well, and howsoever the Judge be desposed toward us, well
or not well, there is this comfort given us here, that that Judgment shall be
per legem, by a law, we shall be judged by a law of liberty; which is our
second branch, in this second part.

Per legem.
The Jews that prosecuted the Judgment against Christ, durst not do that,
without pretending a law: habemus legem, say they, we have a law, and he has
transgressed that. The necessary precipitations into sudden executions, to
which States are forced in rebellious time, we are fain to call by the name of
law, martial law; the torrents and inundations, which invasive armies power
upon nations, we are fain to call by the name of law, the law of arms. No
Judgment, no execution without the name, the color, the pretense of law, for
still men call for a law for every execution. And shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? shall God Judge us, condemn us, execute us at the last day, and
not by law? by something that we never saw, never knew, never notified, never
published, and Judge me by that, and leave out the consideration of that law,
which he bound me to keep? 1 Cor. 1.20.
I ask St. Paul's question, Where is the disputer of the world? who will offer
to dispute unnecessary things, especially where Authority has made it
necessary to us, to forbear such disputations? Blessed are the peacemakers
that command, and blessed are the peace-keepers that obey, and accommodate
themselves to peace, in forbearing unnecessary and uncharitable controversies;
But without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness; the Apostle
invites us to search into on farther mysteries, then such as may be without
controversy; 1 Timothy 3.16.
the mystery of godliness is without controversy: and godliness is to believe
that God has given us a law, and to live according to that law. This, this
godliness, (that is, knowledge and obedience to the law) has the promises of
this life, and the next too, all referred to his law: for without this, this
godliness, (which is holiness) no man shall see God: all referred to a law.
This is Christ's Catechism in St. John, that we might know the only true God,
17.3.
and Jesus Christ whom he sent, a God commanding, and a Christ reconciling us,
if we have transgressed that commandment; and this is the holy Ghost's
Catechism in St. Paul, Deus remunerator, Heb. 11.6.
that we believe God to be, and to be a just rewarder of man's actions; still
all referred to an obedience, or disobedience of a law. The mystery of
godliness is great, that is, great enough for our salvation, and yet without
controversy. For though controversies have been moved about Gods first act,
there can be none of his last act; though men have disputed of the object of
election, yet of the subject of execution there is no controversy: no man can
doubt, but that when God delivers over any soul actually, and by way of
execution to eternal condemnation, that he delivers over that soul to that
eternal condemnation, for breaking this law. In this we have no other adversary
but the over-sad, the despairing soul; and it becomes us all, to lend our hand
to his succor, and so pour in our wine and our oil, into his wounds, that lies
weltring and surrounded in the blood of his own pale and exhausted soul; that
soul, who though it can testify to it self, some endeavor to the ways of
holiness; yet upon some collatteral doubts, is still suspicious and jealous of
God. How often have we seen, that a needless jealousy and suspicion conceived
without cause, has made a good body bad? a needless jealousy and suspicion of
his purposes, and intentions upon thee, may make thy merciful God angry too.
Nothing can alienate God more from thee, then to think that any thing but sin
can alienate him. How would thou have God merciful to thee, if thou will be
unmerciful to God himself? And qui quid tyrannicum in Deo, Basil.
He that conceives any tyrannical act in God is unjust to the God of Justice,
and unmerciful to the God of mercy. Therefore in the 17th. of our injunctions
we are commanded to arm sad souls against despair, by setting forth the mercy
and the benefits, and the godliness of Almighty God: (as the word of the
injunction is, the godliness of God;) for to leave God under a suspicion of
dealing ill with any penitent soul, were to impute ungodliness to God.
Therefore to that mistaking soul, that discomposed, that shivered, and
shriveled, and ravell'd and ruined soul, to that jealous and suspicious soul
only, I say with the Apostle, let no man Judge you, intruding into those things
which he has not seen. Colos. 2.18.
Let no man make you afraid of secret purposes in God, which they have not, nor
you have not seen; for that by which you shall be Judged, is the law, that law
which was notified and published to you. The law alone were much too heavy, if
there were not a suprabundant ease and alleviation in that hand, that Christ
Jesus reaches out to us. O consider the weight and the ease; and for pity to
such distrustful souls, and for establishing of your own, stop your devotions a
little, upon this consideration: first, there is Chirograpbum, A hand writing
of Ordinances against me; v. 14.
a debt, an obligation contracted by our first Parents in their disobedience;
and fallen upon me. And even that, (be it but original sin) is shrewd evidence;
there is my first charge. But deletum est, says the Apostle there, that is
blotted, that's defaced, that cannot be sued against me after baptism: nay
sublatum cruci affixum, 28.15.
It is cancelled, it is naild to the Cross of Christ Jesus, it is no more sin,
in it self it is; but to me to condemnation it is not; there is my charge, and my
discharge for that. But yet there is a heavier evidence; Pactum cum inferno, as
the Prophet Isai speaks; I have made a Covenant with death, and with hell I am
at an agreement; that is, says St. Gregory, Audacter, indesinentur peccamus,
et diligendo, amicitiam profitemur: We sin constantly, and we sin continually,
and we sin confidently, and we find so much pleasure and profit in sin, as that
we have made a league, and sworn a friendship with sin; and we keep that
perverse, and irreligious promise, over-religiously; and the sins of our youth
flow into other sins, when age disables us for them. But yet there is a
delectum est, in this case too, our Covenant with death is disannulled, (says
that Prophet) when we are made partakers of the death of Christ, in the blessed
Sacrament; mine actual sins lose their act, and mine habitual sins fall from
me, as a habit as a garment put of, when I come to that; there is my charge, and
my discharge for that. But yet there is worse evidence against me, then either
this Chirographum, the first hand writing of Adams hand, or then this pactum,
this contract of mine own hand, actual and habitual sin, (for of these, one is
washed out in water, and the other in blood, To. 7.20.
in the two Sacraments.) But then there is Lex in membris, says the Apostle, I
find a law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me; Sin assisted by
me, is now become a Tyrant over me; and has established a government upon me,
and therefore is a law of sin, and a law in my flesh, which after the water of
baptism taken, and the water of penitent tears given; after the blood of Christ
Jesus taken, and mine one blood given, (that is, a holy readiness at that time,
when I am made partaker of Christ's death, to die for Christ,) throws me back by
relapses, into those repented sins. This put the Apostle to that passionate
exclamation, O wretched man that I am; and yet he found a deliverance, even
from the body of his death through Jesus Christ his Lord, that is, a free and
open recourse, and access to him in all oppressions of heart, in all dejections
of spirit. Now, when this Chirographum, this band of Adams hand, Original sin,
is cancelled upon the Cross of Christ, and this pactum, this band of mine own
hand, actual sins, washed away in the blood of Christ, and this Lex in membris,
this disposition to relapse into repented sins, (which as a tide that does
certainly come every day, does come every day, in one form or other) is beaten
back (as a tide by a bank) by a continual opposing the merits, and the example
of Christ Jesus, and the practice of his fasting, and such other medicinal
disciplines, as I find to prevail against such relapses, when by this blessed
means the whole law, against which I am a trespasser, is evacuated, will God
condemn me for all this, and not by a law? when I have pleaded Christ, and
Christ, and Christ baptism, and blood and tears, will God condemn mean oblique
way, when he cannot by a direct way? by a secret purpose, when he has no law
to condemn me by? Sad and discomposed, distorted and distracted soul; if it be
well said in the School, absurdum est disputare ex manuscriptis, it is an
unjust thing, in controversies and disputations, to press arguments out of
manuscripts, that cannot be seen by every man; it were ill said in thy
conscience, that God will proceed against thee, ex manuscriptis, or condemn
thee upon any thing, which thou never sawst, any unreveal'd purpose of his.
Suspicious soul, ill-presaging soul, is there something else besides the day of
Judgment, that the Son of man does not know? disquiet soul, does he not know
the proceeding of that Judgment, wherein himself is to be Judge? but that when he
has died for thy sins, and so fulfilled the law in thy behalf, thou may be
condemned without respect of that law, and upon something, that shall have had
no consideration, no relation to any such breach, of any such law in thee?
Intricated entangled conscience, Christ tells thee of a Judgment, because thou
did not do the works of mercy, not feed, not cloth the poor: for these were
enjoined thee by a law; but he never tells thee of any Judgment therefore,
because thy name was written in a dark book of death, never unclaps'd, never
opened unto thee in thy life. He says to the lovingly and indulgently, fear
not, for it is Gods good pleasure to give you the Kingdom; but he never says
to the wickedest in the world, live in fear, die in anxiety, in suspicion and
suspension, for his displeasure; a displeasure conceived against you before you
were sinners, before you were men, has thrown you out of that kingdom into
utter darkness. There is no condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus, The
reason is added, because the law of the Spirit of life has made them free from
the law of sin and of death: All, upon all sides, is still referred to a law.
And where there is no law against thee, (as there is not to him that is in
Christ; and he is in Christ, who has endeavored the keeping or repented the
breaking of the law) God will never proceed to execution by any secret purpose
ever notified, never manifested. Suspicious, jealous, scattered soul recollect
thy self, and give thy self that redintegration, that acquiescence which the
spirit of God, in the means of the Church offers thee, study the mystery of
godliness which is without all controversy, that is, endeavor to keep, repent
the not keeping of the law and thou art safe, for that you shall be judged by,
is a law. But then this law, is called here a law of liberty; and whether that
denotation, that it is called a law of liberty, import an ease to us or heavier
weight upon us, is our last disquisition and conclusion of all; So speak ye,
and so do, as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty.

Lex libertatis.
That the Apostle here by the law of liberty means the Gospel was never doubted;
he had called the Gospel so before this place; whosoever looks into the perfect
law of liberty, 1.25.
and continues therein, shall be blessed in his deed; that is, blessed in doing
so, blessed in conforming himself to the Gospel; but why does he call it so, A
law of liberty? not because men naturally affecting liberty, might be drawn to
an affection of the Gospel by proposing it, in that specious name of liberty,
though it were not so. The holy Ghost calls the Gospel a pearl, and a treasure,
and a kingdom, and joy, and glory; Not to allure men with false names, but
because men love these; and the Gospel is truly all these, a pearl, and a
treasure, and a kingdom, and joy, and glory; And it is truly a law of liberty;
but of what kind, and in what respect? not such a liberty as they have
established in the Roman Church, where Ecclesiastical liberty must exempt
Ecclesiastical persons from participating all burdens of the State, and from
being traitors, though they commit treason, because they are Subjects to no
secular Prince; nor the liberty of the Anabaptist that overthrows Magistracy,
and consequently all subjection both Ecclesiastical and Laick for when upon
those words, 1 Cor. 7.23.
Be ye not servants of men, St. Chrysostom says, This is Christian liberty,
Nec aliis, nec sibi servire, neither to be subjects to others nor to our
selves, that is spoken with modification an allegiance with relation to our
first allegiance, to God; not to be so subject to others, or to our selves, as
that either for their sakes or our own, we depart from any necessary
declaration of our service to God.

Deo.
First then, the Gospel is a Law of Liberty, in respect of the author of the
Gospel of God himself, because it leaves God at his liberty: Not at liberty to
judge against his Gospel, where he has manifested it for a law; for he has
laid a holy necessity upon himself to judge according to that law, where he has
published that law: But at liberty so, as that it consists only in his good
pleasure, to what nation he will publish the gospel, or in what nation he will
continue the gospel, or upon what persons he will make this gospel effectual. So
Oecumenius, (who is no single witness, nor speaks not alone, but compiles the
former Fathers) places this liberty in God, That God is at liberty to give this
gospel where he will, and at liberty so, as that he has exempted no man, how
well soever he love him, nor put any such fetters or manicles upon himself, but
that he can and will punish those that transgress this law. So it is a law of
liberty to God; nothing determined upon any man, nothing concluded in himself,
lies so in Gods way, as to hinder him from proceeding in his last judgment,
according to the keeping or breaking of this law; still God is at liberty.

And it is a law of liberty in respect of us: Of us, Nobis.
who are Christians; and considered so, either with a respect to the natural
man, or with a respect to the Jew; for, if we compare the Christian with the
natural man, the law of nature lays the same obligation upon the natural man,
as the gospel does upon the Christian, for the moral part thereof. The
christian is no more bound to love God, nor his neighbor, than the natural man
is; therein the natural man has no more liberty, than the christian; So far
their law is equal: And then, all the law, which the christian has and the
natural man has not, is a law of liberty to the christian, that is, a law that
gives him an ease and a readier way to perform those duties; which way the
natural man has not, and yet is bound to the same duties. The natural man, if
he trangress that law which he finds in his own heart, finds a condemnation in
himself, as well as the christian; therein he is no freer than the christian:
But he finds no Sanctuary, no Altar, no Sacrifice, no Church, no such liberty
as the Christian does in the Gospel. So the Gospel is a law of liberty to us,
in respect of the natural man, that it sets us at liberty, restores us to
liberty after we are fallen into prison for debt, into Gods displeasure for
sin, by affording us means of reconciliation to God again.

It is so also in respect of the law given by God to the Jews: Judaei.
The Jews had liberties; that is, refuge and help of sacrifices for sin, which
the natural man had not: For, if the natural man were driven and followed from
his own heart, that he saw no comfort of an innocence there, he had no other
liberties to fly to, no comfort in any other thing, no law, no promise annexed
to any other action; not to Sacrifice as the Jew, or to Sacrament as the
Christian, but must irremediably sink under the condemnation of his own heart.
The Jew had this liberty, a law; and a law, that involved the Gospel; But then
the gospel was to the Jew but as a letter sealed, and the Jew was but as a
servant who was trusted to carry the letter as it was sealed to another, to
carry it to the Christian. Now the Christian has received this letter at the
Jews hand, and he opens it; he sees the Jews prophecy made history to him; The
Jews hope, and reversion made possession and inheritance to him; he sees the
Jews faith made matter of fact; he sees all that was promised and represented
in the law, performed and recorded in the Gospel, and applied in the Church:
there Christ says, Jo. 15.15.
Hence forth call I not you servants, but friends; wherein consists this
enfranchisement? In this; The servant knows not what his master does; (The
Jews knew not that) But I have called you friends, says Christ; For all things
that I heard of my father, I have made known unto you. Heb. 7.17.
The law made nothing perfect, says the Apostle, Gal. 4.24.
Where was the defect? He tells us that, The old covenant (that is the law)
gendreth to bondage; what bondage? he tells us that too, 3.23.
when he says, The law was a schoolmaster. The Jews were as schoolboys,
always spelling and putting together types and figures, with things typified
and figured: How this Lamb should signify Christ, how this fire should
signify a holy Ghost. The Christian is come from school to the University;
from grammar to logic; to him that is Logos, it self, the word; to apprehend
and apply Christ himself; and so is at more liberty, than when he had only a
dark law, without any comment with the natural man, or only a dark comment,
that is, the law with a dim light, and ill eyes, as the Jews had; for though the
Jew had the liberty of alaw, yet they had not the law of liberty. So the gospel
is a law of liberty to God, who is still at his liberty, to give and take, and
to condemn according to that law; and a law of liberty to us, as we are
compared to the natural man, or to the Jew. But when we confine our selves in
our selves, positively without comparison, it is not such a law of liberty to
us, as some men have come to a near, saying, That the sins of Gods children do
them no harm; That God sees not the sins of his children; that God was no
farther out with David in his adultery, than in his repentance; but as to be
born within the covenant, that is, of christian parents, does not make us
christians, Aug.
(for, Non nascitur, sed renascitur, Christianus,) The covenant gives us a
title to the Sacrament of Baptism, and that sacrament makes us christians; so
this law of liberty gives us not a liberty to sin, but a liberty from sin, Noli
liberate abuti, ad libere peccandum, says the same Father, It is not a
liberty, but an impotency, a slavery to sin: Voluntas libera, quae pia, says,
he, only a holy soul, 2 Cor. 3.17.
is a free soul, Where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty, says the
Apostle: Leo.
And, Splendidissimum in se quisque habet speculum, Every man has, a glass, a
crystal, into which, though he cannot call up this spirit, (for the spirit of
God breaths where it pleases him) yet he can see this spirit if he be there in
that glass: Every man has a glass in himself, where he may see himself, and
the Image of God, says that Father, and see how like he is to that: To dare to
reflect upon my self, and to search all the corners of mine own conscience,
whether I have rightly used this law of liberty, and neither been bold before a
sin, upon presumption of an easy, nor diffident after, upon suspicion of an
impossible reconciliation to my God, this is Evangelical liberty.

So then, (to end all) Though it be a law of liberty, because it gives me
better means of prevention before, and of restitution after, than the natural
man or Jew had, yet we consider, that it is the law of liberty, this law, that
has afforded us these good helps, by which we shall be judged; And so though
our case be better than theirs, because we have this law of liberty which they
wanted, yet our case grows heavier than theirs if we use it not aright. The
Jews shall be under a heavier condemnation than the natural man, because they
had more liberty, that is, more means of avoiding sin than the natural man
had, and upon the same reason, the christian under a heavier condemnation than
either, because he shall be judged by the law of liberty.

What Judgment then gives this law? This; Mar. 16.16.
Qui non crediderit, damnabitur; So says this law, in the lawmakers mouth, He
that believes not shall be damned. And as no less light than faith it self,
can show you what faith is, what it is to believe; so no less time than
damnation shall last, can show you what damnation is: For the very form of
damnation is the everlastingness of it: And, qui non crediderit, he that
believes not shall be damned; there is no commutation of penance, nor
beheading after a sentence of a more ignominious death in that Court. Do
thou believe that thou do believe? yet this law takes not that answer; This
law of liberty takes the liberty to look farther; through faith into works; for
so says the law, in the mouth of the lawmakers, To whom much is given, Luc.
12.48.
of him much shall be required. Have thou considered every new title of honor,
and every new addition of office, every new step into higher places, to have
laid new duties, and new obligations upon thee? have thou doubled the hours of
thy prayers when thy preferments are doubled, and increased thine alms
according as thy revenues are increased? have thou done something, done much in
this kind? this law will not be answered so; this law of liberty takes the
liberty to call upon thee for all. Here also the law says, in the mouth of the
lawmakers, If thou have agreed with many adversaries, says Christ, Mat. 5.25.
(let that be if thou have satisfied many duties; (for duties are adversaries,
that is, tentations upon us) yet as long as thou have one adversary, agree with
that adversary quickly in the way; leave no duty undischarged nor unrepented in
this life. Beloved, we have well delivered our selves of the fear of Purgatory;
None of us fear that; but another mistaking has overtaken us, and we flatter
our selves with another danger, that is, compensation; That by doing well in
one place, our ill doing in another is recompensed. An ill officer looks to be
saved because he is a good husband to his wife; a good father to his children;
a good master to his servants; and he thinks he has three to one for his
salvatien. But as nature requires the qualities of every element, which thou
art composed of; so this law of liberty calls upon thee, for the exercises of
all those virtues, that appertain to every particular place thou holdst. This
liberty, this law of liberty takes, It binds thee to believe Christ, all
Christ, Gods Christ, as he was the eternal Son of the Father, God of God; our
Christ, as he was made man for our salvation; and thy Christ, as his blessed
spirit, in this his ordinance applies him to thee, and offers him into thine
arms this minute. And then to know that he looks for a retribution from thee,
in that measure in which he dealt with thee, much for much; and for several
kinds of good, according to those several good things which he has done for
thee: And if thou be first defective in these, and then defective in laying
hold upon him, who is the propitiation and satisfaction for thy defects in
these: This law of liberty returns to her liberty, to pronounce, and the Judge
to his liberty to execute that sentence, Damnaberis, thou will be cast into
prison, where thou must pay the last farthing; thou must; for Christ dies not
there; and therefore there thou must lie till there come such another ransom
as Christ; nay a greater ransom than Christ was, for Christ paid no debts in
that prison: This then is the christians case, and this is the abridgment of
his Religion, Sic loquimini, Sic facite; To speak aright, and to do aright; to
profess the truth and not be afraid nor ashamed of that, and to live according
to that profession: For no man can make God the author of sin; but that man
comes as near it as he can, that makes Gods religion a cloak for his sin. To
this God proceeds not merely, and only by commandment, but by persuasion too;
and though he be not bound to do so, yethe does give a reason: The reason is,
because we must give account of both; both of actions and of words; of both we
shall be judged; But judged by a law, a law which excludes on Gods part, any
secret ill purpose upon us, if we keep his law; A law which excludes on our
part, all pretense of ignorance; for no man can plead ignorance of a law. And
then, a law of liberty; of liberty to God; for God was not bound to save a man
because he made him, but of his own goodness, he vouchsafed him a law, by which
he may be saved: A law of liberty to us; so that there is no Epicurism, to do
what we list; no such liberty as makes us libertins; for then there were no
law, nor Stoicism, nor fatality, that constrains us to do that we would not do,
for then there were no liberty. But the Gospel is such a law of liberty as
delivers us, upon whom it works, from the necessity of falling into the bondage
of sin, before, and from the impossibility of recovering after, if we be fallen
into that bondage. And this is liberty enough: And of this liberty our blessed
God give us the right use, for his son Christ Jesus sake by the operation of
that holy Ghost that proceeds from both.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached to Queen Anne, at Denmarke-house. Sermon. 18.
December. 14. 1617. SERMON XVIII.
Proverbs 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me early shall
find me.


AS the Prophets, and the other Secretaries of the holy Ghost in penning the
books of Scriptures, do for the most part retain, and express in their writings
some impressions, and some air of their former professions; those that had been
bred in Courts and Cities, those that had been Shepherds and Heardsmen, those
that had been Fishers, and so of the rest; ever inserting into their writings
some phrases, some metaphors, some allusions, taken from that profession which
they had exercised before; so that soul, that has been transported upon any
particular worldly pleasure, when it is entirely turned upon God, and the
contemplation of his all sufficiency and abundance, does find in God fit
subject, and just occasion to exercise the same affection piously, and
religiously, which had before so sinfully transported, and possessed it.

A covetous person, who is now truly converted to God, he will exercise a
spiritual covetousness still, he will desire to have him all, he will have good
security, the seal and assurance of the holy Ghost; and he will have his
security often renewed by new testimonies, and increases of those graces in
him; he will have witnesses enough; he will have the testimony of all the
world, by his good life and conversation; he will gain every way at Gods hand,
he will have wages of God, for he will be his servant; he will have a portion
from God, for he will be his Son; he will have a reversion, he will be sure
that his name is in the book of life; he will have pawns, the seals of the
Sacraments, nay, he will have a present possession; all that God has promised,
all that Christ has purchased, all that the holy Ghost has the stewardship
and dispensation of, he will have all in present, by the appropriation and
investiture of an actual and applying faith; a covetous person converted will
be spiritually covetous still.

So will a voluptuous man, who is turned to God, find plenty and deliciousnes
enough in him, to feed his soul, as with marrow, and with fatness, as David
expresses it; and so an angry and passionate man, will find zeal enough in the
house of God to eat him up.

All affections which are common to all men, and those to which in particular,
particular men have been adicted to, shall not only be justly employed upon
God, but also securely employed, because we cannot exceed, nor go too far in
employing them upon him. According to this Rule, Col. 1.
St. Paul, who had been so vehement a persecutor, had ever his thoughts
exercised upon that; and thereupon after his conversion, he fulfils the rest of
the sufferings of Christ in his flesh, he suffers most, he makes most mention
of his suffering of any of the Apostles.

And according to this Rule too, Solomon, whose disposition was amorous, and
excessive in the love of women, when he turned to God, he departed not utterly
from his old phrase and language, but having put a new, and a spiritual
tincture, and form and habit in all his thoughts, and words, he conveyes all
his loving approaches and applications to God, and all Gods gracious answers to
his amorous soul, into songs, and Epithalamians, and meditations upon
contracts, and marriages between God and his Church, and between God and his
soul; as we see so evidently in all his other writings, and particularly in
this text, I love them, etc.

August.
In which words is expressed all that belongs to love, all which, is to desire,
and to enjoy; for to desire without fruition, is a rage, and to enjoy without
desire is a stupidity: In the first alone we think of nothing, but that which
we then would have; and in the second alone, we are not for that, when we have
it; in the first, we are without it; in the second, we were as good we were,
for we have no pleasure in it; nothing then can give us satisfaction, but where
those two concur, amare and frui, to love and to enjoy.

In sensual love it is so; Quid erat quod me delectabat nisi amare et amari? I
take no joy in this world, but in loving, and in being beloved; in sensual love
it is so, but in sensual love, when we are come so far; there is no
satisfaction in that; the same Father confesses more of himself, then any
Commission, any oath would have put him to, Amatus sum, et perveni occulte ad
fruendum, I had all I desired, and I had it with that advantage of having it
secretly; but what got I by all that, Ut caederer virgis ardentibus ferreis,
zeli suspicionis et rixarum; nothing but to be scourged with burning iron rods,
rods of jealousy, of suspicion, and of quarrels; but in the love and enjoying
of this text, there is no room for Jealousy, nor suspicion, nor quarrelsome
complaining.

Devisio.
In this text then you may be pleased to consider these two things, Quid amare,
quid frui, what the affection of this love is, what is the blessedness of this
enjoying; but in the first of these, we must first consider the persons, who
are the lovers in this text; for there are persons that are incredible, though
they say they love, because they are accustomed to falsehood; and there are
persons which are unrequitable, though they be believed to love, because they
love not where, and as they should. When we have found the persons, in a second
consideration we shall look upon the affection it self, what is the love in
this text; and then after that, upon the bond, and union and condition of this
love, that it is mutual, I love them that love me; and having passed those
three branches of the first part, we shall in the second, which is enjoying,
consider first, that this enjoying, is expressed in the word finding; and then
that this finding requires two conditions, a seeking, and an early seeking, And
they that seek me early shall find me.

The Person that professes love in this place is wisdom her self, First part.
The Person.
as appears at the beginning of the Chapter; so that sapere et amare, to be
wise and to love, which perchance never met before nor since, are met in this
text: but whether this wisdom, so frequently mentioned in this book of
Proverbs, be sapientia creata or increat, whether it be the wisdom, or the root
of wisdom, Christ Jesus, has been diversely debated: the occasion grew in that
great Council of Nice, where the Catholic Fathers understood this wisdom, to
be intended of Christ himself, and then the Arrian heretics pressed some
places of this book, where such things seemed to them to be spoken of wisdom,
as could not be applyable to any but to a Creature; and that therefore if
Christ were this wisdom, Christ must necessarily be a Creature, and not God.

We will not dispute those things over again now, they are clearly enough, and
largely enough set down in that Council; but since there is nothing said of
wisdom in all this book, which has not been by good expositors applied to
Christ, much more may we presume the lover in this text, (though presented in
the name of wisdom) to be Christ himself, and so we do.

To show the constancy and durableness of this love, the lover is a he, that is
Christ; to show the vehemence and earnestness of it, the lover is a she, that
is wisdom, as it is often expressed in this Chapter, she cries, she utters
her voice; yea in one place of the Bible (and only in that one place I think)
where Moses would express an extraordinary, and vehement and passionate
indignation in God against his people, when as it is in that text, his wrath
was kindled, and grievously kindled, Number. 11.15.
there and only their does Moses attribute even to God himself the feminine
sex, and speaks to God in the original language, as if he should have called
him Deam Iratam, an angry she God; all that is good then, either in the love of
man or woman is in this love; for he is expressed in both sexes, man and woman;
and all that can be ill in the love of either sex, is purged away, for the man
is no other man then Christ Jesus, and the woman no other woman, then wisdom
her self, even the uncreated wisdom of God himself.

Now all this is but one person, the person that professes love; who is the
other, who is the beloved of Christ, is not so easily discerned: in the love
between persons in this world, and of this world, we are often deceived with
outward signs; we often mis-call and mis-judg civil respects, and mutual
courtesies; and a delight in one another conversation, and such other
indifferent things, as only malignity, and curiosity, and self-guiltiness,
makes to be misinterpretable, we often call these love; but neither amongst our
selves, much less between Christ and our selves, are these outward appearances
always signs of love.

This person then, this beloved soul, is not every one, to whom Christ sends a
loving message, or writs too; for his letters his Scriptures are directed to
all; not every one he wishes well to and swears that he does so, for so he does
to all; As I live (says the Lord) I would not the death of a Sinner; not every
one that he sends jewels, and presents to; for they are often snares to
corrupt, as well as arguments of love; not though he admit them to his table
and supper, for even there the Devil entered into Judas with a sop; not though
he receive them to a kiss, for even with that familarity Judas betrayed him;
not though he betroth himself as he did to the Jews, Osc. 2.14.
sponsabo te mihi in aeternum; not though he make jointures, in pacto salis, in
a covenant of salt, an everlasting covenant; not though he have communicated
his name to them, which is an act of marriage; for to how many has he said:
ego dixit Dii estis, I have said you are Gods; and yet they have been
reprobates; not all these outward things amount so far, as to make us discern
who is this beloved person; for himself says of the Israelites, to whom he had
made all these demonstrations of love, yet after, for their abominations,
devorc'd himself from them, I have forsaken mine house, Jer. 12.7.
I have left mine own heritage, I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into
the hands of her enemies. To conclude this person beloved of Christ, is only
that soul, that loves Christ; but that belongs to the third branch of this
first part, which is the mutual love: The Affection.
but first having found the person, we are to consider the affection it self,
the love of this text; it is an observation of Origens, that though these three
words, Amor, Dilectio, and Charitas, love, and affection, and good will, be all
of one signification in the sctiptures, yet says he, wheresoever there is
danger of representing to the fancy a lascivious and carnal love, the scripture
forbears the word love, and uses either affection, or good will; and where
there is no such danger, the scripture comes directly to this word love, of
which Origens examples are, that when Isaac bent his affections upon Rebecca,
and Jacob upon Rachel, in both places it is dilexit, and not amavit; Cant 5.8.
and when it is said in the Cant. I charge you Daughters of Jerusalem to tell
my well-beloved, it is not to tell him that she was in love, but to tell him,
quod vulneratae charitatis sum; that I am wounded with an affection and good
will toward him; but in this book of Pro. in all the passages between Christ
and the beloved soul, there is evermore a free use of this word, Amor, love;
because it is even in the first apprehension, a pure, a chaste, and an undefiled
love, Eloquia Dominis casta, says David, All the words of the Lord, and all
their words that love the Lord, all discourses, all that is spoken to or from
the soul, is all full of chaste love, and of the love of chastity.

Now though this love of Christ to our souls be too large to shut up or
comprehend in any definition, yet if we content our selves with the definition
of the Schools, Amare est velle alicui quod bonum est, love is nothing but a
desire, that they whom we love should be happy: we may easily discern the
advantage and profit which we have by this love in the Text, when he that
wishes us this good, by loving us, is author of all good himself, and may give
us as much as pleases him, without impairing his own infinite treasure; He
loves us as his ancient inheritance, as the first amongst his creatures in the
creation of the world, which he created for us: He loves us more as his
purchase, whom he has bought with his blood; for even man takes most pleasure
in things of his own getting; But he loves us most for our improvement, when by
his ploughing up of our hearts, and the dew of his grace, and the seed of his
word, we come to give grea^^r cent, in the fruit of sanctification than before.
And since he loves ^s thus, and that in him, this love is velle bonum, a desire
that his beloved should be happy, what soul amongst us shall doubt, that when
God has such an abundant, and infinite treasure, as the merit and passion of
Christ Jesus, sufficient to save millions of worlds, and yet, many millions in
this world (all the heathen excluded from any interest therein) when God has a
kingdom so large, as that nothing limits it, and yet he has banished many
natural subjects thereof, even those legions of Angels which were created in
it, and are fallen from it; what soul amongst us shall doubt, but that he that
has thus much, and loves thus much, will not deny her a portion in the blood
of Christ or a room in the kingdom of heaven? No soul can doubt it except it
have been a witness to it self, and be so still, that it love not Christ Jesus,
for that is a condition necessary: And that is the third branch to which we are
come now in our order; that this love be mutual, I love them, etc.

If any man loves not our Lord Jesus, let him be accursed, Mutual.
says the Apostle; Now the first part of this curse is upon the indisposition
to love; he that loves not at all is first accursed. That stupid
inconsideration, which passes on drowsilie, and negligently upon Gods
creatures, that sullen indifferency in ones disposition, to love one thing no
more than another, not to value, not to choose, not to prefer, that stoniness,
that in humanity, not to be affected, not to be entendred, to wear those things
which God has made objects and subjects of affections; that which St. Paul
places in the bottom, and lees, Romans 1.30.
and dregs of all the sins of the Jews, to be without natural affections, this
distemper, this ill complexion, this ill nature of the soul, is under the first
part of this curse, if any man love not; for he that loves not, knows not God,
for God is love.

But this curse determins not upon that, neither is it principally directed
upon that, not loving; for as we say in the schools, Amor est primus actus
voluntatis, the first thing that the will of man does, is to affect, to choose,
to love something; and it is scarce possible to find any man's will so idle, so
barren, as that it has produced no act at all; and therefore the first act
being love, scarce any man can be found, that does not love something: But the
curses extends, yea is principally intended upon him that loves not Christ
Jesus; though he love the creature, and orderly enough yea; though he love God,
as a great and incomprehensible power, yet if he love not Christ Jesus, if he
acknowledge not, that all that passes between God and him, is in, and for Christ
Jesus, let him be accursed, for all his love.

Now there are but two that can be loved, God and the Creature: and of the
creatures, that must necessarily be best loved, which is nearest us, which we
understand best and reflect most upon, and that is our selves; for, for the love
of other creatures, it is but a secondary love; if we l^^e God, we love them
for his sake; if we love our selves, we love them for our sakes: Now to love
our selves is only allowable, only proper to God himself; for this love is a
desire, that all honor, and praise, and glory should be attributed to ones
self, and it can be only proper to God to desire that: To love our selves then,
is the greatest treason we can commit against God; and all love of the
creatures, determines in the love of our selves: for though sometimes we may
say, that we love them better than our selves; and though we give so good (that
is indeed, so ill testimony) that we do so, that we neglect our selves, both
our religion and our discretion for their sakes, whom we pretend to love, yet
all this is but a secondary love, and with relation still to our selves and our
own contentments: for is this love which we bear to other creatures, within
that definition of love, Velle bonum amato, to wish that which we love happy;
does any ambitious man love honor or office therefore, because he thinks that
title, or that place should receive a dignity by his having it, or an
excellency by his executing it? does any covetous man love a house or horse
therefore, because he thinks that house or horse should be happy in such a
Master or such Rider? does any licentious man covet or solicit a woman
therefore, because he thinks it a happiness to her, to have such a servant? No,
it is only himself that is within the difinition, vult bonum sibi, he wishes
well (as he mistakes it) to himself, and he is content, that the slavery, and
dishonor, and ruin of others should contribute to make up his imaginary
happiness.

August.
O dementiam nescientem amare homines humaniter! what a perverse madness is it,
to love a creature and not as a creature, that is, with all the adjuncts, and
circumstances, and qualities of a creature, of which the principal is that,
that love raise us to the contemplation of the Creator; for if it be so, we may
love our selves, as we are the Images of God; and so we may love other men, as
they are the Images of us, and our nature; yea, as they are members of the same
body; for omnes homines una humanitas, all men make up but one mankind, and so
we love other creatures, as we all meet in our Creator, in whom Princes and
Subjects, Angels and men, and worms are fellow servants.

Si male amaveris tunc odisti? If thou have loved thy self, August.
or any body else principally? or so, that when thou do any act of love, thou
can not say to thine own conscience, I do this for Gods sake, and for his
glory; if thou have loved so, thou have hated thy self, and him whom thou have
loved, and God whom thou should love.

Si bone oderis, says the same Father, If thou have hated as thou should
hate, if thou have hated thine own internal tentations, and the outward
solicitations of others, Amasti, then thou have expressed a manifold act of
love, of love to thy God, and love to his Image, thy self, and love to thine
Image, that man whom thy virtue and thy example has declined, and kept from
offending his, and thy God.

And as this affection, love, does belong to God principally, that is, rather
then to any thing else, so does it also principally, another way, that is,
rather then any affection else; for, the fear of God is the beginning of
wisdom, but the love of God is the consummation, that is, the marriage, and
union of thy soul, and thy Savior.

But can we love God when we will? do we not find, that in the love of some
other things, or some courses of life, of some ways in our actions, and of
some particular persons, that we would fain love them, and cannot? when we can
object nothing against it, when we can multiply arguments, why we should love
them, yet we cannot: but it is not so toward God; every man may love him, that
will; but can every man have this will, this desire? certainly we cannot begin
this love; except God love us first, we cannot love him; but God does love us
all so well, from the beginning, as that every man may see the fault was in the
perverseness of his own will, that he did not love God better. If we look for
the root of this love, it is in the Father; for, though the death of Christ be
toward us, as a root, as a cause of our love, and of the acceptableness of it,
yet, Augst.
Meritum Christi est affectum amoris Dei erga nos, the death of Christ was but
an effect of the love of God toward us, So God loved the world that he gave
his Son: if he had not loved us first, we had never had his Son; here is the
root then, the love of the Father, and the tree, the merit of the Son; except
there be fruit too, love in us, to them again, both root and tree will wither
in us, howsoever they grew in God. I have loved thee with an everlasting love,
Jer. 31.3.
(says God) therefore with mercy I have drawn thee, if therefore we do not
perceive, that we are drawn to lov again by this lov, it is not an everlasting
lov, that shines upon us

All the sunshine, all the glory of this life, though all these be testimonies
of Gods love to us, yet all these bring but a winters day, a short day, and a
cold day, and a dark day, for except we love too, God does not love with an
everlasting love: God will not suffer his love to be idle, and since it profits
him nothing, if it profits us nothing neither, Ambrose.
he will withdraw it; Amor Dei ut lumen ignis, ut splendour solis, ut odor
lucis, non praebenti proficit, sed utenti, The sun has no benefit by his own
light, nor the fire by his own heat, nor a perfume by the sweetness thereof,
but only they who make their use, and enjoy this heat and fragrancy; And this
brings us to our other part, to pass from loving to enjoying.

2 Part.
Tulerunt Dominum meum, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they
have laid him; this was one strain of Mary Magdalens lamentation, when she
found not her Savior in the monument: It is a lamentable case to be fain to
cry so, Tulerunt, They have taken, other men have taken away Christ, by a dark
and corrupt education, which was the state of our Fathers to the Roman
captivity. But when the abjecerunt Dominum, which is so often complained of by
God in the Prophets, is pronounced against thee, when thou have had Christ
offered to thee, by the motions of his grace, and sealed to thee by his
Sacraments, and yet wilt cast him so far from thee, that thou know not where
to find him, when thou have poured him out at thine eyes in profane and
counterfeit tears, which should be thy souls rebaptization for thy sins, when
thou have blown him away in corrupt and ill intended sighs, which should be
gemitus columbae, the voice of the Turtle, to sound thy peace and
reconciliation with thy God; yea when thou have spit him out of thy mouth in
execrable and blaphemous oaths; when thou have not only cast him so far, as
that thou know not where to find him, but have made so ordinary and so
indifferent a thing of sin, as thou know not when thou did lose him, no
nor do not remember that ever thou had him; no, nor do not know that
there is any such man, as Dominus tuus, a Jesus, that is, thy Lord. The
Tulerunt is dangerous, when others hide Christ from thee; but the abjecerunt is
desperate, when thou thy self do cast him away.

To lose Christ may befall the most righteous man that is; but then he knows
where he left him; he knows at what sin he lost his way, and where to seek it
again; even Christ's imagined Father and his true mother, Joseph and Mary, lost
him, and lost him in the holy City, at Jerusalem; they lost him and knew it
not, they lost him and went a days journey without him, and thought him to be
in the company; but as soon as they deprehended their error, they sought and
they found him, when as his mother told him, his father and she had sought with
a heavy heart: Alas we may lose him at Jerusalem, even in his own house, even
at this present, whilst we pretend to do him service; we may lose him, by
suffering our though ^s to look back with pleasure upon the sins which we have
committed, or to look forward with greedines upon some sin that is now in our
purpose and prosecution; we may lose him at Jerusalem, how much more, if our
dwelling be a Rome of Superstition and Idolatry, or if it be a Babylon in
confusion, and mingling God and the world together, or if it be a Sodom, a
wanton and intemperate misuse of Gods benefits to us, we may think him in the
company when he is not, we may mistake his house, we may take a Conventicle for
a Church; we may mistake his apparel, that is, the outward form of his
worship; we may mistake the person, that is, associate our selves to such as
are no members of his body: But if we do not return to our diligence to seek
him, and seek him, and seek him with a heavy heart, though we begun with a
Tulerunt, other men, other tentations took him away, yet we end in an
abjecerunt, we our selves cast him away, since we have been told where to find
him, and have not sought him: And let no man be afraid to seek or find him for
fear of the loss of good company; Religion is no sullen thing, it is not a
melancholy, there is not so sociable a thing as the love of Christ Jesus.

It was the first word which he who first found Christ of all the Apostles,
Saint Andrew, is noted to have said, Invenimus Messiam, we have found the
Messiah, and it is the first act that he is noted to have done, after he had
found him, to seek his brother Peter, Jo. 1.34.
and duxit ad Jesum, so communicable a thing is the love of Jesus, when we have
found him.

But when are we likeliest to find him? It is said by Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.11.
of the words and precepts of God. They are not hid from thee, neither are far
off, Not in heaven that thou should say; Who shall go up to heaven for us to
bring them down? nor beyond the Seas, that thou should go over the Sea for
them; but the word is very near thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; and
so near thee is Christ Jesus, or thou shall never find him; Thou must not so
think him in heaven, as that thou can not have immediate access to him
without intercession of others, nor so beyond Sea, as to seek him in a foreign
Church, either where the Church is but an Antiquaries Cabinet, full of rags and
fragments of antiquity, but nothing fit for that use for which it was first
made, or where it is so new a built house with bare walls, that it is yet
unfurnished of such Ceremonies as should make it comely and reverend; Christ is
at home with thee, he is at home within thee, and there is the nearest way to
find him.

It is true, that Christ in the beginning of this chapter, shadowed under the
name of wisdom, when he discovers where he may be found, speaks in the person
of humane wisdom as well as divine, Does not wisdom cry, and understanding
utter her voice? where- those two words, Wisdom and Understanding, signify
Sapientiam, and Prudentiam; That wisdom whose object is God, and that which
concerns our conversation in this world; for Christ has not taken so narrow a
dwelling, as that he may be found but one way, or in one profession; for in all
professions, in all Nations, in all vocations, when all our actions in our
several courses are directed principally upon his glory, Christ is eminent,
and may easily be found. To that purpose in that place, Christ, in the person
of wisdom, offers himself to be found in the tops of high places, and in the
gates of Cities; to show that this Christ, and this wisdom which must save our
Souls, is not confined to Cloisters and Monasteries, and speculative men only,
but is all so evidently and eminently to be found in the Courts of religious
Princes, in the tops of high places, and in the Courts of Justice (in the gates
of the City) Both these kinds of Courts may have more directions from him then
other places; but yet in these places he is also gloriously and conspicuously
to be found; for wheresoever he is, he cries aloud, as the Text says there,
and he utters his voice. Now Temptations to sin, are all but whisperings, and
we are afraid that a husband, that a father, that a competitor, that a rival,
a pretender, at least the Magistrate may hear of it: Tentations to sin are all
but whisperings; private Conventicles and clandestine worshipping of God in a
forbidden manner, in corners, are all but whisperings; It is not the voice of
Christ, except thou hear him cry aloud, and utter his voice, so as thou may
confidently do whatsoever he commands thee, in the eye of all the world; he is
every where to be found, he calls upon thee every where, but yet there belongs
a diligence on thy part, thou must seek him.

Quaerere.
Esaias is hold (says St. Paul) and says, I was found of them that sought me
not, when that Prophet derives the love of God to ^he Gentiles, who could seek
God no where but in the book of Creatures, and were destitute of all other
lights to seek him by, and yet God was found by them; Esaias is bold (cries the
Apostle) that is, It was a great degree of confidence in Esaias, to say; That
God was found of them that sought him not: Romans 10.20.
It was a boldness and confidence, which no particular man may have; that
Christ will be found, except he be sought; he gives us light to seek him by,
but he is not found till we have sought him; It is true that in that
Commandment of his, Primum quaerite Regnum Dei; First seek the Kingdom of God;
the primum is not to prevent God, that we should seek it before he shows it,
that is impossible; without the light of Grace we dwell in darkness, and in the
shadow of death; but the primum is; That we should seek it before we seek any
thing else, that when the Sun of Grace is risen to us, the first thing that we
do be to seek Christ Jesus: Amos 5.4.
Querite me and vivetis, Seek me and ye shall live, why? we were alive before,
else we could not seek him, but it is a promise of another life, of an eternal
life, if we seek him, and seek him early, which is our last consideration.

The word there used for early, signifies properly Auroram, Early.
the Morning, and is usually transferred in Scriptures to any beginning of any
action; so in particular, Evil shall come upon thee, Esaias 47.11.
and thou shall not know, Shakrah, the morning, the beginning of it; And
therefore this Text is elegantly translated by one, Aurorantes ad me, They that
have their break of day toward me, they that send forth their first morning
beams toward me, their first thoughts they shall be sure to find me. St.
Hierom expresses this early diligence, required in us, well in his translation,
qui mane vigilaverint; They that wake betimes in the morning shall find me;
but the Chaldee Paraphrase better, qui mane consurgunt, they that rise betimes
in the morning shall find me; for which of us does not know that we waked long
ago, that we saw day and had heretofore some motions to find Christ Jesus: But
though we were awake, we have kept our bed still, we have continued still in
our former sins; so that there is more to be done then waking: we see the
Spouse her self says, In my bed, by night, Cant. 3.1.
I sought him whom my Soul loved, but I found him not; Christ may be sought in
the bed, and missed; other thoughts may exclude him; and he may be sought
there and found, we may have good meditations there; and Christ may be nearer
us when we are asleep in our beds, then when when we are awake; But howsoever
the bed is not his ordinary station; he may be, and he says he will be, at the
making of the bed of the sick, but not at the marriage of the bed of the
wanton, and licentious.

To make haste, the circumstance only required here, is that he be sought
early; and to invite thee to it, consider how early he sought thee; It is a
great mercy that he stays so long for thee; It was more to seek thee so early:
Do thou not feel that he seeks thee now, in offering his love and desiring
thine? Can not thou remember that he sought thee yesterday, that is, that
some tentations besieged thee then, and he sought thee out by his Grace, and
preserved thee? and has he not sought thee so, so early, as from the beginning
of thy life? nay, do thou not remember that after thou had committed that
sin, he sought thee by imprinting some remorse, some apprehension of his
judgments, and so miro and divino modo, and quando te oderat diligebat, Grego.
by a miraculous and powerful working of his Spirit, he threatened thee, when he
comforted thee, he loved thee when he chid thee, he sought thee wen he drove
thee from him; He has sought thee amongst the infinite numbers of false and
fashionall Christians, that he might bring thee out from the hypocrite, to
serve him in earnest, and in holiness, and in righteousness; he sought thee
before that amongst the Herd of the nations and Gentiles, who had no Church to
bring thee into his enclosures and pastures, his visible Church, and to feed
thee with his word and sacraments; he sought thee before that, in the catalogue
of all his Creatures, where he might have left thee a stone, or a plant, or a
beast; and then he gave thee an immortal Soul, capable of all his future
blessings; yea, before this he sought thee, when thou wast no where, nothing,
he brought thee then, the greatest step of all, from being nothing, to be a
Creature; how early did he seek thee, when he sought thee in Adam's confused
loins, and out of that leavened and sour loaf in which we were all kneaded
up, out of that massa damnata, that refuse and condemnable lump of dough, he
sought and severed out that grain which thou should be; yea millions of
millions of generations before all this he sought thee in his own eternal
Decree; And in that first Scripture of his, which is as old as himself, in the
book of life he wrote thy name in the blood of that Lamb which was slain for
thee, not only from the beginning of this world, but from the writing of that
eternal Decree of thy Salvation. Thus early had he sought thee in the Church
amongst hypocrites; out of the Church amongst the Heathen; In his Creatures
amongst creatures of an ignoble nature, and in the first vacuity, when thou
wast nothing he sought thee so early as in Adam, so early as in the book of
life, and when will thou think it a fit time to seek him.

Prove. 1.28.
There is an earliness which will not serve thy turn, when afflictions, and
anguish, shall come upon thee; they shall seek me early and shall not find me,
early in respect of the punishment, at the beginning of that; but this is late
in respect of thy fault, or of thine age, when thou art grown old, in the
custom of sin; for thus we may misuse this early, and make it serve all ill
uses, if we will say we will leave Covetousness early, that is, as soon as we
are rich enough; Incontinence early, that is, as soon as we are old or sick;
Ambition early, that is, as soon as we have overthrown and crushed our enemies
irrecoverably; for thus, we shall by this habit carry on this early to our late
and last hour, and say we will repent early, that is, as soon as the bell
begins to toll for us.

It is good for a man that he bear his yoke in his youth, that he seek Christ
early, for even God himself, when he had given over his People to be afflicted
by the Chaldeans, yet complains of the Chaldeans, Esaias 46.6.
that they laid heavy loads upon old men; though this yoke of this amorous
seeking of Christ be a light yoke, yet it is too heavy for an old man, that
has never used himself in all his life to bear it; even this spiritual love
will not suit well with an old man, if he never began before, if he never loved
Christ in his youth, even this love will be an unweildy thing in his age.

Yet if we have omitted our first early, our youth, there is one early left for
us; this minute; seek Christ early, now, now, as soon as his Spirit begins to
shine upon your hearts. Now as soon as you begin your day of Regeneration, seek
him the first minute of this day, for you know not whether this day shall have
two minutes or no, that is, whether his Spirit, that descends upon you now,
will tarry and rest upon you or not, as it did upon Christ at his baptism.

Therefore shall every one that is godly make his Prayer unto thee O God, in a
time when thou may be found: Psalm. 32.6.
we acknowledge this to be that time, and we come to thee now early, with the
confession of thy servant Augustine, sero te amavi pulchritudo tam antiqua, tam
nova; O glorious beauty, infinitely reverend, infinitely fresh and young, we
come late to thy love, if we consider the past days of our lives, but early if
thou be pleased to reckon with us from this hour of the shining of thy
grace upon us; and therefore O God, as thou have brought us safely to the
beginning of this day, as thou have not given us over to a final perishing in
the works of night and darkness, as thou ^ast brought us to the beginning of
this day of grace, so defend us in the same with thy mighty power, and grant
that this day, this day of thy visitation, we fall into no sin, neither run
into any kind of danger, no such sin, no such danger as may separate us from
thee, or frustrate us of our hopes in that eternal kingdom which thy Son our
Savior Christ Jesus has purchased for us, with the inestimable price of his
incorruptible blood. To whom with the Father, etc.

A SERMON of Valediction at my going into Germany, at Loncolns-Inne, April. 18.
1619. SERMON XIX.
Ecclesiast. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.


WE may consider two great virtues, one for the society of this life,
Thankfulness, and the other for attaining the next life, Repentance; as the two
precious Mettles, Silver and Gold: Of Silver (of the virtue of thankfulness)
there are whole Mines, books written by Philosophers, and a man may grow rich
in that mettle, Sermon. 19.
in that virtue, by digging in that Mine, in the Precepts of moral men; of this
Gold (this virtue of Repentance) there is no Mine in the Earth; in the books of
Philosophers, no doctrine of Repentance; this Gold is for the most part in the
washes; this Repentance in matters of tribulation; but God directs thee to it
in this Text, before thou come to those waters of Tribulation, remember now thy
Creator before those evil days come, and then thou will repent the not
remembering him till now. Divisio.
Here then the Holy Ghost takes the nearest way to bring a man to God, by
awaking his memory; for, for the understanding, that requires long and clear
instruction; and the will requires an instructed understanding before, and is
in it self the blindest and boldest faculty; but if the memory do but fasten
upon any of those things which God has done for us, it is the nearest way to
him. Remember therefore, and remember now, though the Memory be placed in the
hindermast part of the brain, defer not thou thy remembering to the hindermost
part of thy life, but do that now in die, in the day, whilst thou have light,
now in diebus, in the days, whilst God presents thee many lights, many means;
and in diebus juventatis, in the days of thy youth, of strength, whilst thou
art able to do that which thou purposest to thy self; And as the word imports,
Bechucocheica, in diebus Electionum tuarum, in the days of thy choice, whilst
thou art able to make thy choice, whilst the Grace of God shines so brightly
upon thee, as that thou may choose the way, and so powerfully upon thee, as
that thou may walk in that way. Now, in this day, and in these days
Remember first the Creator, That all these things which thou laborest for, and
delightest in, were created, made of nothing; and therefore thy memory looks not
far enough back, if it stick only upon the Creature, and reach not to the
Creator, Remember thy Creator, and remember thy Creator; and in that, first
that he made thee, and then what he made thee; He made thee of nothing, but of
that nothing he has made thee such a thing as cannot return to nothing, but
must remain for ever; whether happy or miserable, that depends upon thy
Remembering thy Creator now in the days of thy youth.

Momento. Genesis 8.1.
First remember; which word is often used in the Scripture for considering and
taking care: for, God remembered Noah and every beast with him in the Ark; as
the word which is contrary to that, forgetting is also for the affection
contrary to it, Esaias. 48.15.
it is neglecting, Can a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the
son of her womb? But here we take not remembering so largly, but restrain it to
the exercise of that one faculty, the memory; for it is Stomachus animae. The
memory, says St. Bernard, is the stomach of the soul, it receives and digests,
and turns into good blood, all the benefits formerly exhibited to us in
particular, and exhibited to the whole Church of God: present that which
belongs to the understanding, to that faculty, and the understanding is not
presently settled in it; present any of the prophecies made in the captivity,
and a Jews understanding takes them for deliverances from Babylon, and a
Christians understanding takes them for deliverances from sin and death, by the
Messiah Christ Jesus; present any of the prophecies of the Revelation
concerning Antichrist, and a Papist will understand it of a single, and
momentane, and transitory man, that must last but three year and a half; and a
Protestant may understand it of a succession of men, that have lasted so 1000.
years already: present but the name of Bishop or of elder, out of the Acts of
the Apostle, or their Epistles, and other men will take it for a name of
equality, and parity, and we for a name and office of distinction in the
Hierarchy of Gods Church. Thus it is in the understanding that is often
perplexed; consider the other faculty, the will of man, by those bitternesses
which have passed between the Jesuits and the Dominicans, (amongst other things
belonging to the will) whether the same proportion of grace, offered to men
alike disposed, must necessarily work alike upon both their wills? And amongst
persons nearer to us, whether that proportion of grace, which does convert a
man, might not have been resisted by perverseness of his will? By all these
difficulties we way see, how untractable, and untameable a faculty the will of
man is. But come not with matter of law, but matter of fact, Let God make his
wonderful works to be had in remembrance: Psalm. 111.4.
present the history of Gods protection of his children, from the beginning, in
the ark, in both captivities, in infinite dangers; present this to the memory,
and howsoever the understanding be beclouded, or the will perverted, yet both
Jew and Christian, Papist and Protestant, Puritan and Protestant, are affected
with a thankful acknowledgment of his former mercies and benefits, this issue
of that faculty of their memory is alike in them all: And therefore God in
giving the law, works upon no other faculty but this, Exodus 20.
I am the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt; He only
presents to their memory what he had done for them. And so in delivering the
Gospel in one principal seal thereof, the sacrament of his body, he recommended
it only to their memory, Do this in remembrance of me. This is the faculty that
God desires to work upon; And therefore if thine understanding cannot reconcile
differences in all Churches, if thy will cannot submit it self to the
ordinances of thine own Church, go to thine own memory; for as St. Bernard
calls that the stomach of the soul, we may be bold to call it the Gallery of
the soul, hanged with so many, and so lively pictures of the goodness and
mercies of thy God to thee, as that every one of them shall be a catachism to
thee, to instruct thee in all thy duties to him for those mercies: And as a
well made, and well placed picture, looks always upon him that looks upon it;
so shall thy God look upon thee, whose memory is thus contemplating him, and
shine upon thine understanding, and rectify thy will too. If thy memory cannot
comprehend his mercy at large showed to his whole Church, (as it is almost an
incomprehensible thing, that in so few years he made us of the Reformation,
equal even in number to our adversaries of the Roman Church,) If thy memory
have not held that picture of our general deliverance from the Navy; (if that
mercy be written in the water and in the sands, where it was performed, and not
in thy heart) if thou remember not our deliverance from that artificial Hell,
the Vault, (in which, though his instruments failed of their plot, they did not
blow us up; yet the Devil goes forward with his plot, if ever he can blow out;
if he can get that deliverance to be forgotten.) If these be too large pictures
for thy gallery, for thy memory, yet every man has a pocket picture about him,
Emanuel, a bosom book, and if he will turn over but one leaf, and remember
what God has done for him even since yesterday, he shall find even by that
little branch a navigable river, to sail into that great and endless Sea of
Gods mercies toward him, from the beginning of his being.

Nunc.
Do but remember, but remember now: Of his own will begat he us with the word of
truth, Jam. 1.18.
that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures: That as we consecrate
all his creatures to him, in a sober, and religious use of them, so as the
first fruits of all, we should principally consecrate our selves to his service
betimes. Now there were three payments of first fruits appointed by God to the
Jews: The first was, Primitiae Spicarum, of their Ears of Corn, and this was
early about Easter; The second was Primitiae panum, of Loaves of Bread, after
their corn was converted to that use; and this, though it were not so soon, yet
it was early too, about Whitsontide; The third was Primitiae frugum, of all
their Fruits and Revenues; but this was very late in Autumn, at the fall of the
leaf, in the end of the year. The two first of these, which were offered early,
were offered partly to God, and partly to Man, to the Priest; but in the last,
which came late, God had no part: He had his part in the corn, and in the
loaves, but none in the latter fruits. Offer thy self to God; first, as
Primitias spicarum, (whether thou glean in the world, or bind up whole sheaves,
whether thy increase be by little and little, or apace;) And offer thy self, as
primitias panum, when thou have kneaded up riches, and honor, and favor in a
settled and established fortune) offer at thy Easter, whenever thou have any
resurrection, any sense of raising thy soul from the shadow of death; offer at
thy Pentecost, when the holy Ghost visits thee, and descends upon thee in a
fiery tongue, and melts thy bowels by the power of his word; for if thou defer
thy offering til thy fall, til thy winter, til thy death, howsoever they may be
thy first fruits, because they be the first that ever thou gave yet they are
such, as are not acceptable to God; God has no portion in them, if they be not
offered til then; offer thy self now; for that is an easy request; yea offer to
thy self now, that is more easy; Viximus mundo; vivamus reliquum nobis ipsis;
Thus long we have served the world; Basil.
let us serve our selves the rest of our time, that is, the best part of our
selves, our souls, Expectas ut febris te vocet ad poenitentiam? Had thou
rather a sickness should bring thee to God, than a sermon? Idem.
had thou rather be beholden to a Physician for thy salvation, than to a
Preacher? thy business is to remember; stay not for thy last sickness, which
may be a Lethargy in which thou may forget thine own name, and his that gave
thee the name of a Christian, Christ Jesus himself: thy business is to
remember, and thy time is now; stay not till that Angel come which shall say
and swear, Apo. 10 6.
that time shall be no more.

Remember then, and remember now; In Die, in the day; In Die. Ps. 20.10.
The Lord will hear us In die qua invocaverimus, in the day that we shall call
upon him; and in quacunque dei, in what day soever we call, Ps. 137.4.
and in quacunque die velociter exaudiet, as soon as we call in any day. Psa.
101.1
But all this is Opus diei, a work for the day; for in the night, in our last
night, those thoughts that fall upon us, they are rather dreams, then true
remembrings; we do rather dream that we repent, then repent indeed, upon our
deathbed. To him that travails by night a bush seems a tree, and a tree seems
a man, and a man a spirit; nothing has the true shape to him; to him that
repents by night, on his deathbed, neither his own sins, nor the mercies of
God have their true proportion. Fool, says Christ, this night they will fetch
away thy soul; but he neither tells him, who they be that shall fetch it, nor
whether they shall carry it; he has no light but lightnings; a sudden flash of
horror first, and then he goes into fire without light. Numquid Deus nobis
ignem pacavit? non, sed Diabolo, et Angelis: Chrysosto.
did God ordain hell fire for us? no, but for the Devil, and his Angels. And
yet we that are vessels so broken, as that there is not a sheard left, to fetch
water at the pit, that is, no means in our selves, Esa. 30.
to derive one drop of Christ's blood upon us, nor to wring out one tear of true
repentance from us, have plunged our selves into this everlasting, and this
dark fire, which was not prepared for us: A wretched covetousness, to be
intruders upon the Devil; a wretched ambition, to be usurpers upon damnation.
God did not make the fire for us; but much less did he make us for that fire;
that is, make us to damn us. But now the Judgment is given, Ite maledicti, go
ye accursed; but yet this is the way of Gods justice, and his proceeding, that
his Judgments are not always executed, though they be given. The Judgments and
Sentences of Medes and Persians are irrevocable, but the Judgments and
Sentences of God, if they be given, if they be published, they are not
executed. The Ninevites had perished, if the sentence of their destruction had
not been given; and the sentence preserved them; so even in this cloud of Ite
maledicti, go ye accursed, we may see the day break, and discern beams of
saving light, even in this Judgment of eternal darkness; if the contemplation
of his Judgment brings us to remember him in that day, in the light and
apprehension of his anger and correction.

In Diebus.
For this circumstance is enlarged; it is not in die, but in diebus, not in one,
but in many days; for God affords us many days, many lights to see and
remember him by. This remembrance of God is our regeneration, by which we are
new creatures; and therefore we may consider as many days in it, as in the
first creation. The first day was the making of light; and our first day is the
knowledge of him, who says of himself, ego sum lux mundi, I am the light of the
world, Joh. 1.
and of whom St. John testifies, Erat lux vera, he was the true light, that
lights every man into the world. This is then our first day the true passion
of Christ Jesus. God made light first, that the other creatures might be seen;
Ambro.
Frustra essent si non viderentur, It had been to no purpose to have made
creatures, if there had been no light to manifest them. Our first day is the
light and love of the Gospel; for the noblest creatures of Princes, (that is,
the noblest actions of Princes, war, and peace, and treaties) frustra sunt,
they are good for nothing, they are nothing, if they be not showed and tried by
this light, by the love and preservation of the Gospel of Christ Jesus: God
made light first, that his other works might appear, and he made light first,
that himself (for our example) might do all his other works in the light: that
we also, as we had that light shed upon us in our baptism, so we might make all
our future actions justifiable by that light, and not Erubescere Evangelium,
not be ashamed of being too jealous in this profession of his truth. Then God
saw that the light was good: the seeing implies a consideration; that so a
religion be not accepted blindly, nor implicitly; and the seeing it to be good
implies an election of that religion, which is simply good in it self, and not
good by reason of advantage, or convenience, or other collateral and
by-respects. And when God had seen the light, and seen that it was good, then
he severed light from darkness; and he severed them, non tanquam duo positiva,
not as as two essential, and positive, and equal things; not so, as that a
brighter and a darker religion, (a good and a bad) should both have a being
together, but tanquam positivum et primitivum, light and darkness are
primitive, and positive, and figure this rather, that a true religion should be
established, and continue, and darkness utterly removed; and then, and not till
then, (till this was done, light severed from darkness) there was a day; And
since God has given us this day, the brightness of his Gospel, that this light
is first presented, that is, all great actions begun with this consideration of
the Gospel; since all other things are made by this light, that is, all have
relation to the continuance of the Gospel, since God has given us such a head,
as is sharp-sighted in seeing the several lights, wise in discerning the true
light, powerful in resisting foreign darkness; since God has given us this
day, qui non humiliabit animam suam in die hac, Sermon. 20.
as Moses speaks of the days of Gods institution, he that will not remember
God now in this day, is impious to him; and unthankful to that great instrument
of his, by whom this day spring from an high has visited us.

To make shorter days of the rest, Levit. 23.
(for we must pass through all the six days in a few minutes) God in the second
day made the firmament to divide between the waters above, and the waters
below; and this firmament in us, is terminus cognoscibilium, the limits of
those things which God has given man means and faculties to conceive, and
understand: he has limited our eyes with a firmament beset with stars, our
eyes can see no farther: he has limited our understanding in matters of
religion with a starry firmament too; that is, with the knowledge of those
things, quae ubique, quae semper, which those stars which he has kindled in
his Church, the Fathers and Doctors, have ever from the beginning proposed as
things necessary to be explicitly believed, for the salvation of our souls;
for the eternal decrees of God, and his unreveal'd mysteries, and the
inextricable perplexities of the School, they are waters above the firmament:
here Paul plants, and here Apollo waters; here God raises up men to convey to
us the dew of his grace, by waters under the firmament; by visible sacraments,
and by the word so preached, and so interpreted, as it has been constantly,
and unanimously from the beginning of the Church. And therefore this second day
is perfited in the third, in the congregentur aquae, let the waters be gathered
together; God has gathered all the waters, all the waters of life in one
place; that is, all the doctrine necessary for the life to come, into his
Church: And then producet terra, here in this world are produced to us all
herbs and fruits, all that is necessary for the soul to feed upon. And in this
third days work God repeats here that testimony, videt quod bonum, he saw that
it was good; good, that here should be a gathering of waters in one place, that
is, no doctrine received that had not been taught in the Church; and videt quod
bonum, he saw it was good, that all herbs and trees should be produced that
bore seed; all doctrines that were to be proseminated and propagated, and to be
continued to the end, should be taught in the Church: but for doctrines which
were but to vent the passion of vehement men, or to serve the turns of great
men for a time, which were not seminal doctrines, doctrines that bore seed, and
were to last from the beginning to the end; for these interlineary doctrines,
and marginal, which were no part of the first text, here is no testimony that
God sees that they are good. And, In diebus istis, if in these two days, the
day when God makes thee a firmament, shows thee what thou art, to limit thine
understanding and thy faith upon, and the day where God makes thee a sea, a
collection of the waters, (shows thee where these necessary things must be
taught in the Church) if in those days thou will not remember thy Creator, it
is an irrecoverable Lethargy.

In the fourth days work, let the making of the Sun to rule the day be the
testimony of Gods love to thee, in the sunshine of temporal prosperity, and
the making of the Moon to shine by night, be the refreshing of his comfortable
promises in the darkness of adversity; and then remember that he can make thy
sun to set at noon, he can blow out thy taper of prosperity when it burns
brightest, Amos.
and he can turn the Moon into blood, Act. 2.20.
he can make all the promises of the Gospel, which should comfort thee in
adversity, turn into despair and obduration. Let the first days work, which
was the creation Omnium reptibilium, and omnium volatilium, of all creeping
things, and of all flying things, produced out of water, signify and denote to
thee, either thy humble devotion, in which thou say of thy self to God,
vermis ege et non homo, I am a worm and no man; or let it be the raising of thy
soul in that, pennas columbae dedisti, that God has given thee the wings of a
dove to fly to the wilderness, in a retiring from, or a resisting of tentations
of this world; remember still that God can suffer even thy humility to stray,
and degenerate into an uncomly dejection and stupidity, and senselesness of the
true dignity and true liberty of a Christian: and he can suffer this retiring
thy self from the world, to degenerate into a contempt and despising of others,
and an overvaluing of thine own perfections. Let the last day in which both man
and beasts were made out of the earth, but yet a living soul breathed into man;
remember thee that this earth which treads upon thee, must return to that earth
which thou treadst upon; thy body, that loads thee, and oppresses thee to the
grave, and thy spirit to him that gave it. And when the Sabbath day has also
remembered thee, that God has given thee a temporal Sabbath, placed thee in a
land of peace, and an ecclesiastical Sabbath, placed in a Church of peace,
perfect all in a spiritual Sabbath, a conscience of peace, by remembering now
thy Creator, at least in one of these days of the week of thy regeneration,
either as thou have light created in thee, in the first day, that is, thy
knowledge of Christ; or as thou have a firmament created in thee the second day,
that is, thy knowledge what to seek concerning Christ, things appertaining to
faith and salvation; or as thou have a sea created in thee the third day, that
is, a Church where all the knowledge is reserved and presented to thee; or as
thou have a sun and moon in the fourth day, thankfulness in prosperity, comfort
in adversity, or as thou have reptilem humilitate^, or volatilem fiduciam, a
humiliation in thy self, or an exaltation in Christ in thy fifth day, or as thou
have a contemplation of thy mortality and immortality in the sixth day, or a
desire of a spiritual Sabbath in the seventh, In those days remember thou thy
Creator.

Juventutis.
Now all these days are contracted into less room in this text, In diebus
Bechurotheica, is either, in the days of thy youth, or electionem tuarum, in
the days of thy hearts desire, when thou enjoyest all that thou could wish.
First, therefore if thou would be heard in David's prayer; Delicta
juventutis; O Lord remember not the sins of my youth; remember to come to this
prayer, In diebus juventutis, Ps. 25.7. 29.4.
in the days of thy youth. Job remembers with much sorrow, how he was in the
days of his youth, when Gods providence was upon his Tabernacle: and it is a
late, but a sad consideration, to remember with what tenderness of conscience,
what scruples, what remorces we entered into sins in our youth, how much we were
afraid of all degrees and circumstances of sin for a little while, and how
indifferent things they are grown to us, and how obdurate we are grown in them
now. This was Jobs sorrow, and this was Tobias comfort, 1.4.
when I was but young, all my Tribes fell away; but I alone went after to
Jerusalem. Though he lacked the counsel, and the example of his Elders, yet he
served God; for it is good for a man, Thren. 3.27.
that he bear his yoke in his youth: For even when God had delivered over his
people purposely to be afflicted, yet himself complains in their behalf, That
the persecutor laid the very heaviest yoke upon the ancient: Esa. 47.6.
It is a lamentable thing to fall under a necessity of suffering in our age,
Basil.
Labor fracta instrumenta, ad Deum ducis, quorum nullus usus? would thou
consecrate a Chalice to God that is broken? no man would present a lame horse,
a disordered clock, a torn book to the King? Caro jumentum, thy body is thy
beast; Aug.
and will thou present that to God, when it is lamed and tired with excess of
wantonness? when thy clock, (the whole course of thy time) is disordered with
passions, and perturbations; when thy book (the history of thy life,) is torn,
1000. sins of thine own torn out of thy memory, will thou then present thy self
thus defaced and mangled to almighty God? Basil.
Temperantia non est temperantia in senectute, sed impotentia incontinentiae,
chastity is not chastity in an old man, but a desability to be unchaste; and
therefore thou do not give God that which thou pretendest to give, for thou
have no chastity to give him. Senex bis puer; but it is not bis juvenis, an old
man comes to the infirmities of childhood again; but he comes not to the
strength of youth again,

Do this then In diebus juventutis, in thy best strength, Electionum.
and when thy natural facuties are best able to concur with grace; but do it;
In diebus electionum, in the days when thou have thy hearts desire; for if
thou have worn out this word, in one sense, that it be too late now, to
remember him in the days of youth, that is spent forgetfully) yet as long as
thou art able to make a new choice, to choose a new sin, that when thy heats of
youth are not overcome, but burnt out, then thy middle age chooses ambition,
and thy old age chooses covetousness; as long as thou art able to make thy
choice thou art able to make a better than this; God testifies that power, that
he has given thee; I call heaven and earth to record this day, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
that I have set before you life and death; choose life: If this choice like
you not, Jos. 24.15.
If it seem evil unto you to serve the the Lord, says Josuah then, choose ye
this day whom ye will serve. Here Is the election day; bring that which ye would
have, Sermon. 18.
into comparison with that which ye should have; that is, all that this world
keeps from you, with that which God offers to you; and what will ye choose to
prefer before him? for honor, and favor, and health, and riches, perchance you
cannot have them though you choose them; but can you have more of them than
they have had, to whom those very things have been occasions of ruin? The
Market is open till the bell ring; till thy last bell ring the Church is open,
grace is to be had there: but trust not upon that rule, that men buy cheapest
at the end of the market, that heaven may be had for a breath at last, when
they that hear it cannot tell whether it be a sigh or a gasp, a religious
breathing and anhelation after the next life, or natural breathing out, and
exhalation of this; but find a spiritual good husbandry in that other rule,
that the prime of the market is to be had at first: for howsoever, in thine
age, there may be by Gods strong working, Dies juventutis, A day of youth, in
making thee then a new creature; (for as God is antiquissimus dierum, so in his
school no man is super-annated,) yet when age has made a man impotent to sin,
this is not Dies electionum, it is not a day of choice; but remember God now,
when thou have a choice, that is, a power to advance thy self, or to oppress
others by evil means; now in die electionum, in those thy happy and sunshine
days, remember him.

Creatorem.
This is then the faculty that is excited, the memory; and this is the time,
now, now whilst we have power of election: The object is, the Creator,
Remember the Creator: First, because the memory can go no farther then the
creation; and therefore we have no means to conceive, or apprehend any thing of
God before that. When men therefore speak of decrees of reprobation, decrees of
condemnation, before decrees of creation; this is beyond the counsel of the
holy Ghost here, Memento creatoris, Remember the Creator, for this is to
remember God a condemner before he was a creator: This is to put a preface to
Moses his Genesis, not to be content with his in principio, to know that in the
beginning God created heaven and earth, but we must remember what he did ante
principium, before any such beginning was. Moses his in principio, that
beginning, the creation we can remember; but St. John's in principio, that
beginning, eternity, we cannot; we can remember Gods fiat in Moses, but not
Gods erat in St. John: what God has done for us, is the object of our memory,
not what he did before we were: and thou have a good and perfect memory, if it
remember all that the holy Ghost proposes in the Bible; and it determines in
the memento Creatoris: There begins the Bible, and there begins the Creed, I
believe in God the Father, maker of Heaven and Earth; J^ 7.39.
for when it is said, The holy Ghost was not given, because Jesus was not
glorified, it is not truly Non erat datus, but non erat; for, non erat nobis
antequam operaretur; It is not said there, the holy Ghost was not given, but it
is the holy Ghost was not: for he is not, that is, he has no being to us ward,
till he works in us which was first in the creation: Remember the Creator then,
Sermon. 19.
because thou can remember nothing backward beyond him, and remember him so
too, that thou may stick upon nothing on this side of him, That so neither
height, To. 8. ult.
nor depth, nor any other creature may separate thee from God; not only not
separate thee finally, but not separate so, as to stop upon the creature, but
to make the best of them, thy way to the Creator; We see ships in the river;
but all their use is gone, if they go not to sea; we see men fraighted with
honor, and riches, but all their use is gone, if their respect be not upon the
honor and glory of the Creator; and therefore says the Apostle, Let them that
suffer, 1 Pe^. 4. ult.
commit their souls to God, as to a faithful Creator; that is, He made them,
and therefore will have care of them. This is the true contracting, and the
true extending of the memory, to Remember the Creator, and stay there, because
there is no prospect farther, and to Remember the Creator, and get thither,
because there is no safe footing upon the creature, til we come so far.

Remember then the Creator, and remember thy Creator, for, T^um.
Quis magis fidelis Deo? who is so faithful a Counsailor as God? Basil.
Quis prudentior Sapiente? who can be wiser than wisdom? Quis utilior bono? or
better than goodness? Quis conjunctior Creatore? or nearer then our Maker? and
therefore remember him. What purposes soever thy parents or thy Prince have to
make thee great, how had all those purposes been frustrated, and evacuated if
God had not made thee before? this very being is thy greatest degree; as in
Arithmatick how great a number soever a man express in many figures, yet when
we come to number all, the very first figure is the greatest and most of all;
so what degrees or titles soever a man have in this world, the greatest and the
foundation of all, is, that he had a being by creation: For the distance from
nothing to a little, is ten thousand times more, than from it to the highest
degree in this life: and therefore remember thy Creator, as by being so, he
has done more for thee than all the world besides; and remember him also, with
this consideration, that whatsoever thou art now, yet once thou wast nothing.

He created thee, ex nihilo, he gave thee a being, Ex nihilo.
there is matter of exaltation, and yet all this from nothing; thou wast worse
then a worm, there is matter of humiliation; but he did not create thee ad
nihilum, to return to nothing again, and there is matter for thy consideration,
and study, how to make thine immortality profitable unto thee; for it is a
deadly immortality, if thy immortality must serve thee for nothing but to hold
thee in immortal torment. To end all, that being which we have from God shall
not return to nothing, nor the being which we have from men neither. Bern.
As St. Bernard says of the Image of God in man's soul, uti potest in gehenna,
non exuri, That soul that descends to hell, carries the Image God in the
faculties of that soul thither, but there that Image can never be burnt out, so
those Images and those impressions, which we have received from men, from
nature, from the world, the image of a Lord, the image of a Counsailor, the
image of a Bishop, shall all burn in Hell, and never burn out; not only these
men, but these offices are not to return to nothing; but as their being from
God, so their being from man, shall have an everlasting being, to the
aggravating of their condemnation. And therefore remember thy Creator, who, as
he is so, by making thee of nothing, so he will ever be so, by holding thee to
his glory, though to thy confusion, from returning to nothing; for the Court of
Heaven is not like other Courts, that after a surfeit of pleasure or greatness,
a man may retire; after a surfeit of sin there is no such retiring, as a
dissolving of the soul into nothing; but God is from the beginning the Creator,
he gave all things their being, and he is still thy Creator, thou shall
evermore have that being, to be capable of his Judgments.

Now to make up a circle, by returning to our first word, remember: As we
remember God, so for his sake, let us remember one another. In my long absence,
and far distance from hence, remember me, as I shall do you in the ears of that
God, to whom the farthest East, and the farthest West are but as the right and
left ear in one of us; we hear with both at once, and he hears in both at once;
remember me, not my abilities; for when I consider my Apostleship that I was
sent to you, I am in St. Paul's quorum, quorum ego sum minimus, 1 Cor. 15.9.
the least of them that have been sent; and when I consider my infirmities, 1 Timothy 1.15.
I am in his quorum, in another commission, another way, Quorum ego maximus;
the greatest of them; but remember my labors, and endeavors, at least my
desire, to make sure your salvation. And I shall remember your religious
cheerfulness in hearing the word, and your christianly respect toward all them
that bring that word unto you, and toward my self in particular far bove my
merit. And so as your eyes that stay here, and mine that must be far of, for
all that distance shall meet every morning, in looking upon that same Sun, and
meet every night, in looking upon the same Moon; so our hearts may meet morning
and evening in that God, which sees and hears every where; that you may come
thither to him with your prayers, that I, (if I may be of use for his glory,
and your edification in this place) may be restored to you again; and may come
to him with my prayer, that what Paul soever plant amongst you, or what Apollos
soever water, God himself will give the increase: That if I never meet you
again till we have all passed the gate of death, yet in the gates of heaven, I
may meet you all, and there say to my Savior and your Savior, that which he
said to his Father and our Father, Of those whom thou have given me, have I not
lost one. Remember me thus, you that stay in this Kingdom of peace, where no
sword is drawn, but the sword of Justice, as I shall remember you in those
Kingdoms, where ambition on one side, and a necessary defense from unjust
persecution on the other side has drawn many swords; and Christ Jesus remember
us all in his Kingdom, to which, Sermon. 20.
though we must sail through a sea, it is the sea of his blood, where no soul
suffers shiprwack; though we must be blown with strange winds, with sighs and
groans for our sins, yet it is the Spirit of God that blows all this wind, and
shall blow away all contrary winds of diffidence or distrust in Gods mercy;
where we shall be all Soldiers of one Army, the Lord of Hosts, and Children
of one Quire, the God of Harmony and consent: where all Clients shall retain
but one Counselor, our Advocate Christ Jesus, nor present him any other fee
but his own blood, and yet every Client have a Judgment on his side, not only
in a not guilty, in the remission of his sins, but in a Venite benedicti, in
being called to the participation of an immortal Crown of glory: where there
shall be no difference in affection, nor in mind, but we shall agree as fully
and perfectly in our Allelujah, and gloria in exelcis, as God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost agreed in the faciamus hominem at first; where we shall end, and
yet begin but then; where we shall have continual rest, and yet never grow
lazy; where we shall be stronger to resist, and yet have no enemy; where we
shall live and never die, where we shall meet and never part.

TWO SERMONS, to the Prince and Princess Palatine, the Lady Elizabeth at
Heydelberg, when I was commanded by the King to wait upon my L. of Doncaster in
his Embassage to Germany. First Sermon as we went out, June 16. 1619. SERMON XX.
Romans 13.11. For now is our Salvation nearer then when we believed,


THere is not a more comprehensive, a more embracing word in all Religion, then
the first word of this Text, Now; for the word before that, For, is but a word
of connection, and rather appertains to that which was said before the Text,
then to the Text it self: The Text begins with that important and considerable
particle, Now, Now is salvation nearer, etc. This present word, Now, denotes an
Advent, a new coming, or a new operation, otherwise then it was before: And
therefore does the Church appropriate this Scripture to the celebration of the
Advent, before the Feast of the Birth of our Savior. It is an extensive word,
Now; for though we dispute whether this Now, that is, whether an instant be any
part of time or no, yet in truth it is all time; for whatsoever is past, was,
and whatsoever is future, shall be an instant; and did and shall fall within
this Now. We consider in the Church four Advents or Comings of Christ, of every
one of which we may say Now, now it is otherwise then before: For first there
is verbum in carne, the word came in the flesh, in the Incarnation; and then
there is caro in verbo, he that is made flesh comes in the word, that is,
Christ comes in the preaching thereof; and he comes again in carne saluta, when
at our dissolution and transmigration; at our death he comes by his spirit, and
testifies to our spirit that we die the Children of God: And lastly he comes in
carne reddita, when he shall come at the Resurrection, to redeliver our bodies
to our souls, and to deliver everlasting glory to both. The Ancients for the
most part understand the word of our Text, of Christ's first coming in the flesh
to us in this world; the latter Exposition understand them rather of his coming
in glory: But the Apostle could not properly use this present word Now, with
relation to that which is not now, that is, to future glory, otherwise then as
that future glory has a preparation and an inchoation in present grace; for so
even the future glory of heaven has a Now, now the elect Children of God have
by his powerful grace a present possession of glory. So then it will not be
impertinent to suffer this flowing and extensive word Now to spread it self
into all three: for the whole duty of Christianity consists in these three
things; first in pietate erga Deum, in religion toward God; in which the
Apostle had enlarged himself from the beginning to the twelfth chapter of his
Epistle: And secondly, in charitate erga proximum, in our mutual duties of
society toward our Equals and Inferiors, and of Subjection toward our
Superiors, in which that twelfth chapter, and this to the eitghth verse is
especially conversant: And then thirdly, in sanctimonia propria, in the works
of sanctification and holiness in our selves: And this Text the Apostle
presents as a forcible reason to induce us to that, to those works of
sanctification, because Now our salvation is nearer us then when we believed.
Take then this now, the first way of the coming Christ in person, in the flesh
into this world; and then the Apostle of directs himself principally to the
Jews converted to the faith of Christ, and he tells them, That their salvation
is nearer them now, now they had seen him come, then when they did only believe
that he would come: Take the words the second way, of his coming in grace into
our hearts; and so the Apostle directs himself to all Christians; now, now that
you have bin bred in the Christian Church, now that you are grown from Grace to
grace, from faith to faith, now that God by his spirit strengthens and confirms
you; now is your salvation nearer then when ye believed, that is, when you
began to believe, either by the faith of your Parents, or the faith of the
Church, or the faith of your Sureties at your Baptism; or when you began to
have some notions, and impressions, and apprehensions of faith in your self,
when you came to some degrees of understanding and discretion: Take the word of
Christ's coming to us at the hour of death, or of his coming to us at the day of
Judgment (for those two are all one to our present purpose, because God never
reverses any particular judgment given at a man's death at the day of the
general Judgment:) take the word so, and this is the Apostles argument, you
have believed, and you have lived accordingly, and that faith, and that good
life has brought salvation nearer you, that is, given you a fair and modest
infallibility of salvation, in the nature of reversion; but now, now that you
are come to the approches of death, which shall make your reversion a
possession; Now is salvation nearer you then when you believed. Summarily, the
Text is a reason why we ought to proceed in good and holy ways; and it works
in all the three acceptations of the word; for whether salvation be said to be
near us, because we are Christians, and so have advantage of the Jews, or near
us, because we have made some proficiency in holiness and sanctimony; or near
us, because we are near our end, and thereby near a possession of our endless
joy and glory: Still from all these acceptations of the word arise religious
provocations to perseverance in holiness of life; and therefore we shall pursue
the words in all three acceptations.

In all three acceptations we must consider three terms in the Text; First,
Quid salus, what this Salvation is that is intended here; Part. 1.
and then, Quid prope, what this Distance, this nearness is; and lastly, Quid
credere, what Belief this is. So then, taking the words first the first way, as
spoken by the Apostles, to the Jews newly converted to the Christian Faith,
salvation is the outward means of salvation, which are more and more manifest
to the Christians, then they were to the Jews. And then the second Term,
Nearness (salvation is nearer) is in this, That salvation to the Christian is
in things present or past, in things already done, and of which we are
experimentally sure; but to the Jews it was of future things, of which,
howsoever they might assure themselves that they would be, yet they had no
assurance when: And therefore (in the third place) their Believing was but a
confident expectation, and faithful assenting to their Prophets; quando
credidistis, when you believed, that is, when you did only believe, and saw
nothing.

First then, the first Term in the first acceptance, Salvation, Salus.
is the outward means of salvation. Outward and visible means of knowing, God
God has given to all Nations in the book of Creatures, from the first leaf of
that book, the firmament above, to the last leaf, the Mines under our feet;
there is enough of that. There they have a book which they read; and they have
a sentence of condemnation if they do not, Romans 2.1.
porro inexcusabilis, Therefore art thou inexcusable O man. The visible God was
presented in visible things, and thou might, and would not see him: but
this is only such a knowledge of God as Philosophers, moral and natural men may
have, and yet be very far from making this knowledge any means of salvation.
A man that has often traveled by that way where there stands a fair house
will say, and say truly, that he knows that house; but yet he knows not the
ways that lead nearest and fairest to it, nor he knows not the lodgings and
conveniences of that house as he does that has been an often and welcome
guest to it, or a continual dweller in it. Natural men by passing often
through the contemplation of nature have such a knowledge of God; but the
knowledge which is to salvation, is by being in Gods house, in the Household of
the Faithful, in the Communion of Saints, and by having such a conversation in
heaven in this life. That which our Savior Christ says, In domo Patris, In my
Fathers house there are many Mansions, as it is intended principally of our
state of glory, and diversity of degrees of that in heaven; so is it true also
of Gods house at large, Multae mansiones. In Gods house, which is All (all this
world, and the next too, is Gods house) there are outhouses, rooms without the
house; so considered in this world on the Gentiles, and the Heathen, which are
without the Church, and yet amongst them God has some Servants: so in his
house there are women below stairs, that is, in his visible Church here upon
Earth; and women above stairs, that is, degrees of Glory in the triumphant
Church. To them that are lodged in those outhouses, out of the Covenant out of
the Church, salvation comes sometimes, God does save some of them: but yet is
not near them, that is, they have no ordinary nor established way of attaining
to it, because Christ is not manifested to them in an ordinary preaching of the
Word, and an ordinary administration of the Sacraments. And then to them who
are above stairs, that is in possession of salvation in heaven, we cannot say
salvation is nearer and nearer to them, because they are already in an actual
possession thereof. But to them who are in Gods House, and yet below stairs; to
them who have salvation presented unto them by sensible and visible means; to
them their salvation is properly said io be near. And such a people God had
from the beginning, and shall have to the end; and that people the Jews were;
and therefore their glory was just and true glory, Deuteronomy. 41.7.
when they glorified themselves in that, What Nation is so great? wherein
consisted their greatness? that follows; Unto whom is the Lord so nigh as he
is to us? and in what consisted this nearness? in this; What Nation has
ordinances and laws so righteous as we have? Here then was their salvation;
first God withdrew them from the nations; he naturalized them, he denizend them
into his own kingdom, sub sigillo circumcisionis, in the seal of their blood in
circumcision, he gave them an interest in his blood to be shed in his passion:
and then, this was their farther salvation, that when he had thus taken them
into his service, and put them into his livery, a livery of his own color, of
blood in their circumcision, then he gave them a particular law for all their
actions, how they should live in his favor; and he gave them a particular form
of outward religious worship, which should be acceptable to him; the law, which
was a sensible rule of their life, and their sacrifices, which were the
sensible rule of their religion, was salvation: non taliter, says David, Psa.
147.9.
God has not dealt so with other nations; for though God from other nations do
here and there pick out a servant, yet he has not given other nations
salvation, that is, settled an ordinary means of salvation amongst them. That
was true of the Jews, and will always be true of the whole Church of God,
which Calvin says, quia nec oculis perspicitur, nec manibus palpatur
spiritualis gratia, because the grace of God it self cannot be discerned by the
eye, nor distinguished by the touch, non possumus nisi externis signis adjuti,
statuere Deum nobis esse propitium, we could not assure our selves of the
mercies of God, if we had not outward and sensible signs and seals of those
mercies; and therefore God never left his Church without such external and
visible means and seals of grace. And though all those means were not properly
seals, (for that is proper to sacraments, as a sacrament is strictly taken to
be a seal of grace) yet the Fathers did often call many of these things by that
name sacraments, because they had so much of the nature of a true sacrament, as
that they advanced and furthered the working of grace. How a visible sign,
water, or wine, (even in a true and proper sacrament) should confer grace,
Edwin. h. 5.
fateor me non posse capere, says a learned Bishop in the Roman Church; as
easy a matter as they make it, he professes that he cannot understand it: he
argues it subtly, but he concludes it modestly; omnio brevi sententia dicenda
sunt, consistere in pactis; this must says he be the end of all, that these
things are not to be considered in the reason of man, but in the Covenant of
God: God has covenanted with his people, to be present with them in certain
places, in the Church at certain times, when they make their congregation, in
certain actions, when they meet to pray; and though he be not bound in the
nature of the action, yet he is bound in his covenant to exhibit grace, and to
strengthen grace, in certain sacrifices, and certain sacraments; and so other
sacramental, and ritual and ceremonial things ordained by God in the voice of
his Church, because they further salvation, are called salvation in this sense,
and acceptance of the word, the first way.

This was the first branch, in the first sense of these words; Prope.
salus adminicula salutis, salvation is means of salvation; and the next is the
prope, wherein these means and helps were nearer to the Jews, after they were
converted to the Christian religion, then before: and we consider them justly,
to have been nearer, that is, more discernabl; first, quia plura, because the
helps of the Christians are more; and then, quia potiora, because in their
nature they are better; and lastly, quia manifestiora, because they have a
better evidence toward us; for so as the more bodies are together, the greater
the object is, and so made the more visible; so they are nearer, quia plura,
because they are more; and so, as the more beautiful, and better proportioned a
body is, the more it draws the eye to look upon it; so they are nearer, quia
potiora, because they are better; and so as the more evidence, and light and
luster they have in themselves, the easier things are discerned, so they are
nearer, Plura.
quia manifestiora, because they are more visible. First, how there should be
more helps in the Christian religion, then in the Jewish, is not so evident at
first: for first, if we consider the law to be salvation, they had a vast
multiplicity of laws, scarce less then 600 several laws; whereas the honor of
the Christian religion is, that it is verbum abbreviatum, an abridgment of all
into ten words, as Moses calls the Commandments; and then a re-abridgment of
that abridgment into two, love God, and love thy Neighbor, that is, faith and
works. If we consider their laws to be their salvation, they had more; and if
we consider their sacrifices to be their salvation, they had more too; for
their Rabbis observe at least 50 several kinds of contracting uncleaness, to
which there were appropriated several expiations and sacrifices; whereas we
have only the sacrifices of prayer, and of praise, and of Christ in the
sacrament; for so it is, the ordinary phrase and manner of speech in the
Fathers to call that a sacrifice; not only as it is a commemorative sacrifice,
(for that is amongst our selves, and so every person in the congregation may
sacrifice, that is, do that in remembrance of Christ,) but as it is a real
sacrifice, in which the Priest does that, which none but he does; that is,
really to offer up Christ Jesus crucified to Almighty God for the sins of the
people, so, as that that very body of Christ, which offered himself for a
propitiatory sacrifice upon the cross, once for all, that body, and all that
that body suffered, is offered again, and presented to the Father, and the
Father is entreated, that for the merits of that person, so presented and
offered unto him; and in contemplation thereof, he will be merciful to that
congregation, and apply those merits of his, to their particular souls. These
are our sacrifices, prayer and praise, and Christ thus offered; and how are
these more then the Jews had? they had more laws, and more sacrifices, and as
many sacraments as we; and if nearness of salvation consist in the plurality of
these, how is salvation nearer to us then to them, quatenus plura, in that
first respects as the means are more, as it is truly and properly said, that
there are more ingredients, more simples, more means of restoring in our dram
of triacle or mithridate, then in an ounce of any particular syrup, in which
there may be 3 or 4 in the other, perchance so many hundred; so in that receipt
of our Savior Christ, quicquid ligaveris; in the absolution, of the Minister,
that whatsoever he shall bind or loose upon earth, shall be bound or loose in
heaven; there is more physic, then in all the expiations and sacrifices of the
old law. There an expiation would serve to day, which would not serve to
morrow; if it were omitted till the sun were set upon it, it required a more
severe expiation: and so also an expiation would serve for one transgression,
which would not serve for another; but here, in the absosolution of the
Minister, there is a concurrence, a confluence of medecines of all qualities;
purgative in confession, and restorative in absolution; corasive in the
preaching of Judgments, and cordial in the balm of the sacrament: here is no
limitation of time, at what time soever a sinner repents, nor limitation of
sins, whatsoever is forgiven in earth is forgiven in heaven: salvation is
nearer us in this respect, that we have plura adminicula, more outward and
visible means then the Jews had, because we may receive more in one action,
then they could in all theirs.

It is so also, not only quia plura, because we have more means, Potiora.
but quia potiora, because those means which we have are in their nature
better, more attractive, and more winning. The means, (as we have said before)
were their laws, and their sacrifices, and their sacraments, and for their law,
it was lex interficiens, non perficiens; it was a law, August.
that punished unrighteousness, but it did not confer righteousness: and their
sacrifices, being in blood, (if we remove from them their typical
signification, and what they prefigured, which was the shedding of the blood of
the lamb which takes away the sins of the world) must necessarily create and
excite a natural horror in man, and an aversness from them. Take their
sacraments into comparison, and then one of their sacraments, Circumcision, was
limited to one sex, it reached not to women; and their other sacrament, the
passover, was in the primary signification and institution thereof, only a
gratulatory commemoration of a temporal benefit of their deliverance from
Egypt. And therefore to constitute a judgment proportionably by the effects, we
see the law, and the sacrifice, and the sacraments of thy Jews, did not much
work upon foraign Nations; it was salvation, but salvation shut up amongst
themselves; whereas we see that the law of the Chrstians, which is, to conform
our selves to our great example and pattern, Christ Jesus, who, (if we would
consider him merely as man) was the most exemplar man, for all Theological
virtues, and moral too, that ever any history presented; and the sacrifices of
Christians, which are all spiritual, and therein more proportional to God who
is all spirit; and the sacraments of Christians, in which, though not ex opere
operator, not because that action is performed, not because that sacrament is
administered, yet ex pacto, and quando opus operamur: by Gods covenant, when
soever that action is performed, whenever that sacrament is administered, the
grace of God is exhibited and offered; nec fallaciter, as Calvin says well, it
is offered with a purpose on Gods part, that that grace should be accepted, we
see, I say that these laws, and these sacrifices, and these sacraments have
gained upon the whole world; for in their nature, and in their attractiveness,
and in their applyableness, and so in their effect, they are potiora, better,
and in that respect, salvation is nearer us then it was to the Jews.

Manifestiora.
And so it is, lastly, quia manifestiora, because they have an evidence and
manifestation of themselves, in themselves. Now, this is especially true in the
sacraments, because the sacraments exhibit and convey grace; and grace is such
a light, such a torch, such a beacon, as where it is, it is easily seen. As
there is a luster in a precious stone, which no man's eye or finger can limit to
a certain place or point in that stone, so though we do not assign in the
sacrament, where, that is, in what circumstance or part of that holy action
grace is; or when, or how it enters, (for though the word of consecration alter
the bread, not to another thing, but to another use; and though they leave it
bread, yet they make it other bread, yet the enunciation of those words does
not infuse nor imprint this grace, which we speak of, into that bread) yet
whosoever receives this sacrament worthily, sees evidently an entrance, and a
growth of grace in himself. But this evidence which we speaks of this
manifestation, is not only, (though especially) in the sacraments, but in other
sacramental and ceremonial things, which God (as he speaks by his Church) has
ordained, as the cross in baptism, and adoration at the sacrament (I do not
say, I am far from saying, adoration of the sacrament; there is a fair distance
and a spacious latitude between those two, an adoring of God in a devout
humiliation of the body in that holy action, and an adoring the bread, out of a
false imagination that that bread is God: A rectified man may be very humble
and devout in that action, and yet a great way on this side the superstition
and Idolatry in the practice of the Roman Church) in these sacramental and
ritual, and ceremonial things, which are the bellows of devotion, and the
subsidies of religion, and which were always in all Churches, there is a more
evident manifestation and clearness in these things in the Christian Church,
then was amongst the Jews in the ceremonial parts of their religion, because
almost all ours have reference to that which is already done and accomplished,
and not to things of a future expectation, as those of the Jews were: So you
know the passover of the Jews, had a relation to their coming out of Egypt;
that was past, and thereby obvious to every man's apprehension; every man that
eat the pasover; remembered their deliverance out of Egypt; but then the
passover had also relation to that lamb which was to redeem that world; and
this was a future thing; and this certainly very few amongst them understood,
or considered upon that occasion, that as thy lamb is killed here, so there
shall be a lamb killed for all the world hereafter. Now, our actions in the
Church, do most respect things formerly done, and so they awaken, and work upon
our memory, which is an easier faculty to work upon, then the understanding or
the will. Salvation is nearer us, in these outward helps, because their
signification is clearer to us, and more apprehensible by us, being of things
past, Credidistis.
and accomplished already. So then the Apostle might well say that salvation,
that is, outward means of salvation, was nearer, that is, more in number,
better in use, clearer in evidence then it was before; quando crediderunt, when
they believed, which is the third and last term, in this first acceptance of
the word. Salvation was brought into the world, in the first promise of a
Messiah in the semen contract, That the seed of the woman shall bruise the
serpents head; and it was brought nearer, when this Missias was fixed in
Abraham's race, in semine tuo In thy seed shall all nations be blessed; it was
brought nearer then that, when it was brought from Abraham's race to David's
family, in solio tuo, The scepter shall not depart from thee, till he come; and
still nearer, in Esaias virgo concipiet when so particular mark was set upon
the Messiah as that he should be the son of a virgin; and yet nearer in
Micheas, and tu Bethlem, that Bethlem was designed for the place of his birth;
and nearer in Daniels 70 weeks, when the time was manifested. And though it
were nearer then all this, when John Baptist came to say Repent for the
Kingdom of God is at hand, Mat. 3.2.
yet it was truly very near, nearest of all, when Christ came to say, Luc.
17.21.
Behold the Kingdom of God is amongst you; for all the rest were in the
crediderunt, he was nearer them because they believed he would come; but then
it was brought to the viderunt, they saw he was come. Joh. 20.29.
Beati says Christ: Blessed are they that have believed, and have not seen:
they had salvation brought nearer unto them by their believing; but yet Christ
speaks of another manner of blessedness conferred upon his Disciples, Blessed
are your eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear; Mat. 13.16.
for, verily I say unto you, that many Prophets and Righteous men, have desired
to see the things which ye see, and have not seen them. To end this, the belief
of the Patriarks was blessedness; Joh. 8.56.
and it was a kind of seeing too; for so Christ says your Father Abraham
rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it; but this was a seeing with the eye of
faith which discovers future things; but Christ prefers the blessedness of the
Disciples, because they saw things present and already done. All our life is a
passing bell, but then was Simeon content his bell should ring out, when his
eyes had seen his salvtion. In that especially does St. John exalt the force of
his argument; quae vidimus: 1 John 1.1.
That which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our
hands have handled of the word of life, that declare we unto you. Here is then
the inestimable prerogative of the Christian religion, it is grounded so far
upon things which were seen to be done; it is brought so far from matter of
faith, to matter of fact; from prophecy to history; from what the Messiah
should do, to what he has done; and that was their case to whom this Apostle
spoke these wodrs, as we take them in the first acceptance; salvation, that
is, outward means of salvation in the Church is nearer, that is, more and
better and clearer to you now, that is, when you have seen Christin the flesh,
then when you prefigured him in your law, or sacrifices, or sacraments, or
believed him in your Prophets.

Second part.
In a second sense we took these words, of Christ's second Advent, or coming,
his coming to our heart, in the working of his grace; And so the Apostles
words are directed to all Christians, and not only to the new convertits of
that nation; and so these three terms, salvation, nearness, and believing,
(which we proposed to be considered in all the three acceptations of the words)
will have this signification. Salvation is the inward means of salvation, the
working of the spirit, that sets a seal to the eternal means: the prope, the
nearness lies in this, that this grace which is this salvation in this sense,
grows out of that which is in you already; not out of any thing which is in you
naturally, but Gods first graces that are in you, grows into more and more
grace. Grace does not grow out of nature; for nature in the highest exaltation
and rectifying thereof cannot produce grace. Corn does not grow out of the
earth, it must be sowd; but corn grows only in the earth; nature, and natural
reason do not produce grace, but yet grace can take root in no other thing but
in the nature and reason of man; whether we consider Gods subsequent graces,
which grow out of his first grace, formerly given to us, and well employed by
us, or his first grace, which works upon our natural faculties, and grows
there; still this salvation, that is, this grace is near us, for it is within
us; and then the third term believing, is either, quando credidistis primum,
when you began to believe, either in an imputative belief of others in your
baptism, or a faint belief, upon your first Catechisings and Instrustions; or
quando credidistis tantum, when you only professed a belief, or faith, and did
nothing in declaration of that faith, to the edification of others.

Salus.
First then salvation in this second sense, is the internal operation of the
holy Ghost, in infusing grace: for therefore does St. Basil call the holy Ghost
verbum Dei, the word of God, (which is the name properly peculiar to the Son)
quia interpres filii, sicut filius patris; that as the Father had revealed his
will in the Prophets, and then the Son comes and interprets all that actually;
this prophecy is meant of my coming, this of my dying, and so makes a real
comment, and an actual interpretation of all the prophecies; for he does come,
and he does die accordingly; so the holy Ghost comes, and comments upon this
comment, interprets this interpretation, and tells thy soul that all this that
the Father had promised, and the Son had performed, was intended by them, and
by the working of their spirit, is now appropriated to thy particular soul. In
the constitution and making of a natural man, the body is not the man, nor the
soul is not the man, but the union of these two makes up the man; the spirits
in a man which are the thin and active part of the blood, and so are of a kind
of middle nature, between soul and body, those spirits are able to do, and
they do the office, to unite and apply the faculties of the soul to the organs
of the body, and so there is a man: so in a regenerate man, a Christian man,
his being born of Christian Parents, that gives him a body, that makes him of
the body of the Covenant, it gives him a title, an interest in the Covenant,
which is jus ad rem; thereby he may make his claim to the seal of the Covenant,
to baptism, and it cannot be denied him: and then in his baptism, that
Sacrament gives him a soul, a spiritual seal, jus in re, an actual possession
of Grace; but yet, as there are spirits in us, which unite body and soul, so
there must be subsequent acts, and works of the blessed spirit, that must unite
and confirm all, and make up this spiritual man in the ways of sanctification;
for without that his body, that is, his being born within the Covenant, and his
soul, that is, his having received Grace in baptism, do not make him up. This
Grace is this Salvation; and when this Grace works powerfully in thee, in the
ways of sanctification, then is this Salvation near thee; which is our second
term in this second acceptance, prope, near.

This neerness, which is the effectual working of Grace, Prope. Heb. 4.12.
the Apostle expresses fully, That it pierces to the dividing asunder of soul
and spirit; for, though properly the soul and spirit of a man be all one, yet
diverse faculties and operations give them sometimes diverse names in the
Scriptures; Anima quia animat, says St. Ambrose, and spiritus quia spirat: The
quickening of the body, is the soul; but the quickening of the soul, is the
spirit. If this Salvation be brought to this neerness, that is, this grace to
this powerfulness, thou shall find it in anima, in thy soul; in those organs
wherein thy soul uses thy body, in thy senses, and in the sensible things
ordained by God in his Church, Sacraments and Ceremonies; and thou shall find
it nearer, in spiritu, as the spirit of God has sealed it to thy spirit
invisibly, inexpressibly: It shall be near to thee, so as that thy reason shall
apprehend it; and nearer then that, thy faith shall establish it; and nearer
then all this, it shall create in thee a modest and sober, but yet an
infallible assurance, that thy salvation shall never depart from thee:
Magnificabit anima tua Dominum, as the B. Virgin speaks, Thy soul shall
magnify the Lord; all thy natural faculties shall be employed upon an assent
to the Gospel, thou shall be able to prove it to thy self, and to prove it to
others, to be the Gospel of Salvation: And then Exultabit spiritus, Thy spirit
shall rejoice in God thy Savior, because by the farther seal of
sanctification, thy spirit shall receive testimony from the spirit; that as
Christ is Idem homo cum te, the same man that thou art, so thou art Idem
spiritus cum Domino, the same spirit that he is; so far, as that as a spirit
cannot be separated in it self, so neither can thou be separated from God in
Christ; And this, this exaltation of Grace, when it thus grows up to this
height of sanctification, is that neerness, which brings Salvation farther than
our believing does? and that is the last term in this part; Believing.

Credidistis.
Now, nearer then Believing, nearer than Faith, a man might well think nothing
can bring Salvation; for Faith is the hand that reaches it, and takes hold of
it. But yet, as though our bodily hand reach to our temporal food, yet the
mouth and the stomach must do their office too; and so that meat must be
distributed into all parts of the body, and assimilated to them; so though our
faith draw this salvation near us, yet when our mouth is employed, that we have
a delight to glorify God in our discourses, and to declare his wonderful
works to the sons of men, in our thankfulness: And when this faith of ours is
distributed over all the body, that the body of Christ's Church is edified, and
alienated by our good life and sanctification, then is this Salvation nearer
us, that is, safelier sealed to us, then when we believed only.

Either then, this quando credidistis, when you believed, may be referred to
Infants, or to the first faith, and the first degrees thereof in men. In
Infants, when that seminall faith, or potentiall faith, which is by some
conceived to be in the Infants of Christian parents at their baptism; or that
actual faith, which from their parents, or from the Church, is thought to be
applied to them, accepted in their behalf, in that Sacrament, when this faith
grows up after, by this new coming of Christ in the power of his Grace and
his Spirit, to be a lively faith, expressed in charity; then Salus proprior,
then is Salvation nearer than when they believed; whether this belief were
their own, or their parents, or the Churches, we have no ground to deny, that
Salvation is near, and present to all children rightly baptized; but, for those
who have made sure their Salvation by a good use of Gods graces after, we have
another fair piece of evidence, that Salvation is nearer them. It is so to, if
this believing be referred to our first elements and beginnings of faith: A man
believes the history of Christ, because it is matter of fact, and a story
probable, and well testified: A man may believe the Christian Religion, or the
Reformed Religion for his ease, either because he cannot or will not debate
controversies, and reconcile differences, or because he sees it best for order
and quiet, and civll ends, which he has in that state where he lives. These be
kinds of faith and moral assents: and sometimes when a man is come thus far, to
a historical and a moral faith, God super-infuses true faith; for howsoever he
wrought by reason, and natural faculties, and moral, and civil ways, yet it
was God that wrought from the beginning, and produced this faith, though but
historical or moral. And then, if God do exalt this moral or historical faith
farther then so, to believe not only the History, but the Gospel; not only that
such a Christ lived, and did those miracles, and dyed, but that he was the Son
of God, and dyed for the redemption of the world; this brings Salvation nearer
him, than when he believed; but then, when this grace comes to appropriate
Christ to him, and more than that, to annunciate Christ by him, when it makes
him (as John Baptist was) a burning and a shining lamp; That Christ is showed
to him, and by him to others in a holy life, Then is Salvation nearer him than
when he believed, either as it is credidit primum, when he began to believe,
but had some scruples, or credidit tantum, that he laid all upon faith, but had
no care of works. To end this, this neerness of Salvation, is that union with
God, which may be had in this life: It is the peace of conscience, the
undoubting trust and assurance of Salvation. This assurance (so far as they
will confess it may be had) the Roman Church places in faith, and so far, well,
but then, In fide formata; and so far well enough too; In those works which
declare and testify that faith; for, though this good work do nothing toward
my Salvation, it does much toward this neerness, that is, toward my assurance
of this Salvation; but herein they lead us out of the way, that they call these
works the soul, the form of faith: for, though a good tree cannot be without
good fruits, yet it were a strange manner of speech to call that good fruit,
the life or the soul, or the form of that tree; so is it, to call works which
are the fruits of faith, the life or soul, or form of faith; for that is proper
to grace only which infuses faith. They would acknowledge this neerness of
salvation, this assurance in good works; but say they, man cannot be sure, that
their works is good, and therefore they can have no such assurance. They who
undertook the reformation of Religion in our Fathers days, observing that
there was no peace without this assurance, expressed this assurance thus, That
when a man is sure that he believes aright, that he has no scruples of God, no
diffidence in God, and uses all endeavors to continue it, and to express it in
his life, as long as he continues so, he is sure of Salvation; and farther they
went not: And then there arose men, which would reform the Reformers, and
refine Salvation and bring it into a less room; They would take away the
condition, if you hold fast, if you express it; and so came up roundly and
presently to that; If ever you did believe, if ever you had faith, you are safe
for ever, and upon that assurance you may rest. Now I make no doubt, but that
both these sought the truth, that truth which concerns us, peace and assurance;
and I dispute not their resolutions now; only I say, for these words which we
have in hand now there is a conditional assurance employed in them; for when it
is said now, now that you are in this state, Salvation is near you: thus much
is pugnantly intimated, that if you were not in this state, Salvation were
farther removed from you howsoever you pretend to believe.

Now this has brought us to our third and last sense and acceptance of these
words, as they are spoken of Christ's last coming, 3 Part.
his coming in glory; which is to us at our deaths, and that judgment which we
receive then. And in this acceptance of the word, these three terms,
Salvation, Neerness and Believing, are thus to be understood: Salvation is
Salvation perfected, consummated; Salvation which was brought near baptism, and
nearer in outward holiness, must be brought nearer than that: And this prope,
this neerness is, that now being near death, you are near the last seal of your
perseverance; and so the credidistis, the believing amounts to this: though you
have believed and lived accordingly, believed with the belief of a Jew,
believed all the Prophets, and with the belief of a Christian, believed all
the Gospel, believed with a seminal belief of your own, or an actual belief of
others at your baptism, with a historical belief, and with an Evangelical
belief too, with a belief in your root, in the heart, and a belief in the
fruits, expressed in a good life too, yet there is a continuance and a
perseverance that must crown all this; and because that cannot be discerned
till thine end, then only is it safely pronounced, Now is Salvation nearer you
than when you believed.

Salus.
Here then Salvation is eternal Salvation; not the outward seals of the Church
upon the person, not visible Sacraments, nor the outward seal of the person, to
the Church, visible works, nor the inward seal of the Spirit, assurance here,
but fruition, possession of glory, in the Kingdom of Heaven; where we shall be
infinitely rich, and that without labor in getting, or care in keeping, or fear
in loosing; and fully wise, and that without ignorance of necessary, or study
of unnecessary knowledge, where we shall not measure our portion by acres, for
all heaven shall be all ours; nor our term by years, for it is life and
everlasting life; nor our assurance by precedent, for we shall be safer then the
Angels themselves were in the creation; where our exaltation shall be to have a
crown of righteousness, and our possession of that crown shall be, even the
throwing it down at the feet of the Lamb; where we shall leav off all those
petitions of Adveniat regnum, thy Kingdom come for it shall be come in abundant
power; and the da nobis hodie, give us this day our daily bread, for we shall
have all that which we can desire now, and shall have a power to desire more,
and then have that desire so enlarged, satisfied; And the Libera nos, we shall
not pray to be delivered from evil, for no evil, culpae or poenae, either of
sin to deserve punishment, or of punishment for our former sins shall offer at
us; where we shall see God face to face, for we shall have such notions and
apprehensions, as shall enable us to see him, and he shall afford such an
imparting, such a manifestation of himself, as he shall be seen by us; and
where we shall be as inseparably united to our Savior, as his humanity and
divinity are united together: This unspeakable, this unimaginable happiness is
this Salvation, and therefore let us be glad when this is brought near us.

Prope.
And this is brought nearer and nearer unto us, as we come nearer and nearer to
our end. As he that travails weary, and late toward a great City, is glad when
he comes to a place of execution, because he knows be that is near the town; so
when thou come to the gate of death, glad of that, for it is but one step
from that to thy Jerusalem. Christ has brought us in some neerness to
Salvation, as he is vere Salvator mundi, in that we know, that this is indeed
the Christ, Jo. 4.42.
the Savior of the world: and he has brought it nearer than that, Ephesians. 5.23.
as he is Salvator corporis sui, in that we know, That Christ is the head of
the Church, and the Savior of that body: And nearer than that, Esaias. 43.3.
as he is Salvator tuus sanctus, In that we know, He is the Lord our God, the
holy One of Israel, our Savior: But nearest of all, in the Ecce Salvator tuus
venit, Esa. 62.11.
Behold thy Salvation comes. It is not only promised in the Prophets, nor
only writ in the Gospel, nor only sealed in the Sacraments, nor only prepared
in the visitations of the holy Ghost, but Ecce, behold it, now, when thou can
behold nothing else: The sun is setting to thee, and that for ever; thy houses
and furnitures, thy gardens and orchards, thy titles and offices, thy wife and
children are departing from thee, and that for ever; a cloud of faintness is
come over thine eyes, and a cloud of sorrow over all theirs; when his hand that
loves thee best hangs tremblingly over thee to close thine eyes, Ecce Salvator
tuus venit, behold then a new light, thy Saviors hand shall open thine eyes,
and in his light thou shall see light; and thus shall see, that though in the
eyes of men thou lie upon that bed, as a Statue on a Tomb, yet in the eyes of
God, thou stand as a Colossus, one foot in one, another in another land; one
foot in the grave, but the other in heaven; one hand in the womb of the earth,
and the other in Abraham's bosom: And then vere prope, Salvation is truly near
thee, and nearer than when thou believedst, which is our last word.

Take this Belief in the largest extent; Credidistis.
a patient assent to all foretold of Christ and of Salvation by the Prophets; a
historical assent to all that is written of Christ in the Gospel; an humble and
supple, and applyable assent to the Ordinances of the Church; a faithful
application of all this to thine own soul, a fruitful declaration of all that
to the whole world in thy life, yet all this (though this be inestimable
riches) is but the earnest of the holy Ghost; it is not the full payment, it is
but the first fruits; it is not the harvest, it is but a truce; it is not an
inviolable peace; There remains a rest to the people of God, Heb. 4.9.
says the Apostle; they were the people of God before, and yet there remained
a rest, which they had not yet; not that there is not a blessed degree of rest,
in the Credidi, a happy assurance in the strength of faith here, but yet there
remains a rest better than that; And therefore says that Apostle there, Let
us labor to enter into that rest; as though we have rest in our consciences all
the six days of the week, if we do the works of our callings sincerely, yet
all that while we labor; and there remains a Sabbath, which we have not all the
week; so though we have peace and rest in the testimony of our faith and
obedience in this life, yet there remains a rest, a Sabbath, for which we must
labor; for the Apostle in that place adds the danger; Labor to enter into that
rest, says he, lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief: v. 11.
He speaks of the people of God, and yet they might fall; He speaks of such as
bad believed, and yet they might fall, after the example of unbelief, as far as
they that never believed, if they labored not to the last and set the seal of
final perseverance to their former faith. To conclude all with the force of the
Apostles argument, in urging the words of this text, since God has brought
salvation nearer to you, then to them that believed; nearer to you in the
Gospel, when you have seen Christ come there to the Jews in the Prophets, where
they only read that he should come, and nearer to you, then where you believed,
either seminally and potentially, and imputatively at our baptism, or actually,
and declaratorily in some parts of your life, by having persisted therein thus
far; and since he is now bringing it nearer to you, then when you believed at
best, because your end grows nearer, Eccles. 12.
now, whilst the evil days come not, nor the year approach, wherein thou
shall say, I have no pleasure in them; before the grinders cease, because they
are few, and they wax dark, that look out at the windows, before thou go to the
house of thine age, and the mourners go about in the streets, prepare thy self
by casting off thy sins, and all that is gotten by thy sins: for, as the plague
is got as soon in linings, as in the outside of a garment, salvation is lost,
as far, by retaining ill gotten goods, as by ill getting, forget not thy past
sins so far, as not to repent them; but remember not thy repented sins so far,
as to delight in remembering them, or to doubt that God has not fully forgiven
them; and whether God have brought this salvation near thee, by sickness, or by
age, or by general dangers, put off the consideration of the incomodies of that
age, or that sickness, and that danger, and fill thy self with the
consideration of the nearness of thy salvation, which that age, and sickness,
and danger, minister to thee: that so, when the best Instrument, and the best
song shall meet together, thy bell shall towl, and thy soul shall hear that
voice, Ecce salvator, behold thy Savior comes, thou may bear a part, and
cheerfully make up that music, with a veni Domine Jesu, Come Lord Jesu, come
quickly, come now.

A Sermon Preached at St. Dunstans January 15. 1625. The First SERMON after Our
Dispersion, by the Sickness. SERMON XXI.
Exodus 12.30. For there was not a house where there was not one dead.


GOd intended life and immortality for man; and man by sin induced death upon
himself at first: When man had done so, and that now man was condemned, man
must die; yet yet God gave him, though not an absolute pardon, yet a long
reprieve; though not a new immortality, yet a life of seven and eight hundred
years upon earth: And then, misery, by sin growing upon man, and this long life
which was enlarged in his favor being become a burden unto him, God abridged
and contracted his seven hundred to seventy, and his eight hundred to eighty
years, the years of his life came to be threescore and ten; and if misery do
suffer him to exceed those, even the exceeding it self is misery. Death then is
from our selves, it is our own; but the executioner is from God, it is his, he
gives life; no man can quicken his own soul, but any man can forfeit his own
soul: And yet when he has done so, he may not be his own executioner; for as
God gives life, so he kills, says Moses there: not as the cause of death,
for death is not his creature; but because he employs what person he will, and
executes by what instrument it pleases him to choose, age or sickness, or
justice, or malice, or (in our apprehension) fortune. In that History from
whence we deduce this Text, which was that great execution, the sudden death of
all the firstborn of Egypt; it is very large, and yet we may usefully, and to
good purpose enlarge it, if we take into our consideration spiritual death, as
well as bodily: for so in our houses from whence we came hither, if we left but
a servant, but a child in the cradle at home, there is one dead in that house.
If we have no other house but this which we carry about us, this house of clay,
this tabernacle of flesh, this body, yet if we consider the inmate, the
sojourner within this house, Sermon. 21.
the state of our corrupt and putrified soul, there is one dead in this house
too. And though we be met now in the House of God, and our God be the God of
Life, yet even in this house of the God of Life, and the ground enwrapped in
the same consecration; not only of every such house, but let every man's length
in the house be a house; of every such space this Text will be verified, There
is not a house where there is not one dead.

God is abundant in his mercies to man, and as though he did but learn to give
by his giving, as though he did but practice to make himself perfect in his own
Art, which Art is bountiful Mercy; as though all his former blessings were but
in the way of earnest, and not of payment; as though every benefit that he
gave, were a new obligation upon him, and not an acquittance to him; he
delights to give where he has given, as though his former gifts were but his
places of memory, and marks set upon certain men, to whom he was to give more.
It is not so good a plea in our prayers to God, for temporal or for spiritual
blessings, to say, Have mercy upon me now, for I have loved thee heretofore, as
to say, Have mercy upon me, for thou have loved me heretofore. We answer a
Beggar, I gave you but yesterday; but God therefore gives us to day, because he
gave us yesterday: and therefore are all his blessings wrapped up in that word,
Panis quotidianus, Give us this day our daily bread: Every day he gives; and
early every day; his Manna falls before the Sun rises, and his mercies are new
every morning. In this consideration of his abounding in all ways of mercy to
us, we consider justly how abundant he is in instructing us. He writes his Law
once in our hearts, and then he repeats that Law, and declares that Law again
in his written Word, in his Scriptures. He writes his Law in stone-Tables once;
and then those Tables being broken, he repeats that Law, writes that Law again
in other Tables. He gives us his Law in Exodus and Leviticus, and then he gives
us a Deuteronomy, a repetition of that Law, another time in another Book. And
as he abounds so in instructing us, in going the same way twice over toward
us, as he gives us the Law a second time, so he gives us a second way of
instructing us; he accompanies, he seconds his Law with examples. In his Legal
Books we have Rules; in the Historical, Examples to practice by. And as he is
every way abundant, as he has added Law to Nature, and added Example to Law,
so he has added Example to Example; and by that Text which we have read to you
here, and by that Text which we have left at home, our house and family, and by
that Text which we have brought hither, our selves, and by that Text which we
find here, where we stand, and sit, and kneel upon the bodies of some of our
dead friends or neighbors, he gives to us, he repeats to us, a full, a various,
a multiform, a manifold Catechism, and Institution, to teach us that it is so
absolutely true, that there is not a house in which there is not one dead, as
that (taking spiritual death into our consideration) there is not a house in
which there is one alive.

That therefore we may take in light at all these windows that God opens for us,
Divisio.
that we may lay hold upon God by all these handles which he puts out to us, we
shall make a brief survey of these four Houses; of that in Egypt, where the
Text places it; of that at home, in which we dwell; of this, which is our
selves, where we always are, or always should be within; and of this in which
we are met, where God is in so many several Temples of his, as are above and
under ground: So that this Sermon may be a general Funeral Sermon, both for
them that are dead in the flesh, and for our selves, that are dead in our sins;
for of all these four houses it is true, and by useful accommodation, applyable
to all, There is not a house where there is not one dead.

First then to survey the first House, the House in Egypt, Part 1.
Pharaoh, by drawing upon himself and his Land this last and heaviest plague of
the ten, the universal, the sudden, the midnight destruction of all, all the
first born of Egypt, has made himself a Monument, and a History, and a Pillar
everlasting to the end of the world, to the end of all place in the world, and
to the end of all time in the world, by which all men may know, that man, how
perverse soever, cannot weary God; that man cannot add to his Rebellions so
many heavy circumstances, but that God can add as many, as heavy degrees to his
Judgments. First, God turns their Rivers into blood; Pharaoh sits that process,
and more, many more; and then in this bloody massacre of all their firstborn,
God brings blood out of the channels of their Rivers, into their chambers, into
all their Chambers; not only to cut off their children from without, Jer. 9.21.
and the young men from the streets (as the Prophet speaks) but (as he says
also there) Death came in at their windows, and entered into their Palaces.
Matt. 26.13.
As Christ says of Mary Magdalens devotion, That wheresoever his Gospel should
be preached in the world, there should also this which this woman had done, be
told for a memorial of her: So we may say of man's obduration, Wheresoever the
Book of God shall be read, Pharaoh shall be an example, that God will have his
ends, let man be possessed with the spirit of contradiction as furiously, with
the spirit of rebellion as ragefully as he will. Fremuerunt Gentes, says David
in the beginning of the second Psalm, The Heathen rage, and they break their
sleep to contrive mischief. And within three verses more we find, The Lord
sits still in heaven, and laughs, and has them in derision. The building of
the Tower of Babel did not put God to build another Tower to confront it; God
did nothing, and brought all their labors and their councels to nothing. Dan.
2.34.
God took no hammer in hand to demolish and cast down Nebuchadnezzars Image,
but a stone that was cut out without hands, smote the image, and broke it in
pieces. Si inceperit, if God once set his work on foot, 1 Samuel 3.12.
If I begin, I will also make an end, says God to Samuel; if he have not begun,
si juraverit, if the Lord have sworn it, it shall be, (those whom the Lord
swore should not enter into his Rest, never entered into his Rest.) If he have
not sworn, si locutus fuerit, that is security enough, the security that the
Prophet Esaias gives through all his Prophecy, os Domini, thus and thus it must
be, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: if he have not gone so far, si
cogitaverit, if he have purposed it, Isai. 19.12. 2 Chro. 25.16. Lam. 2.17.
as that word is used in Esaias; if he have determined it, as the word is used in
the Chronicles; if he have devised such a course, as the word is in Jeremy; God
will accomplish his work, if he have begun it; his oath and word, if he have
said or sworn it; his purpose and determination, if he have intended it;
nothing shall frustrate or evacuate his purpose, he will atchieve his ends,
though there be never a soul that does not sigh, never a heart that does not
ache, never a vein that does not bleed, never a house in which there is not one
dead.

In the building of the material Temple, there was no hammer, nor tool of noise
used: In the fitting and laying of us, the living stones of the mystical
Temple, God would use no hammer, no iron, no occasion of noise, or lamentation;
but there are dispositions which will not be rectified without the hammer, and
are not malleable neither, not fit to be rectified by the hammer, till a hot
fire of vehement affliction have mollified them. Thespesius they say was a man
desperately vicious, irrecoverably wicked; his friends asked the Oracle whether
ever he would mend? The Oracle answered, he would when he was dead; he died of
a sudden fall, at least to the eyes, and in the understanding of the world he
died; but he recovered, and came to life again, and then reported such fearful
visions which he had seen in the other world, upon the souls of some of his
companions, and of his own father, as that out of the apprehension of those
terrors in his ecstasy, in his second life, he justified the Oracle; and after
he had been dead, lived well. Many such stories are in the Legends; but I take
this at the fountain where they take most of theirs, that is, out of Plutarch;
for Plutarch and Virgil are two principal Evangelists of the Legendaries. The
Moral of them all is, That God will imprint a knowledge of his Majesty, and a
terror of his Judgments, though the heart be Iron: Exodus 12. Verse. 33.
He would bring the Egyptians to say with trembling, We are dead men, though
they would not be brought to say it, till there was not a house in which there
was not one dead.

But as in a River that is swelled, though the water do bring down sand and
stones, and logs, yet the water is there still; and the purpose of Nature is to
vent that water, not to pour down that sand, or those stones: so though God be
put to mingle his Judgments with his mercies, yet his mercy is there still,
and his purpose is, ever in those judgments, to manifest his mercy. Where the
Channel is stopped by those Sands, and Stones, and Logs, the Water will find
another Channel; where the heart is hardened by Gods corrections, and thereby
made incapable of his mercy, (as in some dispositions, even Gods corrections do
work such obstructions and obdurations, as in Pharaohs case it was) yet the
water will find a Channel, the mercy of God will flow out, and show it self to
others, though not to him; his mercy will take effect somewhere, as (in
Pharaohs case) it did upon the Children of Israel. And yet God would not show
mercy to them, but so, as that at the same time they also might see his
judgments, and thereby be brought to say, God has a Treasury of both, Mercy
and Justice; and God might have changed the persons, and made the Egyptians the
objects of his Mercies, and us of his Justice.

The first act of Gods mercy toward me, when I see him execute a judgment upon
another, is to confess, that that judgment belonged to me, and thereby to come
to a holy fear, being under the same condemnation; as the one Thief said to the
other, upon their several crosses; Fear not thou, being under the same
condemnation? At this time God delivered his Children out of Egypt; then was
fullness of mercy: but God let them see his power and his powerful indignation
upon others, for their instruction. God brought them out; there was fullness of
mercy toward them: but he brought them out in the night. God would mingle some
shadow, some signification of his judgments in his mercies, of adversity in
prosperity, of night in day, of death in life. The persecuting Angel entered
into none of their houses, God let them live; but God, though he let them live,
would not let them be ignorant, that he could have thrown death in at their
windows too: For they came not into a house where there was not one dead.

We stay no longer upon this first survey of the first house, Part. 1. Domus
Nostra.
That in Egypt: The next is, our own house, our habitation, our family. We have
in the use of our Church, a short, and a larger Catechism; both instruct the
same things, the same Religion, but some capacities require the one, and some
the other. God would catechize us in the knowledge of our mortality; since we
have divested our immortality, he would have us understand our mortality; since
we have induced death upon our selves, God would raise such a benefit to us,
out of death, as that by the continual meditation thereof, death might the less
terrify us, and the less damnifie us. First, His Law alone does that office,
even his Common Law, Morte morieris, and stipendium peccati Mors est: All have
sinned, and all must die. And so his Statute Law too, Heb. 9.27.
Statutum est, It is enacted, it is appointed to man once to die: And then as a
Comment upon that Law, he presents to us, either his great Catechisms, Isai.
37.36.
Sennacheribs Catechism, in which we see almost Two hundred thousand Soldiers,
(more by many then both sides arm and pay, in these noiseful Wars of our
Neighbors) slain in one night; 2 Chro. 13.
or Jeroboams Catechism, where Twelve hundred thousand being presented in the
field, (more by many, then all the Kings of Christendom arm and pay) Five
hundred thousand men, chosen men, and men of mighty valor, (as the Text
qualifies them) were slain upon one side in one day; or David's Catechism, 2 Samuel 24.
where Threescore and ten thousand were devoured of the Pestilence, we know not
in how few hours; or this Egyptian Catechism, of which we can make no
conjecture, because we know no number of their houses; and there was not a
house, in which there was not one dead; or God presents us his Catechism in the
Primitive Church, where every day may be written in Red Ink, every day the
Church celebrated Five hundred, in some Copies Five thousand Martyrs every day,
that had writ down their names in their own blood, for the Gospel of Christ
Jesus; or God presents us his Catechism in the later Roman Church; where, upon
our attempt of the Reformation, they boast to have slain in one day Seventy
Millions, in another Two hundred Millions of them that attempted and assisted
the Reformation; or else Gods presents his lesser Catechisms, the several
Funerals of our particular Friends in the Congregation; or he abridges this
Catechism of the Congregation to a less volume then that, to the consideration
of every particular piece of our own Family at home: For so, there is not a
house, in which there is not one dead.

Prove. 19.18.
Have you not left a dead son at home, whom you should have chastned, whilst
there was hope, and have not? Whom you should have beaten with the rod, and
23.13.
to deliver his soul from Hell, and have not? Whom you should have made an
Abel, a Keeper of Sheep; Genesis 4.2.
or a Cain, a Tiller of the Ground; that is, bestowed him, bound him, to some
Occupation, or Profession, or Calling, and have not? You may believe God
without an oath; 1 Samuel 3.13.
but God has sworn, That because Eli restrained not the insolences of his
sons, no sacrifice should purge his house for ever. And scarce shall you find
in the whole Book of God, any so vehement an intermination, any judgment so
vehemently imprinted, as that upon Eli, for not restraining the insolences of
his sons: For in that case God says, I will do a thing in Israel, at which,
both the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle: That is, he would
inflict a sudden death upon the Father, for his indulgence to his sons. Have ye
not left such a dead son, dead in contumacy, and in disobedience, at home? Have
you not left a dead daughter at home? A daughter whom you should have kept at
home, and have not; but suffered, with Dinah, to go out to see the daughters of
the land, and so expose her self to dangerous tentations, as Dinah did? Have ye
not left a dead servant at home, Genesis 34.1.
whom ye have made so perfect in deceiving of others, as that now he is able to
take out a new lesson of himself, and deceive you? Have you left no dead
Inmates, dead Sojourners, dead Lodgers at home? Of whom, so they advance your
profit, you take no care how vicious in themselves they be, or how dangerous to
the State. Deuteronomy. 31.12.
Gather men, and women, and children, and strangers within thy gate, says God,
that they may all learn the Law of the Lord. If thy care spread not over all
thy family, whosoever is dead in thy family by thy negligence, thou shall
answer the King that Subject, that is, the King of Heaven that Soul.

We have (as we proposed to do) surveyed this House in Egypt, Part. 3.
where the Text lays it, and the House at home where we dwell; there is a third
House, which we are, this House of Clay, and of Mud-walls, our selves, these
bodies. And is there none dead there? not within us? The House it self is ready
to fall as soon as it is set up: The next thing that we are to practice after
we are born, is to die. The Timber of this House is but our Bones; and, My
bones are waxen old, says David; and perchance not with age, but as Job says,
His bones are full of the sins of his youth. Ps. 32.3. Job 20.11. Job. 6.12.
The lome-walls of this House are but this flesh; and Our strength is not the
strength of stones, neither is our flesh brass; and therefore, Cursed is the
man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm. Jer. 17.5.
The windows of this House are but our eyes; and, the light of mine eyes is
gone from me, says David; and we know not how, nor how soon. Esai. 59.10.
The foundation is but our feet; and, besides that Our feet stumble at noon,
(as the Prophet complains) David found them so cold, as that no art nor
diligence could warm them. And the roof and covering of this House, is but this
thatch of hair; and it is denounced by more then one of the Prophets, Esai.
15.23. Jer. 48.37.
That upon all heads shall fall baldness: The House it self is always ready to
fall; but is there not also always some dead in this House, in our selves? Is
not our firstborn dead? Our firstborn (says St. Augustine) are the offspring
of our beloved sin; for we have some Concubine-sins, and some one sin that we
are married to: Whatsoever we have begot upon that wife, whatsoever we have got
by that sin, that is our firstborn, and that is dead: How much the better soever
we make account to live by it, it is dead. For, as it was the mischievous
invention of a Persecutor in the Primitive Church, to tie living men to dead
bodies, and let them die so; so men that tie the rest of their Estate to goods
ill gotten, do but invent a way to ruin and destroy all. But that which is
truly every man's first-born-childe, is his zeal to the Religion and Service of
God: As soon as we know that there is a Soul, that Soul knows that there is a
God, and a Worship belonging to that God; and this Worship is Religion. And is
not this firstborn child dead in many of us? In him that is not stirred, not
moved, not affected for his Religion, his pulse is gone, and that is an ill
sign. In him that dares not speak for it, not counsel, not preach for it, his
Religion lies speechless; and that is an ill sign. In him that feeds not
Religion, that gives nothing to the maintenance thereof, his Religion is in a
consumption. In a word, if his zeal be quenched, his firstborn is dead. And so
for these three Houses, That in Egypt, that at home, that in our selves, There
is not a house in which there is not one dead.

Part 4.
The fourth House falling under this survey, is this House in which we are met
now, the house of God; the Church and the ground wrapped up in the same
consecration: and in this house you have seen, and seen in a lamentable
abundance, and seen with sad eyes, that for many months there has scarce been
one day in which there has not been one dead. How should there be but
multiplicity of deaths? why should it be, or be looked to be, or thought to be
otherwise? The Master of the house, Christ Jesus, is dead before; and now it is
not so much a part of our punishment, for the first Adam, as an imitation of
the second Adam, to die; death is not so much a part of our debt to Nature, or
Sin, or Satan, as a part of our conformity to him who died for us. If death
were in the nature of it merely evil to us, Christ would have redeemed us, even
from this death, by his death. But as the death of Christ Jesus is the Physic
of mankind, so this natural death of the body is the application of that
Physic to every particular man, who only by death can be made capable of that
glory which his death has purchased for us. This Physic, all they whom God
has taken to him, have taken, and (by his grace) received life by it. Their
firstborn is dead; the body was made before the soul, and that body is dead.
Rachel wept for her children, and would not be comforted, because they were
not. If these children, and parents, and friends, and neighbors of ours were
not, if they were resolved into an absolute annihilation, we could not be
comforted in their behalf; but Christ, who says, he is the Life, lest we should
think that to belong only to this life, says also that he is the Resurrection.
We were contracted to Christ in our Election, married to him in our Baptism, in
the Grave we are bedded with him, and in the Resurrection estated and put into
possession of his Kingdom: And therefore, because these words do not only
affect us with that sad consideration, That there is none of these houses in
whieh there is not one dead; but minister withal that consolation, That there
is none so dad, but may have a Resurrection, We shall pass another short survey
over all these Houses.

Thus far we have surveyed these four Houses, Egypt, our families, our selves,
and the Church, as so many places of Infection, so many temporal or spiritual
Pesthouses, into which our sins had heaped powder, and Gods indignation had
cast a match to kindle it. But now the very phrase of the Text, which is, That
in every house there was one dead, There was, invites us to a more particular
consideration of Gods mercy, in that, howsoever it were, it is not so now; in
which we shall look how far this beam of mercy shines out in every of these
houses, that it is not so now, There is not one dead in every house now; but
the Infection, (Temporal and Spiritual Infection) is so far ceased, as that not
only those that are alive, do not die, as before; but those whom we called
dead, are not dead; they are alive in their spirits, in Abraham's bosom; and
they are alive in their very bodies, in their contract and inherence in Christ
Jesus in an infallible assurance of a joyful Resurrection.

Now in the survey of the first sort of houses, of Egypt, Egyptus.
herein we are interrupted. Here they were dead, and are dead still: We see
clearly enough Gods indignation upon them; but we see neither of those beams of
mercy, either that there die no more, or that we have the comfort of a joyful
Resurrection in them who are dead: For this fearful calamity of the death of
their firstborn wrought no more upon them, but to bring them to that
exclamation, that vociferation, that voice of despairful murmuring, Omnes
Moriemur, We are all dead men: v. 33.
And they were mischievous Prophets upon themselves; for, proceeding in that
sin which induced that calamity and the rest upon them, they pursued the
children of Israel through the Red Sea, and perished in it; and then they came
not to die one in a house, but as it is expressed in the Story, and repeated in
the Psalms, Exodus 14.28. Psalm. 106.10.
There remained not so much as one of them alive; so that in their case there
is no comfort in the first beam of mercy, that this phrase, They were dead, or
They did die, should intimate, That now they did not die, now Gods correction
had so wrought upon them, as that God withdrew that correction from them, for
it pursued them, and accompanied them to their final and total destruction. And
then for the other beam of mercy, of transferring them which seemed dead in the
eyes of the world, to a better life, by that hand of death, to present
happiness in their souls, and to an assured resurrection to joy and glory in
their bodies, in the communion of Gods Saints, Moses has given us little hope
in their behalf; for thus he encourages his Countrymen in that place, The
Egyptians whom you have seen this day, Exodus 14.13.
you shall see no more for ever: No more in this world, no more in the world to
come. Beloved, as God empayl'd a Goshen in Egypt, a place for the righteous
amongst the wicked; so there is an Egypt in every Goshen, neasts of Snakes in
the fairest Gardens, and even in this City (which in the sense of the Gospel,
we may call, The Holy City; as Christ called Jerusalem, though she had
multiplied transgressions, The Holy City, because she had not cast away his
Law, though she had disobeyed it: So howsoever your sins have provoked God, yet
as you retain a zealous profession of the truth of his Religion, I may in his
name, and do in the bowels of his mercy, call you, The Holy City) even in this
City, no doubt but the hand of God fell upon thousands in this deadly
infection, who were no more affected with it, then those Egyptians, to cry out,
Omnes Moriemur, We can but die, and we must die: And, Edamus, and bibamus, cras
moriemur, Let us eat and drink, and take our pleasure, and make our profits,
for to morrow we shall die, and so were cut off by the hand of God, some even
in their robberies, in half-empty houses; and in their drunkenness in
voluptuous and riotous houses; and in their lusts and wantonness in licentious
houses; and so took in infection and death, like Judas's sop, death dipped and
soaked in sin. Men whose lust carried them into the jaws of infection in lewd
houses, and seeking one sore perished with another; men whose rapine and
covetousness broke into houses, and seeking the Wardrobes of others, found
their own winding sheet, in the infection of that house where they stole their
own death; men who sought no other way to divert sadness, but strong drink in
riotous houses, and there drank up David's cup of Malediction, the cup of
Condemned men, of death, in the infection of that place. For these men that
died in their sins, that sinned in their dying, that sought and hunted after
death so sinfully, we have little comfort of such men, in the phrase of this
Text, They were dead; for they are dead still: As Moses said of the Egyptians,
I am afraid we may say of these men, We shall see them no more for ever.

But God will give us the comfort of this phrase in the next House; Domus
nostra.
This next House is Domus nostra, our Dwelling House, our Habitation, our
Family; and there, They were dead; they were, but by Gods goodness they are
not. If this savor of death have been the savor of life unto us; if this heavy
weight of Gods hand upon us have awakened us to a narrower survey, and a better
discharge of our duties toward all the parts of our Families, we may say, to
our comforts and his glory, There was a son dead in disobedience and murmuring;
there was a daughter dead in a dangerous easiness of conversation; there was a
servant dead in the practice of deceit and falsifying; there was, but the Lord
has breathed a new life into us, the Lord has made even his tempest a
refreshing, and putrefaction a perfume unto us. The same measure of wind that
blows out a candle, kindles a fire; this correction that has hardened some,
has entendred and mollified us; and howsoever there were dead sons, and dead
daughters, and dead servants, this holy sense of Gods Judgments shall not only
preserve for the future, that we shall admit no more such dead limbs into our
Family, but even give to them who were (in these kinds) formerly dead, a new
life, a blessed resurrection from all their sinful habits, by the power of his
grace, though reached to them with a bloody hand, and in a bitter cup, in this
heavy calamity; and as Christ said of himself, they shall say in him, I was
dead, but am alive; and by that grace of God, I am that I am.

The same comfort also shall we have in this phrase of the Text, in our third
House; the third House is not Domus nostra, Domus nos.
but Domus nos, not the House we inhabit, but the House we carry; not that
House which is our House, but that House which is our selves: There also, They
were dead; they were, but are not. For beloved, we told you before in our
former survey of these several Houses, That our firstborn, (for still ye
remember, they were the firstborn of Egypt, that induce all this application;)
Our firstborn in this House, in our selves, is our Zeal; not merely and
generally our Religion, but our zeal to our Religion. For Religion in general,
is natural to us; the natural man has naturally some sense of God, and some
inclination to worship that Power, whom he conceives to be God, and this
Worship is Religion. But then the first thing that this general pious affection
produces in us, is Zeal, which is an exaltation of Religion. Primus actus
voluntatis est Amor; Philosophers and Divines agree in that, That the will of
man cannot be idle, and the first act that the will of man produces, is Love;
for till it love something, prefer and choose something, till it would have
something, it is not a Will; neither can it turn upon any object, before God.
So that this first, and general, and natural love of God, is not begotten in my
soul, nor produced by my soul, but created and infused with my soul, and as my
soul; there is no soul that knows she is a soul, without such a general sense
of the love of God. But to love God above all, to love him with all my
faculties, this exaltation of this religious love of God, is the firstborn of
Religion, and this is Zeal. Religion, which is the Worship of that Power which
I call God, does but make me a man; the natural man has that Religion; but
that which makes me a Father, and gives me an offspring, a firstborn, that is
Zeal: By Religion I am an Adam, but by Zeal I am an Abel produced out of that
Adam. Now if we consider times not long since past, there was scarce one house,
scarce one of us, in whom this firstborn, this Zeal was not dead. Discretion
is the ballast of our Ship, that carries us steady; but Zeal is the very
Freight, the Cargason, the Merchandise it self, which enriches us in the land
of the living; and this was our case, we were all come to esteem our Ballast
more then our Freight, our Discretion more then our Zeal; we had more care to
please great men then God; more consideration of an imaginary change of times,
then of unchangeable eternity it self. And as in storms it falls out often that
men cast their Wares and their Fraights overboard, but never their Ballast, so
as soon as we thought we saw a storm, in point of Religion, we cast off our
Zeal, our Freight, and stuck to our Ballast, our Discretion, and thought it
sufficient to sail on smoothly, and steadily, and calmly, and discreetly in the
world, and with the time, though not so directly to the right Haven. So our
firstborn in this House, in our selves, our Zeal, was dead. It was; there is
the comfortable word of our Text. But now, now that God has taken his fan into
his hand, and sifted his Church, now that God has put us into a straight and
crooked Limbeck, passed us through narrow and difficult trials, and set us upon
a hot fire, and drawn us to a more precious substance and nature then before;
now that God has given our Zeal a new concoction, a new refining, a new
inanimation by this fire of tribulation, let us embrace and nurse up this new
resurrection of this Zeal, which his own Spirit has begot and produced in us,
and return to God with a whole and entire soul, without dividing or scattering
our affections upon other objects; and in the sincerity of the true Religion,
without inclinations in our selves, to induce; and without inclinableness, from
others, upon whom we may depend, to admit, any dramms of the dregs of a
superstitious Religion; for it is a miserable extremity, when we must take a
little poison for physic. And so having made the right use of Gods
corrections, we shall enjoy the comfort of this phrase, in this House, our
selves, our firstborn, our Zeal was dead; it was, but it is not.

Lastly, in this fourth House, the House where we stand now, the House of God,
and of his Saints, God affords us a fair beam of this consolation, in the
phrase of this Text also, They were dead. How appliable to you, in this place,
is that which God said to Moses, Put off thy shoes, for thou treadest on holy
ground; put off all confidence, all standing, all relying upon worldly
assurances, and consider upon what ground you tread; upon ground so holy, as
that all the ground is made of the bodies of Christians, and therein has
received a second consecration. Every puff of wind within these walls, may blow
the father into the sons eyes, or the wife into her husbands, or his into hers,
or both into their childrens, or their childrens into both. Every grain of dust
that flies here, is a piece of a Christian; you need not distinguish your Pews
by figures; you need not say, I sit within so many of such a neighbor, but I
sit within so many inches of my husbands, or wives, or childs, or friends
grave. Ambitious men never made more shift for places in Court, then dead men
for graves in Churches; and as in our later times, we have seen two and two
almost in every Place and Office, so almost every Grave is oppressed with
twins; and as at Christ's resurrection some of the dead arose out of their
graves, that were buried again; so in this lamentable calamity, the dead were
buried, and thrown up again before they were resolved to dust, to make room for
more. But are all these dead? They were, says the Text; they were in your eyes,
and therefore we forbid not that office of the eye, that holy tenderness, to
weep for them that are so dead. But there was a part in every one of them, that
could not die; which the God of life, who breathed it into them, from his own
mouth, has sucked into his own bosom. And in that part which could die, They
were dead, but they are not. The soul of man is not safer wrapped up in the
bosom of God, then the body of man is wrapped up in the Contract, and in the
eternal Decree of the Resurrection. As soon shall God tear a leaf out of the
Book of Life, and cast so many of the Elect into Hell fire, as leave the body
of any of his Saints in corruption for ever. To what body shall Christ Jesus be
loath to put to his hand, to raise it from the grave, then, that put to his very
Godhead, the Divinity it self, to assume all our bodies, when in one person,
he put on all mankind in his Incarnation? As when my true repentance has
re-ingraffed me in my God, and re-incorporated me in my Savior, no man may
reproach me, and say, Thou wast a sinner: So, since all these dead bodies shall
be restored by the power, and are kept alive in the purpose of Almighty God, we
cannot say, They are, scarce that they were dead. When time shall be no more,
when death shall be no more, they shall renew, or rather continue their being.
But yet, beloved, for this state of their grave, (for it becomes us to call it
a state; it is not an annihilation, no part of Gods Saints can come to nothing)
as this state of theirs is not to be lamented, as though they had lost any
thing which might have conduced to their good, by departing out of this world;
so neither is it a state to be joyed in so, as that we should expose our selves
to dangers unnecessarily, in thinking that we want any thing conducing to our
good, which the dead enjoy. As between two men of equal age, if one sleep, and
the other wake all night, yet they rise both of an equal age in the morning; so
they who shall have slept out a long night of many ages in the grave, and they
who shall be caught up in the clouds, to meet the Lord Jesus in the air, at
the last day, shall enter all at once in their bodies into Heaven. No
antiquity, no seniority for their bodies; neither can their souls who went
before, be said to have been there a minute before ours, because we shall all
be in a place that reckons not by minutes. Clocks and Sun-dials were but a late
invention upon earth; but the Sun it self, and the earth it self, was but a
late invention in heaven. God had been an infinite, a super-infinite, an
unimaginable space, millions of millions of unimaginable spaces in heaven,
before the Creation. And our afternoon shall be as long as Gods forenoon; for,
as God never saw beginning, so we shall never see end; but they whom we tread
upon now, and we whom others shall tread upon hereafter, shall meet at once,
where, though we were dead, dead in our several houses, dead in a sinful Egypt,
dead in our family, dead in our selves, dead in the Grave, yet we shall be
received, with that consolation, and glorious consolation, you were dead, but
are alive. Enter ye blessed into the Kingdom, prepared for you, from the
beginning.

Amen.
A SERMON Preached at the Temple. SERMON XXII.
Esther 4.16. Go and assemble all the Jews that are found in Shushan, and fast
ye for me, and eat not, nor drink in three days, day nor night: I also, and my
Maids will fast likewise; and so I will go in to the King, which is not
according to the Law: And if I perish, I perish.


NExt to the eternal and coessential Word of God, Christ Jesus, the written
Word of God, the Scriptures concern us most; and therefore next to the person
of Christ, and his Offices, the Devil has troubled the Church, with most
questions about the certainty of Scriptures, and the Canon thereof. It was
late, before the Spirit of God settled and established an unanime, and general
consent in his Church, for the accepting of this Book of Esther: For, not only
the holy Bishop Melito (who defended the Christians by an Apology to the
Emperor) removed this Book from the Canon of the Scripture, One hundred and
fifty years after Christ; but Athanasius also, Three hundred and forty years
after Christ, refused it too: Yea, Gregory Nazianzen (though he deserved, and
had the style and title of Theologus, The Divine; and though he came to clearer
times, living almost Four hundred years after Christ) did not yet submit
himself to an acceptance of this Book. But a long time there has been no
doubt of it; and it is certainly part of that Scripture which is profitable to
teach, 2 Timothy 3.16.
to reprove, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness. To which purpose, we
shall see what is afforded us in this History of this Heroical Woman, Esther;
what she did in a perplexed and scrupulous case, when an evident danger
appeared, and an evident Law was against her action; and from thence consider,
Sermon. 22.
what every Christian Soul ought to do, when it is surprised and overtaken with
any such scruples or difficulties to the Conscience.

For Esther in particular, this was her case. She being Wife to the King,
Haman, who had great power with the King, had got from him an Edict, for the
destruction of all her people the Jews. When this was intimated to her by
Mordecai, who presented to her Conscience, not only an irreligious forsaking
of God, if she forbore to mediate and use her interest in the King for the
saving of hers, and Gods people; but an unnatural and unprovident forsaking of
her self, because her danger was involved in theirs; and that she her self
being of that Nation, could not be safe in her person, though in the Kings
house, if that Edict were executed, though she had not then so ordinary access
to the King, as formerly she had had: yea, though there were a Law in her way,
that she might not come till she was called, yet she takes the resolution to
go, she puts off all Passion, and all particular respects, she consecrates the
whole action to God; and having in a rectified and well informed Conscience
found it acceptable to him, she neglects both that particular Law, That none
might have access to the King uncalled, and that general Law, That every Man is
bound to preserve himself; and she exposes her self to an imminent, and (for
any thing she knew) an unescapable danger of death: If I perish, I perish.

For the ease of all our memories, we shall provide best, Divisio.
by contracting all, which we are to handle, to these two parts; Esthers
preparation, and Esthers resolution: How she disposed her self, how she
resolved: What her consultation was, what her execution was to be. Her
preparation is an humiliation; and there, first she prepares, that that glory
which God should receive, by that humiliation, should be general; All the
people should be taught, and provoked to glorify God; vade, congrega, Go, and
assemble all. Secondly, The act which they were to do, was to fast, Jejunate:
And thirdly, It was a limited fast, Tribus diebus, Eat not, nor drink in three
days, and three nights: And then, this fast of theirs, was with relation, and
respect to her, Jejunate super me, Fast ye for me. But yet so, as she would not
receive an ease by their affliction; put them to do it for her, and she do
nothing for her self; Ego cum Ancillis, I and my Maids will fast too; and
similiter, likewise, that is, As exactly as they shall. And so far extends her
preparation: Her resolution derives it self into two branches. First, That she
will break an Humane and Positive Law, Ingrediar contra legem, I will go in,
though it be not according to the Law; and secondly, She neglects even the Law
of Nature, the Law of Self-preservation, Si peream, peream.

To enter into the first part, The assembling of the people; though the
occasion and purpose here were religious, yet the assembling of them was a
civil act, 1. Part. Assemblies.
an act of Jurisdiction and Authority. Almost all States have multiplied Laws
against Assemblies of People, by private Authority, though upon pretenses of
Religious occasions. All Conventicles, all Assemblies, must have this
character, this impression upon them, That they be Legitima, lawful: And,
Legitima sola sunt, quae habent authoritatem principis, only those are lawful
which are made by the Authority of the State. Aspergebatur infamia Alcibia des,
quod in domo sua facere Mysteria dicebatur. There went an ill report of him,
because he had sacrifices, and other worships of the gods at home in his own
house: And this was not imputed to him, as a Schismatical thing, or an act of a
different Religion from the State, but an act of disaffection to the State, and
of Sedition. In times of persecution, when no exercise of true Religion is
admitted, these private Meetings may not be denied to be lawful: As for bodily
sustenance, if a man could no otherwise avoid starving, the Schoolmen, and the
Casuists, resolve truly, That it were no sin to steal so much meat as would
preserve life; so, those souls, which without that, must necessarily starve,
may steal their Spiritual food in corners, and private meetings: But if we will
steal either of these foods, Temporal or Spiritual, because that meat which we
may have, is not so dressed, so dished, so sauced, so served in, as we would
have it; but accompanied with some other ceremonies then are agreeable to our
taste; This is an inexcusable Theft, and these are pernicious Conventicles.

Dan. 6.
When that Law was made by Darius, That no man for thirty days should ask any
thing of God or man, but only of the King; though it were a Law that had all
circumstances to make it no Law, yet Daniel took no occasion by this, to induce
any new manner of worshipping of God; he took no more company with him to
affront the Law, or exasperate the Magistrate; only he did as he had used to
do before; and he did not disguise, nor conceal that which he did, but he set
open his windows, and prayed in his Chamber. But in these private Conventicles,
where they will not live voto aperto, that is, pray so, as that they would be
content to be heard what they pray for; As the Jews in those Christian
Countries, where they are allowed their Synagogues, pray against Edom, and
Edomites by name, but they mean (as appears in their private Catechisms) by
Edom, and Edomites, the Christian Church, and Christian Magistracy; so when
these men pray in their Conventicles, for the confusion, and rooting out of
Idolatry and Antichrist, they intend by their Idolatry, a Cross in Baptism; and
by their Antichrist, a man in a Surpless; and not only the persons, but the
Authority that admits this Idolatry, and this Antichristianism. As vapors and
winds shut up in Vaults, engender Earthquakes; so these particular spirits in
their Vault-Prayers, and Cellar-Service, shake the Pillars of State and Church.
Domus mea, Domus orationis; and Domus orationis, Domus mea: My house is the
house of Prayer, says God; and so the house of Prayer must be his house. The
Centurion, of whom Christ testified, That he had not found so great Faith even
in Israel; Matthew. 8.10.
thought not himself worthy, that Christ should come under his Roof; and these
men think no Roof, but theirs, fit for Christ; no, not the Roof of his own
House, the Church: For, I speak not of those Meetings, where the blessed
Children of God join in the House, to worship God in the same manner, as is
ordained in the Church, or in a manner agreeable to that: Such Religious
Meetings as these, God will give a blessing to; but when such Meetings are in
opposition, and detestation of Church Service, though their purpose, which come
thither, do not always intend sedition, yet they may easily think, that none of
those Disciples is so ill a Natural Logician, but that he comes quickly to this
conclusion, That if those exercises be necessary to their Salvation, that State
that denies them those exercises deals injustly with them: And when people are
brought to that disaffection, it is not always in their power that brought them
together so far, to settle them or hold them from going farther. In this case
which we have in hand, of Esther and Mordecai's assembling all the Jews in
Shusan, which was the principal City of Persia, where the Residence of the
Princes was, (Persepolis was a Metropolitan City too; but only for the
treasure, and for the Sepulchers of their Kings, but the Court was at Shusan.)
If when they had been assembled, and their desperate case presented to them,
That an Edict of a general Massacre was going out against them, was it not more
likely (judging humanely, and by comparison of like cases) that they would have
turned to take arms, rather then to fast and pray for their deliverance? How
good soever their pretense (and perchance purpose) be, that assemble people,
and discontent them, the bridle, the stern, is no longer in their hands; but
there arise unexpected storms, of which, if they were not authors in their
purpose, yet they are the occasioners. In Esthers case, the proceeding was safe
enough; for they were called to see, that the Queen her self had undertaken
their deliverance, their deliverance was very likely to be effected; and
therefore it became them to assist her purpose with their devotion, expressed
first in Fasting.

Fasting is not a mere humane Imposition, Jejunate.
as some have calumniated it to be: The Commandments of it are frequent from
God to his people, and the practice of it even amongst the Ninevites, upon
Jona's Preaching, is expressed to be rigid and severe, Let neither man nor
beast taste any thing, nor feed, nor drink water, but let man and beast put on
sackcloth, Jon. 3.7.
and cry mightily unto God. It is true, that they found often that their Fasts
did no good; but when they expostulate it with God, Wherefore have we fasted,
and thou see it not, Esai. 58.2.
we have punished our selves, and thou regardest it not; They received a direct
answer from God, Behold, in the days of your fast you seek your own will,
Ezech. 7.5.
and require all your debts; when ye fasted and mourned, did ye fast unto me?
To place therefore any part of our righteousness, or to dignifie the act of
Fasting, with the name of Merit or Satisfaction, did then, and will always
corrupt and alter the nature of a true and acceptable fast: And therefore we
detest the definition of a fast in the Roman Church, and Abstinentia secundum
formam ecclesiae, intuitu Satisfaciendi, pro peccatis, and acquirendi vitam
aeternam; That fasting is a satisfaction for sins, and an acquisition of life
everlasting. But since the reason of fasting remains, the practice must remain
still: For when Christ excused his Apostles for not fasting, as the Disciples
of John Baptist, and as the Pharisees did, he did not say that fasting is taken
away; but he said, Luc. 5.33.
The Bridegroom was not taken away; but he should be taken away, and they
should fast. When occasions press us, fasting is required at our hands: Caro
mea jumentum, My flesh is my beast; via Christus, and Christ is the way I am to
go; Nonne cibaria ferocienti detraham? Aug.
If it be too wanton, shall not I withdraw some of the provender? Et fame
Domem, quem far non possum, If I cannot govern him, shall I not endeavor to
tame him? And therefore, though by reason of former abuses, it be a slippery
Doctrine, the practice of Fasting, (for scarce any man puts himself to much
fasting, but he is ready to tell God of it, with the Pharisee, I fast twice a
week: And from Hieroms praise of it, Jejunium non est virtus, S. Hier.
sed gradus ad virtutem, That though fasting be not a virtue, yet it is the way
to virtue; we come a step farther with Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
In choro virtutum, extremum sortitur Jejunium, That though fasting be the last
of virtues (except Chrysostom mean by extremum, Joel 1.34. Eccles. 11.
the first) yet it is one; yet Sanctificate vobis Jejunium, Fast with a holy
purpose; and it is a holy action. As you are bid to cast your bread upon the
waters, for many days after you shall find it again; so also cast your fasting
upon the waters, look for no particular reward of it, and God shall give you a
benefit by it in the whole course of your lives.

Tribus Diebus.
But the Jejunate, Fasting it self, has not so much opposition as the Tribus
diebus, that it must be Three days; the certain days, and the limiting of the
time, that is it that offends. All men will say that fasting is necessary to
all men; but not this proportion, and this measure to all men alike. They are
content with that of Augustine, Ego in Evangelicis and Apostolicis literis
totoque instrumento novo revolvens, video praeceptum esse jejunium, As often as
I consider the Gospel, every where I find Commandments for fasting; but they
will have the rest too: Quibus diebus oportet, aut non oportet jejunare,
praeceptum Domini and Apostolorum non video definitum, Upon what days we should
fast, says he, I see no Commandment of Christ or the Apostles: And it is true,
there is no express Commandment for it; but there is an express Commandment to
hear the Church. In the Old Testament God gave express Commandment, De Jejuniis
stativis; certain fixed and Anniversary Fasts: The tenth of the same month
shall be a holy Convocation unto you, and affligetis animas vestras, Ye shall
humble your souls; and every person that does not that, that same day, Levit.
23.27.
shall even be cut off from his people. The disease which they had is
hereditary to us; Concupiscencies in the flesh, and coldness in the service of
God: And though it may be true, that the Church cannot know my particular
infirmities, nor the time when they press me; yet as no Physician for the body
can prescribe me a Receipt against a Fever, and bid me take it such a day,
because perchance at that day I shall have no Fever; yet he can prescribe me
certain Rules and Receipts, which if I take at his times, I shall be the safer
all the year: So our Spiritual Physician, the Church, though she cannot know
when my body needs this particular Physic of fasting, yet she knows, that by
observing the time which she prescribes, I shall always be in the better
spiritual health. As soon as the Church was settled, Fasts were settled too: When
in the Primitive Church they fixed certain times for giving Orders, and making
Ministers, they appointed Fasts at those times; when they fixed certain times
for solemn Baptism, (as they did Easter and Whitsontide) they appointed Fasts
then too; and so they did in their solemn and public Penances. So also when
Christians increased in number, and that therefore, besides the Sabbath Day,
they used to call them to Church, and to give the Sacrament upon other days
too; as soon as Wednesday and Friday were appointed for that purpose, for the
Sacrament, they were appointed to be fasted too. And therefore when St. Cyril
says, Cyril.
Vis tibi ostendam, quale jejunare debes jejunium? Jejuna ab omni peccato.
Shall I tell you what Fast God looks for at your hands, Fast from sin; yet this
is not all the Fasting that he exacts, (though it be indeed the effect and
accomplishment of all) but he adds, Non ideo hoc dicimus, We say not this, says
he, because we would give liberty, Habemus enim quadragesimum, and quartum, and
sextum Hebdomadae diem quibus solemniter jejunamus, We have a fixed Lent to
fast in, and we have Wednesdays and Fridays fixed to fast in. In all times, Gods
people had fixed and limited Fasts, besides these Fasts which were enjoined
upon emergent dangers, as this of Ester. In which there is a harder
circumstance then this, That it was a Fast limited to certain days; for it is,
Jejunate pro me, Fast you for me. And these words may seem to give some color,
some countenance to the Doctrine of the Roman Church, That the merits of one
man may be applied to another; which Doctrine is the foundation of Indulgences,
and the fuel of Purgatory: In which they go so far, as to say, That one may fee
an Attorney to satisfy God for him; he may procure another man to Fast,
Grether.
or do other works of mortification for him: And he that does so for his
Client, Sanguinem pro sanguine Christo reddit, He pays Christ his blood again,
and gives him as much as he received from him; and more, Deum sibi debitorem
efficit, he brings God into his debt, and may turn that dept upon whom he will;
and God must wipe off so much of the other man's score, to whom he intends it.
They go beyond this too; That satisfaction may be made to God, even by our
selves after our death: As they say, when they had brought Maximilian the
Emperor to that mortification, that he commanded upon his deathbed, that his
body should be whipped after he was dead; that purpose of his, though it were
not executed, was a satisfaction of the Justice of God. And (as error can find
no place to stop at) they go yet farther, when they extend this power of
satisfaction even to Hell it self, by authorizing those fables, That a dead man
which appeared, and said he was damned, was by this flagellation, by his
friends whipping of himself in his behalf, brought to repentance in hell, and
so to faith in hell, and so to salvation in hell.

But in the words of Esther here is no intimation of this Heresy; when Queen
Esther appoints others to fast for her, she knew she could no more be the
better for their fasting, then she could be the leaner, or in the better health
for it; but because she was to have benefit by the subsequent act, by their
prayers, she provokes them to that, by which their prayers might be the more
acceptable and effectual, that is, to fasting. And so because the whole action
was for her, and her good success in that enterprise, they are in that sense
properly said to have fasted for her: So that this Jejunate super me, as the
word is, Gnalai, super me, in my behalf, is no more but Orate pro me, Hier.
Pray for me; and so Saint Hierom translates these words, Orate pro me, Pray
for me. And therefore, since Prayers is the way which God has given us to
batter Heaven, whether facta manu Deum oramus, Tertul.
and vim gratum ei facimus, whether we besiege God with our prayers, in these
public Congregations, or whether we wrestle with him hand to hand in our
Chambers, in the battle of a troubled Conscience, let us live soberly and
moderately; and in Bello, and in Duello, here in the Congregation, and at home
in our private Colluctations, we shall be the likelier to prevail with God; for
though we receive assistance from the prayer of others, that must not make us
lazy in our own behalfs; which is Esthers last preparation, she bids all the
people fast for her, that is, for the good success of her good purposes; but
not the people alone, she and her own maids will fast likewise.

Qui fecit te sine te, non salvabit te sine te, Ego and Ancill.
is a saying of Saint Augustine, never too often repeated; and God and his
Church are of one mind; for the Church that did Baptize thee without thy
asking, will not fast for thee, nor pray for thee, without thou fast and pray
for thy self. As in spiritual things, charity begins with ourselves, and I am
bound to wish my own salvation, rather then any other man's; so I am bound to
trust to my making sure of my salvation, by that which I do my self, rather
then by that which I procure others to do for me. Domus Dei, Domus orationis;
we have inestimable profit by the public Prayers of the Church, the House of
God; but as there is Deus, and Domus ejus, so there must be Ego, and Domus mea,
I and my House will serve the Lord. Jos. ult. 15.
I also and my Maids will fast likewise, says Esther, in her great enterprise;
for, that which the Original expresses here, by Gnalai, for me, the Chalde
Paraphrase expresses by Gnimmi, with me: She was as well to fast as they. It
was a great confidence in that Priest that comforted Saint Augustines Mother,
Fieri non potest, ut filius istarum lachrymarum pereat, It is impossible that
the son, for whom so good a mother has poured out so devout tears, should
perish at last; it was a confidence which no man may take to himself, to go to
Heaven by that water, the tears of other men; but tu and domus tua, Do thou and
thy house serve the Lord; teach thine own eyes to weep, thine own body to
fulfill the sufferings of Christ; thine own appetite to fast, thine own heart,
and thine own tongue to pray. Come and participate of the devotions of the
Church; but yet also in thy Chapel of ease, in thine own Bedchamber, provide
that thy self and thy servants, all thy senses, and all thy faculties, may also
fast and pray; and so go with a religious confidence as Esther did, about all
thy other worldly businesses and undertakings.

This was her Preparation. Her Devotion has two branches; 2. Part.
she was to transgress a positive Law, a Law of the State; and she neglected
the Law of Nature it self, in exposing her self to that danger. How far Humane
Laws do bind the conscience, how far they lay such an obligation upon us, as
that, if we transgress them, we do not only incur the penalty, but sin toward
God, has been a perplexed question in all times, and in all places. But how
diverse soever their opinions be, in that, they all agree in this, That no Law,
which has all the essential parts of a Law, (for Laws against God, Laws beyond
the power of him that pretends to make them, are no Laws) no Law can be so
merely a Humane Law, but that there is in it a Divine part. There is in every
Humane Law, part of the Law of God, which is obedience to the Superior. That
Man cannot bind the conscience, because he cannot judge the conscience, nor he
cannot absolve the conscience, may be a good argument; but in Laws made by that
power which is ordained by God, man binds not, but God himself: And then you
must be subject, not because of wrath, but because of conscience. Though then
the matter and subject of the Law, that which the Law commands, or prohibits,
may be an indifferent action, yet in all these, God has his part; and there is
a certain Divine soul, and spark of Gods power, which goes through all Laws,
and inanimates them. In all the Canons of the Church, God has his voice, Ut
omnia ordine fiant; that all things be done decently, and in order; so the
Canon that ordains that, is from God; in all the other Laws he has his voice
too, Ut pie and tranquille vivatur, That we may live peaceably, and
religiously, and so those Laws are from God: And in all, of all sorts, this
voice of his sounds evidently, qui resistit ordinationi, he that resists his
Commission, his Lieutenancy, his Authority, in Lawmakers appointed by him,
resists himself. There is no Law that is merely humane, but only Lex in
membris, The Law in our flesh, which rebels against the Law in our mind; and
this is a Rebellion, a Tyranny, no lawful Government. In all true Laws God has
his interest; and the observing of them in that respect, as made by his
authority, is an act of worship and obedience to him; and the transgressing of
them, with that relation, that is, a resisting or undervaluing of that
authority, is certainly sin. How then was Esthers act exempt from this? for
she went directly against a direct Law, That none should come to the King
uncalled.

Whenever diverse Laws concur and meet together, that Law which comes from the
superior Magistrate, and is in the nature of the thing commanded, highest too,
that Law must prevail. If two Laws lie upon me, and it be impossible to obey
both, I must obey that which comes immediately from the greatest power, and
imposes the greatest duty. Here met in her, the fixed and permanent Law, of
promoting Gods glory, and a new Law of the King, to augment his greatness and
Majesty, by this retiredness, and denying of ordinary access to his person.
Gods Law, for his glory, which is infinite and unsearchable, and the Kings Law,
for his ease, (of which she knows the reason, and the scope) were in the
balance together; if this Law of the King had been of any thing naturally and
essentially evil in it self, no circumstance could have delivered her from sin,
if she had done against it. Though the Law were but concerning an indifferent
action, and of no great importance, yet because Gods Authority is in every just
Law, if she could not have been satisfied in her conscience, that that Law
might admit an exception, and a dispensation in her case, she had sinned in
breaking it. But when she proceeded not upon any precipitation, upon any
singular or seditious spirit, when she debated the matter temperately with a
dispassioned man, Mordecai; when she found a reservation even in the body of
the Law, That if the King held up his Scepter, the Law became no Law to that
party, when she might justly think her self out of the Law, which was (as
Josephus delivers it) Ut nemo ex domesticis accederet, That none of his
servants should come into his presence uncalled; she was then come to that,
which only can excuse and justify the breaking of any Law, that is, a
probable, if not a certain assurance, contracted Bona fide, in a rectified
conscience, That if this present case, which makes us break this Law, had been
known and considered when the Law was made, he that made the Law would have
made provision for this case. No presuming of a pardon, when the Law is broken;
no dispensation given before hand to break it, can settle the Conscience; nor
any other way, then a Declaration well grounded, that that particular case was
never intended to have been composed in that Law, nor the reason and purpose
thereof.

So, when the Conscience of Esther was, and so when the Conscience of any
particular Christian, is, after due consideration of the matter, come to a
religious and temperate assurance, That he may break any Law; his assurance
must be grounded upon this, That if that Law were now to be made, that case
which he has presently in hand, would not be included by him that made that
Law, in that Law; otherwise to violate a Law, either because, being but a
Humane Law, I think I am discharged, paying the penalty; or, because I have
good means to the King, I may presume of a pardon in all cases, where my
privilege works any other way, then, as we have said, (that is, that our case
is not intended in that Law) it had been in Esther, it should be in us a sin to
transgress any Law, though of a Law-nature, and of an indifferent action. But
upon those circumstances which we mentioned before, Esther might see, that that
Law admitted some exceptions, and that no exception was likelier then this,
That the King for all his majestical reservedness, would be content to receive
information of such a dishonor done to his Queen, and to her god; she might
justly think that that Law, intended only for the Kings ease, or his state,
reached not to her person, who was his wife, nor to her case, which was the
destruction of all that professed her Religion.

It was then no sin in her to go in to the King, Si Peream.
though not according to the Law; but she may seem to have sinned, in exposing
her self to so certain a danger as that Law inflicted; with such a resolution,
Si peream, peream, If I perish, I perish. How far a man may lawfully, and with
a good conscience, forsake himself, and expose himself to danger, is a point of
too much largeness, and intricacy, and perplexity to handle now: The general
stream of Casuists runs thus, That a private man may lawfully expose himself to
certain danger, for the preserving of the Magistrate, or of a superior person;
and that reason might have justified Esthers enterprise, if her ruin might
have saved her Country; but in her case, if she had perished, they were likely
to perish too. But she is safer then in that; for first, she had hope out of
the words of the Law, out of the dignity of her place, out of the Justice of
the King, out of the preparation which she had made by Prayer; which Prayer,
Josephus (either out of tradition, or out of conjecture and likelihood) Records
to have been, That God would make both her Language and her Beauty acceptable
to the King that day: Out of all these, she had hope of good success; and
howsoever if she failed of her purpose, she was under two Laws, of which it was
necessary to obey that which concerned the glory of God. And therefore Daniels
confidence, and Daniels words became her well, Behold, our God is able to
deliver me, and he will deliver me; but if he will not, I must not forsake his
honor, nor abandon his service: And therefore, Si peream, peream, If I perish,
I perish.

It is not always a Christian resolution, Si peream, peream, to say, If I
perish, I perish: I care not whether I perish, or no: To admit, to invite, to
tempt tentations, and occasions of sin, and so to put our selves to the hazard
of a spiritual perishing; to give fire to concupiscencies with licentious
Meditations, either of sinful pleasures past, or of that which we have then in
our purpose and pursuit; to fuel this fire with meats of curiosity and
provocation; to blow this fire with lascivious discourses and Letters, and
Protestations, this admits no such condition, Si pereas, If thou perish; but
periisti, thou art perished already; thou did then perish, when thou did so
desperately cast thy self into the danger of perishing. And as he that casts
himself from a steeple, does not break his neck till he touch the ground; but
yet he is truly said to have killed himself, when he threw himself toward the
ground: So in those preparations, and invitations to sin, we perish, before we
perish, before we commit the act, the sin it self: We perished then, when we
opened our selves to the danger of the sin; so also, if a man will wring out,
not the Club out of Hercules hands, but the sword out of Gods hands; if a man
will usurp upon Gods jurisdiction, and become a Magistrate to himself, and
revenge his own quarrels, and in an inordinate defense of imaginary honor,
expose himself to danger in duel, with a si peream, peream, If I perish, I
perish, that is not only true, if he perish, he perishes; if he perish
temporally, he perishes spiritually too, and goes out of the world loaded with
that, and with all his other sins; but it is also true, that if he perish not,
he perishes; he comes back loaded both with the temporal, and with the
spiritual death, both with the blood, and with the damnation of that man, who
perished suddenly, and without repentance by his sword.

To contract this, and conclude all, If a man have nothing in his
contemplation, but dignity, and high place; if he have not Virtue, and
Religion, and a Conscience of having deserved well of his Country, and the
love of God and godly men, for his sustentation and assurance, but only to
tower up after dignity, as a Hawk after a prey, and think that he may boldly
say, as an impossible supposition, Si peream, peream, If I perish, I perish; as
though it were impossible he should perish; he shall be subject to that
derision of the King of Babylon, Quomodo Cecidisti, Esa. 14.12.
How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, thou son of the morning! How art
thou cast down to the ground, that did cast lots upon the Nations!

But that provident and religious Soul, which proceeds in all her enterprises
as Esther did in her preparations, which first calls an assembly of all her
Countrymen, that is, them of the household of the Faithful, the Congregation of
Christ's Church, and the Communion of Saints, and comes to participate the
benefit of public Prayers in his house, inconvenient times; and then does the
same in her own house, within doors, she, and her maids, that is, she and all
her senses and faculties, This soul may also come to Esthers resolution, to go
in to the King, though it be not according to the Law; though that Law be, That
neither fornicator, nor adulterer, nor wanton, nor thief, nor drunkard, nor
covetous, nor extortioner, nor railer, shall have access into the Kingdom of
Heaven; yet this soul thus prepared shall feel a comfortable assurance, that
this Law was made for servants, and not for sons, nor for the Spouse of Christ,
his Church, and the living Members thereof; and she may boldly say, Si peream,
peream; It is all one though I perish; or as it is in the Original, Vecasher,
quomodocunque peream; whether I perish in my estimation and opinion with men,
whether I perish in my fortunes, honor, or health, quomodocunque, it is all
one; Heaven and earth shall pass away, but Gods word shall not pass; and we
have both that word of God which shall never have end, and that word of God
which never had beginning. His Word, as it is his Promise, his Scriptures and
his Word, as it is himself: Christ Jesus for our assurance and security, that
that Law of denying sinners access, and turning his face from them, is not a
perpetual, not an irrevocable Law; but that that himself says, belongs to us:
For a little while have I forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I
gather thee; for a moment in mine anger I hid my face from thee for a little
season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says the
Lord Christ thy Redeemer* How riotously and voluptuously soever I have
surfeited upon sin heretofore, yet if I fast that fast now; how disobedient
soever I have been to my Superiors heretofore, yet if I apply my self to a
conscionable humility to them now; howsoever, if I have neglected necessary
duties in my self, or neglected them in my Family, that either I have not been
careful to give good example, or not careful that they should do according to
my example, (and by the way, it is not only the Master of a house that has the
charge of a Family, but every person, every servant in the house, that has a
body and a soul, has a house, and a Family to look to, and to answer for) yet
if I become careful now, that both I, I my self will, and my whole house, all
my family shall serve the Lord; If I be thus prepared, thus disposed, thus
matur'd, thus mellow'd, thus suppled, thus entendred, to the admitting of any
impressions from the hand of my God; though there seem to be a general Law
spread over all, an universal War, an universal Famine, an universal Pestilence
over the whole Nation, yet I shall come either to an assurance, that though
there fall so many thousands on this and on that hand, it shall not reach me;
Et si pereant, Though others perish, I shall not perish; or to this assurance,
Si peream, peream, If I perish by the good pleasure of God, I shall be well
content to perish so; and to this also, Et si peream, non pereo, Though I
perish, I do not perish; though I die, I do not die; but as that piece of money
which was but the money of a poor man, being given in Subsidy, becomes a part
of the Royal Exchequer: So this body, which is but the body of a sinful man,
being given in Subsidy, as a Contribution to the Glory of my God, in the grave,
becomes a part of Gods Exchequer; and when he opens it, he shall issue out this
money, that is, manifest it again clothed in his Glory: that body which in me
was but a piece of Copper money, he shall make a Talent of Gold; and which in
me was but a grain of Wheat buried in the earth, he shall multiply into many
ears, not of the same Wheat, but of Angels food; The Angels shall feed and
rejoice at my resurrection, when they shall see me in my soul, to have all that
they have, and in my body, to have that that they have not.

A SERMON Preached at Lincoln's Inn, Ascension-day, 1622. SERMON XXIII.
Deuteronomy. 12.30. Take heed to thy self, that thou be not snared by following them
after they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou inquire not after their
gods, saying, How did those nations serve their gods? even so will I do
likewise.


WHen I consider our ascension in this life, (that which David speaks of, Who
shall ascend into the hill of the Lord?) I see the Prophet adds there, Psalm.
24.30.
as another manner of expressing the same thing, And who shall stand in that
holy place? Quis ascendet, and quis stabit? A man does not ascend, except he
stand. And such an ascension (an ascension without a redescent) Moses provides
for here. First they should ascend to an abolishing of all Idolatry; And then
they should stand in that state, persevere in that station, and perpetuate that
ascension to themselves, by shutting themselves up against any new reentries of
that Idolatry which had been once happily banished from amongst them. The
inchoation of this ascension, that step which is happily made in the abolishing
of idolatry, is in the beginning of this Chapter; Ye shall utterly destroy all
the places, (which is a vehement gradation and heightening of the commandment:)
It is a destruction, not a faint discontinuing of idolatry, but destruction; It
is utter destruction, not a defacing, not a deferring of idolatry; and it is
the utter destruction of the very place, not a seizing the riches of the place,
nor a slight correction of the abuses of the place, but the place it self, and
(as is there expressed) all the place, not to leave the Devil one Chapel
wherein the Nations had served their gods. And the Holy Ghost proceeds in the
next verse with this particular vehemence, You shall overthrow their altars,
break their pillars, burn their groves, hew down their images, and destroy
their names. But all this is but the inchoation of this ascension, the first
step in abolishing idolatry: The consummation of it is, in standing there; and
that is in this Text, Take heed to thy self, etc.

Sermon. 23.
The words are an Inhibition, and the persons are all they to whom God has
extended his favors, so far as to deliver them from Idolatry formerly practiced
amongst them, Divisio.
and to bring them to the sincere worship of his Name. And for such persons we
need not go far, for we our selves are they. God has given us such a
deliverance heretofore in the reformation of Religion; so far we are ascended,
and so the Inhibition lies upon us, that we slide not back again. It has two
parts; 1. The main matter of the Inhibition, That we be not snared by
Idolaters, after they have been destroyed from before us. And secondly, two
particular dangers whereby we may be snared; First, by following them: Take
heed you be not snared by them; and then by an overcurious enquiring into
their Religion, Enquire not after their Gods, etc. And through the first, the
matter of the Inhibition, we shall pass by these steps, 1. That there is no
security; there is still danger, though the Idolater be destroyed. And
secondly, That there is therefore a diligence to be required, Take heed to thy
self. And then thirdly, That the danger from which this diligence must deliver
us, is a snare; Take heed lest thou be snared. And for the branches of the
second part, the snare of following them; the snare of enquiring into their
opinions; it shall least incumber you to have them opened then, when we come to
handle them; first we pass through the first part.

1. Part.
In that, the first branch is, That there is no security, though the enemy be
destroyed. And there we are to consider first, what amounts to a destruction,
what is called a destruction in this case; God had promised the children of
Israel, that he would give all the inhabitants of the Land of Promise into
their hands; that he would abolish them, destroy them, and (as his own phrase
is) cut them off. Exodus 23.23.
God performs all his promises; was this performed to them? did God destroy
them all? Truly it was very much that God did in this behalf. He got great
victories for them, and by strange means. One angel was able to destroy for
them almost 200 thousand Assyrians in one night in Senacheribs Army. 2 Kin.
19.35.
This was a real execution by the hands of one, who having Commission, had
truly Power to do it, an Angel. But he prevailed for them so too in another
case, only by an apparition of Angels, when there was no blow stricken, 2 Kin.
6.16.
when Elisha's servant saw mountains full of Horses and Chariots of fire. He
prevailed for them by creatures of a much lower rank, and weak in their nature,
Exodus 23.28.
by Hornets. He promises Moses, that he would send Hornets before them, and
they should drive out the Inhabitants of the Land. He prevails for them by
creatures of a lower rank then they, Jos. 10.10.
by creatures without life, by stones. The Lord discomfeited them by great
stones from heaven. He prevailed by that which is no creature, no subsistence,
a sound only, The Lord thundered with a great Thunder upon the Philistines, and
discomfeited them. He took a lower way then this, he employed nothing, and yet
did the work, by imprinting a terror in their hearts, 1 Samuel 7.10.
Five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall put ten thousand
to flight. And a way lower then that; 2 Kin. 6.17.
he wrought not upon their minds, but upon their senses. He smote a whole Army
with blindness. And he went further yet; he did nothing at all upon them, and
yet wrought his purpose, only by diversion; when Saul pursued David with the
most vehemence of all, 1 Samuel 23.27.
a messenger came and told him that the Philistines had invaded his Land, and
then he gave over the pursuit of David. Really great, admirably strange things
did God in the behalf of his children, for the destruction of his and their
Idolatrous enemies. But yet were they ever destroyed? totally destroyed they
were not; The Lord left some Nations (says the Text there) without hastily
driving them out; neither did he deliver them into the hands of Joshuah. Judge.
2.23.
The Jebusites dwell with the children of Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day,
(says that holy story) and so did other Nations with the other Tribes in other
places. 1.21.28.
They were able (as we are told there) to put the Canaanites to Tribute, but
not to drive them out; to make Penal Laws against them, but not to deliver the
Land of them. Now why did God do this? We would not ask this question, if God
had not told us, ut erudiret in iis Jerusalem, 3.2.
that the Enemy might be their Schoolmaster, and War their Chatechism, that
they might never think that they stood in no more need of God. The Lord was
with Judah, (says the Text) so far with him, 1.19.
as that he drove out the Inhabitants of the Mountain, but yet would not drive
out the Inhabitants of the Valley. Sometimes God does the greater work, and yet
leaves some lesser things undone. God chooses his Matter and his Manner, and
his Measure, and his Means, and his Minutes: But yet God is truly and justly
said to have destroyed those Idolatrous Enemies, in that he brought them so
low, as that they could not give Laws to the children of Israel, nor force them
to the Idolatrous Worship of their gods, though some scattered Idolaters did
still live amongst them. God could destroy Nequitias in coelestibus, he could
evacuate all Powers and Principalities, he could annihilate the Devil, or he
could put him out of Commission, take from him the power of tempting or
soliciting his servants. Though God has not done it, yet he is properly said
to have destroyed him, because he has destroyed his Kingdom. Death is
swallowed up in victory, says Saint Paul out of Ose. O death, where is thy
sting, says he! Where is it! Why, 1 Cor. 15.5.4. Ose. 13.14.
it is in thy bosom. It is at the heart of the greatest Princes of the earth;
Though they be gods, they die like men. O grave, where is thy victory, says he
there! Why, above the Victories, and Trophies and Triumphs of all the
Conquerors in the world. And yet the Apostle speaks, (and justly) as if there
were no death in man, no sting in death, no grave after death, because to him
who dies in the Lord, all this is nothing; not he by death, but death in him is
destroyed. And as it is of the cause of Sin, the Devil; and of the effect of
Sin, Death; so is it of Sin it self; it is destroyed, and yet we sin. He that
is born of God, does not commit sin so, as that sin shall be imputed to him.
Sin and Satan, and Death are destroyed in us, because they can do no harm to
us. So the Idolatrous Nations were destroyed amongst the Israelites, because
they could not bring in an Inquisition amongst them, and force them to their
Religion. And so Idolatry has been destroyed amongst us, destroyed so, as that
it has been declared to be Idolatry toward God, and declared to be
complicated and wrapped up inseparably in Treason toward the King and the
State. Our Schools and Pulpits have destroyed it, and our Parliaments have
destroyed it. Our Pulpits establish them that stay at home; and our Laws are
able to lay hold upon them that run from home, and return ill affected to their
home. Let no man therefore murmur at Gods proceedings, and say, If God had a
mind to destroy Idolatry, he would have left no seed, or he would not have
admitted such arepullulation, and such a growth of that seed as he has done.
God has his own ends and his own ways: He destroyed the Nations from before
the Israelites; Christ has destroyed Sin, and Satan, and Death, and Hell; and
Idolaters amongst us, for Gods greater glory, do remain. For such a destruction
as should be absolute, God never intended, God never promised; for that were to
occasion, and to induce a security, and remove all diligence: Which is our
second Branch in this first part [Cave tibi] see, take heed, etc.

In the beginning of the world we presume all things to have been produced in
their best state; all was perfect, and yet how soon a decay! all was summer,
and yet how soon a fall of the leaf! a fall in Paradise, not of the leaf, but
of the Tree it self, Adam fell; A fall before that, in heaven it self, Angels
fell: Better security then Adam, then Angels had there, we cannot have, we
cannot look for here. And therefore there is danger still, still occasion of
diligence, Lev. 11.3.
of consideration. The chewing of the Cudd was a distinctive mark of cleanness
in the Creature: The holy rumination the daily consideration of his
Christianity, is a good character of a Christian. 1 Cor. 12.31.
Covet earnestly the best gifts, says the Apostle; those to whom he writ had
good gifts already, yet he exhorts them to a desire of better And what does he
promise them? not the Gift it self, but the way to it, I will show a more
excellent way. There is still something more excellent then we have yet
attained to. Non dicit charisma, Chrysostom.
sed viam. The best step, the best height in this world, is but the way to a
better; and still we have way before us to walk further in* Anathema pro
fratribus, Romans 9.3.
was but once said; St. Paul once, and in a vehement, and inordinate zeal, and
religious distemper said so, That he could be content to be separated from
Christ. Exi a me Domine, was but once said, once St. Peter said, Luc. 5.8.
Depart from me, O Lord. The Anathema, the exi but once; but the Adveniat
Regnum, Let thy Kingdom come, I hope is said more then once by every one of us,
every day; every day we receive, and yet every day we pray for that Kingdom,
more and more assurance of Glory, by more and more increase of Grace. For as
there are bodily diseases, and spiritual diseases too, proper to certain ages,
(a young man and an old man are not ordinarily subject to the same distempers,
nor to the same vices) so particular forms of Religion have their
indispositions, their ill inclinations too. Thou art bred in a Reformed Church,
where the truth of Christ is sincerely Preached, bless God for it; but even
there thou may contract a pride, an opinion of purity, and uncharitably
despise those who labor yet under their ignorances or superstitions; or thou
may grow weary of thy Manna, and smell after Egyptian Onions again. It is
not enough that the State and the Church has destroyed Idolatry so far as we
said before; still there are weeds, still there are seeds: And therefore Cave,
Take heed. But yet it is but, Take heed. It is not take thought. Afflict not
thy self, deject not thy self with ominous presages, and prophetical
melancholy, thy God will overthrow this Religion, and destroy this work which
his right hand has been a hundred years in repairing, and scatter his corn
which his right hand has been a hundred years in purifying. Come not to say,
It was but the passion and animosity of Luther, It was but the ambition and
singularity of Calvin that induced this Religion, and now that that is spent,
the Religion melts like snow. Take no such thought, be not afraid that the
truth of God shall or can perish: It is not, Take thought; but it is much less,
Take arms. Men may have false conceptions of preparations, and ways laid
toward a re-entry of Idolatry; and men may have just and true reasons of, or
religious indignation to see so bad and so insolent uses made of those favors
which are offered to persons of that profession; but yet our inhibition is no
further here, but to take heed, not to take arms, not to come by violence, not
to slackness of Allegiance and Obedience. It is but Take heed, and but Take
heed to thy self. Pretend not thou who art but a private man, to be an Overseer
of the Public, or a Controller of him who (by way of coaction) is accountable
to God only, and neither to any great Officer at home, nor to the whole body of
the people there, nor to any neighbour-Prince or State abroad. Idolatry is
destroyed; but yet there is danger, not to make thee take thought, to suspect
Gods Power, or his Will to sustain his Cause; not to take arms, as if the Lord
of Hosts needed Rebels; but to take heed, to watch plots of circumvention, and
to heed to thy self, that is, to all under thy charge, for thy danger is not
evident. It is a snare, Laqueus, which is our last stop and step in this first
part.

There is danger though the Idolaters be thus destroyed. There is use of
diligence, if there be danger, and the more, if this danger be a snare. Take
heed that the Idolater do not kindle a Rebellion; take heed that the Idolater
do not solicit an Invasion; take heed of public and general dangers. These
be Caveats for Princes; but take heed of a snake, take heed of a snare, this
appertains to every private man. Psalm. 11.6.
God studied plagues for Egypt, 69.21.
and they were strange plagues; but that is as great as any at least, which
David speaks of, Pluet laqueos, Upon the wicked God shall rain snares. And
after, Mensa laqueus, Their table shall become a snare before them. And if God
punish our negligence of his former favors so far, as to rain snares even at
our tables, that almost at every table that we can come to, we shall meet some
that would ensnare us, Is not this Caveat necessary in these times? Take heed
that thou be not snared. David thought he had carried his complaint to the
highest, 64.65.
when he said of his Enemies, They commune of laying snares privily. But now
they do not plot privily, but avow their mischiefs, and speak so, as we dare
scarce confess that we heard them: And that is a shrewd snare, when they dare
speak more then we dare hear. Will a man have taken up a snare from the earth,
Amos 3.5.
and have taken nothing, says the Prophet? Since they have laid their snares,
they will take some, and thou may be one: And therefore take heed of their
snares. There is a snare laid for thy son, a persuasion to send him to foreign
Universities; they will say, Not to change his Religion: For Religion, let him
do as he shall see cause; but there he shall be better taught, and better bred
then at home. There is a share laid for thy servants, what need they come to
Church, they have nothing to lose, who will indite them, who will persecute
them? And yet in due time such servants may do the Cause as much good as the
Masters. There is a snare laid for thy wife; Her Religion, say they, does not
hinder her husbands preferment, why should she refuse to apply her self to
them? We have used to speak proverbially of a Curtain Sermon, as of a shrewd
thing; but a Curtain Mass, a Curtain Requiem, a snare in thy bed; a snake in
thy bosom is somewhat worse. I know not what name we may give to such a woman's
husband; but I am sure such a wife has committed adultery, Spiritual Adultery,
and that with her husbands knowledge; call him what you will. There is a snare
for thy servant, for thy son, for thy wife, and for thy fame too; and how far
soever thou were from it, they will have the world believe thou diedst a
Papist. If thy declination be toward profit, if thy byas turn that way, there
is a snare in the likeness of a Chain, of a Jewel, a Pension. If it be society
and conversation, there may be a snare in meeting more good company at Masses,
then at thy Parish Church. If it be levity, and affectation of new things,
there may be a snare of things so new in that Religion, as that this Kingdom
never saw them yet, not then when this Kingdom was of that Religion. For we had
received the Reformation before the Council of Trent, and before the growth of
the Jesuits: And if we should turn to them now, we should be worse then we were
before we received the Reformation; and the Council of Trent and the Jesuits
have made that Religion worse then it was; Romans 8.38.
as St. Bernard says upon St. Paul's words, Neither height, nor depth, nor life,
nor death, shall separate us: Minime tamen dicit, nec nos ipsi. The Apostle
does not say, that we our selves, and our own concupisences shall not separate
us from God. So though Excommunications have not, Invasions have not,
Powder-Plots have not; yet God knows what those snares may work upon us. In
laqueo suo comprehendantur, Psalm. 9.16.
says David. Now laqueus is a snare, as their malice intends it for us; and
laqueus is a halter, as our Laws intend it for them; and in laqueo suo, as it is
theirs, let them be taken. Our good and great God in his power and mercy has
destroyed Idolatry; but in his wisdom he has left exercise for our diligence
in some danger, and that danger is a snare, and therefore, Take heed thou be
not snared. And so we have done with the first part.

Our second part consists of two branches, 2. Part.
of two ways of falling into this danger. First, by following them; and then,
by inquiring into their Religion. For the first, the Original word which we
translate, following, is Achareihem, and it is only post eos, Come not after
them; which (if we were to reflect at all, which we always avoid, upon public
things) would afford a good note for the public, for the Magistrate, Come not
after these Idolaters, but be still beforehand with them. That which is
proverbially said of particular Bodies, will hold in a Body Politic, in any
State. Qui medice misere. That man has no health, who is put to sustain it, or
repair it with continual Physic. That State has no safety, that refers all to
a defensive War, Luke 4.24.
and to a reparation of Breaches, then when they are made. That State will be
subject to the other Proverb, which Chrysostom foresaw: Medice cura teipsum.
That State which has been a Physician to all her neighbor States, let blood,
and staunched blood in them, so as conduced best to their own health, may be
put to employ all her means upon her self, to repair and cure her self, if she
follow, that is (in this acceptance of the word) come after her Idolatrous
enemies, and be not still beforehand with them. But that is not our sphere, the
Public, the State; but yet States consist of Families, and Families of private
persons, and they are in our sphere, in our charge. And therefore we lay this
Inhibition upon all that are Masters of Families, Take heed of being snared by
following, by coming after them, in this sense. That because thou think thou
have a power in thy wife, in thy children, in thy servants, and can do what
thou will with them at any time, therefore thou need not be so scrupulous at
first, but may admit any supplanters, any underminers into thy house, because
they are good company, or because they have relation to great persons. Come not
to this, Post eos, play not that after-game, to put thy self to a necessity of
taking sour and unkind courses with wire and children after; but be
beforehand with such Idolaters, prevent their snare. We lay this Inhibition too
upon every particular conscience. Covetousness is Idolatry, says the Apostle,
and Quot vitia, tot Idola, says St. Hierom. As many habitual sins as we have,
so many Idols have we set up. True repentance destroys this Idolatry, it is
true; but then, Take heed of being snared, post ea, by coming after them, by
exposing thy self to dangers of relapses again, by consideration how easily
thou made thy peace last time with God. It was but a sigh, but a tear, but a
bending of the knee, but a receiving of the Sacrament, that went to it then.
And post ea, when all is done which was done before in the way of sin, all that
is easily done over again, which was done in the way of remedy. Say not so: for
a merry heart, and a cheerful countenance, upon the testimony of a good
conscience, is a better way to God then all the dejections of Spirit, all the
sour contritions, and sad remorses in the world. Thou art not sure that thou
shall get so far, as to such a sadness as God requires for sin, thou may
continue in thy presumption. Thou art not sure that thou shall go no further
then God requires, in that sadness, it may flow out to desperation. Be
beforehand with thy sins, watch the approaches of those enemies; for if thou
build upon that way of coming after them upon presumption of mercy, upon
repentance, thou may be snared, and therefore take heed. And this is the
sense of the phrase, as the Original will afford it, with Idolaters in the
State, with Underminers in thy House, with sins in thy Soul, be still
beforehand, watch their dangerous accesses. But St. Hierom, and the great
stream of Expositors that go with him, give another sense of the word, Ne
imiteris, Be not snared by following them. And in that sense we are to take the
word now.

Follow them not then* that is, imitate them not, neither in their Severity and
Cruelty, nor in their Levity and Facility, neither not in their Severity, when
they will apply all the capital and bloody penalties of the Imperial Laws (made
against Arrians, Manicheans, Pelagians, and Nestorians, Heretics in the
fundamental points of Religion, and with which Christ could not consist) to
every man that denis any collateral and subdivided Tradition of theirs; that if
a man conceive any doubt of the dream of Purgatory, of the validity of
indulgence, of the Latitude of a work of Supererogation, he is as deep in the
faggot here, and shall be as deep in Hell hereafter, as if he denied the
Trinity, or the Incarnation and Passion of Christ Jesus; when in a days
warning, and by the roaring of one Bull, it grows to be damnation to day, to
believe so as a man might have believed yesterday, and have bin saved, when
they will afford no Salvation, but in that Church which is discernable by
certain and inseparable marks, which our Countryman Saunders makes to be six,
and Mich. Medina extends to eleven, and Bellarmine declares to be fifteen, and
Bodius stretches to a hundred, when they make every thing Heresy; and rather
then lack a Text for putting Heretics to death, will accept that false
reading, haereticum hominem devita, which being spoken of avoiding, Titus 3.10.
they will needs interpret of killing (for Erasmus cites a Witness, who heard
an ancient and grave Divine cite that place so, and to that purpose) follow
them not, do not imitate them; be content to judge more charitably of them. For
those amongst them who are under an invincible ignorance (because their
Superiors keep the Scriptures from them) God may be pleased to save by that
revelation of his Son Christ Jesus, which he has afforded them in that Church:
Howsoever, they who have had light offered to them, and wilfully resist it,
must necessarily perish. Follow them not, imitate them not in that severity,
necessarily to damn all who think not in all things as they do: Nor follow them
not in that facility, to make their Divinity, and the Tenets of their Church,
to wait upon temporal affairs, and emergent occasions. The Anabaptist will
delude the Magistrate in an examination, or in any practice, because he thinks
no man ought to be a Magistrate over him in things that have any relation to
spiritual Cognizance, and Treason in alienating the Subject from his Allegiance
must be of spiritual cognizance, Where others are too strong for them, they may
dignifie their Religion (so their Jesuit Ribadineyra says) and where they are
too strong for others, they must profess it, though with Arms (so their Jesuit
Bellarmine argues it.) In this planetary, in this transitory, in this
occasional Religion, follow them not: We say in Logic, Substantia non suscipit
magis and minus, Substantial and fundamental points of Religion (and obedience
to Superiors is amongst those) do not ebb and flow; they bind all men, and at
all times, and in all cases. Induite Dominum Jesu, says the Apostle, Put ye on
the Lord Jesus, Romans 13 14.
and keep him on, put him not off again. Christ is not only the Stuff, but the
Garment ready made; he will not be translated and turned, and put into new
fashions, nor laid up in a Wardrobe, but put on all day, all the days of our
life* though it rain, and rain blood; how foul soever any persecution make the
day, we must keep on that Garment, the true profession of Christ Jesus; follow
not these men in their severity, to exclude men from salvation in things that
are not fundamental, nor in their facility to disguise and prevaricate in
things that are.

The second danger, and our last Branch of this last Part is, Enquire not after
their gods, etc. Ignorance excuses no man. What is curiosity? Augustine.
Qui scire vult ut sciat, He that desires knowledge only that he may know, or
be known by others to know; he who makes not the end of his knowledge the glory
of God, he offends in curiosity, says that Father; But that is only in the end.
But in the way to knowledge there is curiosity too; In seeking such things as
man has no faculty to compass, unrevealed mysteries; In seeking things, which
if they may be compassed, yet it is done by indirect means, by Invocation of
Spirits, by Sorcery; In seeking things which may be found, and by good means,
but appertain not to our profession; all these ways men offend in curiosity. It
is so in us, in Churchmen, si Iambos servemus, and metrorum silvam congerimus,
Hieron.
If we be over-vehemently affected or transported with Poetry, or other secular
Learning. And therefore St. Hierom is reported himself to have been whipped by an
Angel, who found him over-studious in some of Cicero's Books. This is curiosity
in us, and it is so in you, if when you have sufficient means of salvation
Preached to you in that Religion wherein you were Baptized, you enquire too
much, too much trouble your self with the Religion of those, from whose
superstitions you are already by Gods goodness rescued; remember that he who
desired to fill himself with the husks, was the Prodigal. It was Prodigality,
and a dangerous expense of your constancy, to open your self to temptation, by
an unnecessary enquiring into impertinent controversies. We in our profession
may embrace secular Learning, so far as it may conduce to the better discharge
of our duties, in making the easier entrance, and deeper impression of Divine
things in you: You may inform your selves occasionally, when any scruple takes
hold of you, of any point of their Religion. But let your study be rather to
live according to that Religion which you have, then to enquire into that from
which God has delivered you; for that is the looking back of Lots wife, and the
distemper and distaste of the children of Israel, who remembered too much the
Egyptian diet. If you will enquire whether any of the Fathers of the Primitive
Church did at any time pray for any of the dead, you shall be told (and truly)
that Augustine did, that Ambrose did; but you shall not so presently be told
how they deprehended themselves in an infirmity, and collected and corrected
themselves ever when they were so praying* If you enquire whether any of them
speak of Purgatory, you shall easily find they do; but not so easily, in what
sense; when they call the calamities of this life, or when they call the
general Conflagration of the world, Purgatory. If you enquire after
Indulgences, you may find the name frequent amongst them; but not so easily
find when and how the Relaxations of Penances publicly enjoined, were called
Indulgences; nor how, nor when Indulgences came to be applied to souls
departed. If thou enquire without a Melius Inquirendum, without a through
Inquisition (which is not easy for any man who makes it not his whole study
and profession) thou may come to think holy men have prayed for the dead, why
may not I? Holy men speak of Purgatory and Indulgences, why should I abhor the
names or the things? And so thou may fall into the first snare, it has been
done, therefore it may be done; and into another after, It may be done,
therefore it must be done: When thou art come to think that some men are saved
that have done it, thou will think that no man can be saved except he do it:
From making infirmities excusable necessary (which is the bondage the Council
of Trent has laid upon the world) to make Problematical things, Dogmatical;
and matter of Disputation, matter of Faith; to bring the University into
Smithfield, and heaps of Arguments into Piles of Faggots. If thou enquire
further then thy capacity enables thee, further then thy calling provokes thee;
How do those Nations serve their gods? thou may come to say, as the Text
says, in the end, Even so will I do also.

To end all, embrace Fundamental, Dogmatical, evident Divinity: That is
expressed in Credendis, in the things which we are to believe in the Creed. And
it begins with Credo in Deum, Belief in God, and not in man, nor traditions of
men. And it is expressed in petendis, in the things which we are to pray for in
the Lords Prayer; and that begins with Sanctificetur nomen tuum, Hallowed be
thy Name, not the name of any. And it is expressed in Agendis, in the things
which we are to do in the Commandments; whereof the first Table begins with
that, Thou shall have no other gods but me. God is a Monarch alone, not a
Consul with a Colleague. And the second Table begins with Honor to Parents,
that is, to Magistrates, to lawful Authority. Be therefore always fat from
disobeying lawful Authority, resist it not, calumniate it not, suspect it not;
for there is a libelling in the ear, and a libelling in the heart, though it
come not to the tongue or hands, to words, nor actions. If it be possible,
says the Apostle, as much as in you lies, have peace with all men, with all
kind of men. Obedience is the first Commandment of the second Table, and that
never destroys the first Table, of which the first Commandment is, Keep thy
self, that is, those that belong to thee and thy house, entire and upright in
the worship of the true God, not only not to admit Idols for gods, but not to
admit Idolatry in the worship of the true God.

A SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross to the Lords of the Council, and other
Honorable Persons, 24. Mart. 1616. It being the Anniversary of the Kings coming
to the Crown, and his Majesty being then gone into Scotland. SERMON XXIIII.
Prove. 22.11. He that loves Pureness of Heart, for the grace of his Lips, the
King shall be his friend.


THat Man that said it was possible to carve the faces of all good Kings that
ever were, in a Cherry-stone, had a seditious, and a traiterous meaning in his
words. And he that thought it a good description, a good Character of good
subjects, that they were Populus natus ad servitutem, A people disposed to bear
any slavish yoke, had a tyrannical meaning in his words. But in this Text, as
in one of those Tables, in which, by changing the station, and the line, you
use to see two pictures, you have a good picture of a good King, and of a good
subject; for in one line, you see such a subject, as Loves pureness of heart,
and has grace in his lips. In the other line, you see the King gracious, yea
friendly to such a subject, He that loves pureness of heart, for the grace of
his lips, the King shall be his friend. The sum of the words, is, that God will
make an honest man acceptable to the King, for some ability, which he shall
employ to the public. Him that proceeds sincerely in a lawful calling, God
will bless and prosper, and he will seal this blessing to him, even with that
which is his own seal, his own image, the favor of the King, He that loves
pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the King shall be his friend.

We will not be curious in placing these two pictures, nor considering which to
consider first. As he that would vow a fast, till he had found in nature,
whether the Egg, or the Hen were first in the world, might perchance starve
himself; so that King, or that subject, which would forbear to do their several
duties, Sermon. 24.
till they had found which of them were most necessary to one another, might
starve one another; for, King and subjects are Relatives, and cannot be
considered in execution of their duties, but together. The greatest Mystery in
Earth, or Heaven, which is the Trinity, is conveyed to our understanding, no
other way, then so, as they have reference to one another by Relation, as we
say in the Schools; for, God could not be a father without a Son, nor the Holy
Ghost Spiratus sine spirante. As in Divinity, so in Humanity too, Relations
constitute one another, King and subject come at once and together into
consideration. Neither is it so pertinent a consideration, which of them was
made for others sake, as that they were both made for Gods sake, and equally
bound to advance his glory.

Here in our Text, we find the subjects picture first; Divisio.
And his Marks are two; first, Pureness of Heart, That he be an honest Man; And
then Grace of lips, that he be good for something; for, by this phrase, Grace
of lips, is expressed every ability, to do any office of society for the
Public good. The first of these, Pureness of heart, he must love; The other,
that is, Grace of lips (that is, other Abilities) he must have, but he must not
be in love with them, nor overvalue them. In the Kings picture, the principal
mark is, That he shall be friendly and gracious; but gracious to him that has
this Grace of lips, to him that has endeavored, in some way, to be of use to
the Public; And, not to him neither, for all the grace of his lips, for all
his good parts, except he also love pureness of heart; but, He that loves
pureness of heart (There Is the foundation) for the grace of his lips (There Is
the upper-building) the King shall be his friend.

In the first then, which is this Pureness of heart, we are to consider Rem,
sedem, and Modum; what this Pureness is, Part. 1. Puritas.
Then where it is to be lodged and fixed, In the heart; and, after that, the
way, and means by which this Pureness of heart is acquired and preserved, which
is employed and notified in that Affection, wherewith this pureness of heart is
to be embraced and entertained, which is love; For, Love is so noble, so
sovereign an Affection, as that it is due to very few things, and very few
things worthy of it. Love is a Possessory Affection, it delivers over him that
loves into the possession of that that he loves; it is a transmutatory
Affection, it changes him that loves, into the very nature of that that he
loves, and he is nothing else.

For the first, Pureness it self; It is carried to a great height, Res.
for our imitation (God knows, too great for our imitation) when Christ bids us
be perfect, Mat. 5.48.
even as our father which is in heaven is perfect. As though it had not been
perfectness enough, to be perfect, as the Son upon earth was perfect; he
carries us higher, Be perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. The
Son, upon Earth, Christ Jesus, had all our infirmities, and imperfections upon
him, hunger, and weariness, and hearty sorrow to death, and that, which alone
is All, Mortality, Death it self. And, though he were Innocence it self, and
knew no sin, yet there was no sin that he knew not, for, all our sins were his.
He was not only made Man, and by taking (by Admitting, though not by
Committing) our sins, as well as our nature, sinful Man; but he was made sin
for our sakes. And therefore, though he say of himself, sicut ego, John 15.10.
Keep my Commandments, even as I have kept my fathers Commandments, yet still
he refers all originally to the Father; and because he was under our
infirmities and our iniquities, he never says (though he might well have said
so) sicut ego, Be pure, be perfect as I am perfect and pure, but sicut Pater,
be pure as your Father in heaven is pure. Hand to hand with the Father, Christ
disclaims himself, Mat. 26.39.
disavows himself, Non sicut ego, Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will, O Father. We are not referred for the pattern of our purity (though we
might be safely) to him that came from heaven, The Son, but to him which is in
heaven, The Father. Nor to the Sun which is in heaven (the Sun, that is the
pure fountain of all natural light) nor to the Angels which are in heaven,
though they be pure in their Nature, and refined by a continual emanation of
the beams of glory upon them, from the face of God, but, the Father which is in
heaven is made the pattern of our purity; That so, when we see the exact
purity, which we should aim at, and labor for, we might the more seriously
lament, and the more studiously endeavor the amendment of that extreme and
enormous fouleness and impurity, in which we who should be pure, as our Father
which is in heaven is pure, exceed the dog that turns to his own vomit again; 2
Pet. 2.22.
and the Sow, that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

Yet there is no foulness so foul, so inexcusable in the eyes of God, nor that
shall so much aggravate our condemnation, as a false affectation, and an
hypocritical counterfeiting of this Purity. There is a Pureness, a cleanness
imagined (rather dreamed of) in the Roman Church, by which (as their words
are) the soul is abstracted, not only a Passionibus, but a Phantasmatibus, not
only from passions, and perturbations, but from the ordinary way of coming to
know any thing; The soul (say they) of men so purified, understands no longer,
per phantasmata rerum corporalium; not by having any thing presented by the
fantasy to the senses, and so to the understanding, but altogether by a
familiar conversation with God, and an immediate revelation from God; whereas
Christ himself contented himself with the ordinary way; He was hungry, Mat.
21.20.
and a fig tree presented it self to him upon the way, and he went to it to
eat. This is that Pureness in the Roman Church, by which the founder of the
last Order amongst them, Philip Nerius, had not only utterly emptied his heart
of the world, but had filled it too full of God; for, Congrega. Orator.
so (say they) he was fain to cry sometimes, Recede ame Domine, O Lord go
farther from me, and let me have a less portion of thee. But who would be loath
to sink, by being over-fraited with God, or loath to over-set, by having so
much of that wind, the breath of the Spirit of God? Privation of the presence
of God, is Hell; a diminution of it, is a step toward it. Fruition of his
presence is Heaven; and shall any Man be afraid of having too much Heaven, too
much God? There are many among them, that are over laden, oppressed with
Bishropricks and Abbeys, and yet they can bear it and never cry, Retrahe
domine, domine Resume, O Lord withdraw from me, Resume to thy self some of
these superabundancies; and shall we think any of them to be so over-fraited
and surcharged with the presence, and with the grace of God, as to be put to
his Recede domine, O Lord withdraw thy self, and lessen thy grace toward me?
This Pureness is not in their heart, but in their fantasy.

We read in the Ecclesiastic story of such a kind of affectation of
singularity, very early in the primitive Church. Catharsitae.
We find two sorts of false Puritans then; The Catharists, and The Cathari.
The Catharists thought no creatures of God pure, and therefore they brought in
strange ceremonial purifications of those Creatures. In which error, they of
the Roman Church succeed them, in a great part, in their Exorcismes, and
Consecrations; Particularly in the greatest matter of all, in the Sacraments.
For, the Catharists in the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior,
thought not the bread pure, except it were purified by the aspersion of
something issuing from the body of man, not fit to be named here; And so, in
the Roman Church, they induced a use of another Excrement in the other
Sacrament, They must have spittle in the Sacrament of Baptism. For, in those
words of Tertullian, Tertul.
In Baptismo Daemones respuimus, In Baptism we Renounce the Devil, they will
admit no other interpretation of the Respuimus, but that Respuere, is sputo
detestari, Durantius de citib l. 1.19 n. 30.
That we can drive the Devil away, no way, but by spitting at him; Their
predecessors in this, the Catharists, thought no Creatures pure, and therefore
purified them, by abominable, and detestable ways.

The second sort of primitive Puritans, the Cathari, Cathari.
They thought no men pure but themselves, and themselves they thought so pure,
as to have no sin; and that therefore they might and so did, leave out, as an
impertinent clause in the Lords prayer, that petition, Dimitte nobis debita
nostra, for, they thought they ought God nothing. In natural things, Monsters
have no propagation; A Monster does not beget a Monster. In spiritual excesses
it is otherwise; for, for this second kind of Puritans, that attribute all
purity to themselves, and spend all their thoughts upon considering others,
that weed has grown so far, that whereas those Puritans of the Primitive
Church did but refuse to say, Dimitte nobis, Forgive us our trespasses, because
they had no sin, the Puritan Papist is come to say, Recede a nobis, O Lord
stand farther off, for I have too much of thee. And whereas the Puritan of the
primitive Church did but refuse one Petition of the Lords prayer, the later
puritan amongst our selves has refused the whole Prayer. Toward both these
sorts of false puritans, Catharists, and Cathari, derived down to our time, we
acknowledge those words of the Apostle to belong, 2 Timothy 4.2.
Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort; that is, leave no such means untryed, as may work
upon their Understandings, and remove their just scruples; Preach, write,
confer; But when that labor has been bestowed, and they fear up their
Understanding against it, so that the fault lies not then in the darkness of
their Understanding, but merely in the perverseness of the will, over which
faculty other men have no power, toward both these sorts, we acknowledge those
other words of the Apostle to belong too, Gal. 5.12.
Utinam abscindantur, Would to God, they were even cut off that disquiet you;
Cut off, that is, removed from means by which, and from places, in which, they
might disquiet you. These two kinds of false Puritans we find in the Primitive
Church; And Satan, who lasts still, makes them last still too. But if we shall
imagine a third sort of Puritans, and make men afraid of the zeal of the glory
of God, make men hard, and insensible of those wounds that are inflicted upon
Christ Jesus, in blasphemous oaths, and execrations, make men ashamed to put a
difference between the Sabbath and an ordinary day, and so, at last make sin an
indifferent matter, If any man list to be contentious we have no such custom,
1 Cor. 11.16.
neither the Chuch of God. The Church of God encourages them, and assists them
in that sanctity, that purity, with all those means wherewith Christ Jesus has
trusted her, for the advancement of that purity; and professes that she prefers
in her recommendations to God, in her prayers, one Christian truly fervent and
zealous, before millions of Lukewarm. Only she says, in the voice of Christ
Jesus her head, Woe be unto you, Mat. 23 25.
if you make clean the outside of cups and platters, but leave them full of
extortion, and excess within. Christ calls them to whom he says that, blind
Pharisees, if they have done so; If they think to blind others, Christ calls
them blind. But if their purity consist in studying and practicing the most
available means to sanctification, and in obedience to lawful authority
established according to Gods Ordinance, and in acquiescence in fundamental
doctrines, believed in the ancient Church to be necessary to salvation, If they
love the peace of conscience, and the peace of Sion, as Balaam said, Let me dye
the death of the righteous, and let my last end he like his; So I say, let me
live the life of a Puritan, Number. 23.10.
let the zeal of the house of God consume me, let a holy life, and an humble
obedience to the Law, testify my reverence to God in his Church, and in his
Magistrate: For, this is Saint Paul's Puritan, To have a pure heart (The end of
the commandment is love, out of a pure heart) And then to have pure hands (That
we may lift up pure hands, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 8. 3 8.
without wrath or doubting) And to have pure consciences (Having the mystery of
faith in pure consciences.) The heart is the fountain from which my good and
holy purposes flow; My hand is the execution and Declaration of those good
purposes, produced into the eyes of men; and my conscience is the testification
of the Spirit of God with my spirit, that I have actually made those
declarations, that I have lived according to that profession. This is Saint
Paul's Puritan, Pure in Heart, pure in Hand, pure in Conscience; That I do
believe I ought to do this; That really I do it; Thar my conscience tell me
after, it was rightly done; for, a man may do good, ill, and go by ill ways, to
good ends. And then, if our purity be but comparative and not positive, that we
only look how ill other men be, not how good we should be, we shall become
either Catharists, purifying Puritans, quarrelling with men, with States, with
Churches, and attempting a purifying of Sacraments, and Ceremonies, Doctrine
and Discipline, according to our own fancy; Or Cathari, purified puritans, that
think they may leave out the Dimitte debita, they need ask no forgiveness. And
then, Cains major iniquitas (my sin is too great for God to forgive) is not
worse then this minor iniquitas, Genesis 4.13.
My sin is too little for God to consider; I cannot have a pardon, and I do not
need a pardon, It is impossible for me to get it, and it is unnecessary for me
to ask it, are equal contempts against the Majesty and Mercy of God. But this
first consideration (The nature of his pureness) enlarges it self by flowing
into the second branch of this first part, that is, The place where this
pureness is established, The Heart: He that loves pureness of Heart, the King
shall be his friend.

Absolute pureness cannot be attained to In via, Locus. Cor.
It is reserved for us In Patria; At home in heaven, not in our journey here,
is that pureness to be expected. But yet here in the way, there is a degree of
it, acceptable to God; of which himself speaks, and there it may be had;
Blessed are the pure in heart (so the pureness be placed there, all is well) for
they shall see God. Mat. 5.9.
Whether that fight of God be spoken De cognitione Dei, of that sight of God, 1
Cor. 13.12.
which we have here* In speculo, in a glass, in that true glass of his own
making, his word explicated in the Church; or de visione Beatifica, of that
beatifical vision of God, which is salvation, howsoever the reward (the sight
of God) in the perfect fruition thereof may be reserved for the future (They
shall see God) yet they are pure, and they are blessed already, Blessed are the
pure in heart. This pureness then must be rightly placed; for, in many things,
the place qualifies and denominates the things; it is not Balsamum if it grew
not in Palestine. It is not pureness, if it grew not in the Heart. The
Hypocrite is the miserablest of all other; he does God service, and yet is
damned. The shedding of our blood for God is not a greater service then the
winning of souls to God; and the Hypocrite many times does that; his outward
purity works upon them who cannot know it to be counterfeit, and draws them
truly and sincerely to serve God. He does God service, and yet perishes, 1
Reg. 14.10.
because he does it not from the heart. God shall take him away, as a man
takes away dung, till it be all gone. God does not say there, that he will
take away the dunge, but the man; not that he will take away the Dissimulation
of the Hypocrite, but he will take away the Hypocrite himself, as dunge is
taken away, till it be all gone, till this Hypocrite be swept, not clean, but
clean away. If he have a complacency, a joy that he can deceive, Job 20.5.
and can seem that which he is not (The joy of the Hypocrite is but for a
moment) He has no true joy at all; his joy is but dunge, and in a moment comes
a Cart, and fetches away that dunge, sweeps away even that false joy. Can he
hope for more? 8.13.
(The Hope of the Hypocrite shall perish) If he can conceive such a hope, it
shall perish in abortion, and never have life (Their Hope shall be as the
giving up of the Ghost) As soon as it is a Hope, 11.20.
it shall be as the giving up of the Ghost, and a Cart shall carry away that
dunge, that Hope. What Cart? first, God shall disappoint his Hope of deluding
the world; God shall discover him, and lay him open (That the Hypocrites reign
not, 34.30.
lest the people be ensnared) And then, when God has discovered him (The
innocent shall stir up himself against the Hypocrite) that is, 17.8.
consider him, observe him, and arm himself against his imaginations. And God
shall not only discover him to men, but God shall discover himself to him, and
make him see his future condemnation (Fearfulness shall surprise the Hypocrite.
Esa. 33.14. Job 27.8.
) And then (What is the hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away his soul)
when the Cart comes for the last load of dunge, his corrupt, his putrified
soul, what hope has the Hypocrite for the next life?

It is not pureness then, except it be in the right place, the heart; But where
is the heart? The heart is vafrum and inscrutabile, Deceitful above all things,
Jer. 17.9.
and desperately wieked, who can know it? It is uncertain and unsearchable; And
it is so, because it pursues those things which are in fluxu, ever in motion.
Cast but a paper into the river, and fix thine eye upon that paper, and bind
thine eye to follow that paper whithersoever the river, or the wind shall
carry it, and thou can not imagine where thine eye will be to morrow: For,
this paper is not addressed, as a ship, to a certain port, or upon any certain
purpose, but exposed to the disposition of the tide to the rage of the wind,
to the wantonness of the Eddy, and to innumerable contingencies, till it wear
out to nothing. So, if a man set his heart (we cannot call it a setting) if a
man suffer his heart to issue upon any of these fluid and transitory things of
this world, he shall have cor vafrum, and inscrutabile, He shall not know where
to find his own heart. If Riches be this floating paper that his eye is fixed
upon, he shall not know upon what course; If Beauty be this paper, he shall not
know upon what face; If Honor and preferment be it, he shall not know upon what
faction his heart will be transported a month hence. But, if the heart can fix
it self upon that which is fixed, the Almighty and immovable God, if it can be
content to inquire after it self, and take knowledge where it is, and in what
way, it will find the means of cleansing; And so, this second consideration,
The placing of this pureness in the heart, enlarges it self also into the third
branch of this part, which is De Modo, by what means this pureness is fixed in
the heart, in which is involved the Affection with which it must be embraced,
Love, He that loves pureness of heart.

Both these then are settled; Our heart is naturally foul; Modus.
And our heart may be cleansed. But how, is our present disquisition, Who can
bring a clean thing out of filthiness? There is not one: Job 14.4.
Adam foul'd my heart and all yours; nor can we make it clean our selves, Who
can say I have made clean my heart? There is but one way; Prove. 20.9.
a poor beggarly way, but easy and sure, to ask it of God. And, even to God
himself it seems a hard work to cleanse this heart; and therefore our prayer
must be with David, Cor mundum crea, Create, Psalm. 51.12.
O Lord, a pure heart in me. And then comes Gods part, not that Gods part begun
but then; for it was his doing, that thou made this prayer; but because it is
a work that God does especially delight in, to build upon his own foundations;
when he has disposed thee to pray, and upon that prayer created a new heart in
thee, then God works upon that new heart, and By faith purifyes it, Act. 15.9.
enables it to preserve the pureness, as Saint Peter speaks. He had kindled
some sparks of this faith in thee, before thou askedst that new heart; else the
prayer had not been of faith; but now finding thee obsequious to his
beginnings, he fuels this fire, and purifies thee, as Gold and Silver, in all
his furnaces; through Believing and Doing, and suffering, through faith, and
works, and tribulation, we come to this pureness of heart. And truly, he that
lacks but the last, but Tribulation (as fain as we would be without it) lacks
one concoction, one refining of this heart.

But, in this great work, the first act is a Renovation, a new heart; Co^ Nov^m
and the other, That we keep clean that heart by a continual diligence, and
vigilance over all our particular actions. In these two consists the whole work
of purifying the heart; first, an Annihilating of the former heart, which was
all sin; And then a holy superintendency over that new heart, which God
vouchsafes to create in us, to keep it as he gives it, clean, pure. It is, in a
word, a Detestation of former sins, and a prevention of future. And for the
first, Chromakus Anno 390.
Mundi cord sunt, qui deposuere cor peccati; That Is the new heart that has
disseised, expelled the heart of sin. There is in us a heart of sin, which must
be cast up; for whilst the heart is under the habits of sin, we are not only
sinful, but we are all sin* as it is truly said, that land overflowed with sea,
is all sea. And when sin has got a heart in us, it will quickly come to be
that whole Body of Death, Romans 7.24.
which Saint Paul complains of, who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death? when it is a heart, it will get a Brain; a Brain that shall minister
all Sense, and Delight in sin; That Is the office of the Brain; A Brain which
shall send for the sinews and ligaments, to tie sins together; and pith and
marrow to give a succulencie, and nourishment, even to the bones, to the
strength and obduration of sin; and so it shall do all those services, and
offices for sin, that the brain does to the natural body. So also if sin get to
be a heart, it will get a liver to carry blood and life through all the body of
our sinful actions; That Is the office of the liver; And whilst we dispute
whether the throne and seat of the soul be in the Heart, or Brain, or Liver,
this tyrant sin will praeoccupate all, and become all; so, as that we shall
find nothing in us without sin, nothing in us but sin, if our heart be
possessed, inhabited by it. And if it be true in our natural bodies, that the
heart is that part that lives first and dies last, it is much truer of this Cor
peccati, this heart of sin; for, this hearty sinner that has given his heart
to his sin, does no more foresee a Death of that sin in himself, then he
remembers the Birth of it; and, because he remembers not, or understands not
how his soul contracted sin, by coming into his body, he leaves her to the same
ignorance, how she shall discharge her self of sin, when she goes out of that
body. But, as his sin is elder then himself (for Adams sin is his sin) so is it
longer lived then his body, for it shall cleave everlastingly to his soul too.
God asks no more of thee, but, fili da mihi cor, Prove. 23.26.
My son give me thy heart; Because when God gave it thee, it was but one heart.
But since thou have made it Cor and cor (as the Prophet speaks) a Heart, and a
Heart, a double Heart, give both thy Hearts to God; thy natural weakness and
disposition to sin (The inclinations of thy heart)* And thy habitual practice
of sin, (The obduration of thy heart) cor peccans, and Cor peccati, and he
shall create a new heart in thee; which is the first way of attaining this
pureness of heart, to become once in a good state, to have (as it were) paid
all thy former debts, and so to be the better able to look about thee for the
future, for prevention of subsequent sins, which is the other way that we
proposed for attaining this pureness, detestation of former habits,
watchfulness upon particular actions.

Till this be done, till this Cor peccati, Peccata Minutiora.
this hearty habitualness in sin be divested, there is no room, no footing to
stand and sweep it; a heart so filled with foulness will admit no counsel, no
reproof. The great Engineir would have undertaken to have removed the World
with his Engine, if there had been any place to fix his Engine upon, out of the
World; I would undertake, (by Gods blessing upon his Ordinance) to cleanse the
foulest heart that is, if that Engine which God has put into my hands might
enter into his heart; if there were room for the renouncing Gods Judgments,
and for the application of Gods mercies in the merits of Christ Jesus in his
heart, they would infallibly work upon him. But he has petrified his heart in
sin, and then he has immured it, walled it with a delight in sin, and
fortified it with a justifying of his sin, and adds daily more and more
outworks, by more and more daily sins; so that the denouncing of Judgment,
the application of Mercies, Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, (which are the
Engines and Ammunition which God has put into our hands) though they have a
blessed and a powerful operation, and produce heavenly effects, where they may
have entrance; in this, habitual sinners can have none. Some things therefore,
some great things every man must depart with, before he can come to the God of
pure eyes. Abac. 1.13.


When the heart is emptied of infidelity, and of those habits of sin that
filled it, when it is come to a discontinuance, and a detestation of those
sins, then we can better look into every corner, and endeavor to keep it clean;
clean in that measure, that the God of pure eyes will vouchsafe to look upon
it, and the light of his countenance will perfect the work. The diligence
required on our part, is a serious watchfulness and consideration of our
particular actions, how small soever. In the Law, whatsoever was unclean to
eat, made a man unclean, to touch it, when it was dead. Though the body of sin
have so far received a deadly wound in thee, as that thou have discontinued
some habitual sin, some long time; yet if thou touch upon the memory of that
dead sin, with delight, thou begettest a new child of sin. 65.20.
And as Esai speaks of a child, and of a sinner of an hundred years old, so
every sin into which we relapse, is born an hundred years old; it has all the
age of that sin, which we had repented and discontinued before, upon it; it is
born an Adam, in full strength the first minute; born a Giant, born a Devil,
and possesses us in an instant. Every man may observe, that a sin of relapse is
sooner upon him, then the same sin was at the first attempting him; at first,
he had more bashfulness, more tenderness, more colluctation against the sin,
then upon a relapse. And therefore in this survey of sin, thy first care must
be, to take heed of returning top diligently to a remembrance of those
delightful sins which are past; for that will endanger new. And in many cases
it is safer to do (as God himself is said to do) to tie up our sins in a
bundle, and cast them into the sea; so for us to present our sins in general to
God, and to cast them into the bottomless sea of the infinite mercies of God,
in the infinite merits of Christ Jesus; then by an over-diligent enumeration of
sins of some kinds, or by too busy a contemplation of those circumstances
which increased our sinful delignt then when we committed those sins, to commit
them over again, by a fresh delight in their memory. When thou have truly
repented them, and God has forgotten them, do thou forget them too.

The pureness and cleanness of heart which we must love, was evidently
represented in the old Law, and in the practice of the Jews, who took knowledge
of so many uncleanness; they reckon almost fifty sorts of uncleanness, to
which there belonged particular expiations; of which, some were hardly to be
avoided in ordinary conversation: As to enter into the Courts of Justice; for
the Jews that led Christ into the common Hall, would not enter, lest they
should be defiled. Jo. 18.28.
Yea, some things defiled them, which it had been unnatural to have left
undone; as for the son to assist at his fathers Funeral; and yet even these
required an expiation: For these, though they had not the nature of sin, but
might be expiated, (without any inward sorrow or repentance) by outward
ablutions, by ceremonial washings, within a certain time prescribed by the Law,
yet if that time were negligently and inconsiderately overslipt, then they
became sins, and then they could not be expiated, but by a more solemn, and a
more costly way, by sacrifice. And even before they came to that, whilst they
were but uncleanness, and not sins, yet even then they made them incapable of
eating the Paschal Lamb. So careful was God in the Law, and the Jews in their
practice (for these outward things) to preserve this pureness, this cleanness,
even in things which were not fully sins. So also must he that affects this
pureness of heart, and studies the preserving of it, sweep down every cobweb
that hangs about it. Scurrile and obscene language; yea, mis-interpretable
words, such as may bear an ill sense; pleasureable conversation, and all such
little entanglings, which though he think too weak to hold him, yet they foul
him. And let him that is subject to these smaller sins, remember, that as a
spider builds always where he knows there is most access and haunt of flies, so
the Devil that has cast these light cobwebs into thy heart, knows that that
heart is made of vanities and levities; and he that gathers into his treasure
whatsoever thou wast'st out of thine, how negligent soever thou be, he keeps
thy reckoning exactly, and will produce against thee at last as many lascivious
glaunces as shall make up an Adultery, as many covetous wishes as shall make up
a Robery, as many angry words as shall make up a Murder; and thou shall have
dropped and crumbled away thy soul, with as much irrecoverableness, as if thou
had poured it out all at once; and thy merry sins, thy laughing sins, shall
grow to be crying sins, even in the ears of God; and though thou drown thy soul
here, drop after drop, it shall not burn spark after spark, but have all the
fire, and all at once, and all eternally, in one entire and intense torment.
For, as God, for our capacity, is content to be described as one of us, and to
take our passions upon him, and be called angry, and sorry, and the like; so is
he in this also like us, that he takes it worse to be slighted, to be
neglected, to be left out, then to be actually injured. Our inconsideration,
our not thinking of God in our actions, offends him more then our sins. We
know, that in Nature, and in Art, the strongest bodies are compact of the least
particles, because they shut best, and lie closest together; so be the
strongest habits of sin compact of sins which in themselves are least; because
they are least perceived, they grow upon us insensibly, and they cleave unto us
inseparably. And I should make no doubt of recovering him sooner that had
sinned long against his conscience, though in a great sin, then him that had
sinned less sins, without any sense or conscience of those sins; for I should
sooner bring the other to a detestation of his sin, then bring this man to a
knowledge, that that that he did was sin. But if thou could consider that
every sin is a Crucifying of Christ, and every sin is a precipitation of thy
self from a Pinnacle; were it a convenient phrase to say, in every little sin,
that thou would Crucify Christ a little, or break thy neck a little.

Beloved, there is a power in grace, upon thy repentance, to wash away thy
greatest sins; that is the true, the proper Physic of the soul, it is the only
means to recover thee. But yet, were thou not better to make this grace thy
diet, then thy physic? Were thou not better to nourish thy soul with this
grace all the way, then to hope to purge thy soul with it at last? This, as a
Diet, the Apostle prescribes thee, Whether you eat or drink, do all to the
glory of God. He intends it farther there, Whatsoever you do; and farther then
that, in another place, Whatsoever ye do, in deed, 1 Cor. 10.31. Col. 3.17.
or in word, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus. Since there is no action so
little, but God may be glorified in it, there is no action so little, but the
Devil may have his end in it too, and may overthrow thee by a tentation, which
thou think thy self strong enough to leap over. And therefore, if you have
not given over all love of true weights, and true measures, weigh and measure
your particular and indifferent actions, before you do them, and you shall see,
at least, grains of iniquity in them; and then, this advantage will you have,
by this preconsideration, and weighing your actions before hand; that when you
know there is sin in that action, and know that nothing can counterpoise, nor
weigh down sin, but only the Blood of Christ Jesus* you may know too, that the
Blood of Christ Jesus cannot be had before hand. God gives no such
non-obstantes, no such privileges, no leave to sin, no pardon for sin, before
it be committed: And therefore, if this premeditation of this action bring thee
to see that there is sin in it* it must necessarily put a tenderness, a horror,
an aversion in thee, from doing that, to which, (being thus done with this
preconsideration, and presumption) the Blood of thy Savior does not appertain.
To all your other Wares, the baser and courser they are, the greater weight and
measure you are content to give; to the basest of all, to sin, you give the
lightest weight, and scantest measure, and you supply all with the excuses of
the custom of the time, that the necessity of your trade forces you to it, else
you should be poor, and poorly thought of.

Beloved, God never puts his children to a perplexity; to a necessity of doing
any sin, how little soever, though for the avoiding of a sin, as manifold as
Adams. It is not a little request to you, to beware of little sins: It is not a
little request, and therefore I make it, in the words of the greatest to the
greatest, (for they are all one Head and Body) of Christ to his Church, Cant.
2.15.
Capite vulpeculas, Take us the little Foxes, for they devour the Vines. It is
not a cropping, not a pilling, nor a retarding of the growth of the Vines, but
Demoliuntur, as little as those Foxes are, they devour the Vines, they root
them out. Thy Soul is not so easily devoured by that Lion, 1 Pet. 5.8. Apoc.
5.5.
that seeks whom he may devour* for, still he is put to seek, and does not
always find: And thou shall hear his roaring, that is, thou shall discern a
great sin; and the Lion of the Tribe of Judah will come in to thy succor, as
soon as thou call: But take heed that thy Soul be not eaten up with vermin,
by those little sins, which thou think thou can forbear, and give over when
thou will. God punished the Egyptians most, by little things* Hailstones, and
Frogs, and Grasshoppers; and Pharaohs Sorcerers, Exodus 8.16.
which did greater, failed in the least, in Lice. It is true, there is Physic
for this, Christ Jesus that receives thy greatest sins into his Blood, can
receive these Vermin too into his Bowels, even at last; but yet, still make his
Grace rather thy Diet, by a daily consideration before hand, then thy Physic
at last. It is ill to take two Physics at once; bodily, and ghostly Physic
too, upon thy Deathbed. The Apothecary and the Physician do well together; the
Apothecary and the Priest not so well. Consult with him before, at least,
consult with thine own Conscience in those little actions, which either their
own nature, or the custom of the time, or thy course of life, thy calling, and
the example of others in thy calling made thee think indifferent: For though it
may seem a degree of flattery, to preach against little sins in such a City as
this, where greater sins do abound; yet because these be the materials and
elements of greater sins, (and it is impossible to say where a Bowl will lie,
that is let fall down a Hill, though it be let never so gently out of the
hand,) and there is no pureness of heart, till even these Cobwebs and Crumbs be
swept away; He that affects that pureness, will consider well that of St.
Augustine, Psalm. 24.4.
Interest inter rectum cord, and mundum cord; a right heart and a clean
heart, is not all one: He may have a right heart, that keeps in the right way,
in the profession of the right Religion; but he only keeps his heart pure,
that watches all his steps, even in that right way. St. Augustine considers
that question of David, Psalm. 24.3.
Quis ascendet, and quis stabit, Who shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord?
and who shall stand in his holy place? And he applies the answer, Innocens
manibus, and mundo cord; He that has clean hands, and a pure heart: Thus,
That he that has clean hands, clean from blood, clean from bribery and
oppression, clean from fornication, and such notorious sins, Ascendet in
montem, He shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, he shall be admitted to all
the benefits that the Christian Church can give him; but only he that has a
pure heart, a care to glorify God, in a holy watchfulness upon all his
particular actions, to the exclusion of lesser sins, stabit, shall stand safe,
confident, unshaken, in his holy place, even in the judgment of God; clean
hands justify him to men, a pure heart to God: And therefore this pureness of
heart, is here wrapped up in the richest mantle, in the noblest affection, that
the nature of man has, that is, love* For this is not only a contentment, an
acquiescence, a satisfaction, a delight in this pureness of heart, but love is
a holy impatience in being without it, or being in a jealousy that we are
without it; and it is a holy fervor and vehemence in the pursuit of it, and a
preferring it before any other thing that can be compared to it: That Is love;
and therefore it deserves to be insisted upon, now when in our order proposed
at first, from the thing it self that is required (pureness) and the seat, and
center of that pureness (the heart) and the way of this fixation of this
pureness in the heart, (detestation of former habits of sins, and prevention of
future sins, in a watchful consideration of all our actions, before we do
them,) We are come to that affection wherewith this inestimable pureness is to
be embraced, love: He that loves pureness of heart.

Love, in Divinity, is such an attribute, or such a notion, as designs to us
one person in the Trinity; and that person who communicates, and applies to us,
Amor.
the other two persons, that is, The Holy Ghost: So that, as there is no power,
but with relation to the Father, nor wisdom but with relation to the Son, so
there should be no love but in the Holy Ghost, from whom comes this pureness of
heart, and consequently the love of it necessarily: For, the love of this
pureness is part of this pureness it self, and no man has it, except he love
it. All love which is placed upon lower things, admits satiety; but this love
of this pureness, always grows, always proceeds: It does not only file off the
rust of our hearts, in purging us of old habits, but proceeds to a daily
polishing of the heart, in an exact watchfulness, and brings us to that
brightness, Augustine.
Ut ipse videas faciem in cord, and alii videant cor in facie. That thou may
see thy face in thy heart, and the world may see thy heart in thy face; indeed,
that to both, both heart and face may be all one: Thou shall be a Looking-glass
to thy self, and to others too.

Mulieres.
The highest degree of other love, is the love of woman: Which love, when it is
rightly placed upon one woman, it is dignified by the Apostle with the highest
comparison, Ephesians. 5.25.
Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved his Church: And God himself forbad
not that this love should be great enough to change natural affection, Genesis
2.24.
Relinquet patrem, (for this, a man shall leave his Father) yea, to change
nature it self, caro una, two shall be one. Accordingly David expresses himself
so, in commemoration of Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.26.
Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women: A love above that
love, is wonderful. Now, this love between man and woman, does so much confess
a satiety, as that if a woman think to hold a man long, she provides her self
some other capacity, some other title, then merely as she is a woman: Her wit,
and her conversation, must continue this love; and she must be a wife, a
helper; else, merely as a woman, this love must necessarily have intermissions.
And therefore St. Jerome notes a custom of his time, Jerome.
(perchance prophetically enough of our times too) that to uphold an unlawful
love, and make it continue, they used to call one another Friend, and Sister,
and Cosen, Ut etiam peccatis induant nomina caritatis, that they might apparel
ill affections in good names; and those names of natural and civil love might
carry on, and continue a work, which otherwise would sooner have withered. In
Parables, and in Mythology, and in the application of Fables, this affection of
love, for the often change of subjects, is described to have wings; whereas the
true nature of a good love (such as the love of this Text) is a constant union.
But our love of earthly things is not so good as to be volatilis, apt to fly;
for it is always grovelling upon the earth, and earthly objects: As in spiritual
fornications, the Idols are said to have ears and hear not, and eyes and see
not; so in this idolatrous love of the Creature, love has wings, and flies
not; it flies not upward, it never ascends to the contemplation of the Creator,
in the Creature. The Poets afford us but one Man, that in his love flew so high
as the Moon; Endymion loved the Moon. The sphere of our loves is sublunary,
upon things naturally inferior to our selves.

Let none of this be so mistaken, as though women were thought improper for
divine, or for civil conversation: For, they have the same soul; and of their
good using the faculties of that soul, the Ecclesiastic story, and the
Martyrologies, give us abundant examples of great things done, and suffered by
women for the advancement of Gods glory: But yet, as when the woman was taken
out of man, God caused a heavy sleep to fall upon man, Genesis 2.22.
and he slept; so does the Devil cast a heavy sleep upon him too. When the
woman is so received into man again, as that she possesses him, fills him,
transports him. I know the Fathers are frequent in comparing and paralleling
Eve, the Mother of Man, and Mary the Mother of God. But, God forbid any should
say, That the Virgin Mary concurred to our good, so, as Eve did to our ruin.
It is said truly, That as by one man sin entered, and death, Romans 5.12.
so by one man entered life. It may be said, That by one woman sin entered, and
death, (and that rather then by the man; for, 1 Timothy 2.14.
Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived, was in the
transgression.) But it cannot be said, in that sense, or that manner, that by
one woman innocence entered* and life: The Virgin Mary had not the same interest
in our salvation, as Eve had in our destruction; nothing that she did entered
into that treasure, that ransom that redeemed us. She, more then any other
woman, and many other blessed women since, have done many things for the
advancing of the glory of God, and imitation of others; so that they are not
unfit for spiritual conversation; nor for the civil offices of friendship
neither, where both tentation at home, and scandal abroad, may truly be
avoided. I know St. Jerome in that case despised all scandal, and all malicious
mis-interpretations of his purpose therein, rather then give over persuading
the Lady Paula, to come from Rome, to him, and live at Jerusalem: But, I know
not so well, that he did well in so doing. A familiar and assiduous
conversation with women will hardly be without tentation and scandal. St.
Jerome himself apprehended that scandal tenderly, and expresses it
passionately; Sceleratum me putant, and omnibus peccatis obrutum. The world
takes me for a vicious man, more (sceleratum) for a wicked, a facinorous man,
for this, and obrutum, surrounded, overflowed with all sins: Versipellem,
lubricum, mendacem, satanae art decipientem: They take me to be a slippery
fellow, a turn-coat from my professed austerity, a Liar, an Impostor, a
Deceiver; yet, though he discerned this scandal, and this inconvenience in it,
he makes shift to ease himself in this, Nihil aliud mihi objicitur, nisi sexus
meus: They charge me with nothing but my sex, that I am a man; Et hoc nunquam
objicitur, nisi cum Hierosolymam Paula proficiscitur, nor that neither, but
because this Lady follows me to Jerusalem.

He proceeds farther, That till he came acquainted in Paulas house at Rome,
Omnium pene judicio, summo sacerdotio dignus decernebar, every man thought me
fit to be Pope; every man thought reverently of him, till he used her house.
St. Jerome would fain have corrected their mis-interpretations, and slackned
the scandal, as we see in that vehement expostulation, and unlikelihood of an
ill love between him and Paula; Nulla alia me Romae edomare potuit? Was Rome so
barren, so weak, so ill furnished with instruments of tentation, that nothing
in Rome it self could shake my constancy, or retard my austerity, Nisi lugens,
jejuna, squallida, fletibus caecata, but a sad, fasting, ill dressed woman,
blind with weeping? Et quam manducantem nunquam vidi: A woman, whom (as
familiar and domestic as I was in her house) I could never see eat bit of
meat. But all this would not quench the fire, the scandal grew; he found it
even amongst his brethren, Homines Christiani dicunt, he could not say, that
only the enemies of the faith, or his enemies, but they that loved Religion
well, and him well, talked dangerously and suspiciously of it; and yet St.
Jerome could not dispose himself to forbear that conversation. He overcame the
sense of it, with a par pari refertur: I, says he, am even with them: Invicem
insanire videmur, they think me mad, and I think them mad: But this is not
always a safe, nor a charitable way, when he might so easily have cured both
madnesses. But he perseveres in it with that resolution, Saluta Paulam, velit
nolit mundus, in Christo meam; Remember me to my Paula, let the world say what
it will, in Christ, my Paula: Thus he proceeds; if excusably in his own behalf,
that is the best; certainly not exemplarily, not to be followed by others, in
cases of so great scandal: For there goes not only a great deal of innocence
(which we acknowledge, doubtlesly, to have been between that blessed couple)
but there must go a great deal of necessity too, (that is, That Paula could not
have been reduced by any other means to the service of God, or continued in it,
but by following St. Jerome to Jerusalem) to justify such a conversation as
became so scandalous. And howsoever, in some cases excuses might be found, what
good Mariner would anchor under a Rock, and lie in danger of beating upon that?
What Fish would choose his food upon a Hook? What Mouse at a Trap? What man
would mingle Sugar and Rats-bane together, and then trust his cunning to sever
them again? Why should any man choose such company, such conversation, as may
minister tentation to him, or scandal to others? Augustine,
St. Augustine apprehended this danger tenderly, when he gave his reason, why
he would not have his Mother in the house with him, Because, says he, though
there be no danger of scandal in the person of my Mother* all those women that
serve my Mother, and that accompany my Mother, and that visit my Mother, all
they are not Mothers to me; and a lawful conversation may come to an unlawful
love quickly. We see how this love wrought, when it was scattered upon many
women, (and therefore could not be so dangerously vehement upon any one) in
Solomon, whose wife turned away his heart; 1 King 11.4. Augustine.
so that his heart was not perfect with God. Nec errore putavit Idolis
serviendum, Solomon never came to think deliberately, that Idolatry was lawful*
sed blanditiis foemineis ad illa sacrificia compulsus, his appliableness to
women brought him to that sacrilege. Thus it wrought, even when it was
scattered upon many, in Solomon; and we see how it wrought, when it was
collected and contracted upon one object, in Samson; Judge. 16.6.
Because she was importunate upon him (says the Text) and vexed him with her
words continually, his soul was pained unto the death. Yea, if we go as high as
is possible, to Adam himself, we see both St. Augustine and St. Jerome express
his case thus, Adam non tanquam verum loquenti credidit, Adam did not believe
Eve, nor was not overcome by her reasons, when she provoked him to eat the
Apple, Sed sociali necessitudini paruit, he was affected with that near
interest which was between them. And ne contristaretur delicias suas, lest by
refusing he should put her, whom he delighted in, to a desperate sadness, and
sense of her sin, he eat for company. And as the first, and the middle times
did, so without doubt, our own times too, if we search but our selves at home,
do minister examples of this (in a proportion) which neither St. Jerome, nor
Solomon, nor Samson, nor Adam avoided, that an over-tender indulgence toward
such women, that for other respects they were bound to love, inclined them to
do such things, as otherwise they would not have done; Natural and civil
obligations induced conversation, and conversation tentation, or if not that
really, yet scandal.

That that we drive to in all this, is this, that if we may not exceed in this
love, which is natural, and commanded, much less in any other. So that there is
nothing in this world left, for this noble and operative affection, Love, to
work upon, but this pureness of heart. Love it therefore, that thou may seek
it, love it that thou may have it; love it that thou may love it; for (as
we said before) it is a part of this pureness to love it. Some of the ancient
Fathers, out of their love to it, have put so high a price and estimation upon
it, that they hardly afforded any grace, any pardon to those that sinned after
they had once received this pureness in Baptism. So that with them, the heart
could never be clean again, after it was once foul'd a second time. Our new
Roman Chemists, Mald^n.
on the other side, they that can transubstantiate bread into God, they can
change any foulness into cleaness easily. They require no more after sin, but
quendam tenuem dolorem internum, A little slight inward sorrow, and that is
enough. For, they have provided an easier way, then Contrition; for, that which
they have induced, and call Attrition, is not an affection, qui habet pro sine
Deum, That has proposed God, for the mark, that it is directed too; Nec qui
indiget divina gratia; but it is such an affection as may be had without any
concurrence or assistance of grace, and is only Dolor naturalis, Zambran.
and ex timore servili,, a natural sorrow, proceeding only out of a servile
fear of torment. And yet, a Confession made with this Attrition and no more, is
enough for salvation, say they; and he that has made a confession with such a
disposition as this, This that has no reference to God, This that has no
strength from his grace, This that has no motive from the fear of God, shall
never need to repent any farther for his sins. Displiceri de peccato, Caj^tan.
sed non super omni displicibili; This is Attrition, to be displeased with our
sins, but not more with our sins, then with any thing else; Intendere vitare
peccatum, sed non super omne vitabile, To have a purpose to leave a sin, but
not the sin rather then any thing else, this is their Attrition, and this is
their enough for salvation. A sigh of the penitent, a word of the Priest, makes
all clean, and induces an absolute pureness.

Thus some of the Ancients went too far, They would pardon no sin after
Baptism; These new Men go not far enough* They pardon all too easily. Old
Physicians thought all hurts in the heart presently mortal; These new
Physicians can pare off some of the heart, and give it to Idolatry; for, so
they say, that the worship due to God may be given to a creature, so it be not
Tanquam Deo, as that the Creature is thereby professed to be God; and yet, they
confess that that worship which they give to the creature is idolatry, but, not
that Idolatry, say they, which is forbidden in the commandment, which is, that
that Creature, so worshipped with the worship due to God, be also believed to
be God; and so, truly I believe it will be hard to find any Idolatry in the
world; That they that worship any thing, in representation of God, do believe
advisedly that representation to be very God. But the true reason why no hurt
received in the heart can be healed, is, quia palpitat, because it is in
perpetual motion. If the heart lay still, as other parts do, so that medicinal
helps might be applied to it, and admitted by it, there were more hope.
Therefore when we lay such a weight upon the heart, as may settle it, fix it,
give it a reposedness and acquiescence, though it do receive some wounds,
though it be touched with some tentations, it may be cured. But is there any
such weight as should so settle the heart, the soul of Man? This love of
Pureness is that weight. August.
Amor est pondus animae; sicut gravitas, Corporis; As the weight of my body
makes that steady, so this love of Pureness is the weight and the ballast of my
soul; and this weight stays the palpitation, the variation, the deviation of
the heart upon other objects; which variation frustrates all endeavors to cure
it.

The love of this pureness is both the ballast and the frait, to carry thee
steadily and richly too, through all storms and tempests, spiritual and
temporal in this life, to the everlasting Jerusalem. If you be come to this
love, this love of pureness of heart, never to lock up your door till you have
carried out your dust; never to shut your eyes at night, till you have swept
your conscience, and cast your foulness into that infinite sea of the blood of
Christ Jesus, which can contract no foulness by it; never to open your eyes in
the morning, but that you look out to glorify God in the rising of the Sun,
and in his other creatures, and in the peace and safety of your house and
family, and the health of your children and servants; But, especially to look
inward, and consider, whether you have not that night mingled poison with Gods
Physic, whether you have not mingled sloth and laziness in that which God gave
you for rest and refreshing; whether you have not mingled licentiousness in
that which God gave you for a remedy against fornication. And then, when you
shall have found that sin has been awake in you, even when your bodies were
asleep, be sure you cast not the Spirit of God into a sleep in you, when your
bodies are awake, but that you proceed vigilantly in your several ways, with a
foreknowledge, that there is every where coluber in via, A Snake in the way;
in every way that you can take, in every course of life, in every calling,
there is some of the seed of the old Serpent presents it self. And then, if by
Gods infallible word, explicated in his Church, Psalm. 119.104.
which is Lucerna pedibus vestris (The word is the light, but the Church is the
Lantern, 2 Samuel 22.29.
it presents and preserves that light unto you; and though it be said Lucerna
Dominus, Apoc. 21.23.
Thou O Lord art my light, God himself; And Lucerna Agnus, The Lamb, Christ
himself is your light; And lucerna mandatum, Prove. 6.23. John 5.35.
The commandments of God are your light; yet it is also said of John Baptist,
Lucerna ardens, he was a burning and a shining light; The Ministry of the
Gospel in the Church, is your light) If by the benefit of this light, you
consider every step you make, weigh every action you undertake, this is that
love of Pureness, that Pondus animae, the settling of the heart, that keeps it
from evaporating upon transitory things, and settles it so, as that it becomes
capable of that cure, which God, in his Church, in the Absolution of sins, and
seals of Reconciliation, exhibits to it. To recollect and contract that which
has been said, This pureness is not a purifying pureness, to correct and
reform those things that appertain not to us; nor it is not such a purified
pureness as makes us Canonize our selves, and think others Reprobates (for, all
this is no pureness at all:) neither is it the true pureness, if it be not in
the heart (for outward good works, not done to good ends, are impure:) nor is
this pureness of heart acquired by any other means, then by discharging the
heart in a detestation of former habits, and a sedulous watchfulness in
preventing future attempts; nor can this pureness of heart, though by these
means attained to, be preserved, but by this noble and incorruptible affection
of Love, that puts a true value upon it, and therefore prefers it above all
other things. And this was the first of the two marks which we found to be upon
that person that should be capable of the Kings friendship, He that loves
pureness of heart. And the other is, that he have by honest industry fitted
himself, in some way, to be of use to the public, delivered in that phrase,
Grace of lips; He that loves pureness of heart (There Is his honesty;) for the
Grace of his lips (There Is his sufficiency;) The King shall be his friend,
There Is his reward his preferment.

Gratia labiorum.
Ordinarily in Scriptures, where this word lips is not taken naturally,
literally, narrowly, for that part of the body, but transferred to a figurative
and larger sense, either it signifies speaking only (as in Solomon, As,
righteous lips are the delight of Kings, and the King loves him that speaks
right things (That is, Him, in whose Counsels, Prove. 16.13.
and in whose relations he may confide and rely;) or else it is enlarged to all
manner of expressing a man's ability, to do service to that State in which God
has made his station; and by lips, and fruits of lips, is well understood the
fruit of all his good labors and endeavors. And so may those words be well
interpreted, With the fruit of a man's mouth shall his belly be satisfied, and
with the increase of his lips shall he be filled; 18.20.
That is, his honest labors in a lawful calling shall enrich him. As therefore
those words, Verse. 16.
A man's gift makes room for him, and brings him before great men, are not
always understood of Gifts given in nature of Bribes or gratifications for
access to great persons, but also of Gifts given by God to men, that those
Gifts and good parts make them acceptable to great persons; so is not Grace of
lips to be restrained, either to a plausible and harmonious speaking, appliable
to the humor of the hearer (for that is excluded in the first part, the root and
fountain of all, Pureness of heart, for, flattery cannot consist with that) nor
to be restrained to the good Offices and Abilities of the tongue only (though
they be many;) but this Grace of lips is to be enlarged to all declarations,
and expressings, and utterings of an ability to serve the Public; All that is
Grace of lips. And in those words of Osea, We render the Calves of our lips, is
neither meant as the Jews say, 14.13.
Those Calves which we have promised with our lips, and will pay in sacrifice,
then, when we are restored to our Land of promise again. Nor are those Calves
of our lips only restrained to the Lip-service of Praise, Heb. 14.15.
and Prayer, though of them also St. Paul understand them; but they include all
the sacrifices of the New Testament, and all ways by which man can do service
to God; so here the Grace of lips reaches to all the ways by which a man in
civil functions may serve the Public. And this Grace of lips, in some
proportion, in some measure, every man is bound in conscience to procure to
himself; he is bound to enable himself to be useful and profitable to the
Public, in some course, in some vocation.

Since even the Angels, which are all Spirit, be yet administering Spirits, and
execute the Commissions and Ambassages of God, and communicate with men; should
man, who is not made all soul, but a composed creature of body and soul, exempt
himself from doing the offices of mutual society, and upholding that frame in
which God is pleased to be glorified? Since God himself, who so many millions
of ages contented himself with himself in Heaven, yet at last made this world
for his glory; shall any man live so in it as to contribute nothing toward it?
Has God made this World his Theater, ut exhibeatur ludus deorum, Plato.
that man may represent God in his conversation; and will thou play no part?
But think that thou only wast made to pass thy time merrily, and to be the only
spectator upon this Theater? Is the world a great and harmonious Organ, where
all parts are played, and all play parts; and must thou only sit idle and hear
it? Is every body else made to be a Member, and to do some real office for the
sustentation of this great Body, this World; and will thou only be no member of
this Body? Think thou that thou wast made to be Cos Amoris, a Mole in the
Face for Ornament, a Man of delight in the World? Because thy wit, thy fashion,
and some such nothing as that, has made thee a delightful and acceptable
companion, will thou therefore pass in jest, and be nothing? If thou will be
no link of Gods Chain, thou must have no part in the influence and providence,
derived by that, successively to us. Since it is for thy fault that God has
cursed the Earth, and that therefore it must bring forth Thorns and Thistles,
wilt not thou stoop down, nor endanger the pricking of thy hand, to weed them
up? Think thou to eat bread, and not sweat? Have thou a prerogative above
the common Law of Nature? Or must God insert a particular clause of exemption
for thy sake?

Oh get thee then this grace of lips; be fit to be inserted, and be inserted
into some society, and some way of doing good to the Public. I speak not this
to your selves, you Senators of London; but as God has blessed you in your
ways, and in your Callings, so put your children into ways and courses too, in
which God may bless them. The dew of Heaven falls upon them that are abroad;
Gods blessings fall upon them that travel in the world. The Fathers former
labors shall not excuse their Sons future idleness; as the Father has, so the
Son must glorify God, and contribute to the world, in some settled course. And
then, as God has blessed thee in the grace of thy lips, in thy endeavors, in
thy self, so thy sons shall grow up, as the Son of God himself did, in grace
and favor of God and man. As God has blessed thee in the fruit of thy Cattle,
so he shall bless thee in the fruit of thy Body; and as he has blessed thee in
the City, so he shall bless thee in the Field, in that Inheritance which thou
shall leave to thy Son. Whereas, when children are brought up in such a
tenderness, and wantonness at home, as is too frequent amongst you in this
City, they never come to be of use to the State, nor their own Estates of any
longer use to them. That Son that comes to say. My Father has labored, and
therefore I may take mine ease, will come to say at last, My Savior has
suffered, and therefore I may take my pleasure; My Savior has fasted, and
therefore I may riot, My Savior has wept enough, and therefore I may be merry.
But as our Savior requires Cooperarios, that we be fellow-workers with him to
make sure our salvation; so if your Sons be not Cooperarii, Laborers in some
course of life, to make sure their Inheritance, though you have been called
wise in your generation, that is; rich in your own times, yet you will be
called fools in your generation too; that is, ignominious and wretched in your
posterity. In a word, he that will be nothing in this world, shall be nothing
in the next; nor shall he have the Communion of Saints there, that will not
have the Communion of good men here. As much as he can, he frustrates Gods
Creation; God produced things of nothing, and he endeavors to bring all to
nothing again; and he despises his own immortality and glorification; for since
he lives the life of a beast, he shows that he could be content to die so too,
and accepit animam in vano, he has received a soul to no purpose.

This grace of lips then, this ability to do good to the Public, we are bound
to have; but we are not commanded to love it, as we are the pureness of heart;
we must love to have it, but we must not be in love with it when we have it.
But since the holy Ghost has chosen to express these abilities, in this word,
Grace of lips, that intimates a duty of utterance, and declaration of those
abilities which he has. Habere te agnoscere, and ex te nihil habere; To let it
appear in the use of them, that thou have good parts, and to confess that thou
have nothing of thine own; Hoc est nec ingratum esse, nec superbum; therein
thou art neither unthankful to God, nor proud of thy self. As he that has no
other good parts, but money; and locks up that, or employs it so, as that his
money feeds upon the Commonwealth, and does not feed it, (that it lies gnawing
and sucking blood, by Usury, and does not make blood, by stirring and walking
in Merchandise,) is an unprofitable member in State; so he that has good
parts, and smothers them, in a retired and useless life, is inexcusable in the
same measure. When therefore men retire themselves into Cloisters and
Monasteries, when they will not be content with St. Paul's diminution, to be
changed from Saul, to Paulus, (which is little) but will go lower then that
little, by being called minorites, less then little, and lower then that,
minims, least of all; and yet find an order less then that, as they have done,
nullani, nothing at all, Exore suo, out of their own mouths they shall be
judged; and that which they have made themselves here, God shall make them in
the world to come, nullanos, nothing at all. Paulum sepultae distatinertiae
celata virtus, It is all one as if he had no grace of lips, if he never have
the grace to open his lips; to bury himself alive, is as much wrong to the
State, as if he kill himself. Every man has a Politic life, as well as a
natural life; and he may no more take himself away from the world, then he may
make himself away out of the world. For he that dies so, by withdrawing himself
from his calling, from the labors of mutual society in this life, that man
kills himself, and God calls him not. Morte morietur, He shall die a double
death; an Allegorical death here, in his retiring, from his own hand; and a
real death from the hand of God hereafter. In this case, that Vae soli, Woe be
unto him that is alone, has the heaviest weight with it; when a man lives so
alone, as that he respects no body but himself, his own ease, and his own ends.
For, to sum up all concerning this part, the Subject, as our principal duty is,
Pureness of heart toward God, and to love that entirely, earnestly; so the
next is the Grace of lips, Ability to serve the Public; which though we be
bound not to love it with a pride, we are bound not to smother with a retiring.
And then for these endowments (for being Religious, and serviceable to the
State). The King shall be our friend. Which is our second general part, to
which, in our order proposed, we are now come.

As it is frequent and ordinary in the Scriptures, when the Holy Ghost would
express a superlative, Rev, nota superlativi.
the highest degree of any thing, to express it, by adding the name of God to
it (as when Saul and his company were in such a dead sleep, as that David could
take his Spear, and pot of water from under his head; It is called Tardemath
Jehovah, sopor Domini, The sleep of the Lord, The greatest sleep that could
possess a man; and so in many other places, fortitudo Domini, and timor Domini,
signify the greatest strength, and the greatest fear that could fall upon a
man) so also does the Holy Ghost often descend from God, to Gods Lieutenant;
and as to express superlatives, he does sometimes use the name of God; so does
he also sometimes use the name of King. For, Reges sunt summi Regis defluxus
(says that Author, who is so ancient, that no man can tell when he was,
Trismegistus) God is the Sun, and Kings are Beams, and emanations, and
influences that flow from him. Such is the manner of the Holy Ghost expressing
himself in Esai. Tyrus shall be forgotten seventy years, Esaias. 23.15.
according to the years of one King; that is, during the time of any one man's
life, how happy and fortunate soever. And so also the miserable and wretched
estate of the wicked, is likewise expressed, Job. 18.14.
His hope shall be rooted out of his dwelling, and shall drive him to the King
of fears; that is, to the greatest despair; ad Regem interituum (says the
Vulgar) to the greatest destruction that can be conceived. So that in this
first sense, Amicitia Regis, the Kings friendship that is promised here, (The
King shall be his friend) is a superlative friendship, a spreading, a delating,
an universal friendship. He that is thus qualified, all the world shall love
him.

Rex qui fortunatus.
So also by the name of King, both in the Scriptures, and in Josephus, and in
many more profane and secular Authors, are often designed such persons as were
not truly of the rank and quality of Kings; but persons that lived in plentiful
and abundant fortunes, and had all the temporal happinesses of this life, were
called Kings. And in this sense, the Kings friendship that is promised here,
(The King shall be his friend) is utilis amicitia, all such frinds as may do
him good. God promises, that to men thus endowed and qualified belongs the love
and assistance that men of plentiful fortunes can give; great Persons, great in
Estate, great in Power and Authority, shall confer their favors upon such men,
and not upon such as only serve to swell a train, always for ostentation,
sometimes for sedition; much less shall they confer their favors upon
sycophants and buffoons; least of all upon the servants of their vices and
voluptuousness; but they whom God has made Kings in that sense, (Masters of
abundant fortunes) shall do good to them only who have this pureness of heart,
and grace of lips.

Rex Ipse.
But if these words be not only intended of the King literally, That he shall do
good to men thus endowed and qualified, but extended to all men in their
proportion, that all that are able should do good to such persons; yet this
Text is principally intended of the King himself, and therefore is so expressed
singularly and emphatically, The King shall be his friend. As God has
appointed it for a particular dignity to his Spouse, the Church, That Kings
shall be their foster-fathers, Esa. 49.23.
and Queens their nurses; so God has designed it for a particular happiness of
religious and capable men, that they may stand before the King, and hear his
wisdom, as the Queen of Sheba observed of the servants of Solomon, 1 Reg, 10. 9.
and pronounced them happy for that. This then is a happiness belonging to this
pureness, and this grace, that the King shall not only nor absolutely rely upon
the information of others, and take such a measure, and such a character of
men, as the good or bad affections of others will present unto him; but he
shall take an immediate knowledge of them himself; he shall observe their love
to this pureness of heart, and their grace of lips, and so become their friend.

Unto which of the Angels said God at any time, Amicus.
Thou art my son, says the Apostle? Indeed to none of them; Heb. 1.5.
it was a name peculiar to Christ. Unto what man did God ever say, Thou art my
friend? only to one, to Abraham; (Israel, and Jacob, Esa. 41.8. 2 Chr. 20.7.
and the seed of Abraham my friend) Jehosaphat before this had taken knowledge
of this friendship between God and Abraham, (Did thou not give this Land to
the seed of Abraham thy friend for ever?) And so does St. James also record
this friendship after, (Abraham believed, and he was called the friend of God.)
James 2.23.
God never called any man friend, but him to whom he gave a change of name, and
honorable additions. He called him Abraham, a name of dilatation, Patrem
multitudinum, a Father of multitudes; he made him able to do good to others;
for he did not only say, Blessed shall thou be, for that might be, blessed of
others, or blessed amongst others; but it is not Eris Benedictus, but Eris
Benedictio, Thou shall be a Blessing, Genesis 12.2.
a Blessing to others. I will make thee a blessed instrument of conveying my
Blessings to other men. That Is Gods friendship, and the highest preferment that
man is capable of in this life, to extend men beyond themselves, and make them
his Instruments to others.

Step we a step lower, from God to the King; for as Kings have no example but
God, so according to that example they are reserved, and sparing in affording
that name of friend to any. For, as moral men have noted, friendsship implies
some degrees of equality, which cannot stand between King and Subject. But this
is the encouragement to this loving of pureness, and this seeking the grace of
lips; that this is the true and the only way to that friendship of the King,
which is intended in the word of this Text. The word is Nagnah; and Nagnah has
such a latitude in the Scriptures, as may well give satisfaction to any
Subject: For Nagnah signifies Amare, to love; and so the King shall love this
man. But we have known cases in which Kings have been fain to disguise and
dissemble their love, out of a tenderness and lothness to grieve them whom they
have loved before; and so the King may love this man, and he never the better.
Therefore this word Nagnah, signifies sociare, to draw him nearer, to associate
him to him, in Counsels, and other ways, and always to afford him easy
accesses unto him; but we have known cases too, in which Kings, though they
have opened one Cabinet, their Affections, yet they have shut up another, their
Judgments, and their last purposes, even from them whom they have drawn near
them. For Kings naturally love to be at their liberty; and it is not only a
greatness, but an ease, to be able to disavow an instruction, upon the
misunderstanding of the Minister and Instrument. Therefore against such
intricacies and intanglings, this Dagnah signifies Docere, The King shall teach
him, inform him directly, heartily, ingenuously, apertly, without any
perplexities or reservations. And who would not purify his heart, and add
grace to his lips, that he might taste this friendship of the King, to be loved
by him; and feel the influences of his affection, to be drawn near him; and
made partaker of his consultations; to be taught by him, and carried all the
way with clearness, and without danger of mistaking? And who would not employ
the thoughts of a pure heart, and the praises of graceful lips, in
thanksgivings to Almighty God, who has blessed us with such times, as that
such Subjects have found such a King!

Neither is this encouragement to this Pureness, and this Grace in our Text,
only in the benignity of the King, (which yet were a just provocation, that the
King would consider such men before others; for all Kings do not always so) but
it is in his duty, it is in his office; for, (as our Translators have expressed
it) we see it is not said, The King will be; but, The King shall be his friend;
it is not an arbitrary, but a necessary thing. God, in whose hands the Kings
heart is, Non Arbitrarium.
and who only can give Law, and Precept to the King, has said, The King shall
be his friend. Neither has God left the King at that largeness, that he shall
seem to be his friend, and do for him as though he were his friend, but yet not
be so. Etiam simulare Philosophiam, Philosophia est; It is a degree of wisdom
to seem wise. Veritas Amicitiae.
To be able to hold the world in opinion that one is great with the King, is a
degree of greatness. And we have some Tales, and Apophthegms to that purpose;
when men have been suitors to the King for that favor, that they might bid him
but good morrow in his ear, thereby to put impressions in the beholders, that
they had a familiar interest in him. But when the grounds of this Royal
friendship are true and solid, Purenss of heart, and Grace of lips, the
friendship must be so too. And then the ground being good, as it is not said,
the King shall seem to be, but he shall be; so it is not said, the king shall
have been, but he shall be; he shall be so still, he shall continue this
friendship; but yet, but so long as this Pureness and this Grace continues,
which produced this friendship in him.

Duratio Amicitiae.
For all this great frame, the friendship of the King, turns upon this little
hinge, this particle, this monosyllable, His; The King shall be His, His
friend. And to whom has that His relation? To him, and him only that has both
Pureness of heart, and Grace of lips. Neither truth in Religion, nor abilities
to serve the Public, must be wanting in him to whom the King shall be a
friend. For for the first, sincerity in Religion, St. Ambrose expressed that,
Ambros. Offic. l. 2.22.
(and the other too) elegantly; An idoneum putabo qui mihi det consilium, qui
non dat sibi? Can I think him fit to give me counsel, that mis-counsels himself
in the highest business, Religion? Mihi eum vacare credam, qui sibi non vacat?
Shall I think that he will study me, that neglects himself? His best self? the
soul it self? And then for his doing good to the Public, L. 1. 8.
Officium ab Efficiendo, and Efficium dicendum, says he. He only is fit for an
Office, that knows how to execute it; he must have pureness of heart for his
end; for he that proposes not that end, will make an ill end. And he must have
this Grace of lips, which implies that civil-wiswisdom, which, (as the
Philosopher notes) versatur circa media perveniendi; He must know wherein he
may be useful and beneficial to others, thankful to God, profitable to others;
that is his circumference; and then his center here, is the love of the King.
For these destroy not one another, Religion and Prudence. As that love which
Christ bare to St. John, who lay in his bosom, (toward whom Christ had
certainly other humane and affectionate respects, then he had to the rest) made
him not the less fit to be an Apostle, and an Evangelist; nor the great Office
of Apostleship made him not unfit for that love that Christ bare him; so both
these endowments, Pureness of heart, and Grace of lips, are not only
compatible, but necessary to him to whom the King shall be a friend. And both
these does God require, (if we consider the force of the Original words) when
he says, Bring ye men of wisdom, and known among the Tribes, and I will make
them Rulers over you. For, Deuteronomy 1.13.
that addition, (known among the Tribes) excludes reserved men, proud and
inaccessible men; though God do not intend there popular men, yet he does
intend men acceptable to the people. And when David comes to a lustration, to a
sifting of his Family, as he says, He that walks in a perfect way, he shall
serve me; expressing in that, this Pureness; so intending to speak of this
Grace of lips, Psalm. 101.6.
which is an ability to be useful to others, for which nothing makes a man more
unfit then Pride, and harshness, and hardness of access, he scarce knows how to
express himself and his indignation against such a man; Him (says he) that has
a proud look, and a high heart, I cannot; and there he ends abruptly; He does
not say, v. 5.
I cannot work upon him, I cannot mend him, I cannot pardon him, I cannot
suffer him; but only, I cannot, and no more; I cannot tell what to do with him,
I cannot tell what to say of him; and therefore I give him over: Him that has
a proud look, and a high heart, I cannot. Whatsoever his grace of lips be, how
good soever his parts, he does not only want the principal part, Pureness of
heart, but he cannot be a fit instrument of that most blessed union between
Prince and Subject, if his proud look, and harsh behavior make him unacceptable
to honest men. It was (says the Orator to the Emperor Theodosius) Execratio
postrema, an Execration, and an expressing of their indignation, beyond which
they could not go, when speaking of Tarquin, Libidine praecipitem, Avaritia
caecum, furore vaecordem, crudelitate immanem, vocarunt superbum, They thought
it enough to call a man that was licentious, and covetous, and furious, and
bloody, proud; Et putaverunt sufficere convitium, they thought themselves
sufficiently revenged upon him for all their grievances, and that they had said
as much as any Orator in an Invective, any Poet in a Satyr, could say, when
they had imprinted that name upon his memory, Tarquin the Proud.

To those therefore that have insinuated themselves into the friendship of the
King, without these two endowments: If the King has always Christ for his
example, Matthew. 22.12.
if he say to them, Amice, quomodo intrasti, Friend, how came you in? If you
had not this wedding garment on, or if this wedding garment were not your own,
but borrowed by an Hypocritical dissimulation, Amice, quomodo intrasti; though
you be never so much my friend, in never so near place to me, I must know how
you got in; for, I have but two doors, (indeed, not two doors, but a gate, and
a wicket; a greater, and an inferior way.) A religious heart, and useful parts;
if you have not these, if you fear not God, and, if you study not, (as I do)
the welfare of my people; you are not come in at my gate, (that is, Religion)
nor at my wicket, (that is, the good of my people:) And therefore, how near so
ever you be crept, I must have a review, an inquiry, to know, quomodo intrasti,
how you came in.

But for those which have these two endowments, (Religion, and care of the
public) we have the word of the King of Kings, of God himself, in the mouth of
the wisest King, King Solomon, The King shall be his friend: And the King has
Christ himself still for his example, Who loved them whom he loved to the end:
For, as long as the reason, upon which he grounds his word, remains,
Demesthenes.
Regis verbum Regi Rex est, the Kings word, the Kings love, the Kings favor,
Regi Rex est, is a King upon the King, and binds him to his word, as well as
his subjects are bound to him.

To recollect and fasten these pieces; these be the benefits of this pureness
of heart, and grace of lips, first, That the King shall take an immediate and
personal knowledge of him, and not be misled by false characters, or false
images of him, by any breath that would blast him in the Kings ear. And then,
tnat he shall take it to be his Royal Office, and Christian duty to do so; that
to those men, whom he finds so qualified, he shall be a friend in all those
acceptations of the word in our Text: Amabit, he shall love them, impart his
affections to them; Sociabit, he shall associate them to him, and impart his
consultations unto them: And Sociabit again, He shall go along with them, and
accompany their labors, and their services, by the seal of his countenance, and
ratification: And Docebit, He shall instruct them clearly in his just pleasure,
without intangling, or snaring them in perplexities, by ambiguous directions.
This is the capacity required (to be religious and useful;) this is the
preferment assured, The King shall be his friend; and this is the compass of
our Text.

Now, Beloved, as we are able to interpret some places of the Revelation,
better then the Fathers could do, Accommodatio ad Diem.
because we have seen the fulfilling of some of the Prophecies of that Book,
which they did but conjecture upon; so we can interpret and apply this Text by
way of accommodation the more usefully, because we have seen these things
performed by those Princes whom God has set over us. We need not that Edict of
the Senate of Rome, Ut sub titulo gratiarum agendarum; That upon pretense of
thanking our Princes, for that which, we say, they had done, Boni principes,
quae facerent recognoscerent, Good Princes should take knowledge what they were
bound to do, though they had not done so yet.

We need not this Circuit, nor this disguise; for, Gods hand has been abundant
toward us, in raising Ministers of State, so qualified, and so endowed; and
such Princes as have fastened their friendships, and conferred their favors upon
such persons. We celebrate, seasonably, opportunely, the thankful
acknowledgment of these mercies, this day: This day, which God made for us,
according to the pattern of his first days in the Creation; where, Vesper and
mane dies unus, the evening first, and then the morning made up the day; for,
here the saddest night, and the joyfullest morning, that ever the daughters of
this Island saw, made up this day. Consider the tears of Richmond this night,
and the joys of London, at this place, at this time, in the morning; and we
shall find Prophecy even in that saying of the Poet, Nocte pluit tota, showers
of rain all night, of weeping for our Sovereign; and we would not be comforted,
because she was not: Matthew. 2.18.
And yet, redeunt spectacula mane, the same hearts, the same eyes, the same
hands were all directed upon recognitions, and acclamations of her successor,
in the morning: And when every one of you in the City were running up and down
like Ants with their eggs bigger then themselves, every man with his bags, to
seek where to hide them safely, Almighty God shed down his Spirit of Unity, and
recollecting, and reposedness, and acquiescence, upon you all. In the death of
that Queen, unmatchable, immitable in her sex; that Queen, worthy, I will not
say of Nestors years, I will not say of Methusalems, but worthy of Adams years,
if Adam had never fallen; in her death we were all under one common flood, and
depth of tears. But the Spirit of God moved upon the face of that depth; and
God said, Let there be light, and there was light, and God saw that that light
was good. God took pleasure, and found a savor of rest, in our peaceful
cheerfulness, and in our joyful and confident apprehension of blessed days in
his Government, whom he had prepared at first, and preserved so often for us.

Plinius ad Trajan.
As the Rule is true, Cum de Malo principe posteri tacent, manifestum est vilem
facere praesentem, when men dare not speak of the vices of a Prince that is
dead, it is certain that the Prince that is alive proceeds in the same vices;
so the inversion of the Rule is true too, Cum de bono principe loquuntur, when
men may speak freely of the virtues of a dead Prince, it is an evident
argument, that the present Prince practices the same virtues; for, if he did
not, he would not love to hear of them. Of her, we may say (that which was well
said, and therefore it were pity it should not be once truly said, for, so it
was not, when it was first said to the Emperor Julian) nihil humile, aut
abjectum cogitavit, quia novit de se semper loquendum; she knew the world would
talk of her after her death, and therefore she did such things all her life
were worthy to be talked of. Of her glorious successor, and our gracious
Sovereign, Plinus ad Trajan.
we may say; Onerosum est succedere bono Principi, It would have troubled any
king but him, to have come in succession, and in comparison with such a Queen.
And in them both we may observe the unsearchableness of the ways of God; of
them both, we may say, Dominus fecit, It is the Lord that has done it, Psalm.
118.23.
and it is wonderful in our eyes: First, That a woman and a maid should have
all the wars of Christendom in her contemplation, and govern and balance them
all; And then, That a King, born and bred in a warlike Nation, and so
accustomed to the sword, as that it had been directed upon his own person, in
the strength of his age, and in his Infancy, in his Cradle, in his mothers
belly, should yet have the blessed spirit of peace so abundantly in him, as
that by his Councils, and his authority, he should sheath all the swords of
Christendom again. De forti egressa dulcedo, sweetness is come out of the
strong, Judge. 14.24.
in a stranger manner, then when Sampson said so in his riddle; And howsoever
another wise King found it true, Anima saturata calcab it favum, The person
that is full despises honey, Prove. 27.7.
they that are glutted with the benefits of peace, would fallen change for a war;
yet the wisest King of all has pronounced for our King, Mat. 5.9.
Beati pacifici, Blessed are the peacemakers. If subjects will not apprehend
it with joy here, the King himself shall joy hereafter, for, Therefore (says
that Gospel) Therefore, because he was a peacemaker, he shall be called The
child of God. 2 Timothy 2.12.
Though then these two great Princes (of whom the one con-regnat Christo,
reigns now with Christ, the other reigns here over us vice Christi, for Christ,
were near in blood, yet thus were they nearest of kin, quod uterque optimus,
That they were both better then any other, and equal to one another. Dignus
alter eligi, Plin. de Nerva, and Traja.
alter eligere, That she was fittest in that fullness of years, to be chosen
and assumed into heaven; and he fittest (as Saint Paul did because it was more
behoofeful for his brethren) to choose to stay upon earth, for our protection,
and for our direction; because (as in all Princes it is) vita principis
perpetua censura, There cannot be a more powerful increpation upon the subjects
excesses, then when they see the King deny himself those pleasures which they
take.

As then this place, where we all stand now, Non Anticipavit.
was the Sanctuary whither we all resorted this day, to receive the assurance
of our safety, in the proclamation of his undoubted title to this Kingdom, so
let it be our Altar now, where we may sacrifice our humble thanks to God,
first, that he always gave the King a just, and a religious patience of not
attempting a coming into this Kingdom, till God emptied the throne here, by
translating that Queen to a throne more glorious. Perchance he was not without
tentations from other men to have done otherwise. But, Pacatus ad Theodos.
Ad Principatum per obsequ ium venit, he came to be King by his obedience, his
obedience to the law of Nature, and the laws of this Kingdom, to which some
other King would have disputed, whether he should have obeyed or no. Cum omnia
faceret imperare ut deberet, nihil fecit, ut imperaret; All his Actions, all
that he did, showed him fit for this Crown, and yet he would do nothing to
anticipate that Crown.

Next let us pour out our thanks to God, Nen adulatus.
that in his entrance he was beholden to no by-religion. The Papists could not
make him place any hopes upon them, nor the Puritans make him entertain any
fears from them; but his God and our God, as he brought him via lactea, by the
sweet way of Peace, that flows with milk and honey, so he brought him via Regia,
by the direct and plain way, without any deviation or descent into ignoble
flatteries, or servile humoring of any persons or factions. Non occulte.
Which noble, and Christian courage he expressed more manifestly, when, after
that infamous powder treason, the intended dissolution, and conflagration of
this state (that plot that even amazed and astonished the Devil, and seemed a
miracle even in hell, that treason, which, whosoever wishes might be covered
how, is sorry that it was discovered then, whosoever wishes that it might be
forgotten, wishes that it had proceeded; And therefore let our tongue cleave
unto the roof our mouths, if we do not confers his loving kindness before the
Lord, and his wonderful works before the Sons of men) Then I say, did his
Majesty show this Christian courage of his more manifestly, when he sent the
profession of his Religion, The Apology of the Oath of Allegiance, and his
opinion of the Roman Antichrist, in all languages, to all Princes of
Christendom. By occasion of which Book, though there have risen twenty
Rabshakes, who have railed against our God in railing against our Religion, and
twenty Shemeis, who have raised against the person of his sacred Majesty (for,
I may pronounce that the number of them who have barked, and snarl'd at that
book in writing, is scarceless then forty) yet scarce one of them all has
undertaken the arguments of that book, but either repeated, and perchance
enlarged those things which their own Authors had shovel'd together of that
subject (that is, The Popes Temporal power) or else they have bent themselves
maliciously, insolently, sacrilegiously, against the person to his Majesty; and
the Pope may be Antichrist still, for any thing they have said to the contrary.
It belonged only to him, whom no earthly King may enter into comparison with,
John 17.12.
the King of Heaven, Christ Jesus, to say, Those that thou gave me have I
kept, and none of them is lost; And even in him, in Christ Jesus himself, that
admitted one exception; Judas the child of perdition was lost. Our King cannot
say that none of his Subjects are fled to Rome; but his vigilance at home has
wrought so, as that fewer are gone from our Universities thither, in his, then
in former times; and his Books abroad have wrought so, that much greater, and
considerable persons are come to us, then are gone from us. I add that
particular, (from our Universities) because we see, that since those men whom
our Universities had bred, and graduated before they went thither, (of which
the number was great, for many years of the Queens time) are worn out amongst
them, and dead; those whom they make up there, whom they have had from their
first youth there, who have received all their Learning from their beggarly and
fragmentary way of Dictates there, and were never grounded in our Schools nor
Universities, have proved but weak maintainers or that cause, compared with
those men of the first times.

As Plato says of a particular natural body, he that will cure an ill Eye, must
cure the Head; he that will cure the Head, must cure the Body; and he that will
cure the Body, must cure the Soul; that is, must bring the Mind to a
temperature, a moderation, an equanimity; so in Civil Bodies, in States, Head,
and Eye, and Body; Prince, and Council, and People, do all receive their health
and welfare from the pureness of Religion: And therefore, as the chiefest of
all, I chose to insist upon that Blessing, That God has given us a Religious
King, and Religious out of his Understanding. His other Virtues work upon
several conditions of men; by this Blessing, the whole Body is blessed. And
therefore not only they which have been salted with the salt of the Court, as
it is said of the Kings Servants; but all that are salted with the salt of the
Earth, Ezra 4.24. Matthew. 5.13. Mark 9.50.
(as Christ calls his Church, his Apostles) all that love to have salt in
themselves, and peace with one another, all that are sensible of the Spiritual
life, and growth, and good taste that they have by the Gospel, are bound to
praise him, to magnify him for ever, that has vouchsafed us a Religious King,
and Religious out of Understanding.

Many other happinesses are rooted in the love of the Subject; and of his
confidence in their love, his very absence from us is an argument to us. His
continual abode with us has been an argument of his love to us; and this long
Progress of his is an argument of his assurance of our loyalty to him. It is an
argument also of the good habitude and constitution to which he has brought
this State, and how little harm they that wish ill to it, are able to do,
Mamertinus. Maximiano.
upon any advantage; Hanc in vobis fiduciam pertimescunt; This confidence of
his makes his home-enemies more afraid, then his Laws, or his Train'd-Bands; Et
contemnise sentiunt, cum relinquuntur; When they are left to their own
malignity, and to do their worst, they discern in that, how despicable and
contemptible a party they are. Cum in interiora Imperii seceditis, when the
King may go so far from the heart of his Kingdom, and the enemy be able to make
no use of his absence, this makes them see the desperateness of their vain
imaginations. He is not gone from us; for a Noble part of this Body, (our
Nation) is gone with him, and a Royal part of his Body stays with us. Neither
is the farthest place that he goes to, any other then ours, now, when, as the
Roman Orator said; Nunc demum juvat orbem terrarum spectare depictum, Eumenius.
cum in illo nihil videmus alienum; Now it is a comfort to look upon a Map of
the World, when we can see nothing in it that is not our own; so we may say,
Now it is a pleasant sight to look upon a Map of this Island, when it is all
one. As we had him at first, and shall have him again, from that Kingdom, where
the natural days are longer then ours are, so may he have longer days with us,
then ever any of our Princes had; and as he has Immortalitatem propriam sibi,
filium sibi similem, (as it was said of Constantine,) a peculiar immortality,
not to die, because he shall live in his Son; so in the fullness of time, and in
the accomplishment of Gods purposes upon him, may he have the happiness of the
other Immortality, and peacefully surrender all his Crowns in exchange of one,
a Crown of immortal glory, which the Lord the righteous Judge lay up for him
against that day.

To conclude all, and to go the right way from things which we see, to things
which we see not, by consideration of the King, to the contemplation of God;
since God has made us his Tenants of this World, we are bound, not only to pay
our Rents, (spiritual duties and services toward him,) but we are bound to
reparations too, to contribute our help to society, and such external duties as
belong to the maintenance of this world, in which Almighty God has chosen to
be glorified. If we have these two, Pureness of heart, and Grace of lips, then
we do these two; we pay our Rent, and we keep the world in reparation; and we
shall pass through all those steps and gradations, Ambros.
which St. Ambrose harmoniously, melodiously expresses, to be servi per
timorem, to be the servants of God, and live in his fear; to be mercinarij per
laborem, to be the workmen of God, and labor in his Vineyard; to be filij per
lavacrum, to be the sons of God, and preserve that Inheritance which was sealed
to us at first, in Baptism; and last of all, Amici per virtutem, by the good
use of his gifts, the King of Kings shall be our friend. That which he said to
his Apostles, his Spirit shall say to our spirit here, and seal it to us for a
Covenant of Salt, an everlasting, John 15.14.
an irrevocable Covenant, Henceforth call I you not servants, but I have called
you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known
unto you. And the fruition of this friendship, which neither slackens in all
our life, nor ends at our death, the Lord of Life, for the death of his most
innocent Son, afford to us all.

Amen.
A Sermon. 25.
SERMON Preached at the SPITTLE Upon Easter-Munday, 1662. SERMON XXV.
2 Cor. 4.6. For, God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined
in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the
face of Jesus Christ.


THe first Book of the Bible, begins with the beginning; In principio, says
Moses, in Genesis; In the beginning God created heaven and earth: and can there
be any thing prius principio, before the beginning? Before this beginning,
there is. The last Book of the Bible, (in the order as they were written) the
Gospel of St. John, begins with the same word too; In principio, says St. John;
In the beginning was the Word: and here, Novissimum primum, the last beginning
is the first; St. John's beginning, before Moses; Moses speaking but of the
Creature, and St. John of the Creator; and of the Creator, before he took that
name, before he came to the act of Creation; as, the Word was with God, and was
God from all Eternity. Our present Text is an Epitome of both those beginnings:
of the first beginning, the Creation, when God commanded light to shine out of
darkness; and of the other beginning, which is indeed the first, of Him, in
whose face we shall have the knowledge of the glory of God, Christ Jesus.

The first Book of the Bible, is a Revelation, and so is the last, in the order
as they stand, a Revelation too. To declare a production of all things out of
nothing, (which is Moses his work;) that when I do not know, and care not
whether I know or no, what so contemptible a Creature as an Ant is made of, but
yet would fain know what so vast, and so considerable a thing as an Elephant is
made of; I care not for a mustard seed, but I would fain know what a Cedar is
made of; I can leave out the consideration of the whole Earth, but would be
glad to know what the Heavens, and the glorious bodies in the Heavens, Sun,
Moon and Stars are made of; I shall have but one answer from Moses for all,
that all my Elephants, and Cedars, and the Heavens that I consider, were made
of nothing; that a Cloud is as nobly born, as the Sun in the Heavens; and a
beggar, as nobly, as the King upon Earth; if we consider the great Grandfather
of them all, to be nothing: to produce light of darkness thus, is a Revelation,
a Manifestation of that, which, till then, was not: this Moses does. St. John's
is a Revelation too: a Manifestation of that state, which shall be, and be for
ever, after all those which were produced of nothing, shall be returned and
ressolv'd to nothing again; the glorious state of the everlasting Jerusalem,
the Kingdom of Heaven. Now this Text is a Revelation of both these Revelations:
the first state, that which Moses reveals, was too dark for man to see; for it
was nothing: The other, that which St. John reveals, is too bright, too dazzling
for man to look upon; for it is no one limited, determined Object, but all at
once, glory, and the seat and fountain of all glory, the face of Christ Jesus.

The Holy Ghost has showed us both these, severally in Moses, and in St. John,
and both together in St. Paul, in this Text: where, as the Sun stands in the
midst of the Heavens, and shows us both the Creatures that are below it, upon
Earth, and the Creatures that are above it, the Stars in Heaven; so St. Paul,
as he is made an Apostle of the Gentiles, stands in the midst of this Text,
(God has shined in our hearts:) Ours, as we are Apostolical Ministers of the
Gospel; and he shows us the greatness of God, in the Creation which was before,
when God commanded light out of darkness; and the goodness of God which shall
be hereafter, when he shall give us the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, in the face of Christ Jesus.

So that this Text, giving light, by which we see, light commanded by God out
of darkness; and the Object which we are to see, the knowledge of the glory of
God; and this Object being brought within a convenient distance to be seen in
the face of Jesus Christ. And a fit and well-disposed Medium being illumined,
through which we may see it, God having shined in our hearts, established a
Ministry of the Gospel: for that purpose, if you bring but eyes, to that which
this Text brings, Light, and Object, and Distance, and Means, then, as St.
Basil said of the Book of Psalms, upon an impossible supposition, If all the
other Books of Scripture could perish, there were enough in that one, for the
catechizing of all that did believe, and for the convincing of all that did
not: so if all the other Writings of St. Paul could perish, this Text were
enough to carry us through the body of Divinity, from the Cradle of the world,
in the Creation, when God commanded light out of darkness, to the Grave; and
beyond the Grave of the world, to the last Dissolution; and beyond it, when we
shall have fully, the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face
of Christ Jesus. Now, whilst I am to speak of all this, this, which is Omne
scibile, all, and more then can fall within the comprehension of a natural man;
for it is the beginning of this world, and it is the way to the next, and it is
the next world it self, I comfort my self at my first setting out, with that of
St. Gregory, Purgatas aures, and hominum gratiam nancisci, nonne Dei donum est?
I take it for one of Gods great blessings to me, if he have given me now an
Auditory, Purgatae auris, of such spiritual and circumcised Ears, as come not
to hear that Wisdom of Words, which may make the Cross of Christ of none
effect; much less such itching Ears, as come to hear popular and seditious
Calumnies and Scandals, and Reproaches, cast upon the present State and
Government. For, a man may make a Sermon, a Satyr; he may make a Prayer, a
Libel, if upon color of preaching, or praying, against toleration of Religion,
or persecution for Religion, he would insinuate, that any such tolerations are
prepared for us, or such persecutions threatened against us. But if for speaking
the mysteries of your salvation, plainly, sincerely, inelegantly,
inartificially; for the Gold, and not for the Fashion; for the Matter, and not
for the Form, Nanciscor populi gratiam, my service may be acceptable to Gods
people, and available to their Edification; Nonne Dei donum, shall not I call
this a great Blessing of God? Beloved, in him, I must; I do. And therefore,
because I presume I speak to such, I take to my self, that which follows there,
in the same Father, that he that speaks to such a people, does not his duty, if
he consider not deliberately, Quibus, Quando, Quantum loquatur; both to whom,
and at what time, and how much he is to speak. I consider the persons; and I
consider that the greatest part, by much, are persons born since the
Reformation of Religion, since the death of Idolatry in this Land; and
therefore not naturalized by Conversion, by Transplantation from another
Religion to this, but born the natural children of this Church; and therefore,
to such persons, I need not lay hold upon any points of controverted Doctrine.
I consider also Quando, the time; and I consider, that it is now, in these days
of Easter, when the greatest part of this Auditory, have, or will renew their
Hands to Christ Jesus in the Sacrament of his Body, and his Blood; that they
will rather loose theirs, then lack his: and therefore toward persons, who
have testified that disposition in that seal, I need not depart into any
vehement, or passionate Exhortations to constancy and perseverance, as though
there were occasion to doubt it. And I consider lastly, Quantum, how much is
necessary to be spoken to such a people, so disposed; and therefore, farther
then the custom, and solemnity of this day, and place, lays an Obligation upon
me, I will not extend my self to an unnecessary length; especially, because
that which shall be said by me, and by my Brethren which come after, and were
worthy to come before me, in this place, is to be said to you again, by
another, who alone, takes as much pains, as all we, and all you too: Hears all,
with as much patience as all you; and is to speak of all, with as much, and
more labor, then all we. Much therefore for your ease, somewhat for his, a
little for mine own, with such succinctness and brevity, as may consist with
clearness, and perspicuity, in such manner, and method, as may best enlighten
your understandings, and least encumber your memories, I shall open unto you
that light, which God commanded out of darkness, and that light by which he
has shined in our hearts; and this light, by which we shall have the knowledge
of the glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus.

Divisio.
Our parts therefore in these words, must necessarily be three; three Lights.
The first, shows us our Creation; the second, our Vocation; the third, our
Glorification. In the first, We, who were but, (but what?) but nothing, were
made Creatures: In the second, we, who were but Gentiles, were made Christians:
In the third, we, who were but men, shall be made saints. In the first, God
took us, when there was no world: In the second, God sustains us, in an ill
world: In the third, God shall crown us, in a glorious and joyful world. In the
first, God made us; in the second, God mends us; in the third, God shall
perfect us. First, God commanded light out of darkness, that man might see the
Creature; then he shined in our hearts, that man might see himself; at last, he
shall shine so in the face of Christ Jesus, that man may see God, and live; and
live as long, as that God of light and life shall live himself. Every one of
these Parts, will have diverse Branches; and it is time to enter into them. In
the first, the Creation, because this Text does not purposely and primarily
deliver the Doctrine of the Creation, not prove it, not press it, not enforce
it; but rather suppose it, and then propose it by way of Example and
Comparison; (for when the Apostles says, God, who commanded light out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts, he intimates therein, these two
Propositions: first, that the same God that does the one, does the other too;
God perfects his works; and then this Proposition also, As God has done the
one, he has done the other: God himself works by Patterns, by Examples.) These
two Propositions shall therefore be our two first Branches in this first Part.
First, Idem Deus, the same God goes through his works; and therefore let us
never fear that God will be weary: and then Sicut Deus, as God has done, he
will do again; he works by pattern, and so must we: and then from these two, we
shall descend to our third Proposition, Quid Deus, what God is said to have
done here; and it is, that he commanded light out of darkness. In these three,
we shall determine this Part; and for the Branches of the other two Parts, our
Vocation, and our Glorification, it will be a less burden to your memories, to
open them then, when we come to handle the Parts themselves, then altogether
now. Now we shall proceed in the Branches of the first Part. Part 1. Memb. 1.
Idem Deus.


In this, our first Consideration is, Idem Deus, the same our God goes through
all. Those diverse Heretics who thought there were two Gods, (for Cordon
thought so, and Marcion thought so too; the Gnostiques thought so, and the
Maniches thought so too) though they differed in their mistakings, (for error
is always manifold, and multiform) yet all their errors were upon this ground,
this root, They could nor comprehend that the same God should be the God of
Justice, and the God of Mercy too; a God that had an earnestness to punish sin,
and an easiness to pardon sin too. Cordon, who was first, though he made two
Gods, yet he used them both reasonable well; for with him, Alter Bonus, Alter
Justus; Iren. 1.28.29.
one of his Gods is perfectly good, merciful; and the other, though he be not
so very good, yet he is just. Marcion, who came after, says worse; because he
could not discern the good purposes of God in inflicting Judgments, nor the
good use which good men make of his Corrections; but thought all acts of his
Justice to be calamitous and intolerable, and naturally evil: therefore with
him, Alter Bonus, Alter Malus; he that is the merciful God, is his good God;
and he that is so just, but just, is an ill God. Hence they came to call the
God of the New Testament, a good God, because there was Copiosa Redemptio,
plentiful Redemption in the Gospel: and the God of the Old Testament, Malum
Deum, an ill God, because they thought all penalties of the Law, evil. They
came lower; to call that God, which created the Upper Region of man, the Brain,
and the Heart, (the presence and privy Chamber of Reason, and consequently of
Religion too) a good God, because good things are enacted there; and that God
that created the Lower Region of man, the seat and scene of Carnal Desires, and
inordinate Affections, an ill God, because ill actions are perpetrated there.
But Idem Deus, the same God that commanded light out of darkness, has shined
in our hearts: The God of the Law, and the God of the Gospel too; The God of
the Brain, and the God of the Belly too; The God of Mercy, and the God of
Justice too, is all one God.

In all the Scriptures, you shall scarce find such a Demonstration of Gods
Indignation, such a severe Execution, as that upon the Syrians; when, after the
slaughter of one hundred thousand foot in the field in one day, the walls of
the City, into which they fled, fell, and slew twenty seven thousand more. The
Armies of the Israelites were that day, but as little flocks of kids, says the
Text there; and yet those few, slew one hundred thousand. The Walls of Aphak
promised succor; and yet they fell, and slew twenty seven thousand. Now from
whence proceeded Gods vehement anger in this defeat? The Prophet tells the King
the cause; Because the Syrians have said, The Lord is God of the hills, but he
is not God of the valleys. The Israelites had beaten them upon the Hills, and
they could not attribute this to their Forces, for they were very small; they
must necessarily ascribe it to their God; but they thought they might find a
way to be too hard for their God: and therefore, since he was a God of the
mountains, they would fight with him in the valleys. But the God of Israel is
Idem Deus, one and the same God. He is Jugatinus and Vallonia both, as St. Aug.
speaks out of the Roman Authors: he is God of the mountains, he can exalt; and
he is God of the Valleys, he can throw down. Our Age has produced such
Syrians, too; Men, who, after God has declared himself against them many ways,
have yet thought they might get an advantage upon him some other way. They
begun in Rebellions; animated persons of great blood, and great place, to
rebels their Rebellions God frustrated. Then they came to say, (to say in
actions) Their God is God of Rebellions, a God that resists Rebellions; but he
is no God of Excommunications: then they excommunicated us. But our God cast
those thunderbolts, those Bruta fulmina, into the Sea, no man took fire at
them. Then they said, He is a God of Excommunications, he will not suffer an
Excommunication stolen out in his Name, against his Children, to do any harm;
but he is no God of Invasion, let us try him there: Then they procured Invasion;
and there the God of Israel showed himself the Lord of Hosts, and scattered
them there. Then they said, he is the God of Invasions, annihilates them; but
he is not the God of Supplantations; surely their God will not pry into a
Cellar, he will not peep into a vault; he is the God of water, but he is not
the God of fire; let us try him in that Element; and in that Element, they saw
one another justly eviscorated, and their bowels burnt. All this they have
said, so as we have heard them; for they have said it in loud Actions, and
still they say something in corners, which we do not hear. Either he is not a
God of Equivocations, and therefore let us be lying spirits in the mouths of
some of his Prophets, draw some men that are in great Opinion of Learning, to
our side, or at least draw the people into an Opinion that we have drawn them;
or else, he is not the God of jealousy and suspicion, and therefore let us
supple and slumber him with security, and pretenses and disguises. But he is
Idem Deus; that God who has begun, and proceeded, will persevere in mercy
toward us. Our God is not out of breath, because he has blown one tempest,
and swallowed a Navy: Our God has not burnt out his eyes, because he has
looked upon a Train of Powder: In the the light of Heaven, and in the darkness
of hell, he sees alike; he sees not only all Machinations of hands, when
things come to action; but all Imaginations of hearts, when they are in their
first Consultations: past, and present, and future, distinguish not his Quando;
all is one time to him: Mountains and Valleys, Sea and Land, distinguish not
his Ubi; all is one place to him: When I begin, says God to Eli, I will make an
end; not only that all Gods purposes shall have their certain end, but that
even then, when he begins, he makes an end: from the very beginning, imprints
an infallible assurance, that whom he loves, he loves to the end: as a Circle
is printed all at once, so his beginning and ending is all one.

Make thou also the same interpretation of this Idem Deus, in all the
Vicissitudes and Changes of this World. Has God brought thee from an
Exposititious Child laid out in the streets, of uncertain name, of unknown
Parents, to become the first foundation-stone of a great family, and to enoble
a posterity? Has God brought thee from a Carriers Pack, upon which thou came
up, to thy change of Foot-Cloathes, and Coaches? Has God brought thee from one
of these Blew-Coats, to one of those Scarlet Gowns? Attribute not this to thine
own Industry, nor to thine own Frugality; (for, Industry is but Fortunes right
hand, and Frugality her left;) but come to David's Acclamation, Dominus Fecit,
It is the Lords doing: That takes away the impossibility: Psalm. 118.22.
If the Lord will do it, it may be, it must be done; but yet even that takes
not away the wonder; for, as it follows there, Domiminus fecit, and est
Mirabile, though the Lord have done it, it is wonderful in our eyes, to see
whom, and from whence, and whither, and how God does raise, and exalt some men.
And then if God be pleased to make thee a Roll written on both sides, a History
of Adversity, as well as of Prosperity: if when he has filled his Tables, with
the story of Mardoche, a man strangely raised, he takes his Sponge, and wipes
out all that, and writes down in thee, the story of Job, a man strangely
ruined, all this is Idem Deus, still the same God, and the same purpose in that
God, still to bring thee nearer to him, though by a lower way. If then thou
abound, Luke 12.19.
come not to say with the over-secure man, Soul, thou have much goods laid up,
for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry: and if thou want,
come not to that impatience of that Prophet, Satis est, Lord, this is enough,
now take away my life: Nay, though the Lord lead thee into tentation, and do
not deliver thee from Egypt, but let thee fall into a sin, though he let thee
fall so far, as to doubt of his mercy for that sin, yet Idem Deus, all this
while, all this is the same God; and even that voice, though it have an account
of despair in it, is the voice of God; and though it be spoken in the mouth of
the Devil, it is God that speaks it; for even then, when the Devil possesses
man, God possesses the Devil. God can make his profit, and thine, of thy sin:
he can make the horror of a sin committed, the occasion of thy repentance, and
his mercy: Amos 3.6.
for, Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? God is no
disposer to sin, but he is the disposer of sin: God is not Lord of sin, as
Author of sin; but he is the Lord of sin, as Steward of it: and he dispenses
not only for our sins, but the sins themselves. God imprints not that
obliquity, infuses not that venom that is in our sinful Actions, but God can
extract good out of bad, and Cordials out of Poison. Be not thou therefore too
nimble a Sophister, nor too pressing an Advocate against thine own soul:
conclude not too soon, that God has forsaken thee, because he has let thee
fall, and let thee lie some time, in some sin: you know who did so, and yet was
a man according to Gods own heart; for God has set his heart upon that way, to
glorify himself out of David's repentance, rather then out of his innocence. In
the Hills, and in the Valleys too; in spiritual, as well as in temporal
prosperity and adversity too; in the Old, and in the New Testament; in the ways
of mercy, and of justice too, thou may find the same God, who is in every
change Idem Deus; God, that is, the same God, who commanded light out of
darkness, has shined in our hearts: And so we have done with the first
Proposition.

Sicut Deus.
The next is, Sicut Deus; As God has done the one, so he has the other. God
brings himself into comparison with himself: Our unworthiness changes not his
nature: His mercy is new every morning; and, his mercy endures for ever. One
generation is a precedent to another, and God is his own Example; whatsoever he
has done for us, he is ready to do again. When he had once written the Law in
stone-tables, for the direction of his people, and that Moses in an
over-vehement zeal and distemper, had broke those Tables, God turned to his
precedent, remembered what he had done, and does so again; he writes that Law
again in new Tables. When God had given us the light of the Reformation for a
few years of a young King, and that after him, in the time of a pious truly,
but credulous Princess, a Cloud of blood over-shadowed us in a heavy
persecution, yet God turned to his precedent, to the example of his former
mercy, and in mercy re-established that light, which shines yet amongst us; and
(if the sins of the people extinguish it not) shall shine as long as the Sun
and Moon shall shine above. The Lords hand is not shortened, nor weakened in the
ways of justice; and his justice has a Sicut, a precedent, an Example too.
There is Sicut Kore, If we sin as Kore and his Accomplices sinned, as Kore and
his Accomplices, we shall perish. Number. 16.40.
There is an Anathema Sicut illud, Deuteronomy. 7.26.
Thou shall not bring an abomination into thy house, (not an Idolator into thy
house) lest thou be an accursed thing, Sicut illud, as guilty in the eye of
God, Psalm. 83.9.
as the Idolator himself. There is Sicut Midian; God can do unto the men of
these times, as he did unto the Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin, which
perished, and became as the Dung of the earth. He can make their Nobles Sicut
Oreb, Sicut Zeeb, like unto Oreb, like unto Zeeb, and all their Princes Sicut
Zebah, Sicut Salmana. There are precedents of his justice too. But yet in the
greatest act of his justice that ever he did, which was the general drowning of
the whole world, though that history remain as an everlasting Demonstration of
his power, and of his justice, yet he would not have it remain as a precedent;
but he records that, with that protestation, I will no more curse the earth,
nor smite any more, every living thing, as I have done: though I have showed
that I can do it, and have done it, I will do it no more. God forbears, and
ways his own example in matter of justice; but God never showed any mercy, but
he desires that that mercy may be recorded, and produced, and pleaded to our
Conscience, to the whole Congregation, to God himself, as a leading and a
binding case, as he commanded light out of darkness, so he has shined in our
hearts.

God proceeds by example, by pattern: Even in this first great act presented in
our Text, in the Creation he did so. God had no external pattern in the
Creation, for there was nothing extant; but God had from all Eternity an
internal pattern, an Idaea, a pre-conception, a form in himself, according to
which he produced every Creature. And when God himself proceeds upon
pre-conceptions, pre-meditations, shall we adventure to do, or to say any thing
in his service unpremeditately, extemporally? It is not Gods way. Now, it is a
penurious thing, to have but one Candle in a room: it is too dim a light to
work by, to live by, to have but Rule and Precept alone; Rule and Example
together, direct us fully. Who shall be our Example? Hierom.
Idaea novi hominis Christus Jesus. If thou will be a new Creature, (and,
Circumcision is nothing, uncircumcision nothing, but only to be a new
Creature) then Christ is thy Idaea, thy Pattern, thine Original: for, Quid in
eo non Novum? what was there in him that was not new? When was there such a
Conception, of the Holy Ghost? such a birth, of a Virgin? such a pregnancy to
dispute so, so young, with such men? When such a death as God to die? when such
a life, as a dead man to raise himself again? Quid in eo non Novum? To be
produced by this Idaea, built up by this Model, copied by this Original, is
truly, is only to be a new Creature. But that thou may put thy self into
the way to this, it is usefully said, Enim vero, certum vitae genus sibi
constituere; Certainly to undertake a certain Profession, Nazianz.
a Calling in this world, and to propose to our selves the Example of some
good, and godly man in that Calling, whose steps we will walk in, and whom we
will make our precedent, Tanti Momenti esse duco, says that Father, is a matter
of so great importance, as that upon that (says he) lies the building of our
whole life. That little Philosopher Epictetus, could give us that Rule;
Whenever thou enter prisest, any action, says he, consider what Socrates,
what Plato, (that is, what a wise and religious man) would have done in that
case, and do thou so. This way our Savior directs us; Ja. 13.15.
I have given you an example: It is not only Mandatum novum, but exemplum
Novum, That ye should do, even as I have done unto you. And this is the way
that the Apostle directs us to, Phil. 3.13.
Brethren, be followers of me: and because he could not be always with them, he
adds, Look on them which walk so, as you have us for an example. Love the
Legends, the Lives, the Actions, and love the sayings, the Apopththegms of good
men. In all tentations like Joseph's tentations, Genesis 39.9.
love Joseph's words, How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
In all tentations like Jobs tentations, love the words of Job, Job 2.10.
Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? In
all tentations like to Shidrachs and his fellow-Confessors, Dan 3.17.
love their words, Our God is able to deliver us, and he will deliver us: but
if not, we will not serve thy god, nor worship thine image. Certainly, without
the practice, it is scarce to be discerned, what ease and what profit there is,
in proposing certain and good Examples to our selves. And when you have made up
your profit that way, rectified your self by that course, then, as your Sons
write by Copies, and your Daughters work by Samplars, be every Father a Copy to
his Son, every Mother a Samplar to her Daughter, and every house will be an
University. O in how blessed a nearness to their Direction, is that Child, and
that Servant, and that Parishioner, who, when they shall say to Almighty God,
by way of Prayer, What shall I do, to get eternal life? shall hear God answer
to them by his Spirit, Do but as thou see thy Father do, do as thou see thy
Master do, do as thou see thy Pastor do! To become a precedent, govern thy
self by precedent first; which is all the Doctrine that I intended to deduce
out of this second Proposition, Sicut Deus, As God commanded light out of
darkness, so he has shined in our hearts: God did as he had done before: and
so we pass from the Idem Deus, and the Sicut Deus, to the Quid Deus, What that
is which God has done here, He commanded light out of darkness.

Quid Deus.
The drowning of the first world, and the repairing that again; the burning of
this world, and establishing another in heaven, do not so much strain a man's
Reason, as the Creation, a Creation of all out of nothing. For, for the
repairing of the world after the Flood, compared to the Creation, it was eight
to nothing; eight persons to begin a world upon, then; but in the Creation,
none. And for the glory which we receive in the next world, it is (in some
sort) as the stamping of a print upon a Coin; the metal is there already, a
body and a soul to receive glory: but at the Creation, there was no soul to
receive glory, no body to receive a soul, no stuff, no matter, to make a body
of. The less any thing is, the less we know it: how invisible, how intelligible
a thing then, is this Nothing! We say in the School, Deus cognoscibilior
Angelis, We have better means to know the nature of God, then of Angels,
because God has appeared and manifested himself more in actions, then Angels
have done: we know what they are, by knowing what they have done; and it is
very little that is related to us what Angels have done: what then is there
that can bring this Nothing to our understanding? what has that done? A
Leviathan, a Whale, from a grain of Spawn; an Oak from a buried Akehorn, is a
great; but a great world from nothing, is a strange improvement. We wonder to
see a man rise from nothing to a great Estate; but that Nothing is but nothing
in comparison; but absolutely nothing, merely nothing, is more incomprehensible
then any thing, then all things together. It is a state (if a man may call it a
state) that the Devil himself in the midst of his torments, cannot wish. No man
can, the Devil himself cannot, advisedly, deliberately, wish himself to be
nothing. It is truly and safely said in the School, That whatsoever can be the
subject of a wish, if I can desire it, wish it, it must necessarily be better
(at least in my opinion) then that which I have; and whatsoever is better, is
not nothing; whithout doubt it must necessarily produce more thankfulness in
me, toward God, that I am a Christian; but certainly more wonder that I am a
Creature: it is vehemently spoken, but yet needs no excuse, which Justin Marter
says, Ne ipsi quidem Domino fidem haberem, etc. I should scarce believe God
himself, if he should tell me, that any but himself created this world of
nothing; so infallible, and so inseparable a work, and so distinctive a
Character is it of the Godhead, to produce any thing from nothing; and that God
did when he commanded light out of darkness.

Moses stands not long upon the Creation, in the description thereof; no more
will we: When there went but a word to the making it self, why should we make
many words in the description thereof? We will therefore only declare the
three terms in this Proposition, and so proceed; first, God commanded, then he
commanded light, and light out of darkness.

For the first, that which we translate here commanded, is in St. Paul's mouth,
the same that is Moses, Dixit, and no more; God said it. But then if he said
it, Cui dixit? to whom did he say it? Procopius asks the Question; and he
answers himself, Dixit Angelis, He said it to the Angels. For Procopius being
of that opinion, which very many were of besides himself, that God had made the
Angels some time before he came to the Creation of particular Creatures, he
thinks that when he came to that, he called the Angels, that they, by seeing of
what all other Creatures were made, might know also of what stuff; themselves
were made, of the common and general nothing. Some others had said, that God
said this to the Creature it self, which was now in fieri, (as we say in the
School) in the production, ready to be brought forth. Athanasius.
But then, says Athanasius, God would have said Sis Lux, and not Sit Lux: He
would have said, Be thou, O Light, or appear and come forth, O Light, and not
Let there be Light. But what needs all this vexation in Procopius, or
Athanasius? When as Dicere Dei est intelligere ejus practicum: Dionysius.
Carthus.
when God would produce his Idaea, his pre-conception into action, that action,
that production was his Dixit, his saying. It is, as we say in School, Actus
indicativus practici intellectus; Gods outward Declaration of an inward purpose
by execution of that purpose, that his Dixit, his saying. R. Moses.
It is sufficiently expressed by Rab: Moses, In Creatione Dicta sunt
voluntates; In the act of Creation, the Will of GOD, was the Word of God; his
Will that it should be, was his saying, Let it be. Of which it is a convenient
example which is in the Prophet Jonah, 2.10.
The Lord spoke unto the Fish, and it vomited Jonah upon the dry Land; that is,
God would have the Fish to do it, and it did it. God spoke then in the
Creation, but he spoke Ineffabiliter, says St. Aug. August.
without uttering any sound. He spoke, but he spoke Intemporaliter, says that
Father too, without spending any time in distinction of syllables. But yet when
he spoke, Aliquis ad fuit, as Athanasius presses it; Athan.
surely there was some body with him; there was, says he. Who? Verbum ejus ad
fuit, and ad fuit Spiritus ejus, says he, truly, the second Person in the
Trinity, his Eternal Word; and the third Person, the Holy Ghost, were both
there at the Creation, and to them he spoke. For, By the Word of the Lord were
the heavens framed, and all the host of them; Spiritu oris ejus, Job 33.4.
by that Spirit that proceeded from him, says David. The Spirit of God has
made me; 26. 13.
and, By his Spirit he has garnished the heavens. So that, in one word, thou,
who wast nothing, have employed and set on work, the heart and hand of all the
three Persons, in the blessed and glorious Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, to the making of thee; and then what ought thou to be, and to do in
retribution? and not to make thee, that which thou art now, a Christian, but
even to make thee that, wherein (...) wast equal to a worm, to a grain of dust.
Have thou put the whole Trinity to busy themselves upon thee? and therefore
what should thou be toward them? But here, in this branch, we consider not
so much; not his noblest Creature, Man, but his first Creature, Light: He
commanded, and he commanded Light.

And of Light, we say no more in this place, but this; that in all the
Scriptures, in which the word Light is very often metaphorically applied, it is
never applied in an ill sense. Christ is called a Lion; but there is an ill
Lion too, that seeks whom he may devour. Christ is the serpent that was
exalted; but there is an ill serpent, that did devour us all at once. But
Christ is the light of the world, and no ill thing is called light. Light was
Gods signature, by which he set his hand to the Creation: and therefore, as
Princes sign above the Letter, and not below, God made light first; in that
first Creature he declared his presence, his Majesty; the more, in that he
commanded light out of darkness.

There was Lumen de Lumine before; light of light, very God of very God; an
eternal Son of an eternal Father, before: But light out of darkness, is Music
out of silence. It was one distinct plague of Egypt, darkness above; and one
distinct blessing, that the children of Israel had, light in their dwellings.
But for some spiritual Applications of light and darkness, we shall have room
again; when, after we shall have spoken of our second part, our Vocation; as
God has shined in our hearts, positively, we shall come to speak of that
shining comparatively, That God has so shined in our hearts, as he commanded
light out of darkness. And to those two Branches of our second part, the
positive and comparative Consideration of that shining, we are in order, come
now. In the first part, we were made; in this second, we are mended: Part II.
in the first, we were brought into this world; in this second, we are led
through it: in the first, we are Creatures; in this, we are Christians. God
has shined in our hearts. In this part, Divisio.
we shall have two Branches; a positive, and a comparative consideration of the
words: First, the matter it self, what this shining is; and it is the
conversion of Man to God, by the ministry of the Gospel; and secondly, how this
manner of expressing it, answers the comparison, As God commanded light out of
darkness, so he has shined in our hearts. And in the first, the positive, we
shall pass by these few and short steps: first, Gods action, Illuxit, he shine;
it is evidence, Manifestation: And then, the time, when this day breaks, when
this Sun rises. Illuxit, he has shined, he has done enough already. Thirdly,
the place, the sphere in which he shines, the Orb which he has illumined, in
Cordibus: if he shine, he shines in the heart. And lastly, the persons, upon
whom he casts his beams, in Cordibus nostris, in our hearts. And having past
these four in the positive part, we shall descend to the comparative; as God
commanded light out of darkness, so he has shined in our hearts.

1. Lucet.
First then, for Gods action, his working in the Christian Church, which is our
Vocation, we consider man to be all, to be all Creatures; Mar. 16.15.
according to that expression of our Savior's, Go, preach the Gospel to every
Creature; and agreeable to that largeness in which he received it, Colos. 1.23.
the Apostle delivers it, The Gospel is preached to every Creature under
heaven: The properties, the qualities of every Creature, are in man; the
Essence, the Existence of every Creature is for man; so man is every Creature.
And therefore the Philosopher draws man into too narrow a table, when he says
he is Microcosmos, an Abridgement of the world in little: Nazianzen gives him
but his due, when he calls him Mundum Magnum, a world to which all the rest of
the world is but subordinate: For all the world besides, is but Gods
Footstool; Man sits down upon his right hand: and howsoever God be in all the
world, yet how did God dwell in man, in the assumption of that nature? and what
care did GOD take of that dwelling, that when that house was demolished, would
yet dwell in the ruins thereof? for the Godhead did not depart from the dead
body of Christ Jesus in the Grave. And then how much more gloriously then
before, did he re-edifie that house, in raising it again to Glory? Man
therefore is Cura Divini ingenii, Tertul.
a creature upon whom, not only the greatness, and the goodness, but even the
study and diligence of God is employed. And being thus a greater world then the
other, he must be greater in all his parts, and so in his lights; and so he is:
for, instead of this light, which the world had at first, Man has a nobler
light, an immortal, a discerning soul, the light of reason. Instead of the many
stars, which this world has, man has had the light of the Law, and the
succession of the Prophets: And instead of that Sun, which this world had, a
Son from God; man has had the Son of God; God has spoken to us by his Son;
God has shined upon us in his Son. The whole work of Almighty God, in the
Conversion of man, is many times expressed by this act of shining; Act. 2.2.
an effectual, a powerful shining. The infusion of the Holy Ghost into the
Apostles at Pentecost, was with fire: The light which shined upon St. Paul,
going to Damascus, struck him to the ground. Act, 9.4.
And in both those cases, there were tongues too. The Apostles fire, was fiery
tongues, and St. Paul's light, was accompanied with a voice; for then does God
truly shine to us, when he appears to our eyes and to our ears, when by
visible and audible means, by Sacraments which we see, and by the Word which we
he hear, he conveys himself unto us. In Paul's case, there were some that saw
the light, but heard not the voice: God has joined them, separate them not:
Upon him that will come to hear, and will not come to see; will come to the
Sermon, but not to the Sacrament; or that will come to see, but will not come
to hear; will keep his solemn, and festival, and Anniversary times of receiving
the Sacrament, but never care for being instructed in the duties appertaining
to that high Mystery, God has not shined. They are a powerful thunder, and
lightning, that go together: Preaching is the thunder, that clears the air,
disperses all clouds of ignorance; and then the Sacrament is the lightning, the
glorious light, and presence of Christ Jesus himself. And in the having and
loving of these, the Word and Sacraments, the outward means of salvation,
ordained by God in his Church, consists this Irradiation, this Cotuscation,
this shining. And we have done with that.

The next is the time, Illuxit, he has shined already; Illuxit.
and Illuxit Mundo, he has shined; that is, manifested himself sufficiently to
the whole world. Illuxit Nobis, he has done it fully to this Nation; and
Illuxit Vobis, he has shined sufficiently upon every one of you. First, upon
the whole world; for, though at first he shined only upon the Jews, and left
all the world beside in darkness, and in the shadow of death; and even to the
Jews themselves, he shined but as a light in a dark place; the Temple it self
was but a dark room in respect of the Christian Church; yet, 2 Pet. 1.19.
as soon as Christ had established that, illumined that, inanimated that, given
it breath in his Word, the written Scriptures, and given it motion, and action
in the preaching of that Word. and Administration of the Sacraments, when this
was done, immediately there was Meridies, a full noon; the light was at the
highest, the Sun was at the Tropique, it could go no further; no fundamental
thing can be added by man to this light by which the Son of God has shined in
his Church. To set up Candles to Images, is a weakness in them that do it; but
to set up Candles to God, is a presumption; that God cannot or has not shined
out sufficiently upon his Church, in his Institutions, but that they must
supply him with the traditions and additions of men. Lex Lux, says David, The
Law of God, the Scripture, is a light, it is the light, it is all light; and
therefore they who would take away this light, not suffer men to read the
Scriptures; or if they will not snuff this light, not mend the Barbarisms, the
Errors, the Contradictions which are in their Translation, and let it shine
according to the Original Truth, this is a shutting of their eyes against this
Illuxit: For, God has showed enough, and said enough, and done enough, and
suffered enough, for the salvation of his Church; he has shined out upon all,
and needs no supply of lesser lights.

So he has shined upon all; and Illuxit Nobis, he has shined abundantly upon
this Nation. He shined upon us betimes; this day sprung, this Sun rose in the
East; in the East, Christ lived and preached in person; but in his Beams, his
Messengers, he shined quickly into the West too. And when he did so, he did not
so shine upon the West, upon Rome, as that that light was cast upon us, as by
reflection from a glass, from the walls of Rome: but we had it, as they had it,
by persons ordained by God, to convey it over the world. I dispute not too
earnestly, I determine not too vehemently any matter of fact in this point. I
confess ingeniously, we had many Assistances from Rome; but truly, she has
been even with us since: and, Computatis Computandis, I think she may be
content to give us an Acquittance. God shined upon this Island early; early in
the plantation of the Gospel, (for we had not our seed-Corn from Rome,
howsoever we may have had some waterings from thence) and early in the
Reformation of the Church: for we had not the model of any other Foreign
Church for our pattern; we stripped not the Church into a nakedness, nor into
rags; we divested her not of her possessions, nor of her Ceremonies, but
received such a Reformation at home, by their hands whom God enlightened, as
left her neither in a Dropsy, nor in a Consumption; neither in a superfluous
and cumbersome fatness, nor in an uncomely and faint leanness and attenuation:
Early in the Plantation, early in the Reformation, Illuxit Nobis, and we have
light enough, without either seeing other light from Rome, or more of this
light from other places. God continue to us the light of this Reformation,
without re-admitting any old Clouds, any old Clouts, and we shall not need any
such re-Reformation, or super-Reformation, as swimming Brains will needs cross
the Seas for. The Word of God is not above thee, says Moses, nor beyond the
Sea. We need not clime up seven hills, nor wash our selves seven times in a
Lake for it: God make the practice of our lives agreeable to the Doctrine of
our Church; and all the world shall see that we have light enough.

Illuxit Mundo, Illuxit Nobis, and Vobis too; God has also shined sufficiently
upon every of you, that hear this, already: upon the greatest part of you in
both, upon all in one of his Sacraments. God has been content to talk with you
in your infancy, as Parents with their children, before they can speak plain,
in his Language of Catechisms; and since you came to better strength, in his
stronger Language of Preaching. He has admitted you to him in your private
prayers, and come to you in your private readings of his Word. He has opened
your Ears to him, and his to hear you in the public Congregation: and as he
that waters his Garden, pours in water into that Vessel at one place, and pours
it out again at an hundred; God, who as he has walled this Island with a wall
of water, the Sea; so he waters this Garden with the waters of Paradise: the
Word of Life has poured in this water, into that great, and Royal Vessel, the
Understanding, and the love of his truth, into the large and religious heart of
our Sovereign, and he pours it out in 100, in 1000 spouts, in a more plentiful
preaching thereof, then ever your Fathers had it; in both the ways of plenty;
plentiful in the frequency, plentiful in the learned manner of preaching.
Illuxit, he has shined upon you before you were born, in the Covenant, in
making you the Children of the seed of Abraham, of Christian Parents. Illuxit,
he has shined upon you ever since you could hear and see, had any exercise of
natural and supernatural faculties; and Illuxit, by his grace, who sends
treasure in earthen vessels, he has shined upon some of you, since you came
hither now. Consider only now, after all this shining, that a Candle is as
soon blown out, at an open door, or an open window, as in the open street. If
you open a door to a Supplanter, an Underminer, a Whisperer against your
Religion; if there be a broken window, a woman laden with sin, as the Apostle
speaks, and thereby dejected into an inordinate melancholy, (for such a
melancholy as make Witches, makes Papists too) if she be thereby as apt to
change Religions now, as Loves before, and as weary of this God, as of that
man; if there be such a door, such a window, a wife, a child, a friend, a
sojourner bending that way, this light that has shined upon thee, may as
absolutely go out, in thy house, and in thy heart, as if it were put out in the
whole Kingdom. Leave the public to him whose care the public is; and who, no
doubt, prepares a good account to him, to whom only he is accountable. Look
then to thine own heart, and thine own house; for that is thy charge. And so we
have done with the action, shining, evidence; and with the time, Illuxit, there
is enough done already; and we come to the place, in Cord; if God shine, he
shines in the heart.

Fecit Deus Coelum and terram, Non lego quod requieverit, In Cordibus. St.
Ambros.
says that Father; God made heaven and earth, but I do not read that he tested,
when he had done that: Fecit Solemn and Lunam, (as he pursues that Meditation;)
He made the Sun and Moon, and all the host of heaven, but yet he rested not:
Fecit hominem, and Requievit; When God had made man, then he rested: for, when
God had made man, he had made his bed, the heart of man, to rest in. God asks
nothing of man, but his heart; and nothing, but man, can give the heart to God.
Genesis 8.21.
And therefore in that sacrifice of Noah after the flood, and often in the
Scriptures elsewhere, sacrifice is called Odor quietis, God smelt a savor of
rest: in that which proceeds from a religious heart, God rests himself, and is
well pleased. Loqui ad Cor Jerusalem, to speak to the heart of Jerusalem, is
ever the Scripture phrase, from God to man, to speak comfortably; and loqui^e
Cord, to speak from the heart, is an Emphatical phrase, from man to God too.
He that speaks from his own heart, speaks to Gods heart. Did not our hearts
burn within us, while he opened the Scriptures? say those two Disciples that
went with Christ to Emaus. And if your hearts do not so all this while, you
hear but me; Luc. 24.32.
(and, alas! who, or what am I?) you hear not God. But let this light, the love
of the ordinary means of your salvation, enter into your hearts, and shine
there; and then, as the fire in your Chymney grows pale, and faints, and out of
countenance when the Sun shines upon it; so whatsoever fires of lust, of anger,
of ambition, possessed that heart before, it will yield to this, and evaporate.
But why do I speak all this to others? Is it so clear a case, that the hearts
in this Text, are the hearts of others; of them that hear, and not of our
selves that speak? That we are to see now; for that is the next, and last Branch
in this part, who be the persons: in Cordibus nostris, in our hearts.

Nostris.
Certainly this word Nostris, primarily, most literally, most directly, concerns
us; Us, the Ministers of Gods Word and Sacraments. If we take Gods Word into
our mouths, and pretend a Commission, a Calling, for the calling of others, we
must be sure that God has shined in our hearts. There is vocatio
intentionalis, an intentional Calling, when Parents, in their intention and
purpose, dedicates their children to this service of God, the Ministry, even in
their Cradle. And this is a good and holy intention, because though it bind not
in the nature of a Vow, yet it makes them all the way more careful, to give
them such an Education, as may fit them for that profession. And then there is
Vocatio Virtualis, when having assented to that purpose of my Parents, I
receive that public Seal, the Imposition of hands, in the Church of God: but
it is Vocatio radicalis, the calling that is the root and foundation of all,
that we have this light shining in our hearts, the testimony of Gods Spirit to
our spirit, that we have this calling from above. First then, it must be a
light; not a calling taken out of the darkness of melancholy, or darkness of
discontent, or darkness of want and poverty, or darkness of a retired life, to
avoid the mutual duties and offices of society: it must be a light, and a light
that shines; it is not enough to have knowledge and learning; it must shine
out, and appear in preaching; and it must shine in our hearts, in the private
testimony of the Spirit there: but when it has so shined there, it must not go
out there, but shine still as a Candle in a Candlestick, or the Sun in his
sphere; shine so, as it give light to others: so that this light does not shine
in our hearts, except it appear in the tongue, and in the hand too: First, in
the tongue, to preach opportune, and importune; in season and out of season; 2 Timothy 4.2. August.
that is, opportune Volentibus, importune Nolentibus: preaching is in season to
them who are willing to hear; but though they be not, though they had rather
the Laws would permit them to be absent, or that preaching were given over; yet
I must preach. And in that sense, I may use the words of the Apostle, As much
as in me is, I am ready to preach the Gospel to them also that are at Rome: at
Rome in their hearts; at Rome, that is, of Rome, Romans 1.15.
reconciled to Rome. I would preach to them, if they would have me, if they
would hear me; and that were opportune, in season. But though we preach
importune, out of season to their ends, and their purposes, yet we must preach,
though they would not have it done: for we are debtors to all, because all are
our Neighbors. Proximus tuus est antequam Christianus est: August.
A man is thy Neighbor, by his Humanity, not by his Divinity; by his Nature,
not by his Religion: a Virginian is thy Neighbor, as well as a Londoner; and
all men are in every good man's Diocese, and Parish. Irrides odorantem lapides,
says that Father; Thou see a man worship an Image, and thou laughest him to
scorn; assist him, direct him if thou can, but scorn him not: Ignoras quomodo
illum praesciverit Deus; thou know not Gods purpose, nor the way of Gods
purpose upon that man; his way may be to convert that man by thee, and to bring
that man to serve him? Religio tuis fortasse, quam tu qui irridebas; perchance
more sincerely then thou; not only when thou did laugh at him, but even when
thou did preach to him. For brass, I will bring gold, says God in Esaias; and
for iron, silver. God can work in all metals, and transmute all metals: he can
make a Moral Man, a Christian; and a Superstitious Christian, a sincere
Christian; a Papist, a Protestant; and a dissolute Protestant, a holy man, by
thy preaching. And therefore let this light shine in our hearts, in the
testimony of a good Conscience, in having accepted this Calling, but also shine
in our tongues, preach. Though the Disease of St. Chrysostomes times, should
overtake ours, Nicepho.
Qui quantum placuit tantum principibus displicuit; The more good he did by
preaching, the more some great persons were displeased with him; yet all this
were but St. Paul's importune, a little out of season: but out of season we
must preach. How much more now, now, when, as the Apostle says of God, we may
say of Gods Lieutenant, In whom there is no change, nor shadow of change, no
approach toward a change, no occasion of jealousy of it? How much were we
inexcuseable, if either out of fullness of fortunes, or emptiness of learning;
if either out of state, or business, or laziness, or pretense of fear, where no
fear is, we should smother this light, which if it have truly shined in our
hearts, will shine in our tongues too?

It must shine there, and it must shine in our hands also, in our actions, in
the example of our life. Christ says to his Apostles, Vos estis Lux, You are
light: there they were illumin'd': Mat. 15.14, 16.
but to what use? It follows, That men may see your good works: For, as St.
Ambrose says of the Creation, Frustra fecisset Lucem, Ambro.
God had made light to no purpose, if he had not made Creatures to show by that
light: so we have the light of Learning, and the light of other abilities to no
purpose, if we have no good works to show, when we have drawn men's eyes upon
us. Upon those words of Solomon's, Gregor.
Tempus tacendi, tempus loquendi, St. Gregory makes this note, That Solomon
does not say first, There is a time of speaking, and a time of silence, that
when a man has taken that calling, that binds him to speak, then he might
prevaricate in a treacherous silence: but first there is a time of silence, of
study, of preparation, how to speak, and then speak on in Gods Name. But
howsoever there may be tempus tacendi, some time wherein we may be silent; yet
there is not tempus peccandi; no circumstance of time, no circumstance at all
can excuse an ill life in an ill man, less in a leading and exemplar man, least
of all in a Churchman. To that which is vulgarly said, Loquere ut te vidiam;
speak that I may see thee; I do not see thee, not see what is in thee, except I
hear thee preach: Let me add more, Age ut te audiam, do something that I may
hear thee: I do not hear thee, not hear thee to believe thee, except I hear of
thee in a good testimony of thy conversation. I hope our times, and our
callings is far enough from that suspicion of St. Ambrose, Ne sit nomen inane,
crimen immane in Sacerdotibus: God forbid the name of Priest should privilege
any man otherwise obnoxious from just censure. He were a stranee Master of
faculties to himself, that would give himself a Dispensation so; this were
truly to incur a Praemunire in the highest Kingdom, to forfeit all
everlastingly; to appeal from our conversation, to our profession; to make a
holy profession the Cloak, nay, the reason of unholy actions. But I speak not
now of enormous ill, but of omissions of good, and of too easy venturing upon
things, in their own nature indifferent: For, as for our words, St. Bernard
says well, Nugae in ore laici sunt Nugae, in ore Sacerdotis blasphemiae; Idle
words, are but idle words in a secular man's mouth; but in a Churchmans mouth,
they are blasphemies. So for our actions; it may become us, it may concern us
to abstain from some indifferent things, which other men without any scandal
may do.

Hierom.
Vehementer destruit Ecclaesiam Dei, laicos esse meliores Clericis: Nothing
shakes the Church more, then when Churchmen are no better then other men are.
4. 10.
Where we read in Genesis, Vox sanguinis, The voice of Abel's blood calls; it
is in the Original, Vox sanguinum, of bloods, in the plural; many bloods, much
blood: the blood of a whole Parish, of a whole Province, cries out against the
life of such a man: for his Sermons are but his Texts; his life is his Sermon
that preaches; Aaron and Moses were joined in Commission; Aaron had the tongue,
the power of speaking; Moses had the Rod, the power of doing great works. When
the Lystrians called Paul, Act. 14.12.
Mercury, for his Eloquence, they called his Companion Barnabas, Jupiter; their
eye was upon their great work, as well as their sweet words. Clearly and
ingenuously, we, we the Ministers of the Gospel, acknowledge our selves to be
principally intended by the Apostle in this Text; this light, that is the
knowledge, and the love of Gods truth, must shine in our hearts, sincerely
there; and in our tongues, assidiously there; and in our hands, evidently
there; and so we are the persons; but yet not we alone, though the Apostle
express it in that phrase, in Cordibus nostris.

When this Apostle speaks of Hereditas nostra, our inheritance; and Pax nostra,
our peace; and Spes nostra, our hope, as he does to the Ephesians, and often
elsewhere, he does not so appropriate Christ, of whom he says all that, to
himself, as that they to whom he writes, should not have an inheritance, and a
peace, and a hope in Christ, as well as he, or any Apostle. So when he says
here in Cordibus nostris, in our hearts, he intends that the Colossians, that
people to whom he writes, (and he writes to all) should have that light in
their hearts, and consequently in their tongues and hands too; in words and
actions, as well as men of the Church. It is not only to Priests that St.
Peter said, 1 Pet. 2.9.
God had made them a Royal Priesthood; not only of Priests that St. John said,
God has made us Kings and Priests. There is not so Regal, so Sovereign, Ap.
5.10.
so Monarchical a Prerogative, as to have Animum Deosubditum, Leo.
Corporis sui Rectorem; That man who has a soul in subjection to God, and in
dominion over his own body, that man is a King. And then there is not so holy,
so Priestly an Office, as Pietatis hostias de altari Cordis offerre. That man
who from the Altar of a pure heart, Idem.
offers sacrifices of prayer and praise to God, that man is a Priest: so all
you are or may be Kings; and all Priests. Nay, Chrysostom.
St. Chrysostom. appropriates this rather to you, then to us; not to us at all;
for he read this very Text, in Cordibus vestris, in your hearts. Since then to
this intendment you are Priests, as we are; since altogether make up Clerum
Domini, the Lords Clergy, and his portion, do not you make us to be all of the
inferior Ministry, and all you selves to be Bishops over us, to visit us,
judge us, syndicate us, and leave out your selves: Plus Sacerdotum vitam quam
suum discutientes, as St. G. complains; that bestow more time in examining the
lives of their Pastors, then their own. Aquin.
Quid tibi Malus Minister, ubi bonus Dominus, says Aquinas upon this: As long
as thou art sure, that the Master of the house will receive thee kindly, what
carest thou though a surly Fellow let thee in at door? Sacramenta ab sunt
indigne tractantibus, says that Father: August.
An hypocritical preaching of the Word, an unclean Administration of the
Sacraments, shall aggravate the condemnation of that unclean Hypocrite; but yet
Prosunt digne sumentibus; a worthy Receiver, receives the virtue and benefit of
the Word and Sacraments, though from an unworthy Giver.

I may be bold to say, that this City has the ablest preaching Clergy of any
City in Christendom; must I be fain to say, that the Clergy of this City has
the poorest intertainment of any City that can come into comparison with it? it
is so. And that to which they have pretenses and claims to be farther due to
them, is detained, not because that which they have is enough, but because that
which they claim is too much: The circumstance of the quantity and proportion,
keeps off the consideration of the very right: So that this Clergy is therefore
poor, because they should be rich; therefore kept without any part, because so
great a part seems to belong unto them. Grieve not the Spirit of God; grieve
not the spiritual man, the man of God neither: Aug.
Ex tristitia sermo procedens, minus gratus est. He that preaches from a sad
heart, under the sense of a great charge, and small means, cannot preach
cheerfully to you. Provide, says the Apostle, Heb. 13.17.
that they who watch over your souls, may do it with joy, and not with grief:
for, says he, that is unprofitable for you. You receive not so much profit by
them, as you might do, if they might attend your service entirely; when they
are distracted with chargeable suites abroad, or macerated with penurious
fortunes at home. Consider how much other Professions, of Arms, of Merchandise,
of Agriculture, of Law it self, are decayed of late: and thence, (though not
only thence) it is, that so many more in our times, then ever before, of
Honorable and Worshipful Families, apply themselves to our Profession, to the
Ministry. Let therefore this light shine in your hearts, bless God for this
blessed increase, and shine in your tongues; glorify God in a good
interpretation of the actions of his Ministers, and shine in your hands;
cherish and comfort them so, that they be not put to bread and water, that give
you bread and wine; nor mourn in smoaky corners, who bring you the Sunshine of
the glorious Gospel, the Gospel of consolation, into the congregation. And so
we have done with all the four considerations, which made up this first branch,
our Vocation by this Light, considered positively, The Thing, the Time, the
Place, and the Persons. A little remains by debt of promise, Comparatio.
to be said of this Comparatively, As God commanded light, so he has shined in
our hearts. A little before the Text, the act of the Devil is to induce
darkness; but God illumins. Deus hujus saeculi, says the Apostle, the God of
this world, that is, 1. 14.
the Devil, blinds the eyes of men. Which words by the way give just occasion
of making this short note, that many times by altercation and vehemence of
Disputation, the truth of the literal sense is endangered: and therefore we
should rather content our selves with positive and necessary Divinity, then
entangle our selves with impertinent controversies. The Manichees, and those
other Heretics, who constituted Duo Principia, and consequently two Gods, one
good, and one bad, made use of this Text for that opinion; That if the Devil
were God of this world, and if any God did blind the eyes of man, there was an
ill God. And to elevate and take away that Argument of those Heretics, very
many of the ancient Fathers, Irenaeus, literally and expressly, and expressly
and literally S. Chrysostom. too, and S. Aug. says, most of the Orthodox Fathers
would needs read that place with another distinction another interpunction then
indeed belongs to it, not Deus hujus saeculi, The God of this world has
blinded man; but Deus, hujus saeculi mentes, God, that is, the true God, has
blinded the eyes of the men of this world. And so, for fear of giving the name
of God to the Devil, they attribute the action of the Devil to God. I do not
mean that the Fathers do it, they were far from it; but this shift, and this
inconvenient manner of expressing themselves, has made some later men who
think so, think, that the Fathers thought God to be really, positively,
primarily, the author of the excaecation of the Reprobates. In what sense that
may be said, how, and how far God concurs to this excaecation, we dispute not
now. We rest in that of St. Aug. Aliud venit de astutia suadentis, aliud de
nequitia nolentis, aliud de justitia punientis. August.
God has a part, a great part, in this; but not the first. First, says St.
Aug. Satan suggests, then man consents; then enters God, by way of punishment,
of Justice. And how far does he punish? Deserendo, he forsakes that sinner, he
withdraws his Grace: and then, as upon the departing of the Sun, darkness
follows, but the Sun is not the cause of darkness; so upon departing of Grace,
follows excaecation. God, our God, is the God of light, and lightneth every man
that comes into the world. So he begun in the Creation, so he proceeds in our
Vocation, As he commanded light of darkness, so he has shined in our hearts.

First, He made light: There was none before; so first, He shines in our
hearts, by his preventing Grace; there was no light before; not of Nature, by
which any man could see, any means of salvation; not of foreseen Merits, that
God should light his light at our Candle, give us Grace therefore, because he
saw that we would use that Grace well. He made light, he infused Grace.

And then, He made light first of all Creatures: Ut innotescerent, says, St.
Ambr. that by that light all his other Creatures might be seen: which is also
the use of this other light, that shines in our hearts, that by that light, the
love of the Truth, and the glory of Christ Jesus, all our actions may be
manifested to the world, and abide that trial; that we look for no other
approbation of them, then as they are justifiable by that light, as they
conduce to the maintenance of his Religion, and the advancement of his glory:
not to consider actions as they are wisely done, valiantly done, learnedly
done, but only as they are religiously done: and ut abdicemus occulta
dedecoris, v. 2.
as the Apostle speaks; That we may renounce the hidden things of dishonesty,
and not walk in craftiness: that is, not sin therefore, because we see our sins
may be hid from the world: For, says St. Ambrose, speaking of Gyges Ring, a
Ring by which he that wore it, became invisible; Da sapienti; says that Father,
Give a wise man, (a man religiously wise) that Ring, and though he might sin
invisibly before men, he would not, because God sees. Nay, Seneca.
even the moral man goes further then that, in that point; Though I knew, says
he, hominem ignoraturum, and Deum ignosciturum, that man should never know it,
and that God would forgive it, I would not sin, for the very soulness that is
naturally in sin. As God commanded light for the Manifestation of his
creatures, so he has shined in our hearts, that our actions might appear by
that light.

How then made he that light? Dixit, he said it, by his Word. In which we note,
first, the means: Verbo; he did it by his Word; and by his Word, the preaching
of his Word, does he shine in our hearts. And we consider also the dispatch,
how soon he made light, Chrysostom.
with a word. Dixit, id est, summa cum celeritate fecit, his work cost him but
a word; Tertul.
and then Cogitasse jussisse est, his word cost him but a thought. So if we
consider the dispatch of Christ Jesus in all his Miracles, there went but a
Toll, Take up thy bed and walk, to the lame man; but an Ephptata, Be opened,
to the deaf man; but a Quid vides, What see thou? to the blind man. If we
consider his dispatch upon the thief on the cross, how soon he brought him from
reviling, to glorifying; and if any in this Auditory feel that dispatch of the
Holy Ghost, in his heart; that whereas he came hither but to see, he has
heard; or if he came to hear the man, he has heard God in the man, and is
better at this Glass, then he was at the first; better now, then when he came,
and will go away better then he is yet, he that feels this, must confess, that
as God commanded light out of darkness, so he has shined in his heart: So,
that is, by the same means, by his Word; and so, that is, with the same speed
and dispatch.

Again, Deus vidit lucem, God saw the light; he looked upon it; he considered
it: This second light, even Religion it self, must be looked upon, considered;
not taken implicitly, nor occasionally, not advantageously, but seriously and
deliberately, and then assuredly, and constantly.

And then vidit quod bona, God saw that this light was good; God did not see,
nor say that darkness was good; that ignorance, how near of kin soever they
make it to Devotion, was good; nor that the waters were good; that a flui'd, a
moving, a variable, an uncertain irresolution in matter of Religion, is good;
nor that that Abyssus, that depth which was before light, was good; that it is
good to surround and enwrap our selves in deep and perplexing School-points,
but he saw that light, evident and fundamental Articles of Religion, were good,
good to clear thee in all scruples, good to sustain thee in all tentations. God
knew that this light would be good, before he made it; but he did not say so,
till he saw it. God knew every good work that thou should do, every good
thought that thou should think to thy end, before thy beginning, for he of
his own goodness, imprinted this degree of goodness in thee; but yet assure thy
self, that he loves thee in another manner, and another measure, then, when
thou come really to do those good works, then before, or when thou did
only conceive a purpose of doing them: he calls them good when he sees them.

And when he saw this light, this good light, he separated all darkness from
it. When thou have found this light to have shined in thy heart, God manifested
in his way, his true Religion, separate all darkness, the dark inventions and
traditions of men, and the works of darkness, sin; and since thou have light,
be night not thy self again, with relapsing to either.

The comparison of these two lights, created and infused light, would run in
infinitum; I shut it up with this, that as at the first production of light,
till light was made, there was a general, an universal darkness, darkness over
all, but after light was once made, there was never any universal darkness,
because there is no body bigg enough to shadow the whole Sun from the Earth; so
till this light shine in our hearts, we are wholly darkness; but when it has
truly and effectually shined in us, and manifested to us the evidence of our
Election in Gods eternal Decree, howsoever there may be some Clouds, some
Eclipses, yet there is no total darkness, no total, no final falling away of
Gods Saints. And in all these respects, the comparison holds. As God commanded
light out of darkness, so he has shined in our hearts; and so we have done
with all the branches of our second part, which implies our Vocation here, and
we pass to the last, Our Glorification hereafter.

As in our first part we considered by occasion of the first Creature, light,
the whole Creation, and so the Creation of man; Part III.
and in our second part, by occasion of this shining in our hearts, the whole
work of our Vocation and proceeding in this world: so in this third part, by
occasion of this glorious manifestation of God, in the face of Christ Jesus,
which is intended principally, by this Apostle, of, the manifestation of God in
the Christian Church; we shall also, as far, as that dazzling glory will give us
leave, consider the perfect state of glory in the Kingdom of Heaven: So that
first, our branches in this third part, will be three, these three terms, 1
Knowledge, 2 Glory, and then, the face of Jesus Christ. Divisio.
And then we must look upon all these three terms two ways, first, Inchoative,
how we have an inchoation of this knowledge, of this glory, in this face of
Christ Jesus here in the Church; and then Consummative, how we shall have a
consummation of all this hereafter.

Scientia.
To us then, who were created of nothing, in the first part, and called from the
Gentiles in the second, in this third part, our preparation to glory, is
knowledge. The Persons in this part of the Text, are, as in the former; Not
only we, we the Ministers of Gods Word, but you also the hearers thereof: for
there is a knowledge, an art of hearing, as well as of speaking. Students make
up the University, as well as Doctors: and Hearers make up the Congregation, as
well as Preachers. A good hearer is as much a Doctor, as a Preacher: A Doctor
to him that sits by him, in example, whilst he is here: a Doctor to all his
Family, in his repetition, when he comes home: a Doctor, to that which is more
then the whole world, to him, his own soul, all his life. Christ appeared to
this Apostle, Act. 26.16.
and said, I have appeared unto thee, for this purpose, to make thee a Minister
and a witness, to open the Gentiles eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God. There he received his Degree, his
learning, and the use of it; but when St. Paul came abroad into the world, when
he comes to preach, 1.12.
and to write, he says to the Colos. The Father has made us meet to be
partakes of the inheritance of the Saints in his light. Us, says St. Chrysostom,
and so says Theophylact too, and many more then they two; Us, that is, all Us,
Us that preach, you that hear; you are bound to study this knowledge, as well
as we. And truly, a Hearer has in some respects advantage of the Preacher:
for, a Preacher, though in some measure, well disposed, can hardly exuere
hominem, put off the affections of man, by being a Preacher; they stick closer
to him then his Hood and habit, even in the Pulpit. Some little Clouds, if not
of ostentation, and vain glory, yet of complacencie and self-pleasing, will
affect him; the hearer has not that tentation, but has herein a more perfect
exercise of the most Christian virtue, Humility, then the preacher has. Though
therefore, when you cast your eye upon this part of this Text, you see in your
Book, a difference of Character, in this word, To give, to give light, etc.
which seems to fix all upon the person of the Apostle, and consequently of the
Minister; yet that word is not in the Text, but the Text is only, for the
inlightning; God has shined, for the inlightning, etc. which is alike upon
all; and therefore let us, all us, cast off the works of darkness, and put on
the armor of light: light it self is faith; but, the armor of light is
knowledge; an ignorant man is a disarmed man, a naked man.

Ignorance then is not our Usher into this presence, to show us the face of
Christ Jesus: almost in every one of the ancient Fathers, you shall find some
passages, wherein they discover an inclination to that opinion, that before
Christ came in the manifestation of his Gospel (for, since that coming, every
man is bound to see him there) many Philosophers, men of knowledge, and
learning, were saved without the knowledge of Christ. Christus Ratio, says one
of them, well, (for Logos, is, Ratio, and not only Verbum, Justin Martyr.
as it is ordinarily translated) Christ is Reason, rectified Reason; and
secundum Rationem vixerunt, Christiani semper, says he, Whosoever lives
according to rectified Reason, which is the Law of nature, he is a Christian;
and therefore, when that Father, Justin Martyr, who had been before a
Philosopher amongst the Gentiles, came to be a Preacher amongst the Christians,
he never left off his Philosophers habit, because that gave an impression of
his learning, and an estimation by it. That knowledge was a help to salvation,
the Ancients thought: but that is a new Doctrine, that men should make a title
to God, by being ignorant: that whereas all the life of man, is either an
active life, or a contemplative, they should in the Roman Church make one
Order, and call them Nullanos, men that did nothing, in contempt of the active
life, and in contempt of the contemplative life; another Order, whom they call
Ignorantes, men that know nothing. There is an annihilation in sin; Homines cum
peccam, nihil sunt: August.
Then when by sin, I depart from the Lord my God, in whom only I live, and
move, and have my being, I am nothing: and truly, in this sinful profession of
thine, of doing nothing, of knowing nothing, they come too near being nothing.
What other answer can this knowing nothing, here, produce at the last day, from
Christ Jesus, but his Nescio vos, I know not you? As David says of God, Psalm.
18.26.
Cum perverso perverteris, With the froward God will be froward; so, Ignorantes
ignorabit, of the ignorant, God will be ignorant; not know them, that study not
knowledge. The miracle that Christ wrought in the conversion of the World, was
not, that he wrought upon men by Apostles, that were unlearned; for the
Apostles were not so; they were never unprovided to give a pertinent and
satisfactory answer to the learnedest of the Philosophers amongst the Gentiles,
to any of the Gamaliels and Nicodemusses, who were true understanders of the
Law amongst the Jews; to any of their Scribes, the perverters of the Law; to
any of the Pharisees, their Separatists, and Schismatics; to any of the
Sadduces, their formal Heretics; nor to any of their Herodians, their
State-Divines, who made Divinity serve present turns, and occasions: The
Apostles were no ignorant men, then, when they were employed: but in this
consisted the Miracle, that in an instant Christ by his Spirit, infused all
knowledge, necessary for that great function, into them. If they had not had
it, they could not have done his work. All must have it; Intelligite Reges,
says David; for all their business, Kings must study for it: Erudimini Judices;
with their other learning, Judges must have this. The Prophet denounces it for
a heavy curse, The Prophet shall be a fool; Psa. 2. Ose 9.7.
he that should teach, shall not be able to do it: and, as it follows, The
spiritual man shall be mad; if he have knowledge, he shall not know how to use
it. St. Hierome translates that word, Arreptitius, he shall be possessed;
possessed with the spirit of fear, or of flattery; others shall speak in him,
and he become the instrument of men, and not of God. It was the Devils first
advantage, knowledge, The Serpent was wiser then any beast: It is so still;
Satan is wiser then any man in natural, and in Civil knowledge. It Is true, he
is a Lion too; but he was a Serpent first; and did us more harm as a Serpent,
then as a Lion. But now, as Christ Jesus has nailed his handwriting, which he
had against us, to the Cross, and thereby cancelled his evidence; so in his
descent to hell, and subsequent acts of his glorification, he has burnt his
Library, annihilated his wisdom, in giving us a wisdom above his craft; he
has shined in our hearts by the knowledge of his Gospel.

Measure not thou therefore the growth and forwardness of thy Child, by how
soon he could speak, or go; how soon he could contract with a man, or discourse
with a woman: but how soon he became sensible of that great contract which he
had made with Almighty God, in his Baptism: how soon he was able to discharge
those sureties, which undertook for him, then, by receiving his confirmation,
in the Church: how soon he became to discern the Lords Spirit, in the preaching
of his Word, and to discern the Lords body, in the Administration of the
Sacrament. A Christian Child must grow, as Christ when be was a Child, in
wisdom and in stature: Luc. 2.
first, in wisdom, then in stature. Many have been taller at sixteen, then ever
Christ was; but not any so learned at sixty, as he when he disputed at twelve.
He grew in favor, says that Text, with God and man; first, with God, then with
man. Bring up your children in the knowledge and love of God; and good, and
great men, will know, and love them too.

It is a good definition of ill love, that St. Chrysostom. gives, that it is
Animae vacantis passio, a passion of an empty soul, of an idle mind. For fill a
man with business, and he has no room for such love. It will fit the love of
God too, so far, as that that love must be in anima vocante: at first, when the
soul is empty, disencumbred from other studies, disengaged in other affections,
then to take in the knowledge, and the love of God; for, Amari nisi nota
possunt, says St. August. truly; however we may slumber our selves with an
opinion of loving God, certainly we do not, we cannot love him, till we know
him; and therefore hear, and read, and meditate, and confer, and use all means
whereby thou may increase in knowledge. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them, says Christ; you are not happy till you do them; that is true:
but ye can never do them, till ye know them. Zeal furthers our salvation; but
it must be Secundum scientiam, Zeal according to knowledge. Works further our
salvation; but not works done in our sleep, stupidly, casually, nor
erroniously, but upon such grounds as fall within our knowledge to be good.
Faith most of all furthers and advances our salvation; but a man cannot believe
that which he does not know. Conscience includes science; it is knowledge, and
more; but it is that first. It is, as we express it in the School, Syllogismus
practicus. I have a good Conscience in having done well; but I did that upon a
former knowledge, that that ought to be done. God has shined in our hearts, to
give us the light of knowledge, that was the first; and then, of the knowledge
of the glory of God, that is our second term, in this first acceptance of the
Word. The light of the knowledge of the glory of this world, Gloria Dei.
is a good, and a great piece of learning. To know, that all the glory of man,
is as the flower of grass: that even the glory, 1 Pet. 1.24.
and all the glory, of man, of all mankind, is but a flower, and but as a
flower, somewhat less then the Proto-type, then the Original, then the flower
it self; and all this but as the flower of grass neither, no very beautiful
flower to the eye, no very fragrant flower to the smell: To know, that for the
glory of Moab, Auferetur, Esai 16.24.
it shall be contemned, consumed; and for the glory of Jacob it self,
Attenuabitur, It shall be extenuated, 17.^4.
that the glory of Gods enemies shall be brought to nothing, and the glory of
his servants shall be brought low in this word: To know how near nothing, how
mere nothing, all the glory of this world is, is a good, a great degree of
learning.

It is a Book of an old Edition, to put you upon the consideration what great
and glorious men have lost their glory in this world: Give me leave to present
to you a new Book, a new consideration; not how others have lost, but consider
only how you have got that glory which you have in this world: consider
advisedly, and confess ingeniously, whether you have not known many men, more
industrious then ever you were, and yet never attained to the glory of your
Wealth? Many wiser then ever you were, and yet never attained to your place in
the Government of State; and valianter then ever you were, that never came to
have your command in the Wars. Consider then how poor a thing the glory of this
world is, not only as it may be so lost, as many have lost it, but as it may
be so got, as you have got it. Seneca.
Nullum indifferens gloriosum, says that Moral man; In that which is so
obvious, as that any man may compass it, truly this can be no glory.

But this is not fully the knowledge of the glory of this Text: though this
Moral knowledge of the glory of this world, conduce to the knowledge of this
place, which is the glory of God; yet not of the Majestical, and inaccessible
glory of the Essence, or Attributes of God, of inscrutable points of Divinity:
for scrutator Majestatis opprimetur a gloria, Prove. 25.27.
as St. Hiero, and all those three Rabbis, whose Commentaries we have upon
that Book, read that place: He that searches too far into the secrets of God,
shall be dazzled, confounded by that glory. But here, Gloria Dei, is indeed
Gloria Deo; the glory of God, is the glorifying of God: it is as St. Ambro.
expresses it, Notitia cum laud; the glory of God, is the taking knowledge,
that all that comes, comes from God, and then the glorifying of God for
whatsoever comes. And this is a heavenly art, a divine knowledge; that if God
send a pestilence amongst us, we Come not to say, it was a great fruit year,
and therefore there must follow a plague in reason: That if God swallow up an
invincible Navy, we come to say, There was a storm, and there must follow a
scattering in reason: That if God discover a Mine, we come not to say, there
was a false Brother that writ a Letter, and there must follow a discovery in
reason; but remember still, that though in David's Psalms, there be Psalms of
Prayer, and Psalms of Praise; Psalms of Deprecation, and of Imprecation too;
how diverse soever the nature of the Psalm be, yet the Church has appointed to
shut up every Psalm with that one Acclamation, Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, etc. Whether I pray, or praise; depricate Gods Judgments from my
self, or imprecate them upon pods enemies, nothing can fall from me, nothing
can fall upon me, but that God may receive glory by it, if I will glorify him
in it. So that then, in a useful sense, Gloria Dei, is Gloria Deo; but yet more
literally, more directly, the glory of God in this place, is the glorious
Gospel of Christ Jesus: which is that which is intended, and expressed in the
next phrase, which is the last Branch; in this first acceptance of these
words, in facie, The glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

In facie.
When our Savior Christ charged the Sadduces with error, it was not merely
because they were ignorant; the Sadduces were not so: Mat. 22.29.
but, Erratis nescientes Scripturas, says Christ; You err because you
understand not the Scriptures: All knowledge is ignorance, except it conduce to
the knowledge of the Scriptures, and all the Scriptures lead us to Christ. Heb.
1.3.
He is the brightness of his Fathers glory, Sap. 2. 26.
and the express image of his person. The brightness of the everlasting light,
and the image of his goodness. And, to insist upon a word of the fittest
signification, Jo. 6. 27. Hillari.
Him has God the Father sealed. Now, Sigillum imprimitur in Materia diversa: A
Seal graven in gold or stone, does not print in stone or gold: in Wax it will,
and it will in Clay; for this Seal in which God has manifested himself, we
consider it not, as it is printed in the same metal, in the eternal Son of God;
but as God has sealed himself in Clay, in the humane Nature; but yet in Wax
too, in a person ductile, pliant, obedient to his will. And there, Signatum
super nos Lumen vultus, tui, says David, The light of thy countenance, that is,
the image of thy self, is sealed; that is, derived, imprinted, upon us, that
is, Ps. 4.
upon our nature, our flesh. Signatum est, id est, significatum est: Tertul.
God has signified this pretense, manifested, revealed himself in the face of
Jesus Christ. For that is the Office, and service, that Christ avows himself to
have done; O Father, I have manifested thy Name: that is, thy Name of Father,
as thou art a Father: for, Qui Solum Deum novit Creatorem, Cipri.
Judaicae mensuram prudentiae non excedit. Know thou that there is a God,
and that that God created the world? What great knowledge is this? The Jews
know it too. Non est Idem, nosce Deum opificem esse, and habere filium. It is
another Religion, another point of Faith, Chrysostom.
to know that God had a Son of eternal begetting, and to have a world of late
making. God therefore has shined in no man's heart, till he know the glory of
GOD in the face of Jesus Christ, till he come to the manifestation of God, in
the Gospel. So that, that man comes short of this light, that believes in God,
in a general, in an incomprehensible power, but not in Christ; and that man
goes beyond this light, who will know more of God, then is manifested in the
Gospel, which is the face of Christ Jesus: the one comes not to the light, the
other goes beyond, and both are in blindness. Christ is the Image of God, and
the Gospel is the face of Christ: and now, I rest nor in Gods picture, as I
find it in every Creature; though there be in every Creatare an Image of God; I
have a livelier Image of God, Christ. And then I seek not for Christ's face, as
it was traditionally sent to Agabarus in his life; nor for his face, as it was
imprinted in the Veronica, in the woman's Apron, as he went to his death; nor
for his face, as it was described in Lentulus his Letter, to the Senate of
Rome; but I have the glory of God in Christ, I, and I have the face of Christ
in the Gospel, Except God had taken this very person upon him, this individual
person, me, (which was impossible, because I am a sinful person) he could not
have come nearer, then in taking this nature upon him. Now I cannot say, as the
man at the Pool, Hominem non habeo, I have no man to help me; the Heathen
cannot say, I have no God; but I cannot say, I have no man; for I have a Man,
the Man Jesus; him, who by being Man, knows my misery; and by being God, can
and will show mercy unto me. Romans 13.12.
The night is far spent, says the Apostle, the day is at hand; Gregor.
Nox ante Christum, Aurora in Evangelio, Dies in Resurrectione. Till Christ all
was night, there was a beginning of day, in the beginning of the Gospel, and
there was a full noon in the light and glory thereof; but such a day, as shall
be always day, and overtaken with no night, no cloud, is only the day of
Judgment, the Resurrection: And this has brought us to our last step, to the
consideration of these three terms; 1. knowledge; 2. glory; 3. the face of
Christ Jesus in that everlasting Kingdom.

For this purpose did God command light out of darkness, that men might
glorify God in the contemplation of the Creatures; and for this purpose has
God shined in our hearts, by the Scriptures in the Church, that man might be
directed toward him, here; but both these has God done therefore, to this
purpose, this is the end of all, that man might come to this light, in that
everlasting state, in the consummation of happiness in Soul, and body too, when
we shall be called out of the solitariness of the grave, to the blessed and
glorious society of God, and his Angels, and his Saints there. Nazianzen.
Hoc verbo re-concinnor, and componor, and in alium virum migro: with that
word, Surgite mortui, Arise ye that sleep in the dust, all my pieces shall be
put together again, Reconcinnor; with that word, Intra in gaudium, Enter into
thy Masters joy, I am settled, I am established, Componor; and with that word,
Sede ad dextram, sit down army right hand, I become another manner of man, In
alium virum migro; another manner of Miracle, then the same Father makes of man
in this world; Quodnam Mysterium, says he, What a Mystery is man here? Parvus
sum and Magnus: I am less in body then many Creature in the World, and yet
greater in the compass and extent of my Soul then all the World: Humillimus
sum, and Excelsus; I am under a necessity of spending some thoughts upon this
low World, and yet in an ability to study, to contemplate, to lay hold upon the
next: Mortalis sum, and immortalis; in a Body that may, that must, that does,
that did dye ever since it was made; I carry a Soul, nay, a Soul carries me, to
such a perpetuity, as no Saint, no Angel, God himself shall not survive me,
over-live me. And lastly, says he, Terrenus sum, and Coelestis; I have a Body,
but of Earth; but yet of such Earth, as God was the Potter to mold it, God was
the statuary to fashion it; and then I have a Soul, of which God was the
Father, he breathed it into me, and of which no matter can say, I was the
Mother, for it proceeded of nothing. Such a Mystery is man here; but he is a
Miracle hereafter; I shall be still the same man, and yet have another being:
And in this is that Miracle exalted, that death who destroys me, re-edifies me:
Mors veluti medium excogitata, Cyril.
ut de integro restauraretur homo: man was fallen, and God took that way to
raise him, to throw him lower, into the grave; man was sick, and God invented,
God studied Physic for him, and strange Physic, to recover him by death. The
first faciamus hominem, the Creation of man, was a thing incomprehensible in
Nature; but the Denuo nasci, to be born again, was stranger, even to Nicodemus,
who knew the former, the Creation, Joh. 4.3.
well enough. But yet the Immutabimur, is the greatest of all, 1 Cor. 15.57.
which St. Paul calls all to wonder at, Behold, I show you a Mystery, we shall
not all sleep, but we shall all be changed: A Mystery, which it Nicodemus had
discerned it, would have put him to more wonder, then the Denuo nasci; to enter
into his mothers womb, (as he speaks) to enter into the Bowels of the Earth,
and lie there, and lie dead there, not nine months, but many years, and then to
be born again, and the first minute of that new Birth to be so perfect, as that
nothing can be better, and so perfect as that he can never become worse, that
is that which makes all strange accidents to natural Bodies, and Bodies
Politic too, Scientia.
all changes in man, all revolutions of States, easy, and familiar to us; I
shall have another being, and yet be the same man. And in that state, I shall
have the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Christ
Jesus. Of which three things being now come to speak, I am the less sorry, and
so may you be too, if my voice be so sunk, as that I be not heard; for, if I
had all my time, and all my strength, and all your patience reserved till now,
what could I say that could become, what, that could have any proportion, to
this knowledge, and this glory, and this face of Christ Jesus, there in the
Kingdom of Heaven? But yet be pleased to hear a word, of each of these three
words; and first, of Knowledge. In the Attributes of God, we consider his
knowledge to be Principium agendi dirigens, The first proposer, and Director;
This should be done: and then his Will to be Principium imperans, the first
Commander, This shall be done; and then his Power to be Principium exequens,
the first Performer, This is done: This should be done, this shall be done,
this is done, expresses to us, the Knowledge, the Will, and the Power of God.
Now we shall be made partakers of the Divine Nature, and the Knowledge, and the
Will, and the Power of God, shall be so far communicated to us there, as that
we shall know all that belongs to our happiness, and we shall have a will to
do, and a power to execute, whatsoever conduces to that. And for the knowledge
of Angels, that is not in them per essentiam, for whosoever knows so, as the
Essence of the thing flows from him, knows all things, and that is a knowledge
proper to God only: Neither do the Angels know per species, by those
resultances and species, which rise from the Object, and pass through the Sense
to the Understanding, for that is a deceiveable way, both by the indisposition
of the Organ, sometimes, and sometimes by the depravation of the Judgment; and
therefore, as the first is too high, this is too low a way for the Angels. Some
things the Angels do know by the dignity of their Nature, by their Creation,
which we know not; as we know many things which inserior Creatures do not; and
such things all the Angels, good and bad know. Some things they know by the
Grace of their confirmation, by which they have more given them, then they had
by Nature in their Creation; and those things only the Angels that stood, but
all they, do know. Some things they know by Revelation, when God is pleased to
manifest them unto them; and so some of the Angels know that, which the rest,
though confirmed, do not know. By Creation, they know as his Subjects; by
Confirmation, they know as his servants; by Revelation, they know as his
Council. Now, Erimus sicut Angeli, says Christ, There we shall be as the
Angels: The knowledge which I have by Nature, shall have no Clouds; here it
has: that which I have by Grace, shall have no reluctation, no resistance;
here it has: That which I have by Revelation, shall have no suspicion, no
jealousy; here it has: sometimes it is hard to distinguish between a
respiration from God, and a suggestion from the Devil. There our curiosity
shall have this noble satisfaction, we shall know how the Angels know, by
knowing as they know. We shall not pass from Author, to Author, as in a Grammar
School, nor from Art to Art, as in an University; but, as that General which
Knighted his whole Army, God shall Create us all Doctors in a minute. That
great Library, those infinite Volumes of the Books of Creatures, shall be taken
away, quite away, no more Nature; those reverend Manuscripts, written with Gods
own hand, the Scriptures themselves, shall be taken away, quite away; no more
preaching, no more reading of Scriptures, and that great School-Mistress,
Experience, and Observation shall be removed, no new thing to be done, and in
an instant, I shall know more, then they all could reveal unto me. I shall
know, not only as I know already, that a Bee-hive, that an Ant-hill is the same
Book in Decimo sexto, as a Kingdom is in Folio, That a Flower that lives but a
day, is an abridgment of that King, that lives out his threescore and ten
years; but I shall know too, that all these Ants, and Bees, and Flowers, and
Kings, and Kingdoms, howsoever they may be Examples, and Comparisons to one
another, yet they are all as nothing, altogether nothing, less then nothing,
infinitely less then nothing, to that which shall then be the subject of my
knowledge, for, it is the knowledge of the glory of God.

Gloria Dei.
Before, in the former acceptance, the glory of God, was our glorifying of God;
here, the glory of God, is his glorifying of us: there it was his receiving,
here it is his giving of glory. That prayer which our Savior Christ makes,
Glorify me, O Father, with thine own self, Joh. 17.5.
with the Glory which I had, before the world was, is not a prayer for the
Essential Glory of God; for, Christ in his Divine Nature was never divested,
never unaccompanied of that glory; and for his humane Nature, that was never
capable of it: the attributes, and so the Essence of the Glory, of the
Divinity, are not communicable to his Humane Nature, neither perpetually, as
the Ubiquitaries say, nor temporarily in the Sacrament, as the Papists imply.
But the glory which Christ asks there, is, the glory of sitting down at the
right hand of his Father in our flesh, in his humane Nature, which glory he had
before the world, for he had it in his predestination, in the Eternal Decree.
And that is the glory of God, which we shall know; know, by having it. We shall
have a knowledge of the very glory, the Essential glory of God, because we
shall see Sicuti est, as God is, in himself; and Cognoscam at cognitus; I shall
know, as I am known: 1 Cor. 13.12.
that glory shall dilate us, enlarge us, give us an inexpressible capacity, and
then fill it; but we shall never comprehend that glory, the Essential glory;
but that glory which Christ has received in his humane Natute, (in all other
degrees, excepting those which flow from his hypostatical union) we shall
comprehend, we shall know, by having: we shall receive a Crown of glory, that
sadeth not: 1 Pet. 5.4.
It is a Crown that compasses round, no entrance of danger any way; and a
crown that fades not, fears no winter: we shall have interest in all we see,
and we shall see the treasure of all knowledge, the face of Christ Jesus. Then
and there, In facio.
we shall have an abundant satisfaction and accomplishment, of all St.
Augustines three Wishes: He wished to have seen Rome in her glory, to have
heard St. Paul preach, and to have seen Christ in the flesh. We shall have all;
we shall see such a Jerusalem, as that Rome, if that were literally true, which
is hyperbolically said of Rome, In Urbe, in Orb, that City is the whole world,
yet Rome, that Rome, were but a Village to this Jerusalem. We shall hear St.
Paul, with the whole quire of Heaven, pour our himself in that acclamation,
Salvation to our God, that sits upon the Throne, Apoc. 7.10.
and to the Lamb: and we shall see, and see for ever, Christ in that flesh,
which has done enough for his Friends, and is safe enough from his Enemies. We
shall see him in a transfiguration, all clouds of sadness removed; and a
transubstantiation, all his tears changed to Pearls, all his Blood-drops into
Rubies, all the Thorns of his Crown into Diamonds: for, where we shall see the
Walls of his Palace to be Saphyr, and Emerald, and Amethist, Apoc. 21.19.
and all Stones that are precious, what shall we not see in the face of Christ
Jesus? and whatsoever we do see, by that very sight becomes our. Be therefore
no strangers to this face: see him here, that you may know him, and he you,
there: see him, as St. John did, who turned to see a voice: see him in the
preaching of his Word; see him in that seal, which is a Copy of him, as he is
of his Father; Apoc. 1.
see him in the Sacrament. Look him in the face as he lay in the Manger, poor,
and then murmur not at temporal wants; suddenly enriched by the Tributes of
Kings, and doubt not but that God has large and strange ways to supply thee.
Look him in the face, in the Temple, disputing there at twelve years; and then
apply thy self to God, to the contemplation of him, to the meditation upon him,
to a conversation with him betimes. Look him in the face in his Fathers house;
a Carpenter, and but a Carpenter. Take a Calling, and contain thy self in that
Calling. But bring him nearer, and look him in the face, as he looked upon
Friday last; when he whose face the Angels desire to look on, he who was fairer
then the children of men, Psa. 45.3. Esai 52.14.53.3.
as the Prophet speaks, was so marred more then any man, as another Prophet
says, That they hid their faces from him, and despised him; when he who bore up
the heavens bowed down his head, and he who gives breath to all, gave up the
ghost: and then look him in the face again, as he looked yesterday, not lamed
upon the Cross, not putrifi'd in the Grave, not singed in Hell, raised, and
raised by his own power, Victoriously, triumphantly, to the destruction of the
last Enemy, death; look him in the face in all these respects, of Humiliation,
and of Exaltation too; and then, as a Picture look upon him, that look upon it,
God upon whom thou keep thine Eye, will keep his Eye upon thee, and, as in
the Creation, when he commanded light out of darkness, he gave thee a capacity
of this light; and as in thy Vocation, when he shined in thy heart, he gave
thee an inchoation of this light, so in associating thee to himself at the last
day, he will perfect, consummate, accomplish all, and give thee the light of
the glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus there.

This is the last word of our Text: but we make up our Circle by returning to
the first word; the first word is, For; for the Text is reason of that which is
in the Verse immediately before the Text; that is, We preach not our selves,
but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants, for Jesus sake. We
stop not on this side Christ Jesus; we dare not say, that any man is saved
without Christ; we dare say, that none can be saved, that has received that
light, and has not believed in him. We carry you not beyond Christ neither,
not beyond that face of his, in which he is manifested, the Scriptures. Till
you come to Christ you are without God, as the Apostle says to the Ephesians:
and when you go beyond Christ, to Traditions of men, you are without God too.
There is a fine Deo, a left handed Atheism, in the mere natural man, that will
not know Christ; and there is a sine Deo, a right handed Atheism in the
stubborn Papist, who is not content with Christ. They preach Christ Jesus and
themselves, and make themselves Lords over you in Jesus, place, and farther
then ever he went. We preach not our selves, but him, and our selves your
servants for his sake; and this is our service, to tell you the whole compass,
the beginning, the way, and the end of all, that all is done in, and by, and
for Christ Jesus, that from thence flow, and thither lead, and there determine
all, to bring you, from the memory of your Creation, by the sense of your
Vocation, to the assurance of your glorification, by the manifestation of God
in Christ, and Christ in the Scriptures, For, God who commanded light out of
darkness, has shined, etc.

The 26 Sermon. Sermon. 26.

Psa. 68.20. And unto God, the Lord, belong the issues of Death. (from Death)


BUildings stand by the benefit of their foundations that sustain them, support
them; and of their buttresses that comprehend them, embrace them; and of their
contignations that knit and unite them. The foundation suffers them not to
sink; the buttresses suffer them not to swerve; the contignation and knitting,
suffer them not to cleave. The body of our building is in the former part of
this verse; it is this; He that is our God, is the God of salvation; ad
salutes, of salvations in the plural, so it is in the original; the God that
gives us spiritual and temporal salvation too. But of this building, the
foundation, the buttresses, the contignation are in this part of the verse,
which constitutes our text, and in the three diverse acceptations of the words
amongst our expositors, Unto God the Lord belong the issues of death. For,
first the foundation of this building, (that our God is the God of all
salvations) is laid in this, That unto this God the Lord belongs the issues of
death; that is, it is his power to give us an issue and deliverance, even then
when we are brought to the jaws and teeth of death, and to the lips of that
whirl-pool, the grave; and so in this acceptance, this exitus mortis, this
issue of death is liberatio a morie, a deliverance from death; and this is the
most obvious, and most ordinary acceptance of these words, and that upon
which, our translation lays hold, The issues from death. And then, Secondly,
the buttresses, that comprehend and settle this building; that He that is our
God is the God of salvation are thus raised; Unto God the Lord belong the
issues of death, that is, the disposition and manner of our death, what kind of
issue, and transmigration we shall have out of this world, whether prepared or
sudden, whether violent or natural, whether in our perfect senses, or shak'd
and disordered by sickness; there is no condemnation to be argued out of that,
no judgment to be made upon that, for howsoever they dye; precious in his
sight, is the death of his Saints, and with him are the issues of death, the
way of our departing out of this life, are in his hands; and so, in this sense
of the words, this Exitus mortis, the issue of death, is liberatio in morte, a
deliverance in death; not that God will deliver us from dying, but that he will
have a care of us in the hour of death, of what kind soever our passage be; and
this sense, and acceptance of the words, the natural frame and contexture does
well and pregnantly administer unto us. And then lastly, the contignation and
knitting of this building, that he that is our God, is the God of all
salvation, consists in this, Unto this God the Lord belong the issues of death,
that is, that this God the Lord having united and knit both natures in one, and
being God, having also come into this world, in our flesh, he could have no
other means to save us, he could have no other issue out of this world, nor
return to his former glory, but by death. And so in this sense, this exitus
mortis, the issue of death, is liberatio per mortem, a deliverance by death, by
the death of this God our Lord, Christ Jesus; and this is St. Augustines
acceptance of the words, and those many and great persons, that have adhered
to him. In all these three lines then, we shall look upon these words; first,
as the God of power, the Almighty Father, rescues his servants from the jaws of
death; and then, as the God of mercy, the glorious Son, rescued us, by taking
upon himself the issue of death; and then, (between these two,) as the God of
comfort, the holy Ghost rescues us from all discomfort by his blessed
impressions before hand, that what manner of death soever be ordained for us,
yet this exitus mortis, shall be introitus in vitam, our issue in death, shall
be an entrance into everlasting life. And these three considerations, our
deliverance a morte, in morte, per mortem, from death, in death, and by death,
will abundantly do all the offices of the foundation, of the buttresses, of the
contignation of this our building, that He that is our God, is the God of all
salvation, because Unto this God the Lord belong the issues of death.

First Part. A m^^e.
First then, we consider this exitus mortis, to be liberatio a morte; that with
God the Lord are the issues of death, and therefore in all our deaths, and
deadly calamities of this life, we may justly hope of a good issue from him;
and all our periods and transitions in this life, are so many passages from
death to death. Exitus a morte uteri.
Our very birth, and entrance into this life, is exitus a morte, an issue from
death; for in our mothers womb, we are dead so, as that we do not know we live;
not so much as we do in our sleep; neither is there any grave so close, or so
putrid a prison, as the womb would be to us, if we stayed in it beyond our
time, or died there, before our time. In the grave the worms do not kill us: We
breed and feed, and then kill those worms, which we our selves produced. In the
womb the dead child kills the mother that conceived it, and is a murderer, nay a
Parricide, even after it is dead. And if we be not dead so in the womb, so, as
that being dead, we kill her that gave us our first life, our life of
vegetation, yet we are dead so as David's Idols are dead; Psa. 115.6.
in the womb, we have eyes and see not, ears and hear not. There in the womb we
are fitted for works of darkness, all the while deprived of light; and there,
in the womb, we are taught cruelty, by being fed with blood; and may be damned
though we be never born. Of our very making in the womb, David says, 139. 14.
I am wonderfully and fearfully made, and, Such knowledge is too excellent for
me; for, Even that is the Lords doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes. 118. 23.
Ipse fecit nos, It is he that has made us, and not we our selves, no, 200. 3.
nor our Parents neither. Thy hands have made me, and fashioned me round about,
says Job; and, 10. 8.
(as the original word is) Thou have taken pains about me; and yet says he,
Thou do destroy me: though I be the master-peice of the greatest Master,
(man is so) yet if thou do no more for me, if thou leave me where thou made
me, destruction will follow. The womb which should be the house of life,
becomes death it self, if God leave us there. That which God threatens so
often, the shutting of the womb, is not so heavy nor so discomfortable a curse,
in the first as in the latter shutting; not in the shutting of barrenness, as
in the shutting of weakness, Esa. 37 3.
when Children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.
It is the exaltation of misery, to fall from a near hope of happiness. And in
that vehement imprecation the Prophet expresses the highth of Gods anger Give
them O Lord; what will thou give them? Osc. 9 14.
give them a mis-carrying womb. Therefore as soon as we are men, (that is,
inanimated; quickened in the womb) though we cannot our selves, our Parents have
reason to say in our behalves, Wretched man that he is, who shall deliver him
from this body of death? for, To. 7.24.
even the womb is the body of death, if there be no deliverer. It must be he
that said to Jeremy, 1. 5.
Before I formed thee I knew thee, and before thou came out of the womb I
sanctified thee. We are not sure that there was no kind of ship nor boat to
fish in, nor to pass by, till God prescribed Noah that absolute form of the
Ark; that word which the holy Ghost by Moses, uses for the Ark, is common to
all kinds of boats, Thebah; and is the same word that Moses uses for the boat
that he was exposed in, that his mother laid him in an Ark of bullrushes. Exo
2.3.
But we are sure that Eve had no Midwife when she was delivered of Cain;
therefore she might well say, Possedi virum a Domino, Genesis 4.1.
I have gotten a man from the Lord; wholly, entirely from the Lord: it is the
Lord that has enabled me to conceive, the Lord has infused a quickening soul
into that conception, the Lord has brought into the world that which himself
had quickened; without all this might Eve say, my body had been but the house of
death, and Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis, To God the Lord belong the issues
of death.

But then this Exitus a morte, is but Introitus in mortem, this issue, Exitus a
moribus mundi.
this deliverance from that death, the death of the womb, is an entrance, a
delivering over to another death, the manifold deaths of this world. We have a
winding sheet in our Mothers womb, that grows with us from our conception, and
we come into the world wound up in that winding sheet; for we come to seek a
grave. And, as prisoners, discharged of actions, may lie for fees, so when the
womb has discharged us, yet we are bound to it by cords of flesh, by such a
string, as that we cannot go thence, nor stay there. We celebrate our own
funeral with cries, even at our birth, as though our threescore, and ten years
of life were spent in our Mothers labor, and our Circle made up in the first
point thereof. We beg one Baptism with another, a sacrament of tears; and we
come into a world that lasts many ages, but we last not. In domo patris, (says
our blessed Savior, speaking of heaven) multae mansiones, Jo. 14.2.
there are many, and mansions, diverse and durable; so that if a man cannot
possess a martyrs house, (he has shed no blood for Christ) yet he may have a
confessors, he has been ready to glorify God, in the shedding of his blood.
And if a woman cannot possess a virgins house (she has embraced the holy state
of marriage) yet she may have a matrons house, she has brought forth, and
brought up children in the fear of God. In domo patris, In my Fathers house, in
heaven, there are many mansions, but here upon earth, Mat. 8 20.
The Son of man has not where to lay his head, says he himself, No? terram
dedit filiis hominum. How then has God given this earth to the Sons of men? He
has given them earth for their materials, to be made of earth; and he has
given them earth for their grave and sepulture, to return and resolve to earth;
but not for their possession. Heb. 13.14.
Here we havh no continuing City; nay no Cottage that continues; nay, no we, no
persons, no bodies that continue. Whatsoever moved St. Hierome to call the
journies of the Israelites in the wilderness, Exo. 17.1.
Mansions, the word, (the word is nasang) signifies but a journie, but a
peregrination: even the Israel of God has no mansions, Genesis 47 9.
but journies, pilgrimages in this life. By that measure did Jacob measure his
life to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage. And though the
Apostle would not say, morimer, that whilst we are in the body, we are dead,
yet he says, peregrinamur, 2 Cor. 5 6.
whilst we are in the body, we are but in a pilgrimage, and we are absent from
the Lord. He might have said dead; for this whole world is but an universal
Churchyard, but one common grave; and the life and motion, that the greatest
persons have in it, is but as the shaking of buried bodies in their graves by
an earthquake. That which we call life, is but Hebdomada mortium, a week of
deaths, seven days, seven periods of our life spent in dying; a dying seven
times over, and there is an end. Our birth dies in Infancy, and our infancy dies
in youth, and youth, and the rest die in age; and age also dies, and determines
all. Nor do all these, youth out of infancy, or age out of youth, arise so, as
a Phoenix out of the ashes of another Phoenix formerly dead, but as a wasp, or a
serpent out of carrion, or as a snake out of dung; our youth is worse then our
infancy, and our age worse then our youth; our youth is hungry and thirsty
after those sins which our infancy knew not, and our age is sorry and angry
that it cannot pursue those sins which our youth did. And besides, all the way
so many deaths, that is, so many deadly calamities accompany every condition,
and every period of this life, as that death it self would be an ease to them
that suffer them. Upon this sense does Job wish, 10. 18.
that God had not given him an issue from the first death, from the womb;
Wherefore have thou brought me forth out of the womb? O that I had given up the
Ghost, and no eye had seen me; I should have been, as though I had not been.

And not only the impatient Israelites in their murmuring, (would to God we had
died by the hands of the Lord, Ex. 16.3.
in the land of Egypt) but Eliah himself, when he fled from Jezabel, and went
for his life, as that Text says, under the juniper tree requested that he
might die, and said, It is enough, now O Lord take away my life. 1 Reg. 19.4.
So Jonah justifies his impatience, nay his anger toward God himself; Now O
Lord take I beseech thee my life from me, for it is better for me to die, then
to live. And when God asked him, do thou well to be angry for this, 4. 3.
and after, (about the Gourd) do thou well to be angry for that, he replies,
I do well to be angry even unto death. How much worse a death, then death is
this life, which so good men would so often change for death? But if my case be
St. Paul's case, Quotidie morior, 1 Cor. 15.31.
that I die daily, that something heavier then death fall upon me every day; If
my case be David's case, Tota die mortificamur, psa. 44.22.
all the day long we are killed, that not only every day, but every hour of the
day, something heavier then death falls upon me: though that be true of me,
conceptus in peccatis, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me, 51. 5.
(There I died one death) though that be true of me, natus filius irae, I was
born, not only the child of sin, but the child of the wrath of God for sin,
which is a heavier death, yet Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis, with God the
Lord are the issues of death; and after a Job, and a Joseph, and a Jeremy, and
a Daniel, I cannot doubt of a deliverance; and if no other deliverance conduce
more to his glory, and my good, yet, He has the keys of death; Apo. 1.18.
and he can let me out at that door, that is, deliver me from the manifold
deaths of this world, the omni die, and the tota die, the every days death,
and every hours death, by that one death, the final disolution of body and
soul, the end of all.

But then, is that the end of all? Exitus a morte Incinerationis.
is that dissolution of body and soul, the last death that the body shall
suffer? (for of spiritual deaths we speak not now;) it is not. Though this be
exitus a morte, it is introitus in mortem, though it be an issue from the
manifold deaths of this world, yet it is an entrance into the death of
corruption, and putrefaction, and vermiculation, and incineration, and
dispersion, in, and from the grave, in which every dead man dies over again. It
was a prerogative peculiar to Christ, not to die this death, not to see
corruption. What gave him this privilege? not Joseph's great proportions of gums
and spices, that might have preserved his body from corruption and
incineration, longer then he needed it, longer then three days; but yet would
not have done it for ever. What preserved him then? did his exemption, and
freedom from original sin, preserve him from this corruption and incineration.
It Is true, that original sin has induced this corruption and incineration upon
us. 1 C^^. 15.33.
If we had not sinned in Adam, mortality had not put on immortality, (as the
Apostle speaks) nor corruption had not put on incorruption, but we had had our
transmigration from this to the other world, without any mortality, any
corruption at all. But yet since Christ took sin upon him, so far as made him
mortal, he had it so far too, as might have made him see this corruption and
incineration, though he had no original sin in himself. What preserved him
then? did the hypostatical union of both natures, God and man, preserve his
flesh from this corruption, this incineration? it is true that this was a most
powerful embalming: To be embalmed with the divine nature it self, to be
embalmed with eternity, was able to preserve him from corruption and
incineration for ever: And he was embalmed so, embalmed with the divine nature,
even in his body, as well as in his soul; for the Godhead, the divine nature,
did not depart, but remain still united to his dead body in the grave. But yet
for all this powerful imbalming, this hypostatical union of both natures, we
see, Christ did die; and for all this union which made him God and man, he
became no man,) for, the union of body and soul makes the man, and he, whose
soul and body are separated by death, (as long as that state lasts) is,
(properly) no man.) And therefore as in him, the dissolution of body and soul
was no dissolution of the hypostatical union, so is there nothing that
constrains us to say, that though the flesh of Christ had seen corruption and
incineration in the grave, this had been any dissolving of the hypostatical
union; for the divine nature, the Godhead might have remained with all the
elements and principles of Christ's body, as well as it did with the two
constitutive parts of his person, his body and soul. This incorruption then was
not in Joseph's gums and spices; nor was it in Christ's innocence and exemption
from original sin; nor was it, (that is, it is not necessary to say it was) in
the Hypostatical union. But this incorruptibleness of his flesh, Psa. 16 10.
is most conveniently plac,d in that, non dabis, Thou will not suffer thy holy
one to see corruption. We look no farther for causes or reasons in the
mysteries of our religion, but to the will and pleasure of God. Mat. 11.26.
Christ himself limited his inquisition in that; Ita est, even so, father, for
so it seemed good in thy sight. Christ's body did not see corruption, therefore,
because God had decreed that it should not. The humble soul, (and only the
humble soul is the religions soul) rests himself upon Gods purposes, and his
decrees; but then, it is upon those purposes, and decrees of God, which he has
declared and manifested; not such as are conceived and imagined in our selves,
though upon some probability, some verisimilitude. So, in our present case,
Act. 2.31.13.35.
Peter proceeded in his sermon at Jerusalem, and so Paul in his at Antioch;
they preached Christ to be risen without having seen corruption, not only
because God had decreed it, but because he had manifested that decree in his
Prophet. Therefore does St. Paul cite by special number the second Psalm for
that decree, and therefore both St. Peter and St. Paul cite for that place in
the 16. Psalm. for, v. 10.
when God declares his decree and purpose in the express word of his Prophet,
or when he declares it in the real execution of the decree, then he makes it
ours, then he manifests it to us. And therefore as the mysteries of our
religion are not the objects of our reason, but by faith we rest in Gods decree
and purpose, (it is so, O God, because it is thy will it should be so) so Gods
decrees are ever to be considered in the manifestation thereof. All
manifestation is either in the word of God, or in the execution of the decree;
and when these two concur and meet, it is the strongest demonstration that can
be: when therefore I find those marks of Adoption, and spiritual filiation,
which are delivered in the word of God, to be upon me; when I find that real
execution of his good purpose upon me, as that actually I do live under the
obedience, and under the conditions which are evidences of adoption and
spiritual filiation, then, and so long as I see these marks, and live so, I may
safely comfort my self in a holy certitude, and a modest infallibility of my
adoption. Christ determins himself in that, the purpose of God; because the
purpose of God was manifest to him: S. Pet. and S. Paul, determine themselves
in those two ways of knowing the purpose of God, the word of God before, the
execution of the Decree in the fullness of time. It was prophesied before, said
they, and it is performed now; Christ is risen without seeing corruption.

Now this which is so singularly peculiar to him, that his flesh should not see
corruption, at his second coming, his coming to Judgment, shall be extended to
all that are then alive, their flesh shall not see corruption; because (as the
Apostle says, and says as a secret, as a mystery, behold I show you a
mystery) we shall not all sleep, 1 Cor. 15.51.
(that is, not continue in the state of the dead in the grave) but we shall all
be changed. In an instant we shall have a dissolution, and in the same instant
a redintegration, a recompacting of body and soul; and that shall be truly a
death, and truly a resurrection, but no sleeping no corruption. But for us, who
die now, and sleep in the state of the dead, we must all pass this posthume
death, this death after death, nay this death after burial, this dissolution
after dissolution, this death of corruption and putrefaction, of virmiculation
and incineration of dissolution and dispersion, in, and from the grave. When
those bodies which have been the children of royal Parents, and the Parents of
royal Children, must say with Job, 17.14.
to corruption thou art my Father, and to the worm thou art my Mother and my
Sister. Miserable riddle, when the same worm must be my mother, and my sister,
and my self. Miserable incest, when I must be married to mine own mother and
sister, and be both Father and Mother, to mine one mother and sister beget and
bear that worm, which is all that miserable penury, when my mouth shall be
silled with dust, and the worm shall feed, and feed sweetly upon me. 24.20.
When the ambitious man shall have no satisfaction if the poorest a live tread
upon him, nor the poorest receive any contentment, in being made equal to
Princes, for they shall be equal but in dust. 23.24.
One dies at his full strength, being wholly at ease, and in quiet, and
another dies in the bitterness of his soul, and never eats with pleasure; but
they ly down alike in the dust, and the worm cover them. 24.11.
The worm covers them in Job, and in Esai, it covers them, and is spread under
them, (the worm is spread under thee, and the worm covers thee. There is the
mats and the carpet that lie under; and there is the state and the canopy that
hangs over the greatest of the Sons of men. Even those bodies that were the
Temples of the holy Ghost, come to this dilapidation, to ruin, to rubbish, to
dust: Even the Israel of the Lord, and Jacob himself had no other
specification, Esa. 41.14.
no other denomination but that, vermis Jacob, thou worm of Jacob. Truly, the
consideration of this posthume death, this death after burial, that after God,
with whom are the issues of death, has delivered me from the death of the
womb, by bringing me into the world, and from the manifold deaths of the world,
by laying me in the grave. I must die again, in an incineration of this flesh,
and in a dispersion of that dust, that all that monarch that spread over many
nations alive, must in his dust lie in a corner of that sheet of lead, and
there but so long as the lead will last: and that private and retired man, that
thought himself his own for ever, and never came forth, must in his dust of the
grave be published, and, (such are the revolutions of graves) be mingled in his
dust, with the dust of every high way, and of every dunghill, and swallowed in
every puddle and pond; this is the most inglorious and contemptible
villification, the most deadly and peromptory nullification of man, that we can
consider. God seems to have carried the declaration of his power to a great
height, when he sets the Prophet Ezechiel, in the valley of dry bones, 37. 1.
and says, Son of man can these dry bones live? as though it had been
impossible; and yet they did; the Lord laid sinews upon them, and flesh, and
breathed into them, and they did live. But in that case there were bones to be
seen; something visible, of which it might be said, can this, this live? but in
this death of incineration and dispersion of dust, we see nothing that we can
call that man's. If we say can this dust live? perchance it cannot. It may be
the mere dust of the earth which never did live, nor never shall; it may be the
dust of that man's worms which did live, but shall no more; it may be the dust
of another man that concerns not him of whom it is asked. This death of
incineration and dispersion is to natural reason the most irrecoverable death
of all; and yet Domini Domini sunt exitus mortis, unto God the Lord belong the
issues of death, and by recompacting this dust into the same body, and
re-inanimating the same body with the same soul, be shall in a blessed and
glorious Resurrection, give me such an issue from this Death, as shall never
pass into any other death, but establish me in a Life, that shall last as long
as the Lord of Life himself. And so have you that that belongs to the first
acceptance of these words (unto God the Lord belong the issues of Death) That
though from the womb to the grave, and in the grave it self, we pass from
Death to Death, yet, as Daniel speaks, The Lord our God is able to deliver us,
and he will deliver us. And so we pass to our second accommodation of these
words (Unto God the Lord belong the issues of Death) That it belongs to God,
and not to Man, to pass a Judgment upon us at our Death, or to conclude a
dereliction on God's part, upon the manner thereof.

Those Indications which Physicians receive, Part. 2. Liberatio in morte.
and those praesagitions which they give for death or recovery in the Patient,
they receive, and they give out of the grounds and rules of their Art: But we
have no such rule or art to ground a presagition of spiritual death, and
damnation upon any such Indication as we see in any dying man: we see often
enough to be sorry, but not to despayr; for the mercies of God work
momentanely, in minutes; and many times insensibly to bystanders, or any other
then the party departing, and we may be deceived both ways: we use to comfort
our selves in the death of a friend, if it be testified that he went away like
a Lamb, that is, but with any reluctation; But God knows, that may have been
accompanied with a dangerous damp and stupefaction, and insensibility of his
present state. Our blessed Savior admitted colluctations with Death, and a
sadness even in his Soul to death, and an agony even to a bloody sweat in his
body, and expostulations with God, and exclamations upon the Cross. He was a
devout man, who upon his deathbed, or death-turse (for he was an Hermit) said
Septuaginta annis domino servivisti, and mori times? Have thou served a good
Master threescore and ten years, Hilarion.
and now art thou loath to go into his presence? yet Hilarion was loath. He was
a devour man (an Hermit) that said that day that he died, Cogitate hodie
coepisse servire Domino, Barlaam.
and hodie finiturum. Consider this to be the first days service that ever thou
did thy Master to gloryfie him in a christianly and constant death; and, if
thy first day be thy last day too, how soon do thou come to receive thy
wages; yet Barlaam could have been content to have stayed longer for it; Make
no ill conclusion upon any man's lothnesse to die. And then, upon violent
deaths inflicted, as upon malefactors, Christ himself has forbidden us by his
own death to make any ill conclusion; for, his own death had those impressions
in it; he was reputed, he was executed as a Malefactor, and no doubt many of
them who concurred to his death, did believe him to be so. Of sudden deaths,
there are scarce examples; to be found in the Scriptures, upon good men; for,
death in battle cannot be called sudden death: But God governs not by
examples, but by rules; and therefore make no ill conclusions upon
sodain-Death; nor upon distempers neither, though perchance accompanied with
some words of diffidence and distrust in the mercies of God. The Tree lies as
it falls; It Is true; but yet it is not the last stroke that fells the Tree; nor
the last word, nor last gasp that qualifies the Soul. Still pray we for a
peaceable life, against violent deaths, and for time of Repentance against
sudden Deaths, and for sober and modest assurance against d^stemper'd and
diffident Deaths, but never make ill conclus^ion upon persons overtaken with
such Deaths. Domini, Domini sunt exitus Mortis, To God the Lord belong the
issues of Death, and he received Samson, who went out of this world in such a
manner (consider it actively, consider it passively; in his own death, and in
those whom he slew with himself) as was subject to interpretation hard enough;
yet the Holy Ghost has moved Sa^nt Paul to celebrate Samson, in his great
Catalogue, and so does all the Church. Heb. 11.
Our Critical day is not the very day of our death, but the whole course of
our life: I thank him, that prays for me when my bell tolls; but I thank him
much more, that Carechises me, or preaches to me, or instructs me how to live,
fac hoc and vives, There Is my security; The mouth of the Lord has spoken it,
Do this and thou shall live. But though I do it yet I shall die too, die a
bodily, a natural death; but God never mentions, never seems to consider that
death, the bodily, the natural death. God does not say Live well, and thou
shall die well; well, that is, an easy, a quiet death; but live well here, and
thou shall live well for ever. As the first part of a Sentence pieces well with
the last, and never respects, never hearkens after the parenthesis that comes
between, so does a good life here, flow into an eternal life, without any
consideration what manner of death we die. But whether the gate of my prison be
opened with an oiled key (by a gentle and preparing sickness) or the gate be
hewed down, by a violent death, or the gate be burnt down by a rageing and
frantic fever; a gate into Heaven I shall have; for, from the Lord is the
course of my life, and with God the Lord are the issues of death; And farther
we carry not this second acceptance of the words, as this issue of death is
liberatio in morte, God's care that the Soul be safe, what agony soever the
body suffer in the hour of death; but pass to our third and last Part; as
this issue of death is liberatio per mortem, a deliverance by the death of
another, by the death of Christ.

Part. 3. Liberatio per mortem.
Sufferentia^ Job audi^stis and judistis fine^ Domini, says S. Ja. 5.11. You
have heard of the patience of Job, says he; All this while you have done that;
for in every man, calamitous, miserable man a Job speaks; Now see the end of
the Lord, says that Apostle, which is not that end which the Lord proposed to
himself (Salvation to us) nor the end which he proposes to us (conformity to
him) but, See the end of the Lord says he, the end that the Lord himself came
to, Death, and a painful, and a shameful death. But why did he die? and why
die so? Quia Domini Domini sunt exitus Mortis (as Saint Augustine interpreting
this Text, De Civit. Dei l. 17. c. 18.
answers that question) because to this God our Lord belonged these issues of
Death; Quid apertius diceretur? says he there; what can be more obvious, more
manifest, then this sense of these words? In the former part of the verse it is
said, He that is our God is the God of Salvation; Deus salvos faciendi, so he
reads it, The God that must save us; Who can that be, says he, but Jesus? For
therefore that name was given him, because he was to save us: And to this
Jesus, says he, Mat. 1.21.
this Savior, belongs the issues of Death, Nec oportuit cum de hac vita alios
exitus habere, quam mortis, Being come into this life in our mortal nature, he
could not go out of it any other way then by Death. Ideo dictum (says he)
therefore is it said, To God the Lord belong the issues of Death; Ut
ostenderetur moriendo nos salvos facturum, to show that his way to save us, was
to die. And from this Text does Saint Isiodore prove, that Christ was truly man
(which, as many Sects of Heretics denied, as that he was truly God) because to
him, though he were Dominus Dominus (as the Text doubles it) God the Lord, yet
to him, to God the Lord belonged the issues of Death. Oportuit cum pati, more
cannot be said, then Christ himself says of himself, These, Luke 24.26.
things Christ ought to suffer; He had no other way but by Death. So then, this
part of our Sermon must necessarily be a Passion Sermon, since all his life was
a continual Passion, all our Lent may well be a continual Good Friday;
Christ's painful Life took off none of the pains of his Death; he felt not the
less then, for having felt so much before; nor will any thing that shall be
said before, lessen, but rather enlarge your devotion to that which shall be
said of his Passion, at the time of the due solemnization thereof. Christ bled
not a drop the less at last, for having bled at his Circumcision before, nor
will you shed a tear the less then, if you shed some now. And therefore be
now content to consider with me, how to this God the Lord belonged the issues
of Death.

That God the Lord, The Lord of Life could die, is a strange contemplation;
That the Red Sea could be dry; Potuisse Mori. Exodus 14.21.
That the Sun could stand still; Jos. 10.12.
That an Oven could be seven times heat and not burn; That Lions could be
hungry and not bite, is strange, miraculously strange; But super-miraculous,
That God could die: But that God would die, is an exaltation of that; But, even
of that also, it is a super-exaltation, that God should die, must die; and non
exitus (says Saint Augustine) God the Lord had no issue but by death, and
oportuit pati (says Christ himself) all this Christ ought to suffer, was bound
to suffer. Psalm. 94.1. Voluisse Mori.
Deus ultionum Deus, says David, God is the God of Revenges; He would not
pass over the sin of man unrevenged, unpunished. But then, Deus ultionum
libere egit (says that place) The God of Revenges works freely; he punishes,
he spares whom he will; and would he not spare himself? He would not. Dilectio
fortis ut Mors, Can. 8.6.
Love is as strong as Death; stronger; it drew in Death, that naturally was not
welcome. Si possibile (says Christ) If it be possible let this Cup pass, when
his Love, expressed in a former Decree with his Father, had made it impossible.
Many waters quench not Love; Christ tried many; He was baptized out of his
Love, v. 7.
and his love determined not there; He wept over Jerusalem out of his love, and
his love determined not there; He mingled blood with water in his Agony and
that determined not his love; He wept pure blood, all his blood, at all his
eyes, at all his pores; in his flagellations, and thorns; (to the Lord our
God) belonged the issues of blood.) and these expressed, but these did not
quench his love.

Oportuisse Mori
He would not spare, nay, he would not spare himself; There was nothing more
free, more voluntary, more spontaneous then the death of Christ; It Is true,
libere egit, he died voluntarily; But yet, when we consider the contract that
had passed between his Father and him, there was an Oportuit, a kind of
necessity upon him, All this Christ ought to suffer; And when shall we date
this obligation, this Oportuit, this necessity, when shall we say it begun?
Certainly this Decree by which Christ was to suffer all this, was an eternal
Decree; and was there any thing before that that was eternal? Infi^ite love,
eternal love; be pleased to follow this home, and to consider it seriously,
that what liberty soever we can conceive in Christ, to die, or not to die, this
necessity of dying, this Decree is as eternal as that Liberty, and yet how
small a matter made he of this Necessity, and this dying? Genesis 3.15.
His Father calls it but a Bruise, and but a bruising of his heel (The Serpent
shall bruise his heel) and yet that was, that the Serpent should practice and
compass his death. Himself calls it but a Baptism, as though he were to be the
better for it; I have a Baptism to be baptized with; Luke 12.50.
and he was in pain till it was accomplished; and yet this Baptism was his
death. The Holy Ghost calls it Joy (For the joy which was set before him, he
endured the Cross) which was not a joy of his reward after his passion, Heb.
12.2.
but a joy that filled him even in the midst of those torments, and arose
from them. When Christ calls his passion Calicem, a cup, and no worse, (Can ye
drink of my cup;) He speaks not odiously, not with detestation of it; indeed it
was a cup; salus mundo, Mat. 20.22.
A health to all the world; and quid retribuem, says David, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord? Answer you with David, Accipiam Calicom, I
will take the cup of salvation. Take that, that cup of salvation his passion,
if not into your present imitation, yet into your present contemplation, and
behold how that Lord who was God yet could die, would die, must die for your
salvation.

That Moses and Elias talked with Christ in the transfiguration both St.
Matthew, and St. Mark tell us; but what they talked of, Mat 17.3. Mat. 9.4. Luc.
9.31.
only St. Luke; Dicebant excessum ejus, says he; they talked of his decease,
of his death, which was to be accomplished at Jerusalem. The word is of his
Exodus, the very word of our Text, Exitus, his issue by death. Moses, who in
his Exodus had prefigured this issue of our Lord, and in passing Israel out of
Egypt through the red sea, had foretold in that actual prophecy Christ's passing
of mankind through the sea of his blood, and Elias, whose Exodus, and issue out
of this world, was a figure of Christ's ascension, had no doubt a great
satisfaction, in talking with our blessed Lord, De excessu ejus, of the full
consummation of all this in his death, which was to be accomplished at
Jerusalem. Our meditation of his death should be more viseral, and affect us
more, because it is of a thing already done. The ancient Romans had a certain
tenderness, and detestation of the name of death; they would not name death, no
not in their wills; there they would not say, Si mori contingat, but Si quid
humanitas contingat, not if or when I die, but when the course of nature is
accomplished upon me. To us, that speak daily of the death of Christ, (He was
crucified, dead and buried) can the memory or the mention of our death be
irksome or bitter? There are in these latter times amongst us, that name death
freely enough, and the death of God, but in blasphemous oaths and execrations.
Miserable men, who shall therefore be said never to have named Jesus, because
they have named him too often; and therefore hear Jesus say, Nescive vos I
never knew you; because they made themselves too familiar with him. Moses and
Elias talked with Christ of his death only in a holy and joyful sense of the
benefit which they and all the world were to receive by it. Discourses of
religion should not be out of curiosity, but edification. And then they talked
with Christ of his death, at that time when he was at the greatest height of
glory, that ever he admitted in this world; that is, his transfiguration. And
we are afraid to speak to the great men of this world of their death, but
nourish in them a vain imagination of immortallity and immutability. But bonum
est nobis esse hic, (as St. Peter said there) It is good to dwell here, in this
consideration of his death, and therefore transfer we our Tabernacle, (our
devotion) through some of these steps, which God the Lord made to his issue of
death, that day.

Take in his whole day, from the hour that Christ eat the passover upon
Thursday, to the hour in which he died the next day. Make this present day,
Conformitas
that day in thy devotion, and consider what he did, and remember what you have
done. Before he instituted and celebrated the sacrament, (which was after the
eating of the passover) he proceeded to the act of humility, to wash his
Disciples feet; even Peter's, who for a while resisted him. In thy preparation
to the holy and blessed sacrament, have thou with a sincere humilty sought a
reconciliation with all the world, even with those who have been averse from
it, and refused that reconciliation from thee? If so, (and not else) thou have
spent that first part, of this his last day, in a conformity with him. After
the sacrament, he spent the time til night in prayer, in preaching, in Psalms.
Have thou considered that a worthy receiving of the sacrament consists in a
continuation of holiness after, as well as in a preparation before? If so, thou
have therein also conformed thy self to him: so Christ spent his time till
night. At night he went into the garden to pray, and he prayed prolixius; He
spent much time in prayer. Luc. 22.24.
How much? because it is literally expressed that he prayed there three several
times, and that returning to his Disciples after his first prayer, and finding
them asleep, said, could ye not watch with me one hour; Mat. 26.40.
it is collected that he spent three hours in prayer. I dare scarce ask thee
whither thou wentst, or how thou disposedst of thy self, when it grew dark and
after last night. If that time were spent in a holy recommendation of thy self
to God, and a submission of thy will to his; that it was spent in a conformity
to him. In that time, and in those prayers was his agony and bloody sweat. I
will hope that thou did pray; but not every ordinary and customary prayer,
but prayer actually accompanied with shedding of tears, and dispositively, in a
readiness to shed blood for his glory in necessary cases, puts thee into a
corformity with him. About midnight he was taken and bound with a kiss. Art
thou not too conformable to him in that? Is not that too literally, too exactly
thy case? At midnight to have been taken, and bound with a kiss? from thence he
was carried back to Jerusalem; first to Annas, then to Caiphas, and, (as late
as it was) there he was examined, and buffeted, and delivered over to the
custody of those officers, from whom he received all those irr^sions, and
violences, the covering of his face, the spitting upon his face, the
blasphemies of words, and the smartness of blows which that Gospel mentions. In
which compass fell that Gallicinium, that crowing of the Cock, which called up
Peter to his repentance. How thou passedst all that time last night, thou
know. If thou did any thing then that needed Peter's tears, and have not
shed them, let me be thy Cock, do it now; now thy Master, (in the unworthyest
of his servants) looks back upon thee, Do it now. Betimes in the morning, as
soon as it was day, the Jews held a Council in the high Priests house, and
agreed upon their evidence against him, and then carried him to Pilate, who was
to be his Judge. Did thou accuse thy self when thou wak'dst this morning, and
wast thou content to admit even falls accusations, that is, rather to suspect
actions to have been sin which were not, then to smother and justify such as
were truly sins? then thou spendst that hour in conformity to him. Pilat found
no evidence against him; and therefore to ease himself, and to pass a
complement upon Herod, Tetrarch of Galilee, who was at that time at Jerusalem,
(because Christ being a Galilean was of Herod's jurisdiction) Pilat sent him to
Herod; and rather as a mad man, then a malefactor, Herod remanded him with
scorns to Pilat to proceed against him; and this was about 8 of the Clock. Have
thou been content to come to this inquisition, this examination, this
agitation, this cribration, this pursuit of thy conscience, to sift it, to
follow it from the sins of thy youth to thy present sins, from the sins of thy
bed to the sins of thy board, and from the substance to the circumstance of thy
sins; that is time spent like thy Saviors, Pilat would have saved Christ by
using the privilege of the day in his behalf, because that day one prisoner was
to be delivered; but they chose Barrabas. He would have saved him from death,
by satisfying their fury, with inflicting other torments upon him, scourging,
and crowning with thorns, and loading him with many scornful and ignominious
contumelies; but this redeemed him not; they pressed a crucifying. Have thou
gone about to redeem thy sin, by fasting, by alms, by disciplines, and
mortifications, in the way of satisfaction to the justice of God; that will not
serve, that is not the right way. We press an utter crucifying of that sin that
governs thee, and that conforms thee to Christ. Toward noon Pilat gave
Judgment; and they made such have to execution, as that by noon he was upon the
Cross. There now hangs that sacred body upon the cross, re-baptiz'd in his own
tears and sweat, and embalmed in his own blood alive. There are those bowels of
compassion, which are so conspicuous, so manifested, as that you may see them
through his wounds. There those glorious eyes grew faint in their light, so, as
the Sun ashamed to survive them, departed with his light too. And there that
Son of God, who was never from us, and yet had now come a new way unto us, in
assuming our nature, delivers that soul which was never out of his Fathers
hands, into his Fathers hands, by a new way, a voluntary emission thereof; for
though to this God our Lord belong these issues of death, so that, considered
in his own contract, he must necessarily die, yet at no breach, nor battery
which they had made upon his sacred body issues his soul, but emisit, he gave
up the Ghost: and as God breathed a soul into the first Adam, so this second
Adam breathed his soul into God, into the hands of God. There we leave you, in
that blessed dependancy, to hang upon him, that hangs upon the cross. There
bath in his tears, there suck at his wounds, and lie down in peace in his
grave, till he vouchsafe you a Resurrection, and an ascension into that
Kingdom which he has purchased for you, with the inestimable price of his
incorruptible blood.

Amen.
FINIS

