THE Saints Convoy TO HEAVEN. A DISCOURSE occasioned by (and in Part Preached
upon) THE DEATH and FUNERAL OF Mr. Benjamin Lindsey, Who Deceased, the 21st of
February, 1697.

By THO. DOOLITTLE, M. A.

LONDON: Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel, in the Poultry, over against
the Compter. School.

THE EPISTLE TO Mrs. Rebeccah Lindsey, Mother Mr. Joseph Lindsey, Brother
Sisters Mrs. Abigal Shipton, Mrs. Sarah Pike,
Kinsmen Mr. John Hind, Mr. Morgan Hind, Mr. Richard Hind, Mr. Robert Hind,
to Mr. Benjamin Lindsey, lately Deceased.

Dear Friends,
ACcording to the several Relations (nearer or more remote) wherein ye stood to
Mr. Benjamin Lindsey, when he was living with you, Nature and Reason dictates
that ye must be differently affected, as to Degrees, by his being by Death
removed from you, yet being so much beloved and respected by you all, it is
easy to determine that his Death was Matter of Sorrow to you all; but the
Religion ye all profess, and the Christian Doctrine ye all do own, must be
instructive to you, that ye sorrow, not as those that have no Hope, either that
his Soul, being so Pious, was not carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom, or
that his Body, that ye carried and lodged in the Bosom of the Earth, should not
be raised again to a joyful Resurrection, and be hereafter, where the Soul at
present is, in Happiness and Glory: Of which Two Things, the believing
Consideration should dry your weeping Eyes, relieve your mourning Spirits, and
comfort your Sorrowful Hearts.

To the Mother I send this short following Advice:

1. That you would not so much sorrow that your Son's Body is gone down to the
Grave, as rejoice that his Soul is gone up to Heaven: Not so much mourn, that
he whom you did bear, bring forth, and bring up, is taken from you, as be
comforted that God has taken him to himself: As knowing he is better pleased
to be where he is, and more Happy, than if he had continued to be on Earth,
with you, and that he would not be from thence, to come again to you: And let
this make you the less Sorrowful in this World, because his Soul is now
triumphant in the other, which is a better World: for I suppose you loved your
Son better than to grieve at his Preferment.

2. That considering the Greatness of your Age you would clear your Evidences
for Heaven, and not have them to seek, when you should have them to show, nor
to get* when you should have them to use for your more comfortable Departure;
that as you are sure your Body must go down to your Son's Body, so you might be
as sure that your Soul shall go up to his Soul, that as he was where you are,
so you might be with God, where he is.

3. That you daily remember, you are almost at your Journey's End; in a Course
of Nature so near the Door of Eternity, that you cannot be much longer in Time;
therefore when you cannot move so speedily in Natural Motion, run more swiftly
in your Spiritual Race, that you might not fall short of the Joy and Crown that
is set before you.

4. That since your Son (now gone from you) has made such competent Provision
for you, that you need not spend your Breath in asking, What shall I eat, or
what shall I drink, or wherewithal shall I be clothed? Your Enquiries might be,
How shall I love God more, please him better, and be more prepared for my
Eternal State? Since now you need not cark for Earth, take more Care for Heaven.

5. That since you have more Benefit of your Sense of Seeing, than of Hearing,
supply the Defect of Hearing, by your diligent Reading; and the less you can
hear Men speak to you in Discoursing, the more do you speak to God in Praying;
and the less Converse you can have with the Creature, the more Communion do you
desire, get, and maintain with God.

To the Rest of you, let me be your Remembrancer, that ye get a sanctified
Improvement of this Breach by Death, that God has made amongst you, that ye so
mind Temporal, as not to forget your Eternal Concerns, to watch and be always
ready, because the Son of Man might come, in an Hour that ye think not of; to
prepare to follow him and others that are gone before: to keep up the Power of
Godliness in your Hearts, and to demonstrate it in your Lives: Seriously and
believingly to think of another world, and every Day you live in this, to stand
in Time, and look into Eternity: To be Good, and to do Good, as he was, and
did, that is taken from you, whereof (in Part) ye have been Eyewitnesses: To
live Holily, that ye might die not only Peacably, but also Triumphantly; as is
his Prayer for you, who desires it might be yours for him, who is,

Affectionately Yours, To his Power, Tho. Doolittle.
Mugwel-Street, April 8. School.
THE Saints Convoy TO HEAVEN.
Luke XVI. 22. And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by the
Angels into Abraham's Bosom.
SOME think it is not material whether the Discourse of our Lord Jesus
concerning the Rich Man and the Beggar, be taken as a Parable, or an History,
or composed of both; when it is confessed, that under this Narration, Christ
describes the State of the Good and Bad in the other World, and asserts the
Existence of the Soul, after its Separation from the Body; and that it
immediately passes to Heaven or Hell, before the Resurrection of the Body, and
general Judgment of the great Day.

Though there was a Disparity between Lazarus spoken of in the Text, and our
Friend, whose Death is the Occasion of this Discourse upon it, in regard of
their outward Circumstances in this World; yet if the latter be a Partaker of
Felicity with the former, in the other World, I might easily be excused for
choosing this as my Theme upon this sad, but righteous Providence: especially,
when there is no other so express to my Design as this is.

The Rich Man here spoken of, was a voluptuous Sinner; who, while he lived, did
live in outward Pomp; and, when he died, was buried in great State. The Poor
Man was full of Sores, and Hungry, while he lived; and no mention is made of
his Funeral, when he died.

The one was Rich on Earth, but now a Beggar in Hell. The other a Beggar on
Earth, but now Rich in Heaven.

The Poor Man, on Earth, begged for some Crumbs at the Rich Man's Door; but he
could not obtain them. The Rich Man, in Hell, begged for a Drop of Water; but
it was denied him.

Some live and die Poor, and in a State of Sin: These have their Evil Things
here, and hereafter too: Misery on Earth, and more in Hell.

Some live and die Rich, Luke 16. 25
and finally Impenitent: These have their Good Things here, and their Evil
Things hereafter: A short Heaven in this World, and a long Hell in the next.

Some live and die Poor, but in a State of Grace: These have their Evil Things
in this Life, and their Good in the next: Short Misery on Earth, and long
Felicity in Heaven.

Some live and die possessed of a good Estate, and in a State of Grace: These
have their Good Things here, and better hereafter: Now some Earnest, then
actual Possession.

It is better to live and die in the Depths of Poverty, and have the Soul
Everlastingly saved; than in the Heigths of Prosperity, and the Soul Eternally
lost. The worst Condition of a Child of God, be it never so bad, is better than
the best Condition of a Wicked Man, be it never so good.

In the Words of the Text Five Things may be observed: 1. The Passage of a
Believer to the Place of his Eternal Abode. He is carried, or transported to
it. 2. What of the Believer is carried to that Place or State? And that is, the
Soul. He was carried; his Soul, not then his Body. His Soul was transported,
his Body was left behind. The Soul is carried at his Dissolution; the Body not
till the Resurrection. 3. Whither was the Soul carried; what was the Place or
State to which it was transported? Into Abraham 's Bosom. 4. When? As soon as
he died; that Minute it was separated from the Body, it began its Journey to
its Eternal Home. 5. By whom? By the Angels he was carried into Abraham 's
Bosom. Not by one, but many Angels.


Several great Articles of Faith affording great Support and Comfort to
Believers are taught by Christ in these Words.

1. Observation. That the Soul does exist after its Separation from the Body.
Otherwise it would not be capable to be carried to another State of Blessedness
and Glory.

Genesis 2. 7.
In Man's Mortal Body, there is an Immortal Soul.

Death turns the Soul out of the Body, and the Man out of this World.

Death deprives the Body of Life, and leave it a Lump, or Mass of Breathless
Clay; Eccl. 12. 7.
but in Death, the Soul escapes Death. Death, that conquereth all Men's Bodies,
kills no Man's Soul.

The Life and Being of the Soul cannot be destroyed, either, by Outward
Violence, by Inward Principles.


First, Not by Outward Violence. No Finite Power can make the Soul to cease to
be. The most Powerful, Cruel and Enraged Persecutors who may torture, kill or
burn the Body, cannot touch nor reach the Soul. Mat. 10. 28. Fear not them
which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell. Though they had a Will to
kill the Soul, yet they want Power: If they would, they are not able: They can
neither kill it, nor damn it. Luke 12. 4. I say unto you, my Friends, be not
afraid of them that kill the Body, and after that have no more that they can
do. When they have taken away the Life of the Body, they have done their worst,
their most, their all; so that there is no more that they can do; for the Soul
escapes their Fury, and their malicious Rage. And as Creatures cannot, so we
are assured that God will not cause the Soul to cease to be; and this we know:

1. From the Promises he has made to sincere Believers, to give to them
Eternal Life; Joh* 3. 16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting Life. That they shall be for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17.
That they shall be Eternally Saved, Heb. 5. 9. That they shall have a Crown
incorruptible that fades not away, 1 Pet. 1. 4, 5. If these Eternal Things
shall be enjoyed by Believers, then their Souls must exist to all Eternity; for
that which is nothing can enjoy nothing.

2. From the Threatenings of God recorded in his Word, of the Everlasting
Punishment they shall be tormented with in the other World, to all Eternity,
that leave this World in a State of Sin, Rev. 14. 10. The same shall drink of
the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without Mixture, into the Cup
of his Indignation, and they shall be tormented with Fire and Brimstone, in the
the Presence of the Holy Angels, and in the Presence of the Lamb. V. 11. And
the Smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever and ever; and they have no
rest, Day nor Night -- If Souls shall lie under the Punishment of Sense for
ever, they must exist for ever: for that which is nothing by ceasing to be, can
have no Sense of Punishment.

Secondly, The Soul cannot die, or cease to be, by any Internal Principles;
such as contrary Qualities in the Body, which after Conflicts, and one consumed
by the other, cause the Death of the Body: as Fire in the Lamp licking up all
the Oil, causes the Lamp to go out: or if too much Oil be poured in, and
overflows the Fire, it also is extinguished. Neither can the Soul dye with old
Age, as the Body will; for time is not the measure of the Duration of the Soul,
as it is of the Body; but Eviternity, and Beings measured thereby, though they
have a Beginning, yet shall have no Ending.

Use.
Let this awaken all to provide a Lodging for their Souls, against the Hour they
shall be separated from their Bodies. Now our Souls dwell in Houses of Clay,
and these have their Foundation in the Dust, Job 4. 19.
and will shortly fall, and the Soul be dispossessed, and turned out of this
House, in which it is a Tenant at Will of the great Landlord of all the World,
who might Seal a Lease of Ejectment at his Pleasure; when you cannot remove
from one House to another in the same Parish, in the same City, or in the same
Nation; no, nor yet in the same World; but will be such a Remove as never yet
you made, from one World to another.

Since then the Soul after Death will be in Being, it must be some where; for
that which is no where, is nothing. but where shall it be? There are but Two
Places in the other World, where Souls shall be, Heaven, or Hell. Do you know
in which? Or do not you think nor care in which your Soul shall live and lodge
for ever? If in Hell, your Lodging will be so uneasy, that in it you cannot
rest. A Bed of Flames, a Lodging in boiling Lead or Oil, or burning Brimstone,
will cause you to cry out, I am uneasy, I am uneasy in my Lodging, I cannot
rest upon this Bed, I cannot take one wink of Sleep! May I not change my
Lodging? I am weary of being here. May I not go back again from whence I came?
I thought my sick Bed was uneasy, but this is worse, inconceivably worse!
beyond Expression more painful and uneasy! But if I may not go back to my old
Lodgings, in that World from whence I came, Let me seek a cooler Lodging where
I am; Let me rove from one side of Hell unto the other, if I might find some
easy Corner, where I may a while be free from Pain and Torment. But alas! I
cannot. Woe is me, I cannot! Every Nook is Hot, is Hot, is exceeding Hot. The
Justice of God pursues me, wherever I go: My enraged Conscience does accompany
me, and tormenting Devils follow me; and the Fire burns me to what Place soever
I hasten; and there is no Hope; O Desperate Case! there is no Hope, either of
Deliverance, or Mitigation of my Misery. Die I would, but cannot; cease to be I
would, but must not. Cursed Caitiff that I am, in this Extremity I must lie and
lodge to all Eternity.

Secure then your Title to an House Above: to Mansions in Heaven, that when
your Soul shall be turned out of this, it may be received into that. How
comfortable would this Knowledge be, on a dying Bed, when you shall say, This
Tabernacle must be taken down, this Earthly House is going to Ruins, it can be
repaired no more, it can stand no longer? Food I cannot eat to patch it up:
Medicines cannot remove that Sickness from me, which will remove my Soul out of
this Earthly House. But I know, blessed be God, I know that I have a Building
of God; an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. 2. Cor. 5. 1.

II. Observation, The Souls of Believers, after Death, are transported into an
Eternal State of Blessedness. The Body is carried and lodged in the Bosom of
the Earth: the Soul is carried and laid in the Bosom of Abraham.

This Figurative Expression, denotes a Place of Love and dearest Affection.
Christ is God's dear Son, or the Son of his Love, Col. 1. 13. and said to be in
the Bosom of the Father, Joh. 1. 18. John, the beloved of the Lord, is found
nearest Christ, lying in his Bosom, Joh. 13. 23. and There was leaning on Jesus
his Bosom, one of his Disciples whom Jesus loved.

The Bosom is also a Place of Ease and Rest, and sweet Repose: So God
comforting and giving Rest unto his People, is said, to carry them in his
Bosom, Isay. 40. 11. Thus Lazarus, wearied with Affliction, want and Poverty,
was received up to Everlasting Rest.

There are Conjectures why Abraham's Bosom is mentioned, rather than the Bosom
of Moses, or David, or any other that were in Heaven.

1. Because he was on Earth given to Hospitality; Genesis 18. he entertained Three
Angels; and the Angels carried the Soul of this Beggar, who could not obtain
the least Alms at the Rich Man's Gate, into Abraham's Bosom, where his Wants
were all presently supplied. The Rich Man was a Churl; Abraham was Charitable.
The Poor Man was carried from the Churl's Door, to the Charitable Man's Bosom.

2. Because he was the Father of the Faithful, and the Father's Bosom is the
Child's Place.

3. Because the Promise of Canaan, the Type of Heaven, was made to him and his
Seed for ever.

But I conceive the plain meaning is, That he was carried into Heaven, where
the Faithful, with Abraham, the Father of all the Faithful, shall be gathered,
sit down, rest and be comforted for Ever: as Mat. 8. 11. I say unto you, that
many shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down with
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Saved Souls, possessed of their Mansions in Heaven, shall have perfect and
perpetual Rest from all Evils that afflict, molest and burden them, and cause
them here, in the Place of their Pilgrimage, and Travel to their Eternal Home;
to sigh and sob, to grieve and groan, to weep and Mourn; when lodged above,
they shall rest for ever.

1. From the In-dwellings of Corruption. While the Soul dwells here in the
Body, Romans 7. 17* 33. 24.
Sin will dwell in the Soul: While the Believer is here a Sojourner, Sin will
be his constant, disquieting, molesting Inmate: When Body and Soul do part,
then Sin and the Soul shall also part; and though Body and Soul at length shall
meet again; yet they and Sin shall meet no more.

2. From all Troubles arising from ungodly Men: These shall persecute,
imprison, disturb their Peace no more, for ever.

3. From all Temptations of Satan. The Devil got into the Earthly Paradise, and
and by his Subtilty beguiled our first Parents; but is cast down from Heaven,
to return and enter no more; nor shall be a Tempter to any in the Celestial
Paradise any more, for ever. He might follow his tempting Trade with us on
Earth, but must leave it off, as to all in Heaven.

4. From the Imperfection of their Graces. Here our Faith is so feeble, our
Love to God and Christ so little, our Delight so small, our Knowledge so short,
our Desires so faint, our Hope so wavering, and all our Graces in such low
Degrees, that we often call all into Question, doubt of our Sincerity, fear
Hipocrisy, and think our Seize great, if we mourn the more, because we
love no more; and have more Desires to desire more; and sorrow the more,
because we delight in God and Christ, and Fore-views of the glorious State
Above no more. And these make us more restless on our Sick Beds, because our
Souls are Sick, as well as our Bodies; and our inward Man as Weak as our
outward Man is: And too many, instead of departing in Triumph, with Assurance
of Salvation, breath out their Souls with mourning Complaints and Fears,
concerning their future Eternal State; leaving the World with these piercing
Questions, Is God mine? Is Christ mine? Shall Heaven be mine? I am going, but I
know not whither. I must I must leave all my dearest Friends in this World; but
what will be my Company in the next?

But when these Holy Souls shall be carried into Heaven, all these Mists shall
be dispelled; these Clouds shall be scattered; this dark and gloomy Day shall
end in a bright and glorious Sunshine for evermore. For when they are come to
that which is Perfect, and that which is Perfect is come to them, that which is
in Part shall be done away, 1 Cor. 13. 10, 12. For all the Spirits of Just Men,
carried thither, are made Perfect, Heb. 12. 23.

5. From any Desertion from God. The Children of God, in that Light, shall walk
no more in Darkness. Nor question the Love of God to them, nor their Love to
God, any more than we can question whether it be Day, when we see the Sun to
shine in its greatest Brightness; or whether Fire be hot, when it warms our
Hands.

Not one shall there say, My Lord has forsaken me, or my God has forgotten
me. No such Question there; Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9.
Will the Lord cast off for ever? Will he be Favorable no more? Is his Mercy
clean gone for ever? Does his Promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to
be Gracious? Has he in Anger shut up his tender Mercies? When I was on Earth,
this was my Infirmity; but now in Heaven, I will meditate on all that blessed
Work of God, that has brought me to this Glorious Place; and resting in my
Savior's Bosom will talk with this Holy Company, of all the Marvels and
Wonders of his Grace; in bringing me to this happy State of Life, and Light,
and Love, and perfect Rest for Ever.

6. From all Discords and Divisions that were amongst believers on their way on
Earth, to this State in Heaven. There they are all of one Mind, of one Heart
and Way: There is no Diversity of Judgment, no Alienation of Affection, no rash
and uncharitable Censures; but all filled with Love to God and one another.

7. From all ensnaring Allurements of this World. These, too often, did deaden
their Affections toward God, interrupt their Communion with him, and by the
World's Smiles, were sometimes brought under God's Frowns; and when it was best
with their Bodies, it was worst with their Souls: and the more they enjoyed of
the World, the less their Conversation was in Heaven. But there they have got
above all worldly Profits, all fleshly Pleasures, all carnal Joys; and shall
bathe themselves in those Rivers of Pleasures, Psalm. 16. 11.
and be delighted in that fullness of Joy, which is in the Presence of their
Lord and Savior to all Eternity.

8. From all distracting Cares, and disquieting Fears, about the want of things
necessary to bear their Charges on their Journey, while on Earth, to the Bosom
of their Lord. They shall have no more need of such Cautions, Mat. 6. 25.
Take no thought what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye
shall be clothed: For in that Place and State they shall be hungry no more,
Rev. 7. 16.
nor thirst any more, nor feel any Want of any such things; but shall live
without these, as Angels in Heaven do.

9. From all Troubles and Remorse, and Stinging of Conscience. Conscience that
shall still remain in the Bosom of the Damned, Mar. 9. 44.
shall Eternally torment, and gnaw upon them; and, Heb. 11. 25.
for very Vexation, shall cause them to cry out, What Fools were we, for short
Pleasures of Time, to run into these Everlasting Pains? Mat. 16. 26
What Madness did possess us, for small Profits of the World, to lose the
Enjoyments of all the Happiness of Heaven? What Distraction did seize us to
come to this filthy, loathsome Dungeon! to this dark and dismal Prison, for the
fading Honors of a short and Transitory Life? Cursed Caitiffs that we are,
that did prefer the good Things of our corrupt Flesh, before the things that
were really good for Body or for Soul! Miserable Hell Hounds (for so now we
are, and must for ever be) to keep our Sins, and lose our Souls; to gratify our
Lusts, and for them to be cast out from the comfortable Presence of the blessed
Lord! Luke* 15. 16.
To sell Heaven for a Merrybout! to come short of Eternal Joys, for an
Ale-bench Song, and there to drink and swill, like Hogs at a Trough, and now to
lie in tormenting Flames, and cannot obtain one Drop of Water, Luke 16. 24, 25.
(though a River would not be enough) to cool our Tongues.

But the Saints in Abraham's (or rather in their Savior's) Bosom, shall have a
quiet, sedate, and rejoicing Conscience in their own, that shall refresh and
comfort them, that they did deny themselves, to save themselves, that they did
venture or sustain the Loss of Life, to obtain Eternal Life: Heb. 10. 34.
that they took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, that they might have in
Heaven a better and more enduring Substance.

10. From all irksom Weariness in Holy Exercises. While they are in the Bosom
of the Church Militant, they are too often weary in doing their Duty, when they
are not weary of doing of it; and the better they do it, the more weary they
are in doing of it: and if they are weary of it, it is because they do it no
better. They are weary of a dull and lazy, slothful Heart; they are weary of
their unbelieving, hard and unaffected Heart; they are weary of their
distracting Thoughts, and wandering Minds, and roving Affections: But the more
Life and Liveliness, the more activity and exercise of Faith, and Love, Desire
and Delight, of Joy and Hope they perform them with, the less weary they are of
them: Much labor seems light, long time seems short, and the greatest
Pains are pleasant to them: and in so doing, Mat. 26. 41.
they find the Spirit is willing when the Flesh is weak.

The Damned, in the Bowels of Hell, and in the Devil's Bosom, are weary of
their Torments, of their Pain and Punishment; such a Bosom is no Place of Love
or Rest; and the more they are embraced in the Devil's Arms, the more uneasy
still they are, and wish that he could hug them into nothing; and Lamenting,
say, Have our Bosom Sins brought us to such an uneasy Bosom? Have our embraced
Sins brought us to the Embracements of such cruel and merciless Tormentors? We
never hugged our Sins so much, but the Devil huggeth us as close. We never kept
our Sins so fast, but the Devil will keep us now as long. We are weary, we are
weary of this Place and Pain; more weary than we were of Prayers, and Sermons,
and Sabbaths upon Earth; we were weary of them, and Death freed us from that
Weariness; but now we are weary of these Pains, which we were weary in praying
against, and never must be freed from them.

But when the Soul is carried into Heaven, it shall be no more weary of the
Praise, Delight and Love it shall be employed in for ever: and though it shall
not rest Day or Night, saying, Holy, Holy, Rev. 4. 8.
Holy Lord God Almighty, yet it shall find sweet and pleasant Rest, both Night
and Day, in sounding unwearied Hallelujahs to the Lord, in the Savior's Bosom.

Take some Corollaries from what has been said.

1. Let go your Bosom Sins, as you would have your Souls carried into Abraham's
Bosom. Make no Sin your Bosom Friend: Job 31. 33.
neither hide it in your Bosom.

1. by indulging and cherishing of it, as a Mother the Child in her Bosom:
beware of that Sin, which all other Sins are Servants to.

2. By defending and pleading for it.

3. By withstanding the Reproofs that are given to you* for it.

4. By pleasing your self in thinking of it.

5. By not confessing of it to God, who knows the most secret Things in your
Bosom.

2. Let no Bosom Friend draw you to sin; Deuteronomy. 13. 6, 8.
not the Wife, or Husband of your Bosom, or any as dear to you as your own
Soul, lest when you are carried from them by Death, you be not carried by
Angels into Abraham's Bosom.

3. Let Christ have a Room in your Bosom now, that you might be received into
his Bosom hereafter. Christ should lie nearest your Heart: He that is in the
Bosom of the Father, is most worthy of the chiefest and choicest Room in your
Heart. Say and do as the Spouse, Cant. 1. 13. A Bundle of Myrrh is my Well
beloved unto me, he shall lie all Night betwixt my Breasts: Some say Myrrh
betwixt the Breasts is an excellent Cordial: Christ in our Bosom is a reviving
Cordial, for it is a Pledge that we hereafter shall be in his.

4. When the Souls that shall not be carried up to Heaven, shall be dragged
down to Hell, Psalm. 79. 12.
they shall have the Recompense of all their Wickedness poured into their
Bosom, and of all their Reproaches, wherewith they have reproached the Lord.
God now says, Isa. 65. 6, 7.
That then he will not keep Silence, but will recompense into their Bosom, and
will measure their former Works into their Bosom.

5. Whatsoever Soul would be carried up to Abraham's Bosom, must be laborious
in Religion while he is here. He must neither hide his Sins nor his Hand in his
Bosom, not the one from parting from it, nor the other from working with it.
The slothful Man that hides his Hands in his Bosom, Prove. 19. 24
and will not so much as bring it to his Mouth again, must starve, because he
will neither work nor eat: And he that hides his Sin in his Bosom, and will
not so much as bring it to his Mouth Penitently, and with Brokenness of Heart,
to confess his Sin, shall be damned for his Sin. Angels will carry no Idle,
Slothful Souls to Heaven: Abraham's Bosom is no Place for Loiterers: It is
those that Fight, and Run, and Wrestle, and Overcome, that shall have Repose
and Rest in Abraham's Bosom: For, Mat. 11. 12.
The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence, and the Violent take it by Force.

III. Observation, A gracious Soul separated from the Body, is presently
carried by Angels into a State of Happiness in Heaven. At Death it is not
annihilated, nor does it sleep with the Body, neither does it stay in any other
supposed Place, but is instantly on its Journey to Glory, and immediately
passes into the Celestial Paradise.

The sure Word of God does assure us of this: and if we believe the one, we
must grant the other, since it is so express and full in the asserting of this
Doctrine, that is so comfortable to sanctified and prepared Souls.

Designing Brevity in this, I shall only allege a few Texts that do confirm it:

Luke 23. 43. Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou
be with me in Paradise. Where note*

1. The Asserter. Jesus said unto him (the penitent dying Thief.)

2. The Manner of his Assertion. Verily, I say unto thee: A Word of
Asseveration commonly used by Christ, in Matters of great, undoubted Certainty
and Moment.

3. The Thing Asserted. To Day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

Where observe, 1. The Place spoken of: That is, Paradise; that is, the Third
Heaven, where God does manifest his Glorious Presence. Thus Paul, speaking of a
Man caught up to the Third Heaven, presently subjoins, He was caught up into
Paradise: by Two Words intending one and the same Place: 2 Cor. 12. 2, 4. 2.
Who should be in that Place of Paradise: Thou that art now a dying Man. Thou,
that is, thy Soul; for of his Body it could not be understood. 3. With whom the
penitent Thief should be in Paradise: With Christ. Thou that art with me on the
Cross, shall be with me in Heaven. 4. When his Soul should be with him in
Heaven: To day. To day thou shall die, and to day thou shall have Eternal Life:
To day thou shall expire on the Cross, and to day thou shall have a Crown of
Glory in the Highest Heavens.


The different Pointing of the Words, corrupting the Sense, is such a bold
Attempt, that should it be admitted in other Places, as the Opposers of the
Soul's immediate passing into Glory, sawcily do in this, it would be such a
mangling of the Scripture, that we should be at a Loss to know the Meaning of
many plain Texts.

What need had Christ to speak the Words thus; Verily I say unto thee to day?
Did not he know Christ then spoke to him? Did not he hear him? And did he hear
him that Day, and could not he tell that Christ spoke to him that day, except
Christ added, to Day I say unto thee? What need Christ add his asserting
Verily, to these Words, I say unto thee to day? Could not the Thief trust his
own Ears, that he then heard Christ say to him, except Christ add, Verily, I do
as^ure thee that it is to day that I say this to thee?

Which is greater Ground of Support and Comfort to a dying Penitent, to
acquaint him, I say unto thee to Day, thou shall be with me in Paradise; but I
do not tell thee when, nor how many Thousand Years hence, this shall be thy
Happiness; or thus, Verily I say to thee, to day, this very Day, thou shall be
with me in Paradise? It is but a Dream, that the Soul shall sleep when a Man
dies.

A Second Text is, 2 Cor. 5. 6. Therefore we are always confident, knowing that
whilst we are at home in the Body, we are absent from the Lord, Ver. 8. We are
confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the Body, and to be
present with the Lord.

Here note:

1. While the Soul is in the Body, we are in our Earthly Home.

2. While the Soul is in its Earthly Home, it is absent from its true Home,
which is in Heaven, from the Vision and Fruition of God in Glory.

3. When the Soul does leave its Earthly Home, it goes to its Heavenly Home:
for when it is absent from the Body, it shall be present with the Lord, in the
Glorious Enjoyment of him to all Eternity.

4. The Opposition of these Two is immediate. To be present in the Body is to
be absent from the Lord: To be absent from the Body, is to be present with the
Lord.

5. The Confidence of the Apostle that there is such a Glorious State, which is
the reason of our Willingness to leave the Body, that from thenceforth we might
be with the Lord in Heaven. Deny the Souls immediate passing to God in Glory,
and you take away the Reason of the Choice, rather to be absent from the Body,
than to be present in it.

The Third Text is, Phil. 1. 23. For I am in a Straight betwixt two; having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Note,

1. The Apostle's Straight. Two things were before him, to live or die, Reasons
swaying him sometimes to the one* sometimes to the other: For the Good of God's
Church, it would be better for him to live than die, Ver. 22. For his own
Advantage, it would be better for him to die than to live, Ver. 21. This was
his Straight.

2. His own Inclination, and vehement Desire, in respect to himself, that he
would choose rather to depart, than to continue upon Earth.

3. The Reason of his Desire and Wilingness to depart, that he may be with
Christ: But there would be no Reason in this Reason, if by departing, he should
be nothing the sooner with Christ.

4. The Preference of one State before the other, or the comparing of the one
with the other: It is better to die and be with Christ. There is an excellent
Gradation in the Text:

It is (...), better.

It is (...), far better.

It is (...), far better by much.

But if a Believer die, and the Soul is not the sooner with Christ, than if he
had lived longer, it would not have been better but worse, for while the
Apostle lived he had himself much Communion with God, but if he departed, and
not with Christ, he had none.

While he lived he was useful and profitable to the Church on Earth, but after
his Departure he could not.

While he lived he did glorify God on Earth; but if he departed, and went not
to Christ, he could not glorify him, neither on Earth, nor in Heaven.

While he lived, he knew God, and loved him, and delighted in him, and was
sensible of God's Love to him; but if he departed and went not to Christ, he
was capable of none of these; and so still it was worse, far worse, far worse
by much, to depart than live.

This might be largely improved by way of use, which I hope you will
practically use in all your Ways, though I cannot stay to speak, what ye
should, and I hope you will do, if you keep in Remembrance, that a pious
separated Soul is presently on his Journey to the highest Heavens, and who
shall be his Convoy thither: Which was my first Design in choosing this Text, to
entertain your thinking Minds upon this Occasion.

IV. Observation, The Holy Angels of God are the Bearers that carry the
separated Souls of Believers into Heaven.

Men take care for the Bearers of the Body, when dead: God takes care for the
Bearers of the Soul, when departed.

Men are Bearers that carry the Body to the Grave: Angels are the Bearers that
carry the Soul to Glory.

Men mourning follow the Corpse to the House appointed for all the Living:
Angels triumphing go along with the Soul to the Mansions prepared for all the
Believing.

The Ministration of Angels, for the Good of Believers, is asserted in general,
in Heb. 1. 14. Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for
them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation? Where may be noted,

1. The Nature of Angels: They are Spirits, intellectual, immaterial, immortal
and active Creatures; the noblest and most refined Part of God's Creation: more
excellent than Man; yet Servants to Christ their Lord.

2. Their Office: They are Ministering Spirits.

3. Their Number: All of them are so, if there be Degrees and Orders among
them, all and every one of them, from the highest to the lowest are God's
Servants, waiting and attending upon him, to go and come as he appoints, for
the Good of the People of God, whose Fellow Servants they own themselves to be,
Rev. 19. 10. and 22. 9.

4. Their Commission: Being sent before they go, they must have their Warrant
from God, before they move; Psalm. 103. 20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that
excel in Strength, that do his Commandment, hearkening to the Voice of his
Word: though they have Power to Act, yet they must not, nor do they stir, without
a Command from God.

5. Their Execution: They are sent, and then they Minister; They hearken to the
Voice of his Word, and then they do his Commands.

6. The Object of their Ministration, or the Persons they are charged with:
Such as shall be Heirs of Salvation.

Angel is a Word not so much to signify their Nature as their Office, that is
to say, they are Messengers, to go at the Command of their Sovereign Lord, upon
his Errands from Heaven to Earth, and back again from Earth to Heaven; Genesis 28.
12. And he dreamed, and behold a Ladder set upon the Earth, and the Top of it
reached to Heaven, and behold, the Angels of God ascending and descending on it.

The Ministration of Angels in the Behalf of those that shall be Heirs of
Salvation from their Birth to their Death, Genesis 18. 10. Judge. 13. 3, 4, 5. Luke
1. 11, 13, to 18.
(yea, and sometimes before their Conception) is copiously treated of in
Scripture, but from their Death to their Passage to Heaven, and afterward, is
more sparingly mentioned; but one Saying of Christ (as this concerning the Poor
Man's Soul) is sufficient Evidence of their conveying of them from the Place
where they die, to the Place where they shall live for ever.

It will be needful, to more clear Procedings about the Angels conveying the
Souls of Believers, from their Death, to the Place and State of Happiness, to
premise some Propositions; which are,

1. That God by his absolute Power is able to do those things, which in the
ordinary course of Providence, he makes use of second Causes, to accomplish
and bring to pass. What he does by Means, he can do without any Means; he has
tied us to the use of Means, which he himself is not obliged, through any need of
them, Exodus 34. 28. 1 King. 19. 8.
to make use of. So by his Power he supported Moses and Elias Forty Days,
without Eating or Drinking; yet in the ordinary Way of God's Appointment, that
we might live, we must both Eat and Drink. Therefore when we speak of the
Conveyance of Souls, by the Ministration of Angels, to Abraham's Bosom, it is
not to be thought, that he could not do it without them though he does it by them.

2. The Good Pleasure of God is the highest and most satisfying Reason, why he
that could safeguard Souls to Heaven, by his own Almighty Power, will have
them conveyed thither by the Ministry of his Holy Angels. To the Querist, that
seeks for Reasons in the most sublime Mysteries of Religion (as Election,
Special Redemption, Effectual Vocation, etc.) why one, and not another, is an
Instance of God's Grace; the Answer, That it is God's good Pleasure, is, and
ought to be satisfactory; Mat. 11. 25, 26. Ephesians. 1. 5, 11. and this good
Pleasure of God is extended to the Armies of Heaven, as well as to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, Dan. 4. 35.

3. God's good Pleasure, in his Government of Angels and Men, is made known,
not only in his Word, but also by the Events of his Providence: In our present
Case, Christ relates it as a Matter of Fact done by the Angels, that they did
carry the Soul of Lazarus into Abraham's Bosom. Now we know, what Holy Angels
do, is God's Pleasure they should do; for they do nothing but what does please
him. That Angels should convey his Soul to Heaven, was God's good Pleasure.

4. As it is God's good Pleasure to give the Kingdom, not to Men, as Men; but
as believing, sanctified Men; and so to every one that is such, to one, as well
as another: So it is the good Pleasure of God, that his Holy Angels should
convey Souls to this Kingdom, not as Souls, but as believing, sanctified Souls;
and so every Soul that is such, one as well as another.

It might be thought by some, that from this Particular Instance, of Angels
carrying Lazarus his Soul to Heaven, an universal Conclusion cannot be
gathered, that they thus Minister to all other godly separared Souls.

But what may be spoken of one Individual, under this Reduplication (as such)
of any Kind, may be spoken of every Individual of the same Kind. As this
individual Person (Peter) as a Man, is a rational Creature: Therefore, every
one, that is a Man, is a rational Creature. By which, here I mean the same with
Animal Rationale, in Distinction on from Angels, it being nothing to my purpose
to debate, whether they may be called Rational, as well as Intellectual
Creatures.

So this individual Person (Abraham) was Justified, not as a Man, but as a
believing Man: Therefore every Man that is a believing Man, is Justified; and
thus the Apostle draws an Universal concerning all Believers, Romans 4. 23, 24.
from what was written in the particular Case of Abraham, as, a Believer; For
from a Particular, as such, the Consequence is good to all and every one that
is such. Which Axiom is commonly allowed.

In the Matter before us, it is certain, Holy Angels did not carry Lazarus his
Soul to Heaven, as a Soul; for then they should carry all Souls thither: But as
it was an Holy Soul; and if a Soul as Holy, shall by Angels be conducted to
Glory; then every Soul that is Holy, shall be so conveyed also.

5. Angels conveying Holy separated Souls to Heaven, does not detract any thing
from the Glory of God; but does rather make it the more manifest, and is
subservient thereunto. For,

Christ is their only Savior, Angels their Carriers.

Christ is their Commander herein, they his Servants to do it.

Christ by Angels brings Souls to possess that Happiness, which so many Angels
fell from.

Christ, as Mediator, is exalted above those Noble Creatures.

Christ manifests his constant Love to, and Care of the Souls of all Believers,
till he puts them into the actual Possession of what he has purchased for
them: Christ came himself from Heaven to procure it, and sends his Angels from
Heaven to fetch them to it: And this will be made more manifest, by considering
the useful Service of the Ministration of Angels, in conveying Holy Souls into
his Presence.

1. The Holy Angels are the Guides of separated Souls, in their Journey to
Heaven. It is a long Journey from a dying Bed on Earth, to the Heaven of
Heavens: The one being distant from the other, some Millions of Miles, and a
Way the Soul never went before, and to it, an unbeaten Path; it stands in need
of a Guide, to direct it in its Way, which is well known unto the Angels, that
have so often gone to and fro, from the one to the other. Many Passengers in a
Ship, from hence to the East Indies, through the vast and wide Ocean, will need a
Pilot to steer their Course, or else might never arrive to their intended and
desired Harbor: So the Soul that is to pass through the vast Regions of the
fluid Air, in a longer Voyage, (in respect of Distance) will need some to
conduct it, that it might not miss its Way. It may be, it goes out of the Body,
not knowing whither it is going, and how then should it know its Way? Therefore
God that has sent his Angels to direct and prosper the Way of his Servants on
a Journey from one Place to another upon Earth, ( Genesis 24. 7, 40.) will much
more send his Angels to direct their Souls, in their Travel from Earth to
Heaven.

2. Angels are sent to be the Guard of separated sanctified Souls. They are to
pass through the Devils Territories, who is the Prince of the Power of the Air,
Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. where are numerous and powerful unclean Spirits, which are
Principalities and Powers, and Spiritual Wickednesses in high Places, Ephesians. 6.
12. These would intercept the Holy Soul, in its Journey Home to Heaven; but
Holy Angels are its Guard to conduct it through the Hosts of Devils, and
protect it as it passes along.

This has been the frequent Ministration of Angels for the Safety of God's
People from their Enemies in this Life: As when Jacob was to meet his Brother
Esau, who did resolve to kill him; Genesis 32. 1, 2. Jacob went on his Way, and
the Angel of God met him, and he said, this is God's Hosts; and he called the
Name of the Place, Mahaniam, i.e. Two Hosts, or Two Camps; the one to go
before, the other behind him, or one on the one side, and the other on the
other, to keep him safe from Danger every way.

If God send his Angels to guard his Servants in this Life, when in Danger of
their Enemies, will he not much more to defend their separated Souls in their
Passage to Heaven, when they are to pass through the Air, where Devils do
swarm? especially if these Things be considered:

First, When the Host of Devils that the Soul is to pass through, is far more
numerous, than Esau's Company against Jacob.

Secondly, When Devils are more implacable against the separated Soul, than
Esau was against Jacob; for he was reconciled to him; but Devils never will to
Holy Souls.

Thirdly, When Devils are more Powerful to act against the separated Soul on
its way, than Esau and all his Company were against Jacob, when he was on his
Way.

Fourthly, When the Danger at the most, that God's People are in from Wicked
Men, is the Life of the Body, but without doubt, such is the Malice of Devils
against holy Souls separated from their Bodies on their way to Heaven, that if
not defended, they would seize them, to keep them from Eternal Happiness in
Heaven.

Fifthly, When this is the Last Season they shall ever have to make any Attempt
upon the Holy separated Soul, which when once entered into Heaven's Gates,
shall be assaulted no more for Ever.

Though the War with Devils, in some Respects, might be over as soon as the Soul
is separated from the Body, that it shall be no longer managed by the same
Subtilties, alluring Temptations, Fleshly Enticements, evil Suggestions,
sensible objective Snares; yet I conceive, in other Respects, the War is not
ended, till the Soul is safely arrived in Heaven, but is carried on in a
different Manner, to what it was in the Body: When in the Body, he assaulted
the Soul not by Violence, but Persuasion; out of the Body, he knows it will be
in vain to assault by Persuasion, therefore on its Way would seize it by
Violence, did not God, by his Angels, powerfully preserve it. Exodus 14. 9, 28,
29.
For as Pharaoh and his Host pursued the Children of Israel, when they had
escaped out of Egypt to the Red Sea, where God opened the Waters to Israel to
pass through, and shut them upon Pharaoh; so Devils will pursue the Soul to the
Gates of Heaven, till God open to the Soul, and shut them against the Soul's
Pursuers.

For as there are Principalities and Powers of Hell, that way-lay the separated
Soul; so the Principalities and Powers of Heaven are ready to secure it. Jude
V. 9.
And if the Devil contended with the Archangel, and the Archangel with the
Devil, about the Body of Moses, why should we think there is no War, betwixt
the Principalities of Heaven and Hell, about the Soul on its Way to Heaven, or
that the Soul is not active in resisting the violent Assaults of Devils, in
Conjunction with the Holy Angels?

3. God's Love to, and Care of his People is manifested in the Ministration of
Angels, in that they are charged to be their Keepers in all their Ways, Psalm.
91. 11, 12. Now the Way of Believers is Twofold, and they are to keep them in
both, or else they do not keep them in all.

1. In the Way of their commanded Duty, in this Life. 2. In the Way to their
promised Reward, and they are in this Way immediately after Death, till they
enter into Heaven.
Is it likely God should charge his Angels with them, to keep them from
Dangers, while they keep in the way of Duty, and give them a discharge from
keeping them on their way to their Reward? especially when they are in Danger
of Devils, not only in the way of their Duty; but also (passing through their
Territories) on their Way to their Reward, passing from Earth to Heaven.

Do not the Angels of the Lord encamp round about them that fear him, to
deliver them? Psalm. 34. 7. Do not separated Souls, on their Passage, fear God
with an holy, reverential Fear, as well as when they were in their Bodies, and
much more, and so have still the Qualification of such as are the Objects of
Angels Ministration? Do they now encamp round about them on every side, to
deliver them from Danger, while they are liable thereunto, and will they decamp
from them on every side, to deliver them no more, though surrounded with Dangers
after Death, till their Souls enter into Heaven?

Especially when their dearest Friends that take care of the Burial of the
Body, can be no help to the separated Soul, in its Travel to Heaven. Their
Friends and Relations that ministered to them when sick, and on their dying
Beds, till the Moment they gave up the Ghost, from that Instant have no more
that they can do unto, or for their Souls; no, not so much as by their Prayers
for them: And will Angels then forsake them also, and afford them no more Help
on their way to Heaven, than their Friends, whom they have left behind can do?

4. Holy Angels promote and rejoice at the Conversion of God's Elect, because
then they have a Right and Title to Heaven, Luke 15. 7, 10. And will they not
be as careful of their complete Salvation, in watching over them till they are
put into the actual Possession of their Mansions in Heaven?

5. Christ will use the Ministration of Angels, for the Salvation of all the
Elect, as to their Bodies, as well as their Souls united to them, at his second
Coming, and will they neglect the Conveying of the separated Soul, while the
Body till then, is left behind? Angels shall be Christ's Servants then, 1. In
gathering together all the Elect, Mat. 24. 31. 2. In separating between the
Righteous and the Wicked, and severing the one from the other, Mat. 13. 49. 3.
In catching them up to meet the Lord in the Air, 1 These. 4. 17. All the Elect
that shall then be raised, and found alive, shall be caught up as in the Arms
of Angels, to such a Meeting with their Savior, as after it shall be no
parting; for they shall be with the Lord for ever.


Use I. Terror.
Learn hence, the woeful Case of every impenitent Soul, as soon as separated
from the Body: Every finally-unbelieving Sinner's dying Day, will be a doleful,
dreadful, dismal Day: His expiring Moment will be the Beginning of such Horror
as the Soul was never in before; because that very Moment it shall be seized by
Devils, that stand waiting for it, and shall lay hold on it, as ravening
Wolves, as roaring Lions, as enraged Tigers, leap upon their Prey.

Luke 12. 20. God said unto him, thou Fool, this Night (...) they (that is,
Devils) shall demand thy Soul of thee. The word signifies to require ones own,
which is his due; with Vehemence to call for it, and to demand it from one,
though unwilling to give it; yea, as it were, by Force and Violence to wrest it
from another, as owing to him. This Fool sinned all Day, and died at Night: He
served the Devil all Day, and at Night the Devils came to reckon with him, to
pay him his Wages: he took care where to lay his Goods, and the Devils took
care where to lodge his Soul at Night; he reckoned of many Years, but he had
but that Day; he was for taking of his Ease, but the Devil took him and put him
into Little ease; yea, carried him to a Place where he could have no Ease, nor
Rest to all Eternity: he was for his Cups, and Company, and Mirth in both; but
at Night he had such a bitter Cup, and frightful Company, that spoiled his
Mirth and turned it into Mourning.

If one Devil, in some frightful visible Shape, should appear to you in the
deep and silent Night, what Terror would the sight thereof fill you with?
Would not such Fear and Trembling come upon you, as would make all your Bones
to shake, Job. 4. 14, 15.
and make the Hair of your Head stand up, when your Heart and Courage would so
fail you, that you your self would be ready to fall down? as when the Discipes
saw Christ walking on the Sea, they were troubled, Saying, Mat. 14. 26
it is a Spirit; and they cried out for fear.

Oh then, what Horror will the Sinful Soul be filled with, next Moment after
Death! Oh, What Fear! What Trembling! What Amazement shall possess it! How may
we imagine, with what direful Shriekings it will cry out and say, Who are all
these? What Black-Guard is this? What is all this Host I am fallen into, and am
surrounded with? I never saw such a sight as this: I have often been in wicked
Company, but I never fell into such Company as this. Oh! ye greedy Devils! Ye
furious Furies! Ye hasty unclean Spirits! What means your Rage? Whither do ye
hurry me? Whither will ye carry me? Carry thee! First, as Jaylors we will carry
thee as our Prisoner to the Seat of Judgment, to be Tried; and being there
condemned, next, as Executioners, we will carry thee to the Place of Punishment.

Oh! My woeful Case! Oh! My remediless Misery! Oh! My hopeless State! Are these
the Devils I did please? Are these they I did so daily serve, so readily yield
unto? They could not in my Body have forced me to Sin; but now, just out of the
Body, they do, they do, oh, what shall I do? they do force me to the Place of
Torment to suffer for my Sin. Woe is me! Is there no Hope? Alas for me! Is there
none to help? Is there no escaping out of these Hands, I am so suddenly fallen
into? Oh, that Death had killed me, as it has my Body, from whence now I am
turned out! Oh, that I were without Life and Sense, as now my Body is! My
earthly Friends are mourning, weeping, and groaning, over my Breathless*
Carcass; and these Hellish Fiends are rejoicing that I am come from those to
them. My Friends are mourning because they have lost me; and these tormenting
Devils are glad that they have found me: Men on Earth are not in such haste to
carry my Body to the Grave, as these Devils are to carry me to Hell. Oh, Cursed
Caitiff that I am! What Difference has one Hour made? What a miserable
deceived Wretch was I, when in the Body, and how convinced of my Self-deceiving
Flattery, as soon as separated from my Body?

When in the Body, I did think all would be well, as soon as cut of the Body, I
am sure, woe is me, all will be woe.

When in the Body I was amongst my Friends, as soon as out of the Body, I am
amongst mine Enemies.

When in the Body, I did dream of being Happy; as soon as out of the Body, I
saw it was but a Dream.

When in the Body, I did hope, and till I parted from my Body, I would not I
did not part from my Hope, that I should be carried into Heaven; but as soon as
I parted from my Body, I parted from my Hope, and my Hope from me; for these
infernal Spirits are carrying me to Hell, and I cannot, fain I would, but
cannot any longer hope for Heaven.

When in the Body, the Devil and Sin did blind mine Eyes, that I could not see
the sandy Foundation, on which I built my Expectation of Happiness in the
Highest Heavens; but as soon as Death and Friends had closed the Eyes of my
Body, then the Eyes of my Mind were opened, to see all my Building on that
rotten Foundation is gone to Ruin, and I am going in this Company to the
Lowest Hell.

Suchlike bitter Cries, such self-lamenting Groans, we may conceive the
separated sinful Soul to utter, as it is on its way in the Company of Devils to
the Place of Outer-darkness; where there shall be Weeping and Wailing for Ever.

Yet if we consider the Circumstances that will farther aggravate the Sorrow of
the Soul, in its Journey to the Lake of Brimstone, arising from the Company of
unclean Spirits, that are dragging it along to the Place of Torment, which the
distressed unsanctified Soul shall be apprehensive and sensible of, it will
pass our Thoughts to conceive, and our Words to express how great its Horror
will be, and what Fear and Trembling it will be filled with, when it shall find
these Carriers of it to Hell, to be,

1. Exceeding Powerful and Strong, that the seized Soul is not able so to
resist as to rescue it self out of their Hands. Their Strength is signified by
their Names, being called Principalities and Powers, Ephesians. 6. 12. and known by
the Effects which they have done, in such as have been possessed; as we read of
one, Mar. 5. 3, 4. That no Man could bind him, no not with Chains; because that
he had been often bound with Fetters and Chains, and the Chains had been
plucked asunder by him, and the Fetters broken in pieces: Neither could any Man
tame him. How then will this add to the Misery of the Soul seized by them,
when, though it struggle, it cannot get free; though it strive, it is to no
purpose; though it resist, it cannot prevail? O Miserable Wretch that I am! when
I was in the Body, I should have resisted their Temptations, and might; now I
would their Power, but cannot. I should have withstood their enticing
Persuasions, but did not, I could, but would not; now I would withstand their
Force and Violence, but I cannot, fain I would, but woe is me, I cannot: I must
along with these dragging Devils; I would not, but I must, for they are
stronger than I.

2. This will aggravate the Evil of his Passage, in that the Company of Devils
is so Numerous: A Legion of unclean Spirits possessed one Man's Body, Mar. 5.
9. and will not a Legion of them be as ready to seize one Soul? Which, when the
separated Soul perceives, enquires, Why so many? Why so many to one? Why so
many so strong, to one so weak? Are all of one Mind? Are ye all agreed to hurry
me to Hell? Is there not one amongst you all will stand my Friend? Not one to
take my Part, to be on my Side? Alas for me! Though they are many, they are as
one. How strange is this! that a Legion of Devils should be so unanimous in my
Ruin, that all are called by one Name, as if many were one! As the Devil that
possessed a Man, being asked, what is thy Name? he answered, saying, Mar. 5. 9.
My Name is Legion, for we are many. Never was a poor Debtor on Earth, carried
to Prison by the Joint-consent and One-will of many Sergeants; as I poor
Debtor, am carried to the Prison and Dungeon of Hell, by the Joint-consent and
One-will of many Devils.

3. This will aggravate the Sorrow, the Soul in its Passage to its long and
doleful Home will be filled with, That these Carriers are so swift and active
in their Motion: which will increase the Horror of the Soul in its way, upon
these Accounts:

First, Because by flight it cannot escape from them. When we cannot resist an
Enemy by the Strength of our Arm, yet we may escape by the Swiftness of our
Feet: When we cannot get the Victory by Fighting, we might prevent our
Captivity by Running. But this will give no Relief to the separated sinful
Soul, because evil Spirits are such agile, swift, and active Creatures, that
move so fast, that the Soul cannot be more speedy than they: Though Holy Angels,
as they are stronger, so they are swifter than Apostate Spirits, being more
able, ready and speedy to protect and defend us, than Fallen Angels are to hurt
and destroy us; Isay. 6. 2. 6.
and therefore the Good are said to have Wings, (which, as I remember, is not
spoken of the Bad); yet these Infernal Spirits are so much speedier in their
Motion, than the Soul, that it can have no Hope of preventing their
transporting of it from the dying Bed, to its Lodging in the Flames of Hell.

Secondly, Because by them it will be brought so soon to the Place of Torment.
Men on Earth sin so much, swear so fast, and run in the Ways of Wickedness, as
though they could not get to Hell sure enough, nor soon enough: But when they
have done sinning upon Earth, and are on their Way to their Eternal Miserable
State, they will think Devils put them on too fast, and carry them with too
much speed* to that Place where their Entertainment will be so bad. We may
imagine the separated Soul, in the Devil's Arms, to lament it self, saying
What! Is my Journey like to be so short, when my Journey's End will be so bad?
Am I going whither I would not, and yet do these Carriers make such haste? must
I thus be posted to such grievous Torments, whence I shall never be delivered?
Though the Way be so uncomfortable; yet the Place will be so much more, when I
come thither; therefore let me move more slowly to it: Though I have an Hell
within me, on my way to Hell; yet, O that it might be a Thousand Years before I
enter into it! but I wish in vain; for this swift Motion will quickly bring me
to it.

4. The Insultings of the Devils over their Prisoner, will aggravate its Misery
on the Way to Hell; when, as they carry it along, shall reproach it to this
purpose, Here is the Fool we took captive at our Pleasure! Here is the Soul
that had no more Wit than to stop his Ears to the Calls of Mercy, to the Offers
of Grace, to the Tenders of a Savior, to the Commands of God: God called him
to repent, but he would not; God commanded him to believe, but he did not: We
persuaded him to sin, and he did; we enticed him, and he consented; we
suggested, and he yielded. We have him, we have him; away with him, away with
him; he is condemned, make haste, away with him to the Place of Execution: We
led him with a String, we drew him with a single Thread, when in the Body,
whither we listed, but now we have him in Chains, to drag him to the Place
whither he is unwilling to go. Come along.Oh, not so fast! Come along, make
speed.Oh! not so swift, I shall be there too soon! Too soon! thou art expected,
thou art waited for, make haste and come away.

5. Moreover, the Merciless Nature of the Devils, will add to the Amazement of
the Soul in his Passage to the Place where it shall find no Mercy. As the
Damned in Hell cry out for Mercy, for a small Measure of Mercy, as may be in a
Drop of Water, Luke 16. 24, 25.
and no Mercy shall be shown to them: so the separated Soul on its Way thither,
though it cry to its Transporters for the least Favor, shall find none. Might
not we suppose it to cry out and say, What! Will nothing serve you but my
Ruin! will nothing please you but my Damnation! Will nothing satisfy you, but
that I be made as miserable as your selves! have Pity upon me, if ye have any
Pity in you, have Pity upon me! All I have, I would give, that I may find some
Mercy from you. Thou silly Soul! Thou have nothing left to offer unto us, to
spare thee, or to show any Kindness to thee, that we should let thee go: Death
has stripped thee of all, and thou art fallen naked into our Hands: But it was
thy self and not thy Money we desired: Thy Friends have got thy Money, and did
let thee go, but we have gotten thee, and will not let thee go. Oh miserable
Soul that I am! Did I serve you so constantly, so heartily, so cheerfully, when
in my Body; and do ye serve me so cruelly, so unkindly, so unmercifully, as
soon as I am separated from my Body! Is there none to whom I might look for a
little Mercy? Is there none in whom I might hope for help and Succor, in this
distressed Case that I am in? Let me turn mine Eyes every way, if I may see any
hope of Help, when this Company I am fallen into, will afford me none.

First, If I look back to those my Friends, that loved me dearly, that
ministered to me constantly, Night and Day, while I was with them; that parted
with me with weeping Eyes, with wringing Hands, with sorrowful Hearts, cannot
they relieve me? Cannot they give Assistance to me? When I was with them, they
did Comfort me; when I was Sick, they gave me Cordials; when I was in Pain,
they did turn me, hoping I might have Ease; when I was afraid to Die, they
spoke Words of Comfort to me. But now, Woe is me! being separated from my Body,
I am out of their reach, I am past their Help, I am no more capable of
receiving, Psalm. 49. 7, 8.
nor they of affording any Benefit unto me. They are in Time, I am entered into
Eternity; they are in one World, I am now in another, and there is no Converse
I can have with them, and there is no Kindness they can show to me.

Besides, they might be ignorant of my Case, they might not know what Company I
am fallen into, nor what is the way that I am going: Nay, they might be
deceived, thinking I am traveling to Heaven; when, alas! I find I am posting
to Hell: Supposing the Holy Angels of God are carrying me to Glory; and
therefore say, Our Loss is his Gain: While we are left in Trouble, he is going
to his Eternal Rest: and so they do not so much as pity my Case; and though they
are weeping over my dead Body, yet they do not Mourn because of the Misery that
I am in, when they imagine I am on the Way to Happiness, though I find, I know, I
am sure I am on the Road that leads to Eternal Darkness.

Secondly, Though these Devils of Hell that seized me, are merciless Devils, yet
the God of Heaven is a merciful God, may I look up to him, and cry, Most
Merciful Lord, behold my Misery, behold my deep Distress; behold me, if ever,
now behold me and have Compassion on me! See whither this Troop, this Host of
Internal Spirits are carrying me; Stop them, oh! stop them in their Way! or, if
they will, and must to Hell, let not me go with them: Rescue, O rescue me out
of their Hands, while on the Way; for if I enter through the Gates of Hell, and
they be shut upon me, there will be no coming back for Ever: no Hope, no Help
for Ever.

But alas! Woe is me! I call in vain, I Cry in vain, my Petition is in vain:
Devils now can tell me, and Conscience now does tell me, it is too late, and as
they do tell me, so I find that now it is too late, if I had begged sooner, I
might have speeded better: Mercy once, yea often begged of me, and I would not
accept of Mercy: now I beg, and cry, and call for Mercy, and the God of Mercy
does deny me Mercy. Mercy has done with me, and Patience has done with me,
and Grace will have no more to do with me; but Wrath will, and Vengeance will,
and Justice has and will have to do with me for Ever; God is now inexorable,
his Wrath is now implacable, his Anger against me, is never to be appeased.
Mat. 5. 25, 26.
The Adversaries have haled me to the Judge, the Judge has delivered me to
these Officers, that have their Commission from him to cast me into Prison, to
which I am now on my way; from which I shall never return, till I shall pay the
uttermost Farthing, which will never be. The Merciful God has sealed their
Warrant to apprehend me, and they have served it upon me, and to carry me to
the Place of Execution, and I am with them upon my Way unto it, without all
Hope of Reprieve, or Pardon.

Thirdly, May I not with better hope look unto Christ, that he that is the Way
to Heaven might pity me, and stop me in my Way to Hell. It was he that came
down from the highest Heaven, to prevent Sinners going down to the lowest Hell.
It was he that was Taken, Arraigned, Accused, Condemned and Crucified, that
Sinners might be released, discharged, and acquitted from the Guilt and
Punishment of Sin. It was he that delivered Men that were possessed with
Devils, rebuked them and cast them out, and freed them from their Power. O that
Christ would Pity me! O that he would have Mercy on me! O that he would show
some Bowels of Compassion to me, now, even now, before I am actually lodged in
the Flames of Hell!

But this Cry, Poor Wretch that I am! this calling also is in vain; for he did
not die to save Finally-impenitent Sinners, and cursed I was such an one: He
did not design to save such Souls that left their Bodies, Unbelieving and
Unsanctified; and yet I did so, cursed Caitiff! I did so. He would have stopped
me in my Course and Way of Sin, but I would and did go forward; and now he will
not stop me on my Way to Hell, but I must go forwards.

Fourthly, It will be much more vain for me, seized by these Evil Angels, to
look to the Holy Angels of God for Succor and Relief: For they are Ministering
Spirits for the Heirs of Salvation, but I am an Heir of Hell: They are his
Servants to execute his Will against the Servants of Sin and Satan, and such an
one I was, all the time of my Life of Trial: Genesis 3. 24.
As they stood with flaming Swords, which turned every Way, to keep fallen Man
from the Tree of Life, so they stand, as set by God, with Flaming Swords,
turning every Way, to keep unsanctified Souls from entering any Way into Eternal
Blessed Life. Nay, they are to gather out of his Kingdom such as work Iniquity,
Mat. 13. 41, 42.
and to cast them into the Furnace of Fire.

Fifthly, Still will it be in vain for me on my Way to Hell, to look to Holy
Souls lodged in Heaven; as it was for the Rich Man in Torments, to look to
Abraham and Lazarus in Glory. My Friends (when I and they did live on Earth)
did often reprove, exhort, and counsel me, did then pity me, and mourn over me,
because they saw me walk in the Ways of Sin, and longed for my Conversion and
turning unto God; they died before me, and were carried by Angels into
Abraham's Bosom, afterward I also was separated from my Body, and Devils are
carrying me to Eternal Torments, which they in Heaven do not know, or if they
do, they are so far from pitying of me, that they rejoice in the Righteous
Judgments of God upon all his implacable Enemies, how near soever they were
related to them.

If I then on my Passage to my doleful Home, am such a forsaken Soul, forsaken
of God, forsaken of Christ, forsaken of all in Heaven and on Earth, and am
surprised by this Host of Devils, there is no hope, the Way is bad, the End
will be worse, without End: O forlorn! forlorn! What a forlorn Soul am I! I and
all my Friends are separated; my Body and I am separated; my Hopes and I am
separated; my Body is left to be Meat for Worms, and I am taken as a Prey to
Devils; my Body will be carried by Men to a cold Grave, and I am carrying by
Devils to an hot Hell, exceeding hot, where my Pain will be extreme,
intolerable, and eternal.

Use II. Comfort.
That Angels are the Convoy of the Soul on its Passage to Glory, administers
Comfort to all those that are Heirs of Salvation. 1 Cor. 2. 9.
God has not only prepared such things for us in Heaven, which Eye has not
seen nor Ear heard, nor can we now conceive how great and Glorious they are;
set forth by a Kingdom, Mat. 25. 34 Jam. 1. 12. Col. 1. 12. John 14. 2. 2 Cor.
5. 1. 2 Cor. 4. 17.
a Crown, an Inheritance, Mansions in our Father's House, a Paradise, a City
that has Foundations, an House not made with Hands, a Weight of Glory,
Incorruptible Treasures, etc. But has also secured our Way unto them, by the
Ministration of his Angels, who are to conduct our separated Souls to the
actual Possession of them.

I shall amplify this for our greater Delight and Joy in the Fore thoughts of
it, by such Considerations that do by immediate and necessary Consequence flow
from the Convoy of Angels receiving the Souls of Believers, at their
Dissolution, wherever they die, and transporting them into the immediate
glorious Presence of God in the Highest Heavens, where when once lodged they
will be happy for ever.

1. The Excellency of their Company from Earth to Heaven. 2. Their Safety in
their Passage from the one to the other. 3. Their Dignity before they are
actually glorified in Heaven, 4. Their Celerity and speedy Motion, from and to
such distant Places. 5. The Exultancies of Joy, both of the Transporters and
the Passengers, at their Arrival at the Haven of Happiness.
1. The Excellency of the Company the gracious separated Soul is immediately
received into, does cause abundant Delight and Joy unto it. The Difference of
the Company it had while in the Body, and has as soon as out of the Body, does
presently show it is got into another State, into a New World. It had often
heard of the Heavenly Principalities and Powers, Mat. 28. 2, 3, 4. Luke 1. 12.
but they never appeared unto it before. Angels are such glorious Creatures,
that in this mortal State, we could not without Fear, Amazement and Trembling
bear their appearing unto us. But when the Gracious Soul is out of the Body,
the Presence, Company, and Vision of Glorious Angels shall transport it with
Joy, and fill it with great Delight.

Though we cannot tell the Names of Angels that shall be sent to convey our Souls
to Heaven (there being but one Proper Name in Sacred Scripture attributed to a
Created Angel, viz. Gabriel, Dan. 8. 16. and 9. 21. Luke 1. 19, 26. which
signifies a strong Man of God, and might be a common Name to any Angel sent by
God upon any special Message, for every one is a strong Man of God) yet the
Titles and Properties ascribed to them all, are sufficient Grounds of
Satisfaction to us, whoever of them shall be commissioned by God, to Conduct us
to the blessed State above.

Twice we read of an Archangel, 1 These. 4. 16. Jude V. 9. which is Michael,
signifying, who as God, or who is equal to God; to be understood of Christ, the
Son of God, the only uncreated Angel, for it pleased God to send his Son as his
Messenger to declare to Men his Holy Will, and is often, in Scripture, called
an Angel, and he is that Archangel, who is the Head of all Principalities and
Powers, Col. 2. 20. and all the other are his Servants and Attendants.

How much the separated Soul (being then made perfect in Holiness) will be
delighted with the Sight and Knowledge of this new Company, sent to convey it
to Glory, we might apprehend by Titles given to them, setting forth the
excellency of them.

1. This Convoy sent for it, are Holy Ones: In Holiness they were at first
created, and their Holiness they still retain, persevering in it, Dan. 4. 13.
17. and often called, Holy Angels, Mat. 8. 28. and 25. 31. 2. They are Men of
God, assuming the Shape of Men, when sent to Men by God, Judge. 13. 6, 9. 3.
They are Sons of God, having still the Likeness of God, in which they were at
first produced, Job. 1. 6. 4. They are styled Gods; not that God that is
Jehovah, but such Gods as are called Elohim, Psalm. 8. 5. comp. Psalm. 97. 7. 5.
They are God's Host, Genesis 32. 2. by these God does protect his People. 6. They
are twice called Seraphims, because of their burning Zeal for God's Glory, in
executing of his Commands, Isa. 6. 2, 6. 7. They are called Cherubims, Genesis 3.
24. Col. 1. 16.
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers, implying their Vigor, Dignity,
Government under God, over Things and Persons in this World, and the Right they
have to the Government they take upon them.
Who can tell the Greetings, the Salutations betwixt these Glorious Angels and
the Gracious Soul, at their first Meeting, after its Separation from the Body?
All Hail, O Blessed Soul! Have thou fought a good Fight? We are come to carry
thee in Triumph. Have thou run thy Race? We are appointed to fetch thee to thy
incorruptible Crown. Have thou finished thy Course? We are sent to conduct thee
to thy Eternal Rest. The Soul might be conceived to reply, what Joy am I filled
with at this your Salutation! O ye Holy Ones, how glad am I to see you? ye Men
of God, ye Sons of God, how do I rejoice to meet you? Are the Gods, the Host of
God, come to guard me on my way to Glory? Are these Seraphims flaming with Zeal
for God, burning in Love to me, come to take me newly separated from my Body,
to convey me to my Mansion in my Father's House? Are these Cherubims, Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities and Powers come to defend me from the Principalities
and Powers of Hell, and from the Spiritual Wickednesses in high Places, through
whose Territories I am to pass, unto the Place and Happiness purchased,
promised and prepared for me? O how glad am I of your Company in this long
Journey I am to go! How am I rejoiced I shall have your Conduct in this Way I
never went before?

And Blessed, for ever Blessed be my God, that has sent his Angels to be my
Guide and Guard. I must Praise him, I must Praise him before I get to Heaven,
who has sent such a glorious Train to lead me to it: This is the Host of that
God that I did love, and serve, and Trust and hope in: This is the Army of that
God of Heaven, to whom I committed my self, and resigned my self, when I was
parting with my Body on my dying Bed: He has not forgot me, nor his Promises
that he made unto me: when my Father, my Mother, and all my Friends forsook me,
because they could go no further with me, he has sent his Angels to take me
up. O the Difference betwixt the Company that I have lest, and this which I
have found!

In the Body I was in Company with sinful Men, which were my Grief; out of the
Body I am in Company with Holy Angels, which is my Joy.

In the Body I did converse with imperfect Saints; now out of the Body, with
pure, spotless Angels.

In the Body I was with mourning Friends; out of the Body, with triumphing
Angels.

In the Body I was with weak, though loving Relations, that would have helped me,
but they could not; out of the Body I am with these Angels that both can and
will.

In the Body, on my dying Bed, I was with a few that watched with me Night and
Day, till I had made them almost weary; but now, out of the Body, I have many
Holy ones sent from Heaven, to watch me on my way unto that Place, where they
and I never shall be weary.

O Blessed Company! O Blessed change of Company! I never was on such a Journey
before; I never was in such Company on any Journey before; I never found such
Pleasure in any Way I went, in any Company I was ever in before; and sure the
Place I am going to, I shall find to be such, as I was never in before. Come,
put on.

II. The Safety of the separated Soul by the Convoy of Angels, will increase
its Joy on its Way to Glory. It shall be presently freed from all Fears of
Danger.

In the Body it was not without its Fears: Fears from without and within; from
above and below: many Fears it was filled with.

1. From a Tempting Devil, that on his dying Bed endeavored to disturb his
Peace, suggesting evil Thoughts, representing the Evil of his Sin, multiplying
and magnifying them by the Aggravations that did accompany them.

2. From In-dwelling Sin; there being the Remains of Sin abiding in his heart.
I fear what this hard, unbelieving Heart will expose me to.

3. From the Imperfection and Weakness of his Grace. I fear I do not love God;
I fear God loves not me; I fear I am not sincere; I am afraid all my Duties
have been done in Hypocrisy, and that I have not walked before God with an
Upright Heart.

4. From approaching Death. Possessed with Fear about the Pains and Pangs of
Death, how to bear them, and go through them; about his readiness and
preparedness for Death; about his Meetness for a Participation of the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

5. And therefore from the Want of his Evidences of his Title to Heaven, and
Assurance of Salvation: For which Cause the departing Soul was filled with
trembling, perceiving it could not continue much longer in the Body, and yet
afraid to leave it, saying, what if I should be deceived? What if I should make
an Error in my Death about my Eternal State? What if, while I am in the Body, I
should suppose that I have the Truth of Grace, and when out of the Body find
that I had none? This makes me afraid to think of Heaven, least I should miss
of it, or of Hell, least I should be doomed to it.

But as soon as the Gracious Soul is separated from its Body, and beholds the
Chariot and Horses which God has sent for him, all his Doubts are immediately
resolved, and all his Fears presently expelled, and the Clouds that intercepted
the Light of God's Countenance from him, are forthwith scattered and dispersed.

Now the Safety of the gracious separated Soul, and its Freedom from all Fears
of Danger on its Travil to Heaven, by reason of this Angelical Convoy, will
appear by these Circumstances, or rather Qualifications of the Messengers sent
for it.

First, Because the Soul is guarded with such powerful Angels. Evil Angels that
will endeavor to way lay the Soul are strong and powerful Spirits; but the
Holy Angels that are to defend it on its way, are stronger and more powerful
than they; not only in themselves, compared with the other, but also because
Evil Angels oppose the Soul in their own Strength, by mere Permission, without
Assistance from God; but Holy Angels act not only by that Power they are endued
with from God, but also by Commission and Assistance from him; and therefore
when we read of any Fight and Conflict between the Bad and Holy Angels, the
Good always overcame; because Christ, who is that Michael, is the Lord General
of the Heavenly Host, and they fight under his Banner, and he that is the
Captain of our Salvation, is the Captain, Leader, and Commander in Chief of
this Heavenly Army: Rev. 12. 7, 8. And there was War in Heaven, Michael and his
Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels, and
prevailed not, neither was there Place sound any more in Heaven. 9. And the
great Dragon was cast out, that old Serpent, called, the Devil and Satan, which
deceives the whole World; he was cast out into the Earth, and his Angels were
cast out with him, Rev. 20. 1. I saw an Angel come down from Heaven, having the
Key of the Bottomless Pit, and a great Chain in his Hand. 2. And he laid hold
on the Dragon, that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a
Thousand Years. 3. And cast him into the bottomless Pit, and set a Seal upon
him, that he should deceive the Nations no more. Thus the Holy Angels are
celebrated for their Power, being mighty Angels, 2 These. 1. 7. and do excel in
Strength, Psalm. 103. 20. Their Power, under God, is the Soul's Safety, on its
Way from Earth to Heaven.

Secondly, The Soul by this Convoy is safe, because conducted by such knowing
Angels: Evil Angels, though they have lost all that Holiness they were at first
created with, yet they retain great Measures of Knowledge, therefore we read of
the Subtilty, 2 Cor. 11. 3. 2 Cor. 2. 11. Ephesians. 6. 11.
of the Stratagems and Devices of the Devil; yet the Holy Holy Angels are more
knowing than they, for when Devils are cast out, the good Angels do always
behold the Face of God in Heaven, Mat. 18. 10. So that God revealing his Will
to them about any Matter, Message, or Person, they readily know, and as readily
execute what he reveals to them to be his Will to be done by them. As to our
present Purpose, by God's Revelation to them: 1. They know those that are
sincerely Holy; for they rejoice at their Conversion. 2. They know when any
Believer is dissolved by Death, and when his Soul is separated from his Body;
else how should they know when to come for it? 3. They know where any Believer
dies, at home or abroad, on his Bed or in the Field, by Land or Sea; else how
should they know where to come for it? 4. They know the Soul separated, which
is the Soul of a sanctified Man, and which of one unholy; else how should they
know which to take, and which to leave; which to carry to Heaven, and which to
leave to Devils to be carried to Hell; and here (through Divine Revelation) they
never make any Mistake. 5. They know the Way from any part of this World, to
the blessed World above, by their often coming and going, and never miss their
Way.


All which laid together, shows the Safety of Believers Souls, wherever they
live, wherever they die, whoever they be, that there is no fear that they
should not be found by the ministering Angels, or that finding them at Death,
they should lose their Way to Heaven. So that the separated Soul at the first
Appearance of Angels to it, will see the Love and Care of God concerning it,
and with admiring Thoughts thereof, may say, has God made known to you the
Place where I did leave my Body, and the very Moment when I parted from it, and
that I was sincere in Heart to God, and gave you charge to come and guide me in
my Way, unto his Glorious Presence; how cheerfully will I go with you? knowing
that by your Power, under God, I shall not be seized by evil Spirits, and by
your Skill I shall not lose my Way.

Thirdly, The separated Soul, by Angels Ministration, is safe, because convoyed
by such faithful Angels, that are always true to their Trust. If a Man be on a
Journey in Company that is able to protect him, and skilful to direct him, yet
if any in the Company be unfaithful, they may betray him; but here can be no
Danger, nor Ground of Fear in respect of this Convoy.

1. Else Holy Angels would not be faithful to God the Father, in betraying any
one Soul chosen by him to Eternal Life. 2. Nor to God the Son, in losing any
whom he has redeemed and purchased by his most precious Blood. 3. Nor to the
Holy Spirit of God, by dropping any by the Way, which by the special Operation
of his powerful Grace, he has prepared and made meet for Glory, and had given
to them the Pledge and Earnest thereof. 4. Nor to the Soul committed to their
Charge to bring to Heaven; for wherein could greater Unfaithfulness to it be
shown, than in what concerns its Eternal State. 5. Nor to their own Office or
Commission to them, without fail to conduct such an one to the Happiness of
Heaven.
Such Unfaithfulness is inconsistent with the Perfection and spotless Purity of
Holy Angels, which being confirmed, cannot at any time fall into the least
Error or Miscarriage, for then would they cease to be Holy Angels.

What Joy then is this to the separated Soul, that has such a Convoy sent for
it, as shall not endanger it by Weakness or want of Power, by Ignorance or want
of Skill in the Way, or by Unfaithfulness or want of Fidelity to their Trust: O
how happy am I on my Way to Happiness! How sure am I my Way will be prosperous!
How certain is it I shall get safely thither!

Fourthly, The gracious separated Soul will be safe, because transported by
such zealous Angels, Isay. 6. 2, 6.
therefore called Seraphims, because they have a burning Zeal in executing all
that God gives them a Charge to do. Devils are furious, envious and malicious,
and are bent to destroy, devour and damn as many as they can, by watching, by
walking to and fro throughout the Earth, Job 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
by tempting, and at last by dragging Souls to Hell, when separated from their
Bodies. The Holy Angels are more for God's Glory, the Interest of Christ, the
Good of Souls, than Devils are against them, for I suppose the Holy Angels do
more exceed in Goodness, than evil Angels, as bad as they are, are filled with
Wickedness: For in Devils there is something Materially Good (besides their
Being) though it may be Formally or Circumstantially Evil, as much of their
Knowledge: but in Holy Angels there is nothing that is Materially or
Circumstantially Evil.

Therefore the Holy separated Soul received into the Company of Holy Angels, on
its Way to Heaven, may delight it self and say, While in the Body, I was
assaulted with Satan's Temptations, Devils did endeavor to persuade me to sin;
but whatsoever Violence they may now assault me with, they shall no more with
any Hopes entice me from my God, and the good Company I am in will defend me
from them. What Zeal do these Holy ones show in protecting of me? What burning
Love do I feel in their Embracements? What Indignation and Anger do they
discover, as I go along, against any evil Spirits appearing to endanger me?
What Assaults the Spiritual Wickednesses have made, my Convoy has secured me
from: when they did draw near, these did beat them back: they are repulsed; and
I, surrounded with these, go safely on.

Fifthly, The gracious separated Soul will be safe, because defended by
numerous Angels. Whether more Angels revolted than are confirmed, is not
needful to enquire: sure we are, there are multitudes of Thousands that did
never sin, but retain their Integrity, Dan. 7. 10. A thousand thousands
ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousands stood before him. Rev.
5. 11. And I beheld, and I heard the Voice of many Angels round about the
Throne, and the Beasts and the Elders, and the Number of them was ten thousand
times ten thousands, and thousands of thousands. So many that they are
innumerable, Heb. 12. 22.

How many Angels may be sent to convey one particular Soul, is more than I do
know: But we may be sure of this, that a Guard of so many shall be employed, as
is sufficient to protect it against all the Principalities and Powers of Hell;
so that the Soul might pass without fear of Danger, and say, This Number God
has sent, will see me safe in Heaven; for every one of them is Mighty,
Powerful, every one is Knowing and skilful in the Way, and every one is
Faithful to his Trust, 2. King. 6. 16. 17.
every one is Zealous for God's Glory in my Salvation, and mine Eyes being
opened, I see there is more for me than against me.

III. The Convoy of Angels shows us the Dignity and Honor that God puts upon
the separated Soul. Lazarus was much despised, slighted and neglected, when
Body and Soul remained united, and whatsoever Contempt his dead Body was
exposed to, his separated Soul was honored with the Company of Angels. Strange
Change! one while lying amongst the Dogs, and another while carried by Angels:
It Is said, the Romans, after their Victories, in their Triumphs had their
Charriots drawn sometimes with Elephants, sometimes with nimblefooted Jennets,
sometimes with Pyde Horses; and Amasis, King of Egypt, had his Chariot drawn
with Four Kings, whom he had conquered. But the Soul of a Believer is carried
in greater Triumph by Angels into Heaven.

When the King asked Haman, what shall be done to the Man whom the King
delights to Honor, he (supposing it should be himself) said, Let the Royal
Apparel be brought, which the King uses to wear, and the Horse that the King
rides upon, and the Crown Royal which is set upon his Head, and let this
Apparel and Horse be delivered to the Hand of one of the King's most Noble
Princes, that they may array the Man withal, whom the King delights to Honor,
and bring him on Horseback through the Street of the City, and proclaim before
him, thus shall it be done to the Man whom the King delights to Honor, Esth.
6. 6, to 12.

Though we cannot see the Soul when it leaves the Body, nor the Guard of Angels
standing ready to receive it, nor hear the Songs of Triumph as they pass along,
yet we may conceive what is proclaimed (if not verbally, yet really in the
thing done) in the Heavenly Host, as they pass through the Air, Thus shall it
be done to the Soul, whom the King of Glory delights to Honor.

We may also imagine how the Soul it self is transported with Joy, and beats its
Part in those Triumphant Songs, and is revived more than Jacob's fainting Heart
was, when his Sons told him all the Words of Joseph, and when he saw the Wagons
which Joseph had sent to carry him, Genesis 45. 27.
so when the Soul sees the Chariots that God has sent to carry it to Jesus,
is comforted and filled with Admiration, saying, I have lived hitherto in a
strange Land, where God did set me to be prepared for a State of Glory* to be
taught and instructed in Christ's School, by his appointed Ordinances, to be
made meet to be a Partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light: I have
been a Pilgrim and a Sojourner in the lower World, where I dwelt in an Earthly
Tabernacle and Cottage of Clay, where I looked for a City which has
Foundations, whose Maker and Builder is God; and now my Father has sent, lo,
what Glorious Angels he has sent to fetch me home, to possess the Mansion
prepared for me in his own House, and stately Palace in the highest Heavens: I
am going to a better Country than ever yet I was in: I am on my Way to my
Eternal Blessed Home, and with what Honor am I conducted thither? For

The Noblest of God's Creatures are sent by him to fetch me to his Glorious
Presence, to the Place of Light, and Life, and Love.

The Courtiers of Heaven, are my Attendants thither.

These Favorites of the great King are come to lead me to his Palace, and to
introduce me (under Christ) into his Presence.

These Morning Stars are to go before me (which make me to rejoice with
exceeding great Joy) these are to go before me to guide me to the Place where
Jesus is (not lying in a Manger, but) sitting on his Throne at the Right Hand
of the Majesty on high.

These that are to God, what Gentlemen of the Bed chamber are, to Earthly Kings
are come down to fetch me up. Never had an (unbelieving) Earthly King such a
Lifeguard as this; nor such Attendants to wait upon him or to minister to him:
All his Lords and Nobles and Captains, are far inferior to these Angels, and it
is the great God's good Pleasure, that it should be done thus, to all the Souls
whom he delights to honor.

IV. The Celerity and speedy Passage of the separated Soul, from Earth to
Heaven, is evidenced by its being carried by Angels from the one Place to the
other: Though the Distance from this Earth to the highest Heaven, is conceived to
be Millions of Miles, and a further Voyage than from any part in this lower
World, to another most remote, in point of Distance; yet the Passage is not so
long, in respect of time, though the Way be long between the Term from which, and
the Term to which the Soul is carried; yet it is not long the Soul is passing
through the intermediate Distance, because it is helped by the spedy Motion of
the Angels; which, that we may the better conceive, let us consider,

1. The Motion of Angels from Heaven to Earth, and back again, cannot be but
through the Intermediate Distance of the one from the other: For the Continuity
of Angels Motion is not to be taken only from the Continuity of the Duration
(while they move) but also from the Continuity of the Space through which they
remove.

2. The Motion of Angels from such distant Extremes as Heaven and Earth, cannot
be properly and strictly an instantaneous Motion. When an Angel is actually in
Heaven, the Term from which, it is only potentially on Earth, the Term to
which: Now if an Angel could move in one indivisible instant, from one to the
other, it would be in Heaven and on Earth at the same Instant, and so in the
same Moment it would be actually in both the extreme Terms, when he was only
actually in the one, and potentially in the other, which is to say, he is
actually in one, and not in the other in the same Moment, and yet in the same
Moment he is in both, which is a Contradiction.

3. Angels being Spirits, and not corporeal Substances, are not hindered in
their Motion by those things that Bodies are: Bodies move more slowly or more
swiftly, according as the Medium is, as they move swifter in the Air than in
the Water, because the Air being more thin and subtle does not so much resist
the Mover, as the Water that is more dense and gross, must needs do: also
because one Body cannot be penetrated by another, as a Man cannot go through a
Door, when it is shut, the one must hinder the other in its Motion: But Angels,
being Spirits, cannot be retarded in their Motion, by the Solidity or Thickness
of Doors or Walls, to hinder them from coming into a Prison, Castle or a
Chamber where a Believer is a dying, for the receiving of his Soul: For though
one body cannot be in the same particular Place where another Body is, because
then there would be a Penetration of Dimensions; yet Angels by Bodies are not
excluded, because they are immaterial, as appears by a Legion of evil Spirits
(which is Six Thousand Five Hundred) being in one Man: And though One Angel,
because Finite, cannot be in Two distant Places at once, yet many Angels,
because Immaterial, might be in One (where) or Place together at once; and so
their Motion not hindered by the Presence of Bodies, or the Presence one of
another.

4. The Motion of the Angels is exceeding Swift; and to express it, they are
said to have Wings, Isay. 6. 2. Dan. 9. 21.
and that they fly swiftly, more speedily than the Sun that moves Thousands of
Miles in an Hour; it might come near in resemblance to the Motion of the Eye,
that can so quickly turn and look up to Heaven, or to Lightning, that runs in a
little time, from one part of the Heavens to the other, and so comes nearest to
an instantaneous Motion.

But the Scripture, that is the surest Rule to judge by, does teach us, that an
Angel can come from Heaven to Earth, while a Man is making of his Prayer to
God, Dan. 9. 20. While I was speaking and praying, and confessing my Sin, and
the Sin of my People I^rael, and presenting my Supplication before the Lord my
God, for the Holy Mountain of my God. 21. Yea, while I was speaking in Prayer,
even the Man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the Vision at the Beginning, being
caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the Evening Oblation. 22.
And he informed me, and talked with me, and said, ODaniel, I am now come forth
to give thee Skill and Understanding. 23. At the Beginning of thy Supplication
the Commandment came forth, and I am come to show thee, for thou art greatly
beloved. -- Where we might observe,

1. The speedy Return that is sometimes made to Prayer; while a Believer is
praying, the Answer is made; While the Prayer is going up, the Mercy is coming
down.

2. The Angels stand ready before the Lord, waiting to be employed by him for
the Good and Comfort of his People, at his Pleasure.

3. God does but give the Word, and Angels does obey: The Commandment, or the
Word, came forth, and I am come.

4. Angels make Haste to execute God's Commands: Gabriel was caused to fly
swiftly.

5. The Time of his coming was, while Daniel was praying: At the Beginning of
his Prayer Gabriel was in Heaven, before the Ending of it, he was with Daniel.

That the Soul is not long in its Journey to Heaven, is clear, from Christ's
Word to the Thief on the Cross, Luke, 23. 43. Verily I say unto thee, to Day
shall thou be with me in Paradise. The same Day he was on the Cross, he was in
Heaven: The same Day he was Crucified, the same Day he was Glorified: And
though the Day was far spent, yet that Day was his Soul in Heaven: The Soul may
be carried from its Body to the Place of Glory, in a part of a Day. This is
wonderful.

How comfortable is this to a dying Believer; who might, speaking to his
weeping Friends about his Bed, say, What mean your Tears, your Sighs and
Groans? Why are ye cast down? And why are your Hearts troubled? Would you
grieve thus if I were going a Voyage to the Indies, in Hopes of Gain, with a
safe and strong Convoy? Why I am going to a better Place, with a safer Convoy,
for greater Gain, and though the Place be far off, I shall soon be there; the
same Day I go from you on Earth, being helped on my Way by swift and flying
Angels, I shall go to Christ in Heaven. So soon! O then how near will my
separated Soul be to my Mansion above! What! turned out of the Body, and
received into Heaven the same Day! Make what speed you can or will to interr
the Body I shall leave with you, my Soul shall be carried by God's Holy Angels
into Abraham's Bosom, before my Body can be carried by Men, and lodged in the
Bosom of the Earth.

And when the Soul is breathed out, and received into the Angels Arms, and
perceives the swiftness of the Motion they carried it with, how greatly will it
be delighted to think, though the Way be long, yet it will not be long before I
shall be at my Journey's End: O the haste! the haste! the speedy haste they do
make to lodge me in my Savior's Arms! Methinks, they think it long till they
show me, what in Heaven is prepared for me! Methinks, they are Holily Ambitious
to help me forward, that I might see the State, and Place, and Company above,
and how Glorious they all are! O, how do they fly! How do they fly! How swiftly
do they fly with me in their Arms, that they may lodge me in that Place of Rest
and Joy, wherein they have for so long a Duration seen the Face of God, joyed
in their Rest, and rested in their Joy, and are desirous to have me there, that
I, with God, and Christ, and them, might Rest, and Joy to all Eternity. I am
now out of hearing of the Clocks, and see not the artificial Dials, by which
Men see hourly the Motion of the Sun, whereby they measure their Time, and on
their Journeys know how many Miles an Hour they go over: If in an Hour to their
Earthly Home, they travel, with the Help of Horses and Chariots, Eight or Ten
Miles, what haste do they think they make? How soon do they think they shall be
at Home, received and entertained with Joy, with loving Embracements, by
Friends waiting, looking, longing for their coming Home? But their swiftest
Pace to their Earthly Home, is slow to mine, to my Heavenly Home: It is, to
mine, as the Crawling of a Snail, to the Motion of the Sun. God is looking for
me, and Christ is looking for me, and the Blessed Inhabitants above are looking
for me: Is the Cry in Heaven, Why is yonder Soul so long a coming? When will it
be here, that we might have a new Lodger in our Dwellings? Angels were ordered
to go for him, the Horses and the Chariots were sent to fetch him up: Why is
his Chariot so long a coming? Why tarry the Wheels of his Chariot? The Soul on
its Journey looking out of his Chariot, and up to Heaven, and seeing them out
of the Windows of Heaven looking for him, and calling, come away, make haste
and come to us, it replies. I hasten, I hasten, I come, behold I come quickly.

V. The Angels being the Carriers, and the Soul the carried, it will be Matter
of Joy to both, at their Arrival at the Port of Happiness; both Angels the
Transporters, and the Soul that is the Passenger, shall rejoice when landed at
their intended Haven. As Mariners with their Passengers, sailing through
tempestuous Seas, stormy Winds, and raging Waves, having escaped the Sands and
Rocks, and Hands of Pirates, and being come to their designed Harbor, are
filled with Joy, and do shoot and shout, thereby giving out their Signs of Joy:
So the Angels, and the Soul whom they have conveyed to the Gates of Heaven, do
rejoice that their Voyage has been so prosperous.

1. The Angels, that were the Carriers, do with Joy present the Soul to Christ,
saying, O our Lord and King, thou gave us Command to go and fetch this Soul
to thee, and set it in Heaven, before thee, and lo here it is. Thou gave us
in Charge to conduct it in Safety to the Gates of thy Glorious Kingdom, and so
we have. Thou did enjoin us to defend it from the Powers of Darkness, and all
Hellish Principalities that might assault it by the Way, and we have brought it
to thee through their Host, and here it is, we present it to thee, and to the
Father, and the Holy Spirit.

It is welcomed to the Kingdom by the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

God the Father does graciously entertain it, as we must speak in our Manner,
to set forth this Joy, as if he said to this purpose, come thou blessed Soul,
come in, behold the Kingdom, and the Glorious State that I did choose thee to:
look and see what I prepared for thee before the Foundation of the World: All
this Glory I did design for thee, from all Eternity to all Eternity. There were
but a few, in Comparison of those I justly passed by, that I chose unto this
Happiness, and it pleased me to make thee one of those few, thou wast involved
in Sin and Guilt, thou wast wallowing in thy Blood, thou wast dead in
Trespasses and Sins, as well as others: but it was my pleasure to ordain thee
to be brought unto this Place and Paradise of Joy, which now thou do behold,
and which I sent my Angels to bring thee to: Come, welcome to my Glorious
Palace; come, enter in, and sit down with all this Happy Company, that before
thee I have received hither.

God the Son will also entertain it, saying, Come, O dear and precious Soul, I
am Jesus thy Redeemer, I am Christ thy Savior, I am he that went from Heaven
to Earth, that thou and others might be brought from Earth to Heaven; I am he
that suffered that thou might be saved, that died that thou might live; I
am he that for thy sake did wear a Crown of Thorns, that thou for my sake
might wear a Crown of Glory. Behold me, for I am he that was crucified for
thee, that thou might be Glorified with me. Come, enter into thy Master's
Joy, welcome to my Kingdom, welcome to my Presence; come, enter into thy
Master's Joy.

God the Holy Ghost shall also Graciously receive it to his Glory, saying, (as
we may conceive) Draw near, thou dear and precious Soul, draw near; my Comforts
shall delight thee more than Ever: Thou shall be filled with my Joy more than
ever. Thou wast born in Sin, but I caused thee to be born again, thou wast
unclean, but I did wash thee in thy Savior's Blood. Thou wast unfit for this
Glorious Place and Company; but I did prepare and make thee meet to be a
Partaker of this Inheritance, with these Saints, in Light: The Image of God, by
Sin, was raced out of thee; But I did, with my own Finger, engrave it again
upon thee: (...) work in thee what Grace was found in thee: I did enable thee
to pray, and hope, and wait for this Crown of Life, of Righteousness and Glory,
which is now set upon thy Head: I did give thee the Pledge, and Earnest, and
First Fruits of this Glory, which now thou art possessed of: I bid thee Welcome
to thy Entrance into it.

2. The Soul that was brought by Angels, and thus entertained by the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, at its first Arrival there, shall be filled and
transported with unspeakable Joy; when received in, and looking about, might be
conceived to say, What Glorious Place is this! what a Glorious Company is this!
But let me turn mine Eyes unto my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ! My Lord! I did
love thee before I ever saw thee: O how Glorious is my Lord! This is he that
redeemed me by his Blood: This is he who bought me with his Blood, who bought
me with his Blood; who when I was a Captive redeemed me, and bought me with his
Blood. How low was he abased, how high is he exalted! How much was he abused,
how much is he now admired! O, how did I long to see my Lord! How desirous have
I been to be with him, where he is, and so I am; I was not, but now I am! O how
good is it to be here! I never was in such a Place before: I never was in such
Company before, except in my Passage to it: Here are such Glorious Sights I
never saw, such harmonious Songs and Praises, as before I never heard. Is this
the State I prayed for, and hoped, and waited for! I heard much of it, before I
came into it, but at my first Entrance, I see more, I enjoy more, I feel more
than I did ever hear. O the Joy! the Joy! the Fullness of Joy that I am filled
with!

O God my Father, I do Praise thee, I do Praise thee; I will for ever Praise
thee that it was thy Pleasure to choose me to it.

O God my Lord Redeemer, I do Praise thee, I do Praise thee, I will for ever
Praise thee, that thou did so freely, so greatly Love me, with such a costly
Love, as with the Price of thy Blood, to purchase this Possession for me, and
me to be brought to this Possession, to be an Heir and Inheritor of such a
Kingdom.

O God the Holy Ghost, my Sanctifier, I Praise thee, I Praise thee, I will for
ever Praise thee, that by thy Powerful changing of my Heart, bowing of my Will,
renewing of my Nature, have prepared me, that I might be and am received into
this Glorious State.

I am but newly entered in, and I must begin my joyful Praises; and because this
Happy State shall never end, my Praise shall never end.

3. The Holy Angels that are in Heaven shall with Joy receive the Soul that is
brought by other Angels to the Gates thereof, as some of the Angels were ready
to come for it; so those that staid Above will be ready to set open the Gates
for its Entrance; for if they rejoiced when it was converted, much more will
they when actually saved.

4. The Saints that were there before will, with Joy, welcome the Newcomers;
for if Good Men on Earth are rejoiced when others are made Good, much more will
saved Souls above rejoice, when others with them, are actually saved; and as
Abraham did Lazarus, receive them into their Bosoms.

Use III. Exhortation.
From the Ministration of Angels attending the Souls of Believers at their
Dissolution, several Duties might be inferred, some of which are these:

I. Give Thanks to God, and Praise him for his Love to, and Care of you that
are his People: That he has made it the Office of such Holy and Noble Spirits,
to be your Attendants to minister unto you, for your Good: For if Children
should be thankful to God for their good Parents, who have loved them, and took
care of them in their Infancy, and provided Necessaries for them all along as
they grew up, and Orphans for good and careful Guardians, and Pupils for good
Tutors, and People for good Ministers, and Subjects for good Magistrates, and
for all the Good that these have received from them, under God, as his
Ministers to them for Good; then we should also for the Good Angels, and for
the Good God does convey to us by them, as his Servants herein, while we live
on Earth, in the Place of our Pilgrimage, Angels looking upon us, as Strangers
in this World, do us many good Turns; for it is not to be supposed, that these
good Angels that are so careful of us, when we die, should do no Offices of
Love to us, while we live; especially, when Scripture sets forth more
copiously, the Ministration of Angels for us in this Life, but more sparingly
after Death.

Though they do many things for us when we neither see them, nor know they are
done by them, yet what the Scripture reveals, we might as confidently believe
and hope for, as if we visibly saw it: They have been often used by God for his
People's Good, in many Respects, ordinary and extraordinary.

1. To direct them in the Way wherein they were to go, about their Lawful
Employments, that they might not wander, Genesis 24. 7. and 32. 1.

2. To Watch them, to preserve them from Hurt and Danger, pitching their Camps
about their Dwellings, Psalm. 34. 7. and many a Night our Safety has been more
from the watchful Angels, than the Watchmen in the Streets; for except the Lord
keep the City, Psalm. 127. 1
(which he often does by Angels) the Watchmen waketh but in vain.

3. To be instrumental in healing them when they have been sick and diseased:
We may owe more to Angels herein (under God) than to the Physicians, being more
skilful than they; and how far godly Physicians might be helped in prescribing
their Medicines, by the secret, undiscernible Suggestions of knowing, holy
Angels, is a thing seldom thought of, Joh. 5. 4.

4. To supply our outward Wants, when reduced to great Straits, 1 King. 19. 5,
6, 7.

5. To bear them in their Arms, and to support them by their Power, to keep
them from pernicious falls: Who knows how often Angels have prevented their
Falls from their Horses, when riding on their Journeys, Psalm. 91. 11, 12.

6. To enlarge their Liberty when they have been confined, and to deliver them
out of Prisons, which they may be instrumental in more Ways than one, Acts 12.
7, etc.

7. To comfort them in their Fears and Perplexities of Mind, Isay. 6. 5, 6, 7.

Though some of these mentioned were extraordinary Cases, yet they are apparent
Evidences of their invisible Services, and of their Ability and Readiness to
serve God in ordinary, and extraordinary Cases, in which God at his Pleasure,
may command them to help us, and we are sure they will obey. If for these ye
should bless God, ought you not thankfully to acknowledge God's Love to, and
Care of your Souls, when separated, in sending Angels to be their Convoy to
Heaven?

1. Because evil Spirits would be too strong for the Soul, without a Guard.

2. Because your dearest Friends, can no way help your separated Soul.

3. Because there are no other Second Causes that your separated Souls can be
committed to, besides the Holy Angels.

4. Because it is your Comfort to have such good Company with you on your Way:
Traveling alone is solitary in a shorter Journey: suitable Company is
desirable.

II. Learn your Engagement to Christ, for the Reconciliation he has procured
for you.

1. With God: By the Blood of his Cross, he has purchased your Peace with him:
Without this Peace made, God would have used the Ministration of Angels for
your Destruction and Damnation, as he will by them cast the Ungodly into the
Furnace of Fire, at the Second Coming of Christ; but the Hostility betwixt God
and Believers is taken away by Christ, and the Breach made up by his Blood,
Col. 1. 20.

2. With Holy Angels: Betwixt Men and Devils Christ will make no Peace: War
betwixt them is proclaimed, and shall be continued. Holy Angels that were
confirmed, stood on God's Side, against Angels that apostatized, and Mankind
that had revolted, Isa. 37. 36. Act. 12. 23.
and were ready to execute God's Judgments at his Pleasure, upon his Enemies,
of which we have many Instances in Scripture.

Wherefore that Angels are so ready to convey Believers Souls to Heaven, which
is so great an Office of Love, must be attributed to Christ, who has made such
Holy Angels to be such great Friends to them, Ephesians. 1. 10.

III. Learn what Duties are incumbent upon you, while you live, from this
Ministration of Holy Angels to your Souls, when you die: as they have been
God's Messengers to make known his Will, Luke 2. 10, 11. Act. 1. 10. 11.
and publish his good Pleasure, to instruct and teach, to bring glad Tidings of
a Savior for lost Sinners, and to be Witnesses of Christ's Ascension into
Heaven, and to declare his coming again, by audible Voice; so they by their
Example in taking the Care and Charge of Holy separated Souls, to conduct them
to Heaven, teach us several Duties.

1. By their Love to Believers separated Souls, we should be excited to great
Love to them. Love should be reciprocal, in loving them that love us: Should
not we love the Angels in Heaven, who are so ready to help us up to Heaven?
Should we love every one on Earth, in whom we see the Holy Image and Likeness
of God in smallest Measure, and should not we love these Holy Angels that are
like to God in highest Degrees? Should we love the Ministers of God, whose
Preaching God has made instrumental for our Conversion and Preparation for
Heaven, and should we not love these Messengers of God, who are sent by him to
fetch us to the Possession of our Mansions in Heaven? Do we love the Company of
good Men that travel with us upon Earth, as they are Guides and Guards unto us
on our Way, and shall we not love these Holy Angels of God, that will be our
Companions in our Journey to Heaven? If we are to love such as are our Enemies
in Life, surely we should love these that will be such Friends unto us after
Death.

2. By their Condescension in the carrying the Soul of the meanest Believer to
Heaven, we should learn Humility, and to condescend to Men of low Estates, for
the Good and Welfare of their Souls. What mere Creatures are more Noble and
Excellent than the Holy Angels in Heaven? And what Believer, as to outward
Circumstances, was poorer and more loathsome than Lazarus? Was he not a Beggar
that wanted Bread? Was he not a Cripple, that could not go to, but was laid at
the Rich Man's Gate? Was he not only sore, but full of Sores, that a nice and
squeamish Person would have disdained to look upon him, but much more to dress
his Sores? And yet the Angels of God did not disdain to carry this Poor Man's
Soul into Abraham's Bosom? Did they take him in their Arms, whom the Rich Man
would not take and lay in any of his Outhouses?

Are any of the Sons of Men more Excellent, more Noble, more Knowing, and set
higher in any Capacity above the Poorest and most Contemptible Believer upon
Earth, than the Angels in Heaven? and yet are they ready to minister to the
Meanest, and shall any of us be so Great in our own Eyes, and look upon our
selves in such a Magnifying Glass, as to refuse to help forward the Salvation
of the Poorest Soul?

3. Let the Ministration of Angels, in carrying Souls to Heaven, be a Pattern
of our Obedience to God, all the Days of our Life on Earth. As they obey God in
this, as in all things else, so let us write after their Copy, Mat. 6. 10.
to do the Will of God, as by them in Heaven it is done: Though we cannot do it
equally in Degrees, yet let it be our Holy Ambition to come as near to them as
we can, in these Particulars:

First, They do not stir to fetch a Soul to Heaven, without a Warrant from God;
they are sent before they Come: So let us see what Warrant we have from God for
what we do, before we do it; demanding of our selves, has God commanded this?
Has he spoke the Word? Will the Holy Scripture, Psalm. 119. 11.
wherein God's Will and my Duty is revealed, bear me out, if I do this or that?
What a Multitude of Sins by this would be prevented?

Secondly, Angels come and carry believing Souls to Heaven, with greatest
Alacrity and Cheerfulness: As they joy in their Conversion, so in carrying them
to Eternal Salvation, if they be sent never so often, to fetch never so many,
they never grudge their Labor, they have not the least Regret nor Repining,
but the more they are sent for the more they are pleased and do rejoice. So we
should serve the Lord with Gladness, and and come before his Presence with
Singing, Psalm. 100. 2. We should pray to him with Delight, hear from him and
obey him with Cheerfulness, and Joy.

Thirdly, Angels having a Charge to fetch a Believer's Soul, come speedily,
without delay; they make haste to receive it, that they may be present at the
very Moment of its Separation: They never come too late. In like manner we
should imitate their Obedience in ours, Psalm. 119. 60. I made haste, and
delayed not to keep thy Commandments. God commands you now to repent, but you
put it off till hereafter: God enjoins you to Day, whiles it is called to Day,
Heb. 3. 7, 8.
to hearken to his Voice; but you stop your Ears to Day, and so you will to
morrow, if you shall have the same hardness of Heart to Morrow, as you have to
Day. Angels in conveying Souls do not so; but when God gives the Word, they
obey speedily and fly swiftly.

Fourthly, Angels in carrying Souls to Heaven are Faithful in their Service in
fetching as many as God sends them for, and no more, and the very same Souls
and no other; they never mistake one for another, and never drop or lose any by
the Way committed to their Charge. We, in Imitation of them, should be faithful
in doing what God commands to every Person, in what Capacity, Station and
Relation we stand to them: to one as well as another, and not only to one,
neglecting another, when each are equally committed to our Charge.

Fifthly. Holy Angels serve God in this Ministration with persevering
Constancy: They have been employed in Transporting Souls for many Ages already
past, innumerable Souls have been conveyed from this World to that above, and
so they do still, as often as Believers die, and so they will to the World's End,
till all the Souls, ordained by God for Eternal Life, are lodged in the
Heavens. To which Pattern we should conform our selves in our Obedience to God,
persevering therein to our Lives End, Psalm. 119. 112. I have inclined my Heart
to perform thy Statutes always, even to the End.

4. Let the Care of Angels, in carrying Holy Souls to Heaven, make us careful
of our own Souls, that they be such, and so qualified with special Grace, that
they may be the Object of their Care, when they shall be separated from our
Bodies, as you desire they, and not Devils, should have them, when out of the
Body; do you make it your great Concern, to have them Sanctified in the Body:
For Holy Angels will not touch an unholy separated Soul, to defend it from the
Devil's seizing of it. If the Soul be unholy while you live, and leave the Body
unholy when you die, it will be unfit for the Glorious Presence of God, for the
Holy Place and Company Above, and it will not be in their Commission to carry
it thither, neither will they do it.

5. Grieve not, nor offend the Holy Angels of God, as you expect and hope they
should carry your Souls to Heaven when you die. Good and Evil Angels are your
Spectators and Observers, when you might think little of it: When you do Evil,
bad Angels rejoice, good Angels are offended: when you please God, Devils are
displeased, but good Angels are delighted at it.

Take heed in secret what you do, for there may be more Devils and Holy Angels
with you, though not seen by you, than you are aware of.

Be mindful how you behave your self in the Public Ordinances, because of
Angels, good and bad, for when you come to these, good and bad Angels come
also; Mat. 13. 19
the Devil to catch the Word from you, that you might not be saved, but that he
might catch and carry your Soul at Death, to Hell: Good Angels to promote your
Conversion now, that they may carry your Souls to Heaven hereafter. Because of
these Holy Angels in the Assembly watch your Carriage, 1 Cor. 11. 10.
shall they see your Eyes rolling after sinful Objects? Shall they see you
sleeping under the Word, or in time of Prayer? Will you so grieve those that
you hope shall be employed, in carrying your Soul to Heaven? Blush more that
Angels see you nodding in Duty, than that Men see you.

IV. Though Angels shall be so careful of you, to carry your separated Soul to
Heaven, yet be you careful, that you now carry nothing to them that is due to
God; neither your Prayers, nor any part of Religious Worship that properly
belongs to God. Rev. 22. 8, 9.
Worshipping of Angels is offensive to God, and displeasing to them, and they
refuse to accept it: Though you were upon your dying Bed, you may not pray to
them to come and guard you, but you may pray to God that he would send them to
defend you, and carry you to Glory; as in another Case Manoah did, Judge. 13. 8.
Manoah entreated the Lord and said, O my Lord, let the Man of God, which thou
did send, come again unto us. -- 9. And God hearkened to the Voice of Manoah,
and the Angel of God came again. -- 16. The Angel said, If thou will offer a
Burnt Offering, thou must offer it to the Lord.

V. This is great Encouragement to dying Believers: When such an one perceives
the approaching of Death, that he must get up and ride upon that Pale Horse
that will carry him into the other World, he might say, Farewell, Dear Friends,
Farewell; I am going, my time is ended my Course is finished; I shall be no
more with you, and when my Soul is departed, there is no more that you can do
for it: Weep not, neither be ye grieved, I have those that will take care of
me, when ye cannot; God will take Care of me, and Christ will take Care of me,
and the Holy Angels of God will take Care of me: I have God's Promise for my
Security, God's Power for my Protection, God's Angels for my Guard: The Angel
of the Covenant will charge his Angels with me; the Messenger of the Covenant
will send his Messengers for me: The Surety of the Covenant has undertaken,
with God, for me, and for me with God, and I shall reap the benefit of his
Suretiship, and the Blessings of the Covenant for Ever, when carried up into
Heaven: Death will carry me into Eternity; and Angels will carry me into a
blessed Eternity of Life and Joy, with Christ in Glory. The Horsemen of Israel
are a coming, the Chariot is making ready, and as Death hastens, so do they,
and will certainly be here as soon as Death, if not before. Shall I be afraid
of Death, or Devils, or Hell, when Angels will meet me at Death's Door, and
carry me to Heaven's Gates, and others let me in to take up my Lodging in
Abraham's Bosom?

This is Ground of support to a Believer on his dying Bed, when he must mount
the Pale Horse of Death, which will carry him into another World, that God will
charge his Angels to attend, and to be read to receive his separated Soul, and
carry it into the State and Place of Eternal Happiness in the other World.

This also might alleviate the Grief of surviving Friends, which often loads
and burdens the Heart, because of the Departure of such, that while they lived,
were their Comfort and Delight; when they consider the joyful Company of the
Holy Angels they have to convoy them to their Eternal Blessed Home, their
joyful Entertainment there, their happy Rest, their holy Employment, their
inconceivable Joys in the immediate Presence of their Glorious God and Exalted
Redemer, and the Eternal Spirit, and that all this shall be their Happiness to
all Eternity.

It is no blind Charity to conclude that the Soul of this deceased Friend, is
safely arrived at Heaven, and has his Mansion there, when those that knew him
best, and conversed with him most, and had the longest Acquaintance to observe
his Conversation, can, and do affirm, that his whole Life was very Exemplary,
suitable to his Profession, and worthy of others Imitation.

When I was at his Funeral, a grave, solid, and judicious Christian, said to
me, I have known him from his Beginning to his End, and think, that whatsoever
migh be said of an Upright Man, might be said concerning him.

He was very diligent in Redeeming his time, Improving it in the Duties of his
particular and general Calling, cautious and watchful that he might not waste
nor mispend the Hours of his Life, for though he had a considerable Estate, yet
he was as laborious in his Station, as if he had not Bread to eat, till he had
got it by his Hands; not from a covetous Desire of Gain, which was manifest, in
that the same Hands that worked for it, were as ready to give it, as the
Necessities of others called for it: For to my Knowledge, he gave a
considerable Allowance, for many Years, toward the Education of a poor
Scholar, whom, when he heard preach, before he died, said to me, he thought his
Money well bestowed, and was a Comfort to him that it had been so rightly
placed, and that he saw such Fruits of what he had therein done.

He was more than ordinarily ready to promote the Preaching of the Gospel
amongst a People that, by reason of their low Circumstances, were not able to
procure it; one Instance I remember, when a Friend of mine did but mention the
Case of such a People in the Country, though he did not ask him, yet before they
parted, I saw him give several Pounds to be toward the Maintenance of a
Preacher for that Year.

Another special Friend of mine, of his intimate Acquaintance, told me since
his Death, that once he desired some Assistance from him, for the Relief of a
very fit Object of Charity, more than ordinary, for which purpose he readily
(beyond his Expectation) gave many Pounds. After some considerable time
intervening, the same Person, upon another extraordinary Occasion, renewed his
Request for his Help, and he cheerfully gave him upon that Account, as much as
he did for the other. Whereupon my Friend told me, that such a Free-giver
spoiled him for a Beggar for others (as to him) for after that, he could never
prevail with himself to ask him any more, who was so easily prevailed with to
give so liberally.

He was an earnest desirer of the Welfare of the Souls of others, for I know
that he has often bought many Dozens of Books of several Subjects, and given
them to Poor Persons and Families, asking nothing but that they would take them
and diligently read them: Also if any desired him to transcribe out of his
Short Hand into Long, any Sermon under which they were more than usually
affected (though he was fully employed, yet) he would take time from his sleep,
and write it very fair and give them, being ready to promote the Interest of
Souls, both by his Purse and Pains.

He was a singular Pattern of Dutifulness to Parents; being very tender and
careful of his very aged Mother, both in respect to her Temporal and Spiritual
State, liberally assisting her as to both (for though she was left a Widow in
good Worldly Circumstances, yet in her Old Age she enjoyed not that Plenty as
before). For Temporals, she, by his Care wanted nothing; in Spirituals he was
as forward to afford his Help, for being Weak through Age, and difficult in
hearing, could not attend (as formerly) upon Public Ordinances, to supply the
Want whereof, it was his constant Practice for many Years, every Lord's Day in
the Evening, to go to her House, and laying his Face near her Ear, repeated the
Sermons he had taken that Day, to her, and the rest in the Family.

He was not short in his Relation, as a Brother to his Sisters, Two that by
Providence were brought from higher to lower Circumstances in their outward
State, he made comfortable Provisions for, one of which being discomposed in
her Head, and not capable of caring for her self, he (like a loving Brother)
was exceeding kind unto her, while he lived, and has left them what will be a
good Stay and Support unto them, now he is taken from his Mother and them.

He never was a talkative Man, but the less he said, the more he did; not like
many, whose Tongues run faster in speaking Religiously, than their Feet in
walking Holily: His Works did praise him more, to the Observers of what he did,
than his Words did commend him to the Hearers of what he said; though what he
said was Savoury, and his Words were weighty, rather than many; speaking but
little though to good Purpose: And as he was sparing in his Words, when in
Health, so he spoke not much when sick and on his dying Bed: but told me, he
had good Hopes of his Spiritual and Eternal State, and though he found Satan
tempting to shake his Reliance on Christ, yet there he placed his only Trust
and Dependence for Salvation, having consented to him, and accepted of him in
all his Offices as offered in the Gospel.

Concerning the last Sermon he heard, which was about Love-sickness to Christ,
through the abundant Sense of Christ's Love to the Soul, he said, it was an
excellent, comfortable Frame of Spirit, in such as have experience of it: and
this I thought he said, from his own Experience, as having found and felt how
comfortable it was.

His Head being affected with his Distemper, and much inclined to Sleep, yet
asked me to pray with him, saying, though I be drowsy, yet will I not sleep while
you pray, but will join in the Prayers with you; and when sick, kept waking in
his Bed, during the time of Prayer, when many in Health, in Family and
Congregation, are sleeping when they should be praying: and though he was so
heavy, yet would not be satisfied, except the Duty were performed, and striving
against his Sleep, that he might strive with God in Prayer, said afterward,
his Soul was refreshed, and was the better for it.

Within the space of about Fifteen Days, he was well and dead, when Sickness
did seize him, Death made haste to remove him; but though Death prevented him of
longer Time, he had prevented Death from hurrying him to Eternal Death, by his
timely spiritual Birth and Conversion unto God, by his sound Repentance, and
unfeigned Faith in Christ, which manifested it self by the Fruits thereof,
through the whole Course of his Life, persevering therein to the End, and when
God gave Commission to Death to make such haste to have his Body carried to the
Grave, he gave Commission to his Angels to make as much speed to carry his Soul
into Abraham's Bosom; where it is in perfect Rest, and Love, and Joy; and let us
all prepare that our Remove by Death, might be from Earth to Heaven. Amen.

FINIS.

