PARADOXES, PROBLEMES, ESSAYS, CHARACTERS, Written By Dr DONE Dean of PAUL'S:
To which is added a Book of EPIGRAMS: Written in Latin by the same Author;
translated into English by I: MAINE, D. D.

As also Ignatius his Conclave, A SATYR, Translated out of the Original Copy
written in Latin by the same Author; found lately amongst his own Papers.

De Iesuitorum dissidiis.

Quos pugnare, Scholis, clama^t, hi, (discite Regna)
Non sunt Unanimes, conveniuntque nimis.
London, Printed by T: N: for Humphrey Moseley at the Prince's Arms in St
Paul's Churchyard, 1652.

The Table.
PARADOXES.
I. A Defense of Women's Inconstancy. 1 II. That Women ought to paint 7 III.
That by Discord Things increase. 10 IV. That Good is more common then Evil 13
V. That all things kill themselves 16 VI. That it is possible to find some
virtue in some Women. 18 VII. That Old men are more fantastic then Young. 20
VIII. That Nature is our worst Guide. 23 IX. That only Cowards dare lie, 26 X.
That a Wise Man is known by much laughing. 29 XI. That the Gifts of the Body
are better then those of the Mind. 33 XII. That Virginity is a Virtue. 81
PROBLEMS.
I. WHy have Bastards the best Fortune. 38 II. Why Puritans make long Sermons.
41 III. Why did the Devil reserve Jesuits till these latter days. 42 IV. Why
is there more variety of Green then of other colors. 43 V. Why do young
Laymen so much study Divinity. 44 VI. Why has the common Opinion afforded
Women souls. 45 VII. Why are the Fairest falsest. 47 VIII. Why Venus-Star only
does cast a shadow? 49 IX. Why is Venus-star multinominous, called both
Hesperus and Vesper? 52 X. Why are New Officers least oppressing? 54 XI. Why
does the Pox so much affect to undermine the Nose? 66 XII. Why die none for
Love now? 58 XIII. Why do women delight much in Feathers? 59 XIV. Why does
not Gold soil the Fingers? ib. XV. Why do Great men of all dependants,
choose to preserve their little Pimps? 60 XVI. Why are Courtiers sooner
Atheists, then men of other conditions? 61 XVII. Why are Statesmen most
incredulous? 62
CHARACTERS.
THe Character of a Scot at the first sight. 65 The true Character of a Dunce.
67
AN Essay of Valor, 72 A Sheaf of Miscellany Epigrams, 88 Ignatius nis
Conclave, 107
Ben. Johnson to the Author.
WHo can doubt, Done, where I a Poet be?
When I dare send my Epigrams to thee
That so alone can judge, so alone do make:
And in thy censures, evenly, do take
As free simplicity, to disavow,
As thou have best authority to allow:
Read all I send: and, if I find but one
Marked by thy hand, and with the better stone
My title's sealed. Those that for claps do write,
Let punies, porters, players praise delight,
And till they burst, their backs, like asses load:
A man should seek great glory, and not broad.
PARADOXES.
I. A Defense of Women's Inconstancy.
THat Women are Inconstant, I with any man confess, but that Inconstancy is a
bad quality, I against any man will maintain: For every thing as it is one
better than another, so is it fuller of change; The Heavens themselves
continually turn, the Stars move, the Moon changes; Fire whirleth, Air
flies, Water ebbs and flows, the face of the Earth alters her looks, time
stays not; the Color that is most light, will take most dies: so in Men, they
that have the most reason are the most inalterable in their designs, and the
darkest or most ignorant, do seldomest change; therefore Women changing more
than Men, have also more Reason. They cannot be immutable like stocks, like
stones, like the Earths dull Center; Gold that lies still, rusteth; Water,
corrupts; Air that moves not, poysoneth; then why should that which is the
perfection of other things, be imputed to Women as greatest imperfection?
Because thereby they deceive Men. Are not your wits pleased with those jests,
which cozen your expectation? You can call it pleasure to be beguiled in
troubles, and in the most excellent toy in the world, you call it Treachery: I
would you had your Mistresses so constant, that they would never change, no not
so much as their smocks, then should you see what sluttish virtue, Constancy
were. Inconstancy is a most commendable and cleanly quality, and Women in this
quality are far more absolute than the Heavens, than the Stars, Moon, or any
thing beneath it; for long observation has picked certainty out of their
mutability. The Learned are so well acquainted with the Stars, Signs and
Planets, that they make them but Characters, to read the meaning of the Heaven
in his own forehead. Every simple fellow can bespeak the change of the Moon a
great while beforehand: but I would fain have the learned man so skillful, as
to tell when the simplest Woman means to vary. Learning affords no rules to
know, much less knowledge to rule the mind of a Woman. For as Philosophy
teaches us, that Light things do always tend upwards, and heavy things decline
downward; Experience teaches us otherwise, that the disposition of a Light
Woman, is to fall down, the nature of women being contrary to all Art and
Nature. Women are like Flies, which feed among us at our Table, or Fleas
sucking our very blood, who leave not our most retired places free from their
familiarity, yet for all their fellowship will they never be tamed nor
commanded by us. Women are like the Sun, which is violently carried one way,
yet has a proper course contrary: so though they, by the mastery of some
overruling churlish husbands, are forced to his Byas, yet have they a motion
of their own, which their husbands never know of: It is the nature of nice and
fastidious minds to know things only to be wary of them: Women by their slye
changeableness, and pleasing doubleness, prevent even the mislike of those, for
they can never be so well known, but that there is still more unknown. Every
woman is a Science; for he that plods upon a woman all his life long, shall at
length find himself short of the knowledge of her: they are born to take down
the pride of wit, and ambition of wisdom, making fools wise in the adventuring
to win them, wisemen fools in conceit of losing their labors; witty men stark
mad, being confounded with their uncertainties. Philosophers write against them
for spite, not desert, that having attained to some knowledge in all other
things, in them only they know nothing, but are merely ignorant: Active and
Experienced men rail against them, because they love in their liveless and
decrepit age, when all goodness leaves them. These envious Libellers ballad
against them, because having nothing in themselves able to deserve their love,
they maliciously discommend all they cannot obtain, thinking to make men
believe they know much, because they are able to dispraise much, and rage
against Inconstancy, when they were never admitted into so much favor as to be
forsaken. In mine opinion such men are happy that women are Inconstant, for so
may they chance to be beloved of some excellent woman when it comes to their
turn out of their Inconstancy and mutability, though not out of their own
desert. And what reason is there to clog any woman with one man, be he never so
singular? Women had rather, and it is far better and more Judicial to enjoy all
the virtues in several men, than but some of them in one, for otherwise they
lose their taste, like diverse sorts of meat minced together in one dish: and to
have all excellencies in one man (if it were possible) is Confusion and
Diversity. Now who can deny, but such as are obstinately bent to undervalue
their worth, are those that have not soul enough to comprehend their
excellency, women being the most excellent Creatures, in that man is able to
subject all things else, and to grow wise in every thing, but still persists a
fool in woman? The greatest Scholar, if he once take a wife, is found so
unlearned, that he must begin his Horn-book, and all is by Inconstancy. To
conclude therefore; this name of Inconstancy, which has so much been poisoned
with slanders, ought to be changed into variety, for the which the world is so
delightful, and a woman for that the most delightful thing in this world.

II. That Women ought to Paint.
FOulness is Loathsome: can that be so which helps it? who forbids his beloved
to gird in her waste? to mend by shooing her uneven lameness? to burnish her
teeth? or to perfume her breath? yet that the Face be more precisely regarded,
it concerns more: For as open confessing sinners are always punished, but the
wary and concealing offenders without witness, do it also without punishment;
so the secret parts needs the less respect; but of the Face, discovered to all
Examinations and surveys, there is not too nice a Jealousy. Nor does it only
draw the busy Eyes, but it is subject to the divinest touch of all, to
kissing, the strange and mystical union of souls. If she should prostitute her
self to a more unworthy man than thy self, how earnestly and justly would
thou exclaim? that for want of this easier and ready way of repairing, tobetray
her body to ruin and deformity (the tyrannous Ravishers, and sudden Deflourers
of all women) what a heinous adultery is it? What thou love in her face is
color, and painting gives that, but thou hate it, not because it is, but
because thou know it. Fool, whom ignorance makes happy, the Stars, the Sun,
the Sky whom thou admirest, alas, have no color, but are fair, because they
seem to be colored: If this seeming will not satisfy thee in her, thou have
good assurance of her color, when thou see her lay it on. If her face be
painted on a Board or Wall, thou will love it, and the Board, and the Wall:
Can thou loath it then when it speaks, smiles, and kisses, because it is
painted? Are we not more delighted with seeing Birds, Fruits, and Beasts
painted then we are with Naturals? And do we not with pleasure behold the
painted shape of Monsters and Devils, whom true, we durst not regard? We repair
the ruins of our houses, but first cold tempests warns us of it, and bites us
through it; we mend the wrack and stains of our apparel, but first our eyes,
and other bodies are offended; but by this providence of Women, this is
prevented. If in Kissing or breathing upon her, the painting fall off, thou art
angry, will thou be so, if it stick on? Thou did love her, if thou beginnest
to hate her, then it is because she is not painted. If thou will say now, thou
did hate her before, thou did hate her and love her together, be constant
in something, and love her who shows her great love to thee, in taking this
pains to seem lovely to thee.

III. That by Discord things increase.
Nullos esse Deos, inane Coelum Affirmat Coelius, probatque quod se Factum
vidit, dum negat haec, beatum.
SO I assevere this the more boldly, because while I maintain it, and feel the
Contrary repugnancies and adverse fightings of the Elements in my Body, my Body
increases; and whilst I differ from common opinions by this Discord, the
number of my Paradoxes increases. All the rich benefits we can frame to our
selves in Concord, is but an Even conservation of things; in which Evenness we
can expect no change, no motion; therefore no increase or augmentation, which
is a member of motion. And if this unity and peace can give increase to things,
how mightily is discord and war to that purpose, which are indeed the only
ordinary Parents of Peace. Discord is never so barren that it affords no fruit;
for the fall of one estate is at the worst the increaser of another, because it
is as impossible to find a discommodity without advantage, as to find
Corruption without Generation: But it is the Nature and Office of Concord to
preserve only, which property when it leaves, it differs from it self, which
is the greatest discord of all. All Victories and Emperies gained by war, and
all Judicial decidings of doubts in peace, I do claim children of Discord. And
who can deny but Controversies in Religion are grown greater by Discord, and
not the Controversy, but Religion it self: For in a troubled misery men are
always more Religious then in a secure peace. The number of good men, the only
charitable nourishers of Concord, we see is thin, and daily melts and wains;
but of bad discording it is infinite, and grows hourly. We are ascertained of
all Disputable doubts, only by arguing and differing in Opinion, and if formal
disputation (which is but a painted, counterfeit, and dissembled discord) can
work us this benefit, what shall not a full and main discord accomplish? Truly
me thinks I owe a devotion, yea a sacrifice to discord, for casting that Ball
upon Ida, and for all that business of Troy, whom ruined I admire more then
Babylon, Rome, or Quinzay, removed Corners, not only fulfilled with her fame,
but with Cities and Thrones planted by her Fugitives. Lastly, between Cowardice
and despair, Valor is gendred; and so the Discord of Extremes begets all
virtues, but of the like things there is no issue without a miracle: Vxor
pessima, pessimus maritus
Miror tam male convenire.


He wonders that between two so like, there could be any discord, yet perchance
for all this discord there was never the less increase.

IV. That Good is more common then Evil.
I Have not been so pitifully tired with any vanity, as with silly Old Men's
exclaiming against these times, and extolling their own: Alas! they betray
themselves, for if the times be changed, their manners have changed them. But
their senses are to pleasures, as sick men's tastes are to Liquors; for indeed
no new thing is done in the world, all things are what, and as they were, and
Good is as ever it was, more plenteous, and must of necessity be more common
then Evil, because it has this for nature and perfection to be common. It
makes Love to all Natures, all, all affect it. So that in the worlds early
Infancy, there was a time when nothing was evil, but if this world shall suffer
dotage in the extremest crookedness thereof, there shall be no time when
nothing shall be good. It dares appear and spread, and glister in the world,
but evil buries it self in night and darkness, and is chastised and suppressed
when good is cherished and rewarded And as Imbroderers, Lapidaries, and other
Artisans, can by all things adorn their works; for by adding better things, the
better they show in Lush and in eminency; so good does not only prostrate her
amiableness to all, but refuses no end, no not of her utter contrary evil, that
she may be the more common to us. For evil manners are parents of good Laws;
and in every evil there is an excellency, which (in common speech) we call
good. For the fashions of habits, for our moving in gestures, for phrases in
our speech, we say they were good as long as they were used, that is as long as
they were common; and we eat, we walk, only when it is, or seems good to do so.
All fair, all profitable, all virtuous, is, good, and these three things I
think embrace all things, but their utter contraries; of which also fair may be
rich and virtuous; poor may be virtuous and fair; vicious may be fair and rich;
so that good has this good means to be common, that some subjects she can
possess entirely; and in subjects poisoned with evil, she can humbly stoop to
accompany the evil. And of indifferent things many things are become perfectly
good by being common, as customs by use are made binding Laws. But I remember
nothing that is therefore ill, because it is common, but women, of whom also;
They that are most common, are the best of that Occupation they profess.

V. That all things kill themselves.
TO affect, yea to effect their own death all living things are importuned, not
by Nature only which perfects them, but by Art and Education, which perfects
her. Plants quickened and inhabited by the most unworthy soul, which therefore
neither will nor work, affect an end, a perfection, a death; this they spend
their spirits to attain, this attained, they languish and wither. And by how
much more they are by man's Industry warmed, cherished and pampered; so much the
more early they climb to this perfection, this death. And if amongst men not to
defend be to kill, what a heinous self, murder is it, not to defend it self.
This defense because Beasts neglect, they kill themselves, because they exceed
us in number, strength, and a lawless liberty: yea, of Horses and other beasts,
they that inherit most courage by being bred of gallantest parents, and by
Artificial nursing are bettered, will run to their own deaths, neither
solicited by spurs which they need not, nor by honor which they apprehend
not. If then the valiant kill himself, who can excuse the Coward? Or how shall
man be free from this, since the first man taught us this, except we cannot
kill our selves, because he killed us all. Yet least something should repair
this common ruin, we daily kill our bodies with surfeits, and our minds with
anguishes. Of our powers, remembering kills our memory: Of affections, Lusting
our lust; Of virtues, Giving kills liberality. And if these kill themselves, they
do it in their best and supreme perfection: for after perfection immediately
follows excess, which changes the natures and the names, and makes them not
the same things. If then the best things kill themselves soonest, (for no
affection endures, and all things labor to this perfection) all travel to
their own death, yea the frame of the whole world, if it were possible for God
to be idle, yet because it began, must die. Then in this idleness imagined in
God, what could kill the world but it self, since out of it, nothing is?

VI. That it is possible to find some virtue in some Women.
I Am not of that seard Impudence that I dare defend Women, or pronounce them
good, yet we see Physicians allow some virtue in every poison. Alas! why should
we except Women? since cerrtainly they are good for Physic at least, so as
some wine is good for a fever. And though they be the Occasioners of many
sins, they are also the Punishers and Revengers of the same sins: For I have
seldom seen one which consumes his substance and body upon them, escape
diseases, or beggary; and this is their Justice. And if suum cuique dare, be
the fulfilling of all Civil Justice, they are most just; for they deny that
which is theirs to no man, Tanquam non liceat nulla puella negat.
And who may doubt of great wisdom in them, that does but observe with how
much labor and cunning our Iusticers and other dispensers of the Laws study
to embrace them: and how zealously our Preachers dehort men from them, only by
urging their subtilties and policies, and wisdom, which are in them? Or who can
deny them a good measure of Fortitude, if he consider how valiant men they have
overthrown, and being themselves overthrown, how much and how patiently they
bear? And though they be most intemperate, I care not, for I undertook to
furnish them with some virtue, not with all. Necessity, which makes even bad
things good, prevails also for them, for we must say of them, as of some sharp
pinching Laws; If men were free from infirmities, they were needless. These or
none must serve for reasons, and it is my great happiness that Examples prove
not Rules, for to confirm this Opinion, the World yields not one Example.

VII. That Old men are more Fantastic then Young.
WHo reads this Paradox but thinks me more fantastic now, than I was
yesterday, when I did not think thus: And if one day make this sensible change
in men, what will the burden of many years? To be fantastic in young men is
conceitfull distemperature, and a witty madness; but in old men, whose senses
are withered, it becomes natural, therefore more full and perfect. For as when
we sleep our fancy is most strong; so it is in age, which is a slumber of the
deep sleep of death. They tax us of Inconstancy, which in themselves young they
allowed; so that reproving that which they did approve, their Inconstancy
exceeds ours, because they have changed once more then we. Yea, they are more
idly busied in conceited apparel than we; for we, when we are melancholy,
wear black; when lusty, green; when forsaken, tawny; pleasing our own inward
affections, leaving them to others indifferent; but they prescribe laws, and
constrain the Noble, the Scholar, the Merchant, and all Estates to a certain
habit. The old men of our time have changed with patience their own bodies,
much of their laws, much of their languages; yea their Religion, yet they
accuse us. To be Amorous is proper and natural in a young man, but in an old
man most fantastic. And that ridling humor of Jealousy, which seeks and
would not find, which requires and repents his knowledge, is in them most
common, yet most fantastike. Yea, that which falls never in young men, is in
them most fantastike and natural, that is, Covetousness; even at their
journeys end to make great provision. Is any habit of young men so fantastike,
as in the hottest seasons to be double-gowned or hooded like our Elders? Or
seems it so ridiculous to wear long hair, as to wear none. Truly, as among
the Philosophers, the Skeptike, which doubts all, was more contentious, then
either the Dogmatick which affirms, or Academike which denies all; so are
these uncertain Elders, which both calls them fantastic which follow others
inventions, and them also which are led by their own humorous suggestion, more
fantastic then other.

VIII. That Nature is our Worst Guide.
SHall she be guide to all Creatures, which is her self one? Or if she also
have a guide, shall any Creature have a better guide then we? The affections of
lust and anger, yea even to err is natural, shall we follow these? Can she be a
good guide to us, which has corrupted not us only but her self? was not the
first Man, by the desire of knowledge, corrupted even in the whitest integrity
of Nature? And did not Nature, (if Nature did any thing) infuse into him this
desire of knowledge, and so this corruption in him, into us? If by Nature we
shall understand our essence, our definition or reason, nobleness, then this
being alike common to all (the Idiot and the Wizard being equally reasonable)
why should not all men having equally all one nature, follow one course? Or if
we shall understand our incli nations: alas! how unable a guide is that which
follows the temperature of our slimie bodies? for we cannot say that we derive
our inclinations, our minds, or souls from our Parents by any way: to say that
it is all from all, is error in reason, for then with the first nothing
remains, or is a part from all, is error in experience, for then this part
equally imparted to many children, would like Gavel-kind lands, in few
generations become nothing: or to say it by communication, is error in
Divinity, for to communicate the ability of communicating whole essence with
any but God, is utter blasphemy. And if thou hit thy Fathers nature and
inclination, he also had his Fathers, and so climbing up, all comes of one man,
and have one nature, all shall embrace one course; but that cannot be,
therefore our complexions and whole bodies, we inherit from Parents; our
inclinations and minds follow that: For our mind is heavy in our bodies
afflictions, and rejoices in our bodies pleasure: how then shall this nature
govern us that is governed by the worst part of us? Nature though often chased
away, it will return; it is true, but those good motions and inspirations which
be our guides must be wooed, courted, and welcomed, or else they abandon us.
And that old Axiom, nihil invita, etc. must not be said thou shall, but thou will do nothing against Nature; so unwilling he notes us to curb our natural
appetites. We call our bastards always our natural issue and we define a
Fool by nothing so ordinary, as by the name of natural. And that poor
knowledge whereby we conceive what rain is, what wind, what thunder, we call
Metaphysicke, supernatural; such small things, such no things do we allow to
our pliant Natures apprehension. Lastly, by following her we lose the pleasant,
and lawful commodities of this life, for we shall drink water and eat
roots, and those not sweet and delicate, as now by Man's art and industry they
are made: we shall lose all the necessities of societies, laws, arts, and
sciences, which are all the workmanship of Man: yea we shall lack the last
best refuge of misery, death, because no death is natural: for if ye will not
dare to call all death violent (though I see not why sicknesses be not
violences) yet causes of all deaths proceed of the defect of that which nature
made perfect, and would preserve; and therefore all against nature.

IX. That only Cowards dare die.
Extremes are equally removed from the mean; so that headlong desperateness
as much offends true valor, as backward Cowardice: of which sort I reckon
justly all un-inforced deaths. When will your valiant man die of necessity? so
Cowards suffer what cannot be avoided: and to run into death unimportun'd is to
run into the first condemned de sperateness. Will he die when he is rich and
happy? then by living he may do more good: and in afflictions and miseries,
death is the chosen refuge of Cowards. Fortiter ille facit qui miser esse
potest.
But it is taught and practiced among our Gallants, that rather than our
reputations suffer any maim, or we any misery, we shall offer our breasts to
the Cannons mouth, yea to our swords points: And this seems a very brave and a
very climbing (which is a Cowardly, earthly, and indeed a very grovelling)
spirit. why do they chain these slaves to the Galleys, but that they thrust
their deaths, and would at every loose leap into the Sea? why do they take
weapons from condemned men, but to bar them of that ease which Cowards affect,
a speedy death. Truly this life is a tempest, and a warfare, and he which
dares die, to escape the anguish of it, seems to me, but so valiant, as he
which dares hang himself, least he be pressed to the wars. I have seen one in
that extremity of Melancholy, which was then become madness, to make his own
breath an Instrument to stay his breath, and labor to choke himself; but alas!
he was mad. And we knew another that languished under the oppression of a poor
disgrace, so much, that he took more pains to die, then would have served to
have nourished life and spirit enough to have outlived his disgrace. what
Fool will call this Cowardlyness, Valor? or this Baseness, Humility? And
lastly, of these men which die the Allegorical death of entering into Religion,
how few are found fit for any show of valiancy? but only a soft and supple
metal, made only for Cowardly solitariness.

X. That a Wise Man is known by much laughing.
RIdi, si sapis, o puella ride; If thou be wise, laugh: for since the powers
of discourse, reason, and laughter, be equally proper unto Man only, why shall
not he be only most wise, which has most use of laughing, as well as he which
has most of reasoning and discoursing? I always did, and shall understand that
Adage; Per risum multum possis cognoscere stultum,
That by much laughing thou may know there is a fool, not, that the laughers
are fools, but that among them there is some fool, at whom wise men laugh:
which moved Erasmus to put this as his first Argument in the mouth of his
Folly, that she made Beholders laugh: for fools are the most laughed at, and
laugh the least themselves of any. And Nature saw this faculty to be so
necessary in man, that she has been content that by more causes we should be
importuned to laugh, than to the exercise of any other power; for things in
themselves utterly contrary, beget this effect; for we laugh both at witty and
absurd things: At both which sorts I have seen men laugh so long, and so
earnestly, that at last they have wept that they could laugh no more. And
therefore the Poet having described the quietness of a wise retired man, says
in one, what we have said before in many lines; Quid facit Canius tuus? ridet.
We have received that even the extremity of laughing, yea of weeping also, has
been accounted wisdom: and that Democritus and Heraclitus, the lovers of these
Extremes, have been called lovers of Wisdom. Now among our wise men I doubt not
but many would be found, who would laugh at Heraclitus weeping, none which weep
at Democritus laughing. At the hearing of Comedies or other witty reports, I
have noted some, which not understanding jests; etc. have yet chosen this as
the best means to seem wise and understanding, to laugh when their Companions
laugh; and I have presumed them ignorant, whom I have seen unmoved. A fool if
he come into a Princes Court, and see a gay man leaning at the wall, so
glistring, and so painted in many colors that he is hardly discerned from one
of the Pictures in the Arras, hanging his body like an Iron-bound chest, girt
in and thick rib'd with broad gold laces, may (and commonly does) envy him. But
alas! shall a wise man, which may not only not envy, but not pity this
Monster, do nothing? Yes, let him laugh. And if one of these hot choleric
firebrands, which nourish themselves by quarrelling, and kindling others, spit
upon a fool one spark of disgrace, he, like a thatcht house quickly burning,
may be angry; but the wise man, as cold as the Salamander, may not only not be
angry with him, but not be sorry for him; therefore let him laugh: so he shall
be known a Man, because he can laugh, a wise Man that he knows at what to
laugh, and a valiant Man that he dares laugh: for he that laughs is justly
reputed more wise, then at whom it is laughed. And hence I think proceeds that
which in these later formal times I have much noted; that now when our
superstitious civilitie of manners is become a mutual tickling flattery of one
another, almost every man affects an humor of jesting, and is content to be
deject, and to deform himself, yea become fool to no other end that I can spy,
but to give his wise Companion occasion to laugh; and to show themselves in
promptness of laughing is so great in wise men, that I think all wise men, if
any wise man do read this Paradox, will laugh both at it and me.

XI. That the Gifts of the Body are better then those of the Mind.
I Say again, that the body makes the mind, not that it created it a mind,
but forms it a good or a bad mind; and this mind may be confounded with soul
without any violence or injustice to Reason or Philosophy: then the soul it
seems is enabled by our Body, not this by it. My Body licenseth my soul to see
the worlds beauties through mine eyes: to hear pleasant things through mine
ears; and affords it apt Organs for the convenience of all perceivable delight.
But alas! my soul cannot make any part, that is not of it self disposed to see
or hear, though without doubt she be as able and as willing to see behind as
before. Now if my soul would say, that she enables any part to taste these
pleasures, but is her self only delighted with those rich sweetnesses which
her inward eyes and senses apprehend, she should dissemble; for I see her
often solaced with beauties, which she sees through mine eyes, and with
music which through mine ears she hears. This perfection then my body has,
that it can impart to my mind all his pleasures; and my mind has still many,
that she can neither teach my indisposed part her faculties, nor to the best
espoused parts show it beauty of Angels, of Music, of Spheres, whereof she
boasts the contemplation. Are chastity, temperance, and fortitude gifts of the
mind? I appeal to Physicians whether the cause of these be not in the body;
health is the gift of the body, and patience in sickness the gift of the
mind: then who will say that patience is as good a happiness, as health, when
we must be extremely miserable to purchase this happiness. And for nourishing
of civil societies and mutual love amongst men, which is our chief end while
we are men; I say, this beauty, presence, and proportion of the body, has a
more masculine force in begetting this love, then the virtues of the mind: for
it strikes us suddenly, and possesses us immoderately; when to know those
virtues require some Judgment in him which shall discern, a long time and
conversation between them. And even at last how much of our faith and belief
shall we be driven to bestow, to assure our selves that these virtues are not
counterfeited: for it is the same to be, and seem virtuous, because that he
that has no virtue can dissemble none, but he which has a little, may gild
and enamell, yea and transform much vice into virtue: For allow a man to be
discreet and flexible to complaints, which are great virtuous gifts of the
mind, this discretion will be to him the soul and Elixir of all virtues, so
that touched with this even pride shall be made humility; and Cowardice,
honorable and wise valor. But in things seen there is not this danger, for
the body which thou love and esteemest fair, is fair: certainly if it be
not fair in perfection, yet it is fair in the same degree that thy Judgment
is good. And in a fair body, I do seldom suspect a disproportioned mind, and
as seldom hope for a good in a deformed. When I see a goodly house, I assure
my self of a worthy possessour, from a ruinous weather-beaten building I turn
away, because it seems either stuffed with varlots as a Prison, or handled by
an unworthy and negligent tenant, that so suffers the wast thereof. And truly
the gifts of Fortune, which are riches, are only handmaids, yea Pandars of the
bodies pleasure; with their service we nourish health, and preserve dainty, and
we buy delights so that virtue which must be loved for it self, and respects
no further end, is indeed nothing: And riches, whose end is the good of the
body, cannot be so perfectly good, as the end whereto it levels.

PROBLEMS.
I. Why have Bastards best Fortune?
BEcause Fortune her self is a Whore, but such are not most indulgent to their
issue; the old natural reason (but those meeting in stolen love are most
vehement, and so contribute more spirit then the easy and lawful) might
govern me, but that now I see Mistresses are become domestic and in ordinary,
and they and wives wait but by turns, and agree as well as they had lived in
the Ark.

The old Moral reason (that Bastards inherit wickedness from their Parents, and
so are in a better way to preferment by having a stock beforehand, then those
that build all their fortune upon the poor and weak stock of Original sin)
might prevail with me, but that since we are fallen into such times, as now the
World might spare the Devil, because she could be bad enough without him. I see
men scorn to be wicked by example, or to be beholding to others for their
damnation. It seems reasonable, that since Laws rob them of succession in civil
benefits, they should have something else equivalent. As Nature (which is Laws
pattern) having denied Women Constancy to one, has provided them with cunning
to allure many; and so Bastards de jure should have better wits and experience.
But besides that by experience we see many fools amongst them, we should take
from them one of their chiefest helps to preferment, and we should deny them to
be fools: and (that which is only left) that women choose worthier men then
their husbands, is false de facto: either then it must be that the Church
having removed them from all place in the public Service of God, they have
better means than others to be wicked, and so fortunate: Or else because the
two greatest powers in this world, the Devil and Princes concur to their
greatness: the one giving bastardy, the other legitimation: As Nature frames
and conserves great bodies of contraries. Or the cause is, because they abound
most at Court, which is the forge where fortunes are made, or at least the shop
where they be sold.

II. Why Puritans make long Sermons
IT needs not for perspicuousness, for God knows they are plain enough: nor do
all of them use Sem-brief-Accents, for some of them have crotchets enough. It
may be they intend not to rise like glorious Tapers and Torches, but like
Thin-wretched-sick-watching-C^s, which languish and are in a Divine Consumption
from the first minute, yea in their snuff, and stink, when others are in their
more profitable glory. I have thought sometimes, that out of conscience, they
allow long measure to course ware. And sometimes, that usurping in that place a
liberty to speak freely of Kings, they would reign as long as they could. But
now I think they do it out of a zealous imagination, that, It is their duty to
Preach on till their Auditory wake.

III. Why did the Devil reserve Jesuits till these latter days.
DId he know that our Age would deny the Devils possessing, and therefore
provided by these to possess men and kingdoms? Or to end the disputation of
Schoolmen, why the Devil could not make lice in Egypt; and whether those things
be presented there, might be true; has he sent us a true and real plague,
worse than those ten? Or in o^ntation of the greatness of his Kingdom, which
even division cannot shake, does he send us these which disagree with all the
rest? Or knowing that our times should discover the Indies, and abolish their
Idolatry, does he send these to give them another for it? Or peradventure they
have been in the Roman Church these thousand years, though we have called them
by other names.

IV. Why is there more Variety of Green then of other Colors?
IT is because it is the figure of Youth wherein nature would provide as many
green, as youth has affections; and so present a Seagreen for profuse wasters
in voyages; a Grasse-green for sudden new men enobled from Grasiers; and a
Goose-green for such Politicians as pretend to preserve the Capitol. Or else
Prophetically foreseeing an age, wherein they shall all hunt. And for such as
misdemeane themselves a Willo-green; For Magistrates must as well have Fasces
born before them to chastize the small offenses, as Secures to cut off the
great.

V. Why do young Laymen so much study Divinity.
IS it because others tending busily Churches preferment, neglect study? Or had
the Church of Rome shut up all our ways, till the Lutherans broke down their
uttermost stubborn doors, and the Calvinists picked their inwardest and
subtlest locks? Surely the Devil cannot be such a Fool to hope that he shall
make this study contemptible, by making it common. Nor that as the Dwellers by
the River Origus are said (by drawing infinite ditches to sprinkle their barren
Country) to have exhausted and intercepted their main channel, and so lost
their more profitable course to the sea; so we, by providing every ones self,
divinity enough for his own use, should neglect our Teachers and Fathers. He
cannot hope for better heresies then he has had, nor was his Kingdom ever so
much advanced by debating Religion (though with some aspersions of Error) as by
a dull and stupid security, in which many gross things are swallowed. Possible
out of such an ambition as we have now, to speak plainly and fellow-like with
Lords and Kings, we think also to acquaint our selves with Gods secrets: or
perchance when we study it by mingling humane respects, It is not Divinity.

VI. Why has the common Opinion afforded Women Souls?
IT is agreed that we have not so much from them as any part of either our
mortal souls of sense or growth; and we deny souls to others equal to them
in all but in speech for which they are beholding to their bodily instruments
For perchance an Oxes heart, or a Goats, or a Foxes, or a Serpents would
speak just so, if it were in the breast, and could move that tongue and jaws.
Have they so many advantages and means to hurt us (for, ever their loving
destroyed us) that we dare not displease them, but give them what they will?
And so when some call them Angels, some Goddesses, and the Palpulian Heretics
made them Bishops, we descend so much with the stream, to allow them Souls? Or
do we somewhat (in this dignifying of them) flatter Princes and great
Personages that are so much governed by them? Or do we in that easiness and
prodigality, wherein we daily lose our own souls to we care not whom, so labor
to persuade our selves, that since a woman has a soul, a soul is no great
matter? Or do we lend them souls but for use, since they for our sakes, give
their souls again, and their bodies to boot? Or perchance because the Devil
(who is all soul) does most mischief, and for convenience and proportion,
because they would come nearer him, we allow them some souls; and so as the
Romans naturalized some Provinces in revenge, and made them Romans, only for
the burden of the Commonwealth; so we have given women souls only to make
them capable of damnation?

VII. Why are the fairest falsest.
I Mean not of falls Alchimy beauty, for then the question should be inverted,
Why are the falsest fairest? It is not only because they are much solicited and
sought for, so is gold, yet it is not so common; and this suit to them, should
teach them their value, and make them more reserved. Nor is it because the
delicatest blood has the best spirits, for what is that to the flesh?
perchance such constitutions have the best wits, and there is no proportionable
subject, for women's wit, but deceit? does the mind so follow the temperature
of the body, that because those complexions are aptest to change, the mind is
therefore so? Or as Bells of the purest metal retain their tinkling and sound
largest; so the memory of the last pleasure lasts longer in these, and
disposes them to the next: But sure it is not in the complexion, for those
that do but think themselves fair, are presently inclined to this multiplicity
of loves, which being but fair in conceit are false in deed: and so perchance
when they are born to this beauty, or have made it, or have dreamed it, they
easily believe all addresses and applications of every man, out of a sense of
their own worthiness to be directed to them, which others less worthy in their
own thoughts apprehend not, or discredit. But I think the true reason is, that
being like gold in many properties (as that all snatch at them, but the worst
possess them, that they care not how deep we dig for them, and that by the Law
of nature, Occupandi conceditur) they would be like also in this, that as Gold
to make it self of use admits allay, so they, that they may be tractable,
mutable, and current, have to their allay Falsehood.

VIII. Why Venus-star only does cast a shadow?
IS it because it is nearer the earth? But they whose profession it is to see
that nothing be done in heaven without their consent (as Re -- says in himself
of Astrologers) have bid Mercury to be nearer. Is it because the works of Venus
want shadowing, covering, and disguising? But those of Mercury need it more;
for Eloquence, his occupation, is all shadow and colors; let our life be a
sea, and then our reason and even ons are wind enough to carry us whether we
should go, but Eloquence is a storm and tempest that miscarries: and who doubts
that Eloquence which must persuade people to take a yoke of sovereignty (and
then beg and make Laws to tie them faster, and then give money to the
invention, repair and strengthen it) needs more shadows and coloring, then to
persuade any man or woman to that which is natural. And Venus markets are so
natural, that when we solicit the best way (which is by marriage) our
persuasions work not so much to draw a woman to us, as against her nature to
draw her from all other besides. And so when we go against nature, and from
Venuswork (for marriage is chastity) we need shadows and colors, but not
else. In Seneca's time it was a course, an un- Roman and a contemptible thing
even in a Matron, not to have had a Love beside her husband, which though the
Law required not at their hands, yet they did it zealously out of the Council
of Custom and fashion, which was venery of supererrogation: Et te spectator
plusquam delectat Adulter,
says Martial: And Horace, because many lights would not show him enough,
created many Images of the same Object by wainscoting his chamber with
lookingglasses: so that Venus flies not light, so much as Mercury, who creeping
into our understanding, our darkness would be defeated, if he were perceived.
Then either this shadow confesses that same dark Melancholy Repentance which
accompanies; or that so violent fires, needs some shadowy refreshing and
intermission: Or else light signifying both day and youth, and shadow both
night and age, she pronounces by this that she professes both all persons and
times.

IX. Why is Venus-star multinominous, called both Hesperus and Vesper.
THe Moon has as many names, but not as she is a star, but as she has diverse
governments; but Venus is multinominous to give example to her prostitute
disciples, who so often, either to renew or refresh themselves toward lovers,
or to disguise themselves from Magistrates, are to take new names. It may be
she takes new names after her many functions, for as she is supreme Monarch of
all Suns at large (which is lust) so is she joined in Commission with all
Mythologicks, with Juno, Diana, and all others for marriage. It may be because
of the diverse names to her self, for her affections have more names than any
vice: scilicet, Pollution, Fornication, Adultery, Lay. Incest, Church-Incest,
Rape, Sodomy, Mastupration, Masturbation, and a thousand others. Perchance her
diverse names showed her appliableness to diverse men, for Neptune distilled and
wet her in love, the Sun warms and melts her, Mercury persuaded and swore her,
Jupiters authority secured, and Vulcan hammered her. As Hesperus she presents
you with her bonum utile, because it is wholsomest in the morning: As Vesper
with her bonum delectabile, because it is pleasantest in the evening. And
because industrious men rise and endure with the Sun in their civil businesses,
this Star calls them up a little before, and remembers them again a little after
for her business; for certainly,

Venit Hesperus, ite capell^e: was spoken to Lovers in the persons of Goats.

X. Why are new Officers least oppressing?
Must the old Proverb, that Old dogs bite sorest, be true in all kind of dogs?
Me thinks the fresh memory they have of the money they parted with for the
place, should hasten them for the re-imbursing: And perchance they do but seem
easier to their suitors; who (as all other Patients) do account all change of
pain, easy. But if it be so, it is either because the sudden sense and
contentment of the honor of the place, retards and remits the rage of their
profits, and so having stayed their stomachs, they can forbear the second
course a while: Or having overcome the steepest part of the hill, and clambered
above Competitions and Oppositions they dare loiter, and take breath: Perchance
being come from places, where they tasted no gain, a little seems much to them
at first, for it is long before a Christian conscience overtakes, or straies
into an Officers heart. It may be that out of the general disease of all men
not to love the memory of a predecessor, they seek to disgrace them by such
easiness, and make good first impressions, that so having drawn much water to
their Mill, they may afterward grind at ease: For if from the rules of good
horfemanship, they thought it wholesome to jet out in a moderate pace, they
should also take up toward their journeys end, not mend their pace
continually, and gallop to their Inns-dore, the grave; except perchance their
conscience at that time so touch them that they think it an injury and damage
both to him that must sell, and to him that must buy the Office after their
death, and a kind of dilapidation if they by continuing honest should discredit
the place, and bring it to a lower rent, or under-value.

XI. Why does the Pox so much affect to undermine the Nose?
PAracelsus perchance says true, That every Disease has his Exaltation in
some part certain. But why this in the Nose? Is there so much mercy in this
disease, that it provides that one should not smell his own stinck? Or has it
but the common fortune, that being begot and bred in obscurest and secretest
places, because therefore his serpentine crawling and insinuation should not be
suspected, nor seen, he comes soonest into great place, and is more able to
destroy the worthiest member, then a Disease better born? Perchance as mice
defeat Elephants by knawing their Proboscis, which is their Nose, this wretched
Indian Vermin practices to do the same upon us. Or as the ancient furious
Custom and Connivency of some Laws, that one might cut off their Nose whom
he deprehended in Adultery, was but a Tipe of this; And that now more
charitable laws having taken away all Revenge from particular hands, this
common Magistrate and Executioner is come to do the same Office invisibly? Or
by withdrawing this conspicuous part, the Nose, it warnes us from all
adventuring upon that Coast; for it is as good a mark to take in a flag as to
hang one out. Possibly heat, which is more potent and active then cold,
thought her self injured, and the Harmony of the world out of tune, when cold
was able to show the highway to Noses in Muscovia, except she found the means
to do the same in other Countries. Or because by the consent of all, there is
an Analogy, Proportion and affection between the Nose and that part where this
disease is first contracted, and therefore Heliogabalus chose not his Minions
in the Bath but by the Nose; And Albertus had a knavish meaning when he preferred
great Noses; And the licentious Poet was Naso Poeta. I think this reason is
nearest truth, That the Nose is most compassionate with this part: Except this
be nearer, that it is reasonable that this Disease in particular should affect
the most eminent and perspicuous part, which in general does affect to take
hold of the most eminent and conspicuous men.

XII. Why die none for Love now?
BEcause women are become easyer. Or because these later times have provided
mankind of more new means for the destroying of themselves and one another,
Pox, Gunpowder, Young marriages, and Controversies in Religion. Or is there in
true History no Precedent or Example of it? Or perchance some die so, but are
not therefore worthy the remembering or speaking of?

XIII. Why do Women delight much in Feathers?
THey think that Feathers imitate wings, and so show their restlessness and
instability. As they are in matter, so they would be in name, like
Embroiderers, Painters, and such Artificers of curious vanities, which the
vulgar call Pluminaries. Or else they have feathers upon the same reason, which
moves them to love the unworthiest men, which is, that they may be thereby
excusable in their inconstancy and often changing.

XIV. Why does not Gold soil the fingers?
Does it direct all the venom to the heart? Or is it because bribing should not
be discovered? Or because that should pay purely, for which pure things are
given, as Love, Honor, Justice and Heaven? Or does it seldom come into innocent
hands, but into such as for former foulness you cannot discern this?

XV. Why do great men of all dependants, choose to preserve their little Pimps?
IT is not hecause they are got nearest their secrets, for they whom they bring
come nearer. Nor because commonly they and their bawds have lain in one belly,
for then they should love their brothers as well. Nor because they are witnesses
of their weakness, for they are weak ones. Either it is because they have a
double hold and obligation upon their masters for providing them surgery and
remedy after, as well as pleasure before, and bringing them always such stuff, as
they shall always need their service? Or because they may be received and
entertained every where, and Lords fling off none but such as they may destroy
by it. Or perchance we deceive our selves, and every Lord having many, and, of
necessity, some rising, we mark only these.

XVI. why are Courtiers sooner Atheists then men of other conditions?
IS it because as Physicians contemplating Nature, and finding many abstruse
things subject to the search of Reason, thinks therefore that all is so; so they
(seeing men's destinies, mad at Court, neck out and in joint there, War, Peace,
Life and Death derived from thence) climb no higher? Or does a familiarity with
greatness, and daily conversation and acquaintance with it breed a contempt of
all greatness? Or because that they see that opinion or need of one another,
and fear makes the degrees of servants, Lords and Kings, do they think that God
likewise for such Reason has been man's Creator? Perchance it is because they
see Vice prosper best there, and, burdened with sin, do they not, for their
ease, endeavor to put off the fear and Knowledge of God, as facinorous men
deny Magistracy? Or are the most Atheists in that place, because it is the
fool that said in his heart, There is no God.

XVII. Why are statesmen most incredulous?
ARe they all wise enough to follow their excellent Pattern Tiberius, who
brought the senate to be diligent and industrions to believe him, were it never
so opposite or diametricall, that it destroyed their very ends to be believed,
as Asinius Gallus had almost deceived this man by believing him, and the Major
and Aldermen of London in Richard the Third? Or are businesses (about which
these men are conversant) so conjecturall, so subject to unsuspected
interventions that they are therefore forced to speak oraculously,
whisperingly, generally, and therefore escapingly, in the language of
Almanack-makers for weather? Or are those (as they call them) Arcana imperii,
as by whom the Prince provokes his lust, and by whom he vents it, of what
Cloth his socks are, and such, so deep, and so irreveald, as any error in them
is inexcusable? If these were the reasons, they would not only serve for
state-business. But why will they not tell true, what a Clock it is, and what
weather, but abstain from truth of it, if it conduce not to their ends, as
Witches which will not name Jesus, though it be in a curse? eithere they know
little out of their own Elements, or a Custom in one matter begetts an habit
in all. Or the lower sort imitate Lords, they their Princes, these their
Prince. Or else they believe one another, and so never hear truth. Or they
abstain from the little Channel of truth, least, at last, they should find the
fountain it self, God.

The Character of a Scot at the first sight.
AT his first appearing in the Charterhouse, an Olive colored Velvet suit
owned him, which since became mous-colour, A pair of unskour'd stockingsgules,
One indifferent shoe, his band of Edinburgh, and cuffs of London, both
strangers to his shirt, a white feather in a hat that had bin sod, one only
cloak for the rain, which yet he made serve him for all weathers: A
Barrenhalf-acre of Face, amidst whereof an eminent Nose advanced himself, like
the new Mount at Wansted, over-looking his Beard, and all the wild Country
thereabouts; He was tended enough, but not well; for they were certain dumb
creeping Followers, yet they made way for their Master, the Lord. -- At the
first presentment his Breeches were his Sumpter, and his Packets, Trunks,
Cloak-bags, Portmanteau's and all; He then grew a Knightwright, and there is
extant of his ware at 100l. 150l. and 200l. price. Immediately after this, he
shifteth his suit, so did his Whore, and to a Bear-baiting they went, whither I
followed them not, but Tom. Thorney did.

The True Character of a Dunce.
HE has a Soul drowned in a lump of Flesh, or is a piece of Earth that
Prometheus put not half his proportion of Fire into, a thing that has neither
edge of desire, nor feeling of affection in it, The most dangerous creature for
confirming an Atheist, who would straight swear, his soul were nothing but the
bare temperature of his body: He sleeps as he goes, and his thoughts seldom
reach an inch further then his eyes; The most part of the faculties of his soul
lie Fallow, or are like the restive Jades that no spur can drive forwards
toward the pursuit of any worthy design; one of the most unprofitable of all
Gods creatures, being as he is, a thing put clean besides his right use, made
fit for the cart and the flail, and by mischance Entangled amongst books and
papers, a man cannot tell possible what he is now good for, save to move up and
down and fill room, or to serve as Animatum Instrumentum for others to work
withal in base Employments, or to be a foyl for better wits, or to serve (as
They say monsters do) to set out the variety of nature, and Ornament of the
Universe, He is mere nothing of himself, neither eats, nor drinks, nor goes,
nor spits but by imitation, for all which, he has set forms and fashions, which
he never varies, but sticks to, with the like plodding constancy that a milhors
follows his trace, both the muses and the graces are his hard Mistrisses,
though he daily Invocate them, though he sacrifize Hecatombs, they still look a
squint, you shall note him often (besides his dull eye and louting head, and a
certain clammie benumbed pace) by a fair displayed beard, a Nightcap and a gown,
whose very wrincles proclaim him the true genius of formality, but of al
others, his discourse and compositions best speak him, both of them are much of
one stuf and fashion, he speaks just what his books or last company said unto
him without varying one whit and very seldom understands himself, you may know
by his discourse where he was last, for what he read or heard yesterday he now
discharges his memory or notebook of, not his understanding, for it never came
there; what he has he flings abroad at al adventurs without accomodating it to
time, place persons or occasions, he commonly loses himself in his tale, and
flutters up and down windles without recovery, and whatsoever next presents it
self, his heavy conceit seizes upon and goes along with, however
Heterogeneal to his matter in hand, his jests are either old flead proverbs, or
lean-starv'd- Apophthegm's, or poor verbal quips outworn by Servingmen,
Tapsters and Milkmaids, even laid aside by Bassaders, He assents to all men
that bring any shadow of reason, and you may make him when he speaks most
Dogmatically, even with one breath, to averr pure contradictions, His
Compositions differ only terminorum positione from Dreams, Nothing but rude
heaps of Immaterial-inchoherent drossie-rubbish-stuffe, promiscuously thrust up
together, enough to Infuse dullness and Barrenness of Conceit into him that is
so Prodigal of his ears as to give the hearing, enough to make a man's memory
Ache with suffering such dirtie stuff cast into it, as unwellcome to any true
conceit, as Sluttish Morsells or Wallowish Potions to a Nice-Stomack which
whiles he empties himself of, it sticks in his Teeth nor can he be Delivered
without Sweat and Sighs, and Humms, and Coughs enough to shake his Grandams
teeth out of her head; Heel spitt, and scratch, and yawn, and stamp, and turn
like sick men from one elbow to another, and Deserve as much pity during this
torture as men in Fits of Tertian Feavors or self lashing Penitentiaries; in a
word, Rip him quite asunder, and examine every shred of him, you shall find him
to be just nothing, but the subject of Nothing, the object of contempt, yet
such as he is you must take him, for there is no hope he should ever become
better.

An Essay of Valor.
I Am of opinion that nothing is so potent either to procure or merit Love, as
Valor, and I am glad I am so, for thereby I shall do my self much ease,
because Valor never needs much wit to maintain it: To speak of it in it self,
It is a quality which he that has, shall have least need of, so the best
League between Princes is a mutual fear of each other, it teaches a man to
value his reputation as his life, and chiefly to hold the Lie unsufferable,
though being alone, he finds no hurt it does him, It leaves it self to others
censures, for he that brags of his own valor, disswades others from believing
it, It fears a word no more then an Ague, It always makes good the Owner, for
though he be generally held a fool, he shall seldom hear so much by word of
mouth, and that enlarges him more than any spectacles, for it makes a little
fellow be called a tall man, it yields the wall to none but a woman, whose
weakness is her prerogative, or a man seconded with a woman as an usher, which
always goes before his betters, It makes a man become the witness of his own
words, and stand to whatever he has said, and thinks it a reproach to commit
his reviling unto the Law, it furnishes youth with action, and age with
discourse, and both by futures, for a man must ever boast himself in the
present tense, and to come nearer home, nothing draws a woman like to it; for
Valor toward men, is an Emblem of an ability toward women, a good quality
signifies a better. Nothing is more behooffull for that Sex; for from it they
receive protection, and we free from the danger of it: Nothing makes a shorter
cut for obtaining, for a man of Arms is always void of Ceremony, which is the
wall that stands between Pyramus and Thisbe, that is, Man and Woman, for there
is no pride in women but that which rebounds from our own baseness (as Cowards
grow Valiant upon those that are more Cowards) so that only by our pale asking,
we teach them to deny, and by our shamefacedness, we put them in mind to be
modest, whereas indeed it is cunning Rhetoric to persuade the hearers that
they are that already which he would have them to be; This kind of bashfulness
is far from men of Valor, and especially from soldiers, for such are ever men
(without doubt) forward and confident, losing no time least they should lose
opportunity, which is the best Factor for a Lover, and because they know women
are given to dissemble, they will never believe them when they deny, Whilome
before this age of wit, and wearing black, were broke in upon us, there was no
way known to win a Lady but by Tylting, Turnying, and riding through Forests,
in which time these slender striplings with little legs were held but of
strength enough to marry their widows, and even in our days there can be given
no reason of the Inundation of Servingmen upon their Mistresses, but (only)
that usually they carry their Masters Weapons, and his Valor; To be accounted
handsome, just, learned, or well favored, all this carries no danger with it,
but it is to be admitted to the Title of Valiant Acts, at least the adventuring
of his mortality, and al women take delight to hold him safe in their arms who
has 'scapt thither through many dangers: To speak at once, Man has a
privilege in Valor; In clothes and good faces we but imitate women, and many
of that Sex will not think much (as far as an answer goes) to dissemble wit
too. So then these neat youths, these women in men's apparel are too near a
woman to be beloved of her, They be both of a Trade, but be grim of aspect, and
such a one a Glass dares take, and she will desire him for neatness and
variety; A skar in a man's face is the same that a mole in a woman's; a Jewel
set in white to make it seem more white, for a skar in a man is a mark of
honor and no blemish, for it is a skar and a blemish too in a Soldier to be
with out one: Now as for all things else which are to procure Love, as a good
face, wit, good clothes, or a good body, each of them I confess may work
somewhat for want of a better, That is, if Valor be not their Rival; A good
face avails nothing if it be in a coward that is bashful, the utmost of it is
to be kissed, which rather increases then quenches appetite; He that sends
her gifts sends her world also, that he is a man of small gifts otherwise, for
wooing by signs and tokens implies the Author dumb; and if Ovid who writ the
Law of Love, were alive (as he is extant) would allow it as good a diversity,
that gifts should be sent as gratuities, not as bribes; Wit gets rather
promise then Love, Wit is not to be seen, and no woman takes advice of any in
her loving, but of her own eyes, and her waiting woman's; Nay which is worse,
Wit is not to be felt, and so no good fellow; Wit applied to a woman makes her
dissolve (or disclose) her simpering, and discover her teeth with laughter, and
this is surely a purge for love; for the beginning of love is a kind of foolish
melancholy, as for the man that makes his Tailor his Bawd, and hopes to
inveagle his Love with such a colored suit, surely the same deeply hazards the
loss of her favor upon every change of his clothes; So likewise for the other,
that Courts her silently with a good body, let me certify him that his clothes
depend upon the comeliness of the body, and so both upon opinion; she that
has been seduced by Apparel, let me give her to wit, that men always put off
their clothes before they go to bed: and let her that has been enamored of
her servants body, understand, that if she saw him in a skin of cloth, that is,
in a suit made to the pattern of his body, she would see slender cause to love
him ever after; there are no clothes sit so well in a woman's eye, as a suit of
Steel, though not of the fashion, and no man so soon surpriseth a woman's
affections, as he that is the subject of all whisperings, and has always
twenty stories of his own deeds depending upon him; Mistake me not, I
understand not by valor one that never fights but when he is backed with drink
or anger, or hissed on with beholders, nor one that is desperate, nor one that
takes away a Servingmans weapons when perchance it cost him his quarters wages,
nor yet one that wears a privy Coat of defense and therein is confident, for
then such as made Bucklers, would be accounted the Catalines of this
Commonwealth -- I intend one of an even Resolution grounded upon reason, which
is always even, having his power restrained by the Law of not doing wrong. But
now I remember I am for Valor and therefore I must be a man of few words.

PARADOX. XII. Place this after Paradox XI. fol. 37.
That Virginity is a Virtue.
I Call not that Virginity a virtue, which resideth only in the Bodies
integrity; much less if it be with a purpose of perpetual keeping it: for
then it is a most inhumane vice -- But I call that Virginity a virtue which is
willing and desirous to yield it self upon honest and lawful terms, when just
reason requires; and until then, is kept with a modest chastity of Body and
Mind. Some perchance will say that Virginity is in us by Nature, and therefore
no virtue. True, as it is in us by Nature, it is neither a Virtue nor Vice, and
is only in the body: (as in Infants, Children, and such as are incapable of
parting from it) But that Virginity which is in Man or or Woman of perfect age,
is not in them by Nature: Nature is the greatest enemy to it, and with most
subtle allurements seeks the overthrow of it, continually beating against it
with her Engines, and giving such forcible assaults to it, that it is a strong
and more then ordinary virtue to hold out till marriage. Ethick Philosophy
says, That no Virtue is corrupted, or is taken away by that which is good:
Hereupon some may say, that Virginity is therefore no virtue, being taken away
by marriage. Virginity is no otherwise taken away by marriage, then is the
light of the stars by a greater light (the light of the Sun:) or as a less
Title is taken away by a greater: (an Esquire by being created an Earl) yet
Virginity is a virtue, and has her Throne in the middle: The extremes are, in
Excess: to violate it before marriage; in defect, not to marry. In ripe years
as soon as reason persuades and opportunity admits, These extremes are equally
removed from the mean: The excesse-proceeds from Lust, the defect from
Peevishness, Pride and Stupidity. There is an old Proverb, That, they that die
maids, must lead Apes in Hell. An Ape is a ridiculous and an unprofitable
Beast, whose flesh is not good for meat, nor its back for burden, nor is it
commodious to keep an house: and perchance for the unprofitablenesse of this
Beast did this proverb come up: For surely nothing is more unprofitable in the
Commonwealth of Nature, then they that die old maids, because they refuse to be
used to that end for which they were only made. The Ape brings forth her
young, for the most part by twins; that which she loves best, she kills by
pressing it too hard: so foolish maids soothing themselves with a false conceit
of virtue, in fond obstinacy, live and die maids; and so not only kill in
themselves the virtue of Virginity, and of a Virtue make it a Vice, but they
also accuse their parents in condemning marriage. If this application hold not
touch, yet there may be an excellent one gathered from an Apes tender love to
Conies in keeping them from the Weasel and Ferret. From this similitude of an
Ape and an old Maid did the foresaid proverb first arise. But alas, there are
some old Maids that are Virgins much against their wills, and fain would change
their Virgin-life for a Married: such if they never have had any offer of fit
Husbands, are in some sort excusable, and their willingness, their desire to
marry, and their forbearance from all dishonest, and unlawful copulation, may
be a kind of inclination to virtue, although not Virtue it self. This Virtue
of Virginity (though it be small and fruitless) it is an extraordinary, and no
common Virtue. All other Virtues lodge in the Will (it is the Will that makes
them virtues.) But it is the unwillingnesse to keep it, the desire to forsake
it, that makes this a virtue. As in the natural generation and formation made
of the seed in the womb of a woman, the body is joynted and organized about the
28 day, and so it begins to be no more an Embrion, but capable as a matter
prepared to its form to receive the soul, which fails not to insinuate and
innest it self into the body about the fortieth day; about the third month it
has motion and sense: Even so Virginity is an Embrion, an unfashioned lump,
till it attain to a certain time, which is about twelve years of age in women,
fourteen in men, and then it begins to have the soul of Love infused into
it, and to become a virtue: There is also a certain limited time when it
cease to be a virtue, which in men is about forty, in women about thirty
years of age: yea, the loss of so much time makes their Virginity a Vice, were
not their endeavor wholly bent, and their desires altogether fixed upon
marriage: In Harvest time do we not account it a great vice of sloth and
negligence in a Husbandman, to overslip a week or ten days after his fruits
are fully ripe; May we not much more account it a more heinous vice, for a
Virgin to let her Fruit (in potentia) consume and rot to nothing, and to let
the virtue of her Virginity degenerate into Vice, (for Virginity ever kept is
ever lost.) Avarice is the greatest deadly sin next Pride: it takes more
pleasure in hoording Treasure then in making use of it, and will neither let
the possessor nor others take benefit by it during the Misers life; yet it
remains entire, and when the Miser dies most come to some body. Virginity ever
kept, is a vice far wors then Avarice, it will neither let the possessor nor
others take benefit by it, nor can it be bequeathed to any: with long keeping
it decays and withers, and becomes corrupt and nothing worth. Thus seeing that
Virginity becomes a vice in defect, by exceeding a limited time; I counsel all
female Virgins to make choice of some Paracelsian for their Physician, to
prevent the death of that Virtue: The Paracelsians (curing like by like) say,
That if the lives of living Creatures could be taken down, they would make us
immortal. By this Rule, female Virgins by a discreet marriage should swallow
down into their Virginity another Virginity, and devour such a life and spirit
into their womb, that it might make them, as it were, immortal here on earth,
besides their perfect immortality in heaven: And that Virtue which otherwise
would putrify and corrupt, shall then be complete; and shall be recorded in
Heaven, and enrolled here on Earth; and the name of Virgin shall be exchanged
for a far more honorable name, A Wife.

A sheaf of Miscellany EPIGRAMS.
Written in Latin by I. D. Translated by J. Main D. D.
1. Upon one who for his wives fault took it ill to be called Cuckold.
RUde scoffer! why do call me Cuckold? No
Loose fires of Love did in my bosom grow.
No wedlock knot by me unti'd has bin;
Nor am I guilty of another sin.
Thy wife being not her own with thy limbs she,
Fooled Cuckold, does commit Adultery.
Being, then, one flesh, and thou her Head, it is fit
The Horus, in Justice, on thy Brow should fit.
2. Upon One Roger a Rich Niggard, familiarly unacquainted with the Author.
BOttomless pit of gold! slave to thy Chest!
Poor in the midst of Riches not possessed!
Self Tantalus! To thine own wealth a Thief!
Affording scarce thy half-starv^d Womb relief.
Cheating thy limbs with cloths transparent worn;
Plague to thy self! To all men else a scorn!
Who madly do men's silver shapes adore;
And thence getst Cheeks pale as the silver Ore.
Fear not I Will beg; my mind's above thy pelf;
Good Thrifty Hodge, give something to thy self.
3. Upon a Whore barren and not barren.
THy often repeated is no Childless sin;
When thou art lain with still thy purs lies in.
4. On the same.
Thy dowbak'd Lusts, and Tail which vainly wags,
Are recompensed by thy still teeming bags.
5. On an old Bawd.
Lo, I an old Whore have to young resigned;
Yet in my old flesh dwells a young whores mind.
6. On the same.
Though ramage grown, Thou Art still for carting fit;
Thy will with others bodies does commit.
7. On the same.
She, whose scarce yet quenched lust to freeze begins,
Lived by her own once, now by others sins.
8. On a Bawdy House.
Here Mal, providing for Threescore,
Sets up the Trade she learned before,
With watchings many, sweatings more.
9. Upon an old rich scolding Woman who being married to a poor young man
upbraided him daily with the smallness of his Fortune. The Husbands complaint.
What wife like mine has any Husband known?
By day she is all Noise, by night all stone.
10. Another.
Shut thy purse-mouth, Old Trot, And let us appeal;
VVho'd without sauce taste so deformed a Meal?
11. On her unpleasing Kisses.
They cannot be Kisses called but toothless Nips,
Which, Beldam, come from thy faint trembling lips.
12. Another.
When thy dry grissels with my soft lips close,
I give thee kisses, thou return'st me blows.
13. Another.
Thy senses fail thee, And pray God they may,
To me thy Cofers will their loss defray.
14. On the same old Wife.
Thou art no Woman, nor no woman's part,
Infant, or Girl; say, who the Devil art.
15. To the same.
Be not seen, Thou, whom I distracted love,
Least my prodigious dotage scandal prove.
For being a mere Image, 'twil be spread,
That I no wife did, but an Idol wed.
16. Upon one who saw the Picture of his scolding wife in a Painters shop.
Dialog.
Painter, whose face is that I see?
Thy wives. Alas! I fear it is she.
Just so her scolding eyes do burn;
And Brow does into wrincles turn.
I tremble at her sharp nose; so
Her frighting chin does pointed grow.
All parts are so drawn to the life,
Methinks the picture, like my wise,
Begins to brawl, and kindle strife.
17. Another.
Say Painter, who is this whom thy hand has made,
Thy wife who do enquire, at least her shade.
It Is so; yet Painter, I had cause to doubt,
Seeing her Tongue, her most known part left out.
18. Another.
Who Is this, Painter? Thy wife, O
That she were in earnest so.
19. Another.
Venus, when Pygmalion praid,
Changed a Statue to a Maid;
Whose cold Marble drunk warm blood.
If at my request she would
My wife into Marble turn,
I would white Doves to her burn.
20. Upon a Pipe of Tobacco mis-taken by the Author for the Toothache.
Outlandish Weed! whilst I thy virtues tell,
Assist me Bedlam, Muses come from Hell.
21. Another.
An Herb thou art, but useless; for made fire,
From hot mouths puffed, thou do in fumes expire.
22. Another.
A cloud Ixion for a Goddess kissed;
So thou thy Lovers cosen'st with a mist.
23. To the Tobacco-seller.
Merchant of Smoke, when next thou make a feast
Invite some starved Chamelion to be guest.
24. Another.
Lothings, stincks, thirst, rhumes, aches, and catarrh,
Base weed, thy virtues, that is, thy poisons are.
25. Another.
I love thee not, nor thou me having tried
How thy scorcht Takers are but Takers fried.
26. Another.
Niggards till dead are Niggards; so vile weed,
Thy bounty from thy ashes does proceed.
27. Upon a Town built in the place where a wood grew; From whence it is called
Dukes-Wood, or the Burse
A Wood into fair buildings changed we see;
And the Oak stands City where 'twas fel'd a tree.
28. Another.
Fallen Oaks the Axe does into Timber hew;
And a Town stands where Trees demolisht grew.
29. Another.
From a Woods ruins did these Buildings rise,
And it stood Grove where now it Rafters lies.
30. Another.
This naked Beam which bears up Roofes from ground,
Was once with branches and fair green top, crowned.
31. Another.
Wood yields to stone, boughs are made joyces here,
And where a Cops stood now fair streets appear.
32. Upon a navigable River cut through a Town built out of a Wood.
Horsemen turn sailers, waves roll where grew woods
And against Nature Art make ways through floods.
33. Another.
The drowned land here a Crystal garment wears,
And her own trees, made Barges, once more bears.
34. Another.
The tree her womb-bred on the back now floats
Of this o're-flown field, now in wandering Boats.
35. Another.
The ground whose head was once enricht with Oaks,
Her Temples now steept in seawater sokes.
36. Another.
The place where once grew Ash for warlike spears
The Maze makes drunk now with his brinish tears
37. Upon the Medows over-flown there.
The Medows which their perfumed locks did boast
Ore-flown with waters have their perfumes lost.
38. Another.
The hungry Cow here lately did mistake;
And seeking grass was cosen'd with a lake.
39. Another.
Here Fishes dwell, till now not used to fields;
And pasture ground here sportful Gudgeons yields.
40. Another.
Mere pleasant fields drowned by the wandering Maze,
See scaly flocks swim where once sheep did graze.
41. Another.
Dukes-wood where once thick bushes did appear,
Like a new Island now stands in a mere.
42. Upon a piece of ground ore-flown, where once a Leaguer quartered.
Here where Tents stood, Mars now to Neptune yields,
And Sea-nymphs tread moist dances ore the fields.
43. Another.
Fishes now quarter where pavilions stood;
And the smooth Tench dies the sharp hook with blood.
44. Another.
Finn'd Soldiers here in Belgic Quarters jar;
And the fierce Pike in troubled streams makes war.
45. Another.
Dutchman! This Grove once hatched the Warlick Speer,
Which angry Perches on their backs now wear.
46. Another.
Gudgeons, where soldiers lay, ly trencht in Sand,
Fearing the bloody Colors of the Land.
47. A Dutch Captain of Foot, having with his Soldiers entered a Breach, and
there a while fought valiantly with a Two-handed Sword; In the very point of
Victory, being mortally wounded, spoke thus:
I fighting die; How much more blessed then they,
Whom a blind shot does, standing idle, slay.
48. Another.
We Have conquered Boys; My wounds I highly rate,
When with such Honor they requite my fate.
49. Another.
Thus conquering killed, my ashes triumphs gain,
And make me wish thus to be often slain.
50. Another.
I die well paid, whilst my expiring breath,
Smiles ore the Tombs of foes made kin by death.
51. Another.
Me the queld Spaniard to the next world sent
Not unrevenged; his Troops before me went.
52. His Will.
Let Heaven my soul, the foe my life, the grave
My corpse, my fame let my saved Country have.
53. To the Prince of Aurange, on his famous Victory over the Spaniards in
Dukes-Wood.
Now Golden Fruit, Prince, hang on Dukes-wood Boughs;
Since it with Laurel crowned thy conquering Brows.
54. Another.
Holland and Aurange may their Conquest boast
Of the quelled Spaniard, but brave Aurange most.
55. Another.
Spaniard, no more call Golden Fleeces thine,
Since the bright name of Aurange does more shine.
56. A Panegyric on the Hollanders being Lords of the Sea. Occasioned by the
Authors being in their Army at Dukes-wood.
Heathen! No more thy Neptune boast; Here see
A Neptune more Lord of the sea then He;
Whom fruitful Holland feeds, Holland Sea-bred;
And neighboring Zealand folds in watery bed.
Neptune's a Dutch God; Here his wanderings stay;
And his calmed ragings con^ring chains obey.
His standing Flood here to the Bridle yields,
And his fierce Torrent plays through unknown fields.
Here the swollen sea views the inferior ground,
And yet no green bush, even to wonder, drowned;
Whilst Billows, like huge mountains, do hang over
The pleasing Vales which creep along the shore.
Banks hold waves captive, and through sluices free,
And Glebes from watery prisons snatched we see.
Glebes, which were long of sun, and sky bereaved,
Now the Dutch Plowman sees well cornd and sheav'd.
Curbing the Ocean with stout Mounds and Bars,
And with the salt Gods of it waging Wars.
Making Art fetch from the deep's ravenous womb
Pastures, lost towns, and houses; In which swomm
Shell'd Citizens,' among pillars drencht in brine.
Should Achelous here join strengths with thine,
And wrestle for the conquest, Holland, here
Each Drayner would a Hercules appear;
And cosening Art with Art, in these dried Plains,
Would bind the often shape-changing God in chains.
The often tamed Maze here the Dutch yoke endures,
And his feared Master to the VValls secures
Of the sam'd Burse now, Dutchman, fear no harms,
When against neighboring Cities seas take arms.
The Oceans thine, with thee his waves have sworn
The league which Philip broke. By him thou art born
To the parcht Indians, and those lands of gold
Which the proud Tyrant does in bondage hold:
Whose wealth transported from the plundered Mine
His Plate-Fleet calls his, But the Sea makes thine.
Each Duch-man is Columbus; Worlds unknown
To the discovering Spaniard, are his grown:
Nor can I here conceal, nor yet say well,
Where Heynskirch's praise, or Oliver's excel,
Or Heyn's more bold adventure; whose bright Ore
Pressed the Sea's back with wealth snatch from the shore
For whilst I do Dutch voyages rehearse,
And sail with thy victorious Ships in verse,
I, Holland in thy swimming Camp am rolled
Into all Seas, and there both Poles behold.
The Africa sands to thee large tribute send,
And Asia glories to be styled thy friend;
America's rich Mines grow in thy lands,
And at thy conquests Europe wondering stands.
57. To Sleep, stealling upon him as he stood upon the Guard in the corner of a
running Trench, at the siege of Duke's-Wood.
WHy do besiege mine eyes, untimely Sleep?
And over my limbs with thy dull setters creep?
Hence, hence, depart; To roofs well tyll'd repair;
To beds of down, and minds unvext with care.
Shut Virgins eyes, whilst Love tired with delay,
Unstrings his Bow, and lets his Arrows play.
Rock weary Ploughmen, and new strength beget
In those whose spirits were breathed forth in sweat;
To men oppressed with grief, who court thy charms.
And men unbusied lend thy Opium arms.
Be kind to Men in bedlam, close the eyes
Of him who in a raging fever lies.
But let me watch; not as a spy, to mark,
With whom my wench steals meetings in the dark.
Here guards are kept, and from yond watchful towers,
The crasty Foe vyes broken: sleeps with ours;
Seeking by slye plots, what pitcht-fields deny;
Hence, hence, then Morpheus, from our quarters fly.
Our very standing still here business find;
Duty imploys our bodies, cares our mind.
Duty which may the next hour double strike;
Whilst each man here stands grasping of a pike;
Waitings stolen onsets with our weary spears,
Examining even whispers with our ears.
Doubts of the coming Foe, with hopes are mixed,
And all eyes are one his approaches fi^t.
All passengers we summon with our eyes,
Ask who they are, and question them or spies.
If well-known friends, they pass; if not, they stay
Till we their doubtful answers strictly weigh.
Will not this serve, Sleep? will not all this fright thee?
See, then, a night turned into day to light thee.
See a bright shine from coal black powder spring,
And light from darkness once more issuing.
See flames like those belcht forth from Aetna's Maw,
Such flames as no Fleece-stealing Jason saw.
Hecuba's child of fire in dreams begot,
Was not like that from murdring Canons shot.
If yet thou wilt stay, hear thunders mixed with flame,
Such as near yet from Cyclops Anvil came.
Hark how the loud gun shakes the trembling sky,
whilst threatening Bals in showers of murder fly.
Sicilian Bull did not so loudly roar;
Nor was the sword more dreadful which hung over
Damocles neck from guilt roof. Then, away,
And to such dangers, Sleep, don't me betray.
58. To his Fellow Sentinels.
ANd you, Comrades, with me this night endure;
Let our cause make us bold, Courage secure.
Lets with stout minds our present dangers meet;
And let our stations from their toyls grow sweet.
Stations where soldiers are made brothers. Night^
In wine, and Revels spent make winged flights;
A coy whore is with patience watched for, yet
No honor's gained; glory with dangers met
Here does attend us; toyls are paid with praise.
Let Us weave us Crowns, then, of immortal Bays.
To Heaven our souls, to Earth let us flesh assign,
But in our minds let loyal honor shine.
59. In Comaedam celeberrimam Cinthiam dictam ad in stantiam alterius f^cit.
SIc vaga formosas superabat Cinthia Nymphas
Ut tu nunc socias Cinthia dicta tuas.
Quae tibi Majestas vultus, que gratia frontis!
Spiritus ut major quam muliebris inest?
Tam been compositum suavis decet actio corpus
Ut posset credi singula membra loqui.
Cum velis esse Venus, vel cum velis esse Diana
Tam sunilis non est ipsa vel ipsa sibi,
Si velis esse Diana hos o non desere saltus,
Haec nemus haec fontem florida scena dabit.
O si te nudam semel hoc in font viderem
Cornua tunc essent paenaque grata canes.
Si Luna esse velis fiat tibi sphaera theatrum,
Pascantur radiis Lumina nostra tuis.
Sed raro hinc abeas, and cum discedere velles
O si te possent Lumina nostra sequi;
Aut tua cum desit foelix praesentia nobis
Impressis liceat viribus usque srui.
Idem Anglice versum.
AS wandering Cinthia all her Nymphs excells,
So do thou all thy fellows; In thee dwells
Majesty mixed with loveliness, a spirit
That Is more then womanish; thy graces merit,
And force a liking, as the lights above;
The Earths light vapors upwards force and move:
Thy action does each passion so well fit,
As if each limb did help to utter it:
If thou will Venus or Diana be,
Neither will be so like her self as thee.
(...) thou be Diana, haunt these fields,
(...) both woods and fountains yields.
That I could see thee here but wash thy snow,
Acteon's fate I Would joy to undergo.
Will thou be the Moon, then make thy sphere this stage;
But it were pity thou should change thy age;
And if from our Horizon thou should go,
Still to view thee we would change Horizon too;
But that we may when thou art gone from hence,
Still be made happy by thy influence.
On one particular passage of her action, when she was to be stripped of her
clothes by Fulvio, but not without much resistance. Videns excogitavit.
AS Fulvio Cinthia's glory would eclips,
And graced by her limbs, her robe off strips;
To see her how she strove, and prayed, and cried,
But for the plays sake none could have denied.
And as she strove with him, so modesty
Did strive with anger for the mastery.
How was she pale with anger, red with shame!
Her color changed, with choler went and came,
As when the winking moon strives with a cloud,
Whose glory darkness does by fits enshroude:
was it nor envy, that we might not see
That which from the smock could scarce discerned be;
Or wast for shamefastness: yes, yes, 'twas so,
That too much hiding of her face did show.
So looked the Nymph which Jupiter beguiled
In The water with Diana got with child;
So Salmacis half ravished in the brook,
As she almost stripped to her smock did look.
The Poet was too sparing, had she been
Like intrapt Venus naked to have been seen;
And with a net unhid been covered;
How on her limbs our hungry eyes had fed,
And dwelt on her seen members, whilst the rest
Had by proportion easily been guest:
But pity 'twere that she enjoined had been
So hard a penance, guilty of no sin.
Finis.
IGNATIUS HIS CONCLAVE: OR, His Inthronisation in a late Election in HELL.

Wherein many Things are mingled by way of SATYR.

Concerning
The disposition of Jesuits. The Creation of a new Hell. The establishing of a
Church in the Moon.
There is also added an Apology for JESUITS.

All dedicated to the Two adversary Angels, which are Protectors of the Papal
Consistory, and of the College of SORBON.

By JOHN DONE, Doctor of Divinity, and late Dean of Saint Paul's.

Printed at London, 1653.

To the two tutelar Angels, Protectors of the Popes Consistory, and of the
College OF SORBON.
MOst noble couple of Angels, lest it should be said that you did never agree,
and never meet, but that you did ever abhor one another, and ever Resemble
Janus with a diverse face;
I attempted to bring and join you together once in these papers not that I
might compose your differences, for you have not choson me for Arbi^or; but,
that you might beware of an enemy common to you both, I will relate what I saw.
I was in an Ecstasy, and My little wandering sportful Soul,
Guest, and companion of my body,
had liberty to wander through all places, and to survey and reckon all the
rooms, and all the volumes of the heavens, and to comprehend the situation,
the dimensions, the nature, the people and the policy, both of the swimming
Islands, the Planets, and of all those which are fixed in the Firmament. Of
which, I think it an honester part as yet to be silent, then to do Galilaeo
wrong by speaking of it, who of late has summoned Nuncius ^ydereus.
the other worlds, the Stars to come nearer to him, and give him an account of
themselves, Or to Keppler, who (as himself testifies of himself) ever since
Tycho Braches death, has received it into De stella (...) Cygno.
his care, that no new thing should be done in heaven without his knowledge.
For by the law, Prevention must take place; and therefore what they have found
and discovered first, I am content they speak and utter first. Yet this they
may vouchsafe to take from me, that they shall hardly find Enoch, or Elias any
where in their circuit. When I had surveied all the heavens, then as The Lark
by busy and laborious ways,
Having climbed up th'ethereall hill, does raise
His Hymns to Phoebus Harp: And striking then
His sails, his wings, does fall down back again,
So suddenly, that one may safely say,
A stone came lazily that came that Way,
In the twinkling of an eye, I saw all the rooms in Hell open to my sight.
And by the benefit of certain spectacles, I know not of what making, but I
think, of the same, by which Gregory the great and Beda did discern so
distinctly the souls of their friends, when they were discharged from their
bodies and sometimes the souls of such men as they knew not by sight, and of
some that were never in the world, and yet they could distinguish them flying
into Heaven, or conversing with living men. I saw all the channels in the
bowels of the Earth; and all the inhabitants of all nations, and of all ages
were suddenly made familiar to me. I think truly, Robert Aquinas when he
Paleotus de Sindone cap. 6.
took Christ's long Oration, as he hung upon the Cross, did use some such
Instrument as this, but applied to the ear: And so I Iosephina di Gieron
Gratian.
think did he, which dedicated to Adrian 6. that Sermon which Christ made in
praise of his Father Joseph: for else how did they hear that, which none but
they ever heard? As for the Suburbs of Hell (I mean both Limbo and Purgatory) I
must confess I passed them over so negligently, that I saw them not: and I was
hungerly carried, to find new places, never discovered before. For Purgatory
did not seem worthy to me of much diligence, because it may seem already to
have been believed by some persons, in some corners of the Roman Church for
about 50 years; that is ever since the Council of Trent had a mind to
fulfill the prophecies of Homer, Virgil, and the other Patriarks of the
Papists, and being not satisfied with making one Transubstantiation, purposed
to bring in another: which is, to change Fables into Articles of Faith.
Proceeding therefore to more inward places, I saw a secret place, where there
were not many, beside Lucifer himself; to which, only they had title, which
had so attempted any innovation in this life, that they gave an affront to all
Antiquity, and induced doubts, and anxieties, and scruples, and after a
liberty of believing what they would, at length established opinions, directly
contrary to all established before. Of which place in Hell, Theod: Ni em: nemus
unio, Tra. 6. cap. 29.
Lucifer afforded us hertofore some little knowledge, when more then 200.
years since, in an Epistle written to the Cardinal S. Sexti, he promised him
a room in his palace, in the remotest part of his eternal Chaos, which I take
to be this place. And here Pope Boniface 3. and Mahomet, seemed to contend
about the highest room. He gloried of having expelled an old Religion, and
Mahomet of having brought in a new; each of them a great deluge to the world.
But it is to be feared, that Mahomet will fail therein, both because he
attributed something to the old Testament, and because he used Sergius as his
fellow-Bishop, in making the Alcoran; whereas it was evident to the supreme
Judge Lucifer, (for how could he be ignorant of that which himself had put
into the Popes mind?) that Boniface had not only neglected, but destroyed the
policy of the State of Israel, established in the old Testament, when he
prepared Popes a way, to tread upon the necks of Princes, but that he also
abstained from al Example and Coadjutor, when he took upon him that new name,
which Gregory himself (a Pope neither very foolish, nor overmodest) ever
abhord. Besides that every day affords new Advocates to Boniface his side. For
since the Franciscans were almost worn out (of whom their General Francis,
Sedulius Apolog. pro libro Con form. l. 2. cap. 2.
had seen 6000, Soldiers in one army, that is, in one Chapter) which, because
they were then but fresh Soldiers, he saw assisted with 18000 Devils; the
Jesuits have much recompensed those decaies and damages, who sometimes have
maintained in Harlay defense des Jesuits.
their Tents, 200000 Scholars. For though the Order of Benedict have ever been
so fruitful, that they say of it, That all the new Orders, Vollader: deCanoniza
Fran cis To. in Epist.
which in latter times have broken out, are but little springs, or drops, and
that Order the Ocean, which has sent out 52 Popes, 200 Cardinals, 1600
Archbishops, 4000 Bishops, and 5000 Saints, approved by the Church, and
therefore it cannot be denied, but that Boniface his part is much relieved by
that Order; yet if they be compared to the Jesuits, or to the weak and
unperfect types of them, the Franciscans, it is no great matter that they have
done. Though therefore they esteem Mahomet worthy of the name of an Innovator,
and therein perchance not much inferior to Boniface, yet since his time, to
ours, almost all which have followed his S^t, have lived barren in an (...) and
idle concord, and cannot boast that they have produced any new matter: whereas
Boniface his Successors awakened by him, have ever been fruitful in bringing
forth new sins, and new pardons, and Idolatries, and King-killings. Though
therefore it may religiously, and piously be believed, that Turks as well as
Papists, come daily in Troops to the ordinary and common places of Hell; yet
certainly to this more honorable room reserved for especial Innovators, the
Papists have more frequent access; and therefore Mahomet is out of hope to
prevail, and must imitate the Christian Emperors, and be content to sit (as
yet he does) at the Popes feet. Now to this place not only such endeavor to
come, as have Innovated in matters directly concerning the soul, but they also
which have done so, either in the Arts, or in conversation, or in any thing
which exercises the faculties of the Soul, and may so provoke to quarrelsome
and brawling controversies, for so the truth be lost, it is no no matter how.
But the gates are seldom opened, nor scarce oft^ then once in an age. But my
destiny favored me so much, that I was present then, and saw all the
pretenders, and all that affected an entrance, and Lucifer himself, who then
came out into the outward chamber, to hear them plead their own Causes. As
soon as the door creekt, I spied a certain Mathematician, which till then had
been busted to find, to deride, to detrude Ptolomey; and now with an erect
countenance, and settled pace, came to the gates, and with hands and feet,
(scarce respecting Lucifer himself) beat the doors and cried; Are these shut
against me, to whom all the Heavens were ever open, who was a Soul to the
Earth, and gave it motion?

By this I knew it was Copernicus: For though I had never heard ill of his
life, and therefore might wonder to find him there; yet when I remembered that
the Papists have extended the name and punishment of Heresy, almost to every
thing, and that as yet I used Gregory's and Bedes Bellar. de Purgat. lib. 2. c.
8.
spectacles, by which one saw Origin, who deserved so well of the Christian
Church, burning in hell, I doubted no longer, but assured my self that it was
Copernicus which I saw, to whom Lucifer said, Who are you? For though even by
this boldness you seem worthy to enter, and have attempted a new faction even
in Hell, yet you must first satisfy those which stand about you, and which
expect the same fortune as you do. Except, O Lucifer, answered Copernicus, I
thought thee of the Race of the Star Lucifer, with which I am so well
acquainted, I should not vouchsafe thee this discourse. I am he, which pitying
thee who were thrust into the center of the world, raised both thee and thy
prison, the Earth, up into the Heavens; so as by my means, God does not enjoy
his revenge upon thee. The Sun, which was an officious Spy, and a betrayer of
faults and so thy enemy, I have appointed to go into the lowest part of the
world. Shall these Gates open to such as have Innovated in small matters, and
shall they be shut against me, who have turned the whole frame of the world,
and am thereby almost a new Creator. More then this he spoke not. Lucifer stuck
in a meditation. For what should he do? It seemed unjust to deny entry to him
which had deserved so well, and dangerous to grant it to one of so great
ambitions, and undertakings: Nor did he think that himself had attempted
greater matters before his fall. Something he had which he might have
conveniently opposed, but he was loath to utter it, lest he should confess his
fear. But Ignatius Loyola which was got near his chair, a subtle fellow, and
so endued with the Devil, that he was able to tempt, and not only that, but
(as they say) even to possess the Devil, apprehended this perplexity in
Lucifer. And making himself sure of his own entrance, and knowing well, that
many thousands of his family aspired to that place, he opposes himself against
all others. He was content they should be damned, but not that they should
govern. And though when he died he was utterly ignorant in all great learning,
and knew not so much as Ptolomeys or Copernicus name, but might have been
persuaded that the words Almagest, Zenith, and Nadir, were Saints names, and
fit to be put into the Letanie, and Ora pro nobis joined to them; yet after he
had spent some time in hell, he had learnt somewhat of his Jesuits, which daily
came thither. And whilst he stayed at the threshold of Hell, that is, from the
time when he delivered himself over to the Popes will, he took a little taste
of learning. Thus furnished, thus he undertakes Copernicus. Do you think to win
our Lucifer to your part, by allowing him the honor of being of the Race of
that Star? who was not only made before all the Stars, but being glutted
with the glory of shining there, transferred his dwelling and Colonies unto
this Monarchy, and thereby gave our Order a noble example, to spy, to invade,
and to possess foraign Kingdoms. Can our Lucifer or his followers have any
honor from that Star Lucifer, which is but Ve^us? Whose face how much we
scorn, appears by this, that for the most part we use her aversly and
preposterously. Rather let our Lucifer glory in Lucifer the Calaritan Bishop;
not therefore because he is placed amongst Heretics, only for affirming the
propagation of August de Haer. c. 81
the soul; but especially for this, that he was the first that opposed the
dignity of Princes, and imprinted the names of Antichrist, Judas, and other
stigmatique marks upon the Emperor; But for you, what new thing have you
invented, by which our Lucifer gets any thing? What cares he whether the earth
travel, or stand still? Has your raising up of the earth into heaven, brought
men to that confidence, that they build new towers or threaten God again? Or do
they out of this motion of the earth conclude, that there is no hell, or deny
the punishment of sin? Do not men believe? do they not live just as they did
before? Besides, this detracts from the dignity of your learning, and derogates
from your right and title of coming to this place, that those opinions of
yours, may very well be true. If therefore any man have honor or title to this
place in this matter, it belongs wholly to our Clavins, who opposed himself
opportunely against you, and the truth, which at that time was creeping into
every man's mind. He only can be called the Author of all contentions, and
School-combates in this cause; and no greater profit can be hoped for here in,
but that for such brables, more necessary matters be neglected. And yet not
only for this is our Clavius to be honored, but for the great pains also which
he took in the Gregorian Calender, by which both the peace of the Church, and
civil businesses have been egregiously troubled: nor has heaven it self
escaped his violence, but has ever since obeyed his appointments: so that S.
Steven, John Baptist, and all the Harlay. defense dis Jesuits mesdi. 6.
rest, which have been commanded to work miracles at certain appointed days,
where their relics are preserved, do not now attend till the day come, as
they were accustomed, but are awaked ten days sooner, and constrained by him to
come down from heaven to do that business. But your inventions can scarce be
called yours, since before you, Heraclides, Ecphantus, and Aristarchus thrust
them into the world: who notwithstanding content themselves with lower rooms
amongst the other Philosophers, and aspire not to this place, reserved only for
Antichristian Heroes: neither do you agree so well amongst your selves, as that
you can be said to have made a Sect, since, as you have perverted and changed
the order and Scheme of others: so Tycho Brachy has done by yours, and others
by his. Let therefore this little Mathematician (dread Emperor) withdraw
himself to his own com pany. And if hereafter the Fathers of our Order can draw
a Cathedral Decree from the Pope, by which it may be defined as a matter of
Faith, That the earth does not move; and an Anathema inflicted upon all which
hold the contrary: then perchance both the Pope which shall decree that, and
Copernicus his followers (if they be Papists) may have the dignity of this
place. Lucifer signified his assent: and Copernicus without muttering a word,
was as quiet as he thinks the Sun: when he which stood next him, entered into
his place. To whom Lucifer said: And who are you? He answered, Philippus
Aureolus Theophrastus Paracelsus Bombast of Hohenheim. At this Lucifer
trembled, as if it were a new Exorcisme, and he thought it might well be the
first verse of S. John, which is always employed in Exorcismes, and might now
be taken out of the Welsh or Irish Bibles. But when he understood that it was
but the web of his name, he recollected himself, and raising himself upright,
asked was he had to say to the great Emperor Satan, Lucifer, Beelzebub,
Leviathan, Abaddon. Paracelsus replied, It were an injury to thee, O glorious
Emperor, if I should deliver before thee what I have done, as though all those
things had not proceeded from thee, which seemed to have bin done by me, thy
organ and conduit; yet since I shall rather be thy trumpet herein then mine own,
some things may be uttered by me. Besides therefore that I brought all
Methodicall Physicians and the Art it self into so much contempt, that that
kind of Physic is almost lost; this also was ever my principal purpose, that
no certain new Art, nor fixed rules might be established, but that all remedies
might be dangerously drawn from my uncertain, ragged, and unperfect
experiments, in trial whereof how many men have been made carkases? And falling
upon those times which did abound with paradoxicall and unusual diseases, of
all which, the pox, which then began to rage, was almost the center and sink: I
ever professed an assured and an easy cure thereof, lest I should deterr any
from their licentiousness. And whereas almost all poisons are so disposed and
conditioned by nature, that they offend some of the senses, and so are easily
discerned and avoided, I brought it to pass, that that treacherous quality of
theirs might be removed and so they might safely be given without suspicion,
and yet perform their office as strongly. All this I must confess I wrought by
thy minerals and by thy fires, but yet I cannot despair of my reward, because I
was thy first minister and instrument in these innovations. By this time
Ignatius had observed a tempest risen in Lucifers countenance: for he was just
of the same temper as Lucifer, and therefore suffered with him in every thing,
and felt all his alterations. That therefore he might deliver him from
Paracelsus, he said; You must not think sir, that you may here draw out an
Oration to the proportion of your name. It must be confessed that you attempted
great matters, and well becoming a great officer of Lucifer, when you undertook
not only to make a man in your Alimbecks, but also to preserve him immortal.
And it cannot be doubted, but that out of your Commentaries upon the
Scriptures, in which you were utterly ignorant, many men have taken occasion of
erring, and thereby this kingdom much indebted to you. But must you therefore
have access to this secret place? What have you compassed even in Physic it
self, of which we Jesuits are ignorant? For though our Ribadenegra have
reckoned none of our Order, which has written in ^ysick, yet how able and
sufficient we are in that faculty, I will be tried by that Pope who has given
a privilege Bulla 18 in Gre^ cont. (...) a (...) ovius de Majest. E^s. milic.
c. 7
to Jesuits to practice Physic and to be present at Deathsbed, (a) which is
denied to other Orders: for why should he deny us their bodies, whose souls he
delivered to us? and since he has transferd upon us the power to practice
Physic, he may justly be thought to have transferd upon us the art it self by
the same Omnipotent Bull; since he which grants the end, is by our Rules of Law
presumed to have granted all means necessary to that end. Let me (dread
Emperor) have leave to speak truth before thee; These men abuse and profane
too much thy metals, which are the bowels and treasure of thy Kingdom: For
what does Physic profit thee? Physic is a soft and womanish thing. For since
no medicine does naturally Mosnes. Theor. 1 cap. 2.
draw blood, that science is not fit nor worthy of our study. Besides, why
should those things which belong to you, be employed to preserve from diseases,
or to procure long life? were it not fitter that your Brother and Colleague,
the Bishop of Rome, which governs upon the face of your earth, and gives daily
increase to your Kingdom, should receive from you these helps and subsidies? To
him belongs all the gold, to him all the precious stones, conceald in your
intrals, whereby he might bait and ensnare the Princes of the earth, through
their Lords and Councillors means, to his obedience, and to receive his
commandments, especially in these times, when almost every where his ancient
rights and tributes are denied unto him. To him belongs your Iron, and the
ignobler metals, to make engines; To him belongs your Minerals apt for poison;
To him the Saltpeter, and all the Elements of Gunpowder, by which he may
demolish and overthrow Kings and Kingdoms, and Courts, and seats of Justice.
Neither does Paracelsus truly deserve the name of an Innovator, whose doctrine
Severi^us and his other followers do referr to the most ancient times. Think
therefore your self well satisfied, if you be admitted to govern in chief that
Legion of Homicid Physicians, and of Princes which shall be made away by poison
in the midst of their sins, and of women tempting by paintings and
face-Physick. Of all which sorts great numbers will daily come hither out of
your Academy.

Content with this sentence, Paracelsus departed; and Machiavel succeeded, who
having observed Ignatius his forwardness, and sauciness, and how, uncald, he
had thrust himself into the office of Kings-Attorney, thought this stupid
patience of Copernicus and Paracelsus, (men which tasted too much of their
Germany) unfit for a Florentine: and therefore had provided some venomous
darts, out of his Italian Arsenal, to cast against this worn soldier of
Pampelune, this French-Spanish mungrell, Ignatius. But when he thought better
upon it, and observed that Lucifer ever approved whatsoever Ignatius said, he
suddenly changed his purpose; and putting on another resolution, he determined
to direct his speech to Ignatius, as to the principal person next to Lucifer,
as well by this means to sweeten and mollify him, as to make Lucifer suspect,
that by these honors and specious titles offered to Ignatius and entertained
by him, his own dignity might be eclipsed or clouded; and that Ignatius by
winning to his side politic men, exercised in civil businesses, might attempt
some innovation in that Kingdom. Thus therefore he began to speak. Dread
Emperor, and you, his watchful and diligent Genius, father Ignatius,
Arch-Chancellor of this Court, and highest Priest of this highest Synagogue
(except the primacy of the Roman Church reach also unto this place) let me
before I descend to myself, a little consider, speak, and admire your
stupendous wisdom, and the Government of this state. You may vouchsafe to
remember great Emperor) how long after the Nazarens death, you were forced to
live a solitary, a barren, and an Eremiticall life, till at last, as it was
ever your fashion to imitate Heaven) out of your abundant love, you begot this
dearly beloved son of yours, Ignatius, which stands at your right hand. And
from both of you proceeds a spirit, whom you have sent into the world, who
triumphing both with Mitre and Crown, governs your Militant Church there. As
for those sons of Ignatius, whom either he left alive, or were born after his
death, and your spirit, the Bishop of Rome, how justly and properly may they be
called equivocall men? And not only equivocall in that sense, in which the
Popes Legates, at your Nicene Council were called Equivocal, because they did
agree in all their opinions, and in all their words: but especially because
they have brought into the world a new art of Equivocation. O wonderful and
incredible Hypercritiques, who not out of marble fragments, but out of the
secretest Records of Hell it self, that is, out of the minds of Lucifer, the
Pope and Ignatius, (persons truly equivocall) have raised to life again the
language of the Tower of Babel so long concealed, and brought us again from
understanding one another. For my part (O noble pair of Emperors) that I may
freely confess the truth, all which I have done, wheresoever there shall be
mention made of the Jesuits, can be reputed but childish, for this honor I
hope will not be denied me, that I brought in an Alphabet, and provided certain
elements, and was some kind of Schoolmaster in preparing them a way to higher
undertakings; yet it grieves me and makes me ashamed that I should be ranked
with this idle and Chymaericall Copernicus, or this cadaverous vulture,
Paracelsus. I scorn that those gates into which such men could conceive any
hope of entrance, should not voluntarily fly open to me: yet I can better
endure the rashness and fellowship of Paracelsus then the other: because he
having been conveniently practiced in the butcheries and mangling of men, he
had the reason to hope for favor of the Jesuits: For I my self went always
that way of blood, and therefore I did ever prefer the sacrifices of the
Gentiles and of the Jews, which were perfor med with effusion of blood (whereby
not only the people but the Priests also were animated to bold enterprises)
before the soft and wanton sacrifices of Christians. If I might have had my
choice, I should rather have wished that the Roman Church had taken the Bread
than the Wine from the people, since in the wine there is some color to imagine
and represent blood. Neither did you (most reverend Bishop of this diocese
Ignatius) abhor from this way of blood. For having consecrated your first age
to the wars, and grown, somewhat unable to follow that course by reason of a
wound; you did presently begin to think seriously of a spiritual war against
the Church and found means to open ways even into Kings chambers, for your
executioners. Which dignity you did not reserve only to your own Order, but
(though I must confess, that the foundation, and the nourishment of this
doctrine remains with you, and is peculiar to you, out of your infinite
liberality,) you have vouchsafed sometime, to use the hands of other men in
these employments. And therefore as well they, who have so often in vain
attempted it in England, as they which have brought their great purposes to
effect in France, are indebted only to you for their courage and resolution.
But yet although the entrance into this place may be decreed to none, but to
Innovators, and to only such of them as have dealt in Christian business, and
of them also, to those only which have had the fortune to do much harm; I
cannot see but that next to the Jesuits, I must be invited to enter, since I
did not only teach those ways by which, thorough perfidiousnesse and
dissembling of Religion, a man might possess and usurp upon the liberty of
free Commonwealths; but also did arm and furnish the people with my
instructions, how when they were under this oppression, they might safeliest
conspire, and remove a tyrant, or revenge themselves of their Prince and redeem
their former losses; so that from both sides, both from Prince and people, I
brought an abundant harvest, and a noble increase to this kingdom. By this
time I perceived Lucifer to be much moved with this Oration, and to incline
much toward Machiavel; For he did acknowledge him to be a kind of Patriarch,
of those whom they call Laymen. And he had long observed, that the Clergy of
Rome tumbled down to Hell daily, easily, voluntarily, and by troops, because
they were accustomed to sin against their conscience, and knowledge; but that
the Laity sinning out of a sloathfulnesse, and negligence of finding the
truth, did rather offend by ignorance and omission. And therefore he thought
himself bound to reward Machiavel, which had awakened this drowsy and
implicit Laity to greater, and more bloody Undertakings. Besides this, since
Ignatius could not be denied the place, whose ambitions and turbulencies
Lucifer understood very well, he thought Machiavel a fit and necessary
Instrument to oppose against him; that so the skales being kept even by their
factions, he might govern in peace, and two poisons mingled might do no harm.
But he could not hide this intention from Ignatius, more subtle than the Devil
and the verier Lucifer of the two: Therefore Ignatius rushed out, threw
himself down at Lucifers feet, and grovelling on the ground adored him. Yet
certainly, Vasques would not call this idolatry, because in the shape of the
Devil he worshipped him, whom he accounted the true God. Here Ignatius cried,
and thundered out, With so great noise and horror,
That had that powder taken fire, by which
All the Isle of Britain had flowne to the Moon,
It had not equalled this noise and horror.
And when he was able to speak distinctly, thus he spoke; It cannot be said
(unspeakable Emperor) how much this obscure Florentine has transgressed
against thee, and against the Pope thy image-bearer, (whether the word be
accepted, as Imaginarium.
Gratian takes it when he calls the Scriptures; Imaginary Books or as they
take it, which give 21 q. Omnis jactura.
that style to them who carry the Emperors Image in the field;) and last of
all against our Modest. in verb. Milite
Order. Durst any man before him; think upon this kind of injury, and calumny,
as to hope that he should be able to flatter, to catch, to entrap Lucifer
himself? Certainly, whosoever flatters any man, and presents him those
praises, which in his own opinion are not due to him, thinks him inferior to
himself, and makes account that he has taken him prisoner, and triumphs over
him. Who ever flatters, either he derides, or (at the best) instructs. For
there may be, even in flattery, an honest kind of teaching, if Princes by being
told that they are already endued with all virtues necessary for their
functions, be thereby taught what those virtues are, and by a facile
exhortation, excited to endeavor to gain them. But was it fit that this
fellow, should dare either to deride you, or (which is the greater injury) to
teach you? Can it be believed, that he delivers your praises from his heart,
and and does not rather herein follow Gratians levity; who says: That you are
called Prince of the 32. q. 2. Pudor.
world, as a king at Chests, or as the Cardinal of Ravenna, only by derision?
This man, whilst he lived, attributed so much to his own wit, that he never
thought himself beholden to your helps, and insinuations; and was so far from
invoking you, or sacrificing to you, that he did not so much as acknowledge
your kingdom nor believe that there was any such thing in Nature as you. I
must confess that he had the same opinion of God also; therefore deserves a
place here, and a better then any of the Pagan or Gentile Idolaters: For in
every Idolatry and false worship there is some Religion, and some perverse
simplicity, which tastes of humility; from all which this man was very free when
in his heart he utterly denied that there was any God. Yet since he thought so
in earnest, and believed that those things which he affirmed were true, he must
not be ranked with them; which having been sufficiently instructed of the true
God, and believing him to be so, do yet fight against him in his enemies Army.
Neither ought it to be imputed to us as a fault, that sometimes in our
Exorcismes we we speak ill of you, and call you Heretic and Drunkard, and
Flagel. Demon. Menghi.
Whisperer, and scabbed Beast, and conjure the elements that they should not
receive you, and threaten you with indissoluble damnation, and torments a
thousand thousand times worse then you suffer yet. For these things you know
are done out of a secret covenant and contract between us, and out of mysteries
which must not be opned to this Neophite, who in our Synagogue is yet but
amongst the Catechumeni. Which also we acknowledge of Holy Water, and our Agnus
Dei, of which you do so wisely dissemble a fear, when they are presented to
you: For certainly if there were any true force in them, To deliver Bodies from
Diseases, Souls from Sins, and the Elements from Spirits, and malignant
Impressions, (as in the verses which Urban the fifth sent with his Agnus Dei to
the Emperor it is pretended) it Summa Bullarii, verbo Agnus Dei.
had bin reason that they should first have exercised their force upon those
verses, and so have purged and delivered them, if not from Heresy, yet from
Barbarousnesse and Soloecismes; that Heretics might not justly say, There was
no truth in any of them but only the last; which is, That the least piece
which thence does fall,
Will do one as much good as all.
And though our Order have adventured further in Exorcismes then the rest, yet
that must be attributed to a special privilege, by which we have leave to
question any possessed persons of what matters we will; whereas all other Orders
are miserably bound to the present matter, and the business then in hand. For
though I do not believe, that either from your self, or from your Vicar the
Pope, any such privilege is issued; yet our Cotton deserves to be praised, who
being questioned, how he durst propose certain seditious Interrogatories to a
possessed person, to deliver himself, feigned such a privilege; and with an
un-heardof boldness, and a new kind of falsifying, did (in a manner)
counterfeit Lucifers hand and seal, since none but he only could give this
privilege: But if you consider us out of this liberty in Exorcismes, how humble
and servile we are toward you, the Relations of Peru testify enough, where it
is recorded, that when one of your angels at midnight appeared to our Barcena
alone in his Chamber, Litera di Diego Torres.
he presently rose out of his chair, and gave him the place, whom he professed
to be far worthier thereof then he was. But to proceed now to the injuries
which this fellow has done to the Bishop of Rome, although very much might be
spoken, yet by this alone, his disposition may be sufficiently discerned, that
he imputes to the Pope, vulgar and popular sins, far unworthy of his
greatness. Weak praising is a kind of accusing, and we detract from a man's
honor, if when we praise him for small things, and would seem to have said
all, we conceal greater. Perchance this man had seen some of the Catalogues of
Reserved Cases, which every year the Popes increase, and he might think, that
the Popes did therefore reserve these sins to themselves, that they only
might commit them. But either he is ignorant or injurious to them. For can they
be thought to have taken away the liberty of sinning from the people, who do
not only suffer men to keep Concubines, but sometimes do command them? who
make Did. 32. qui.
St. Peter beholden to the Stews for part of his Revenue: and who excuse women
from the infamous name of Whore, till they have delivered themselves over to
23000 men. The Professors Ibid. Vidua. Scappus de jure non script- l. 1. c. 54.
of which Religion teach, That University Men which keep Whores in their
chambers, may not be expeld for that, because it ought to be presumed before
hand, that Scholars will not live without them. Shall he be thought to have a
purpose of deterring others from sin, which provides so well for their
security, that he teaches, that he may dispense in all the Commandments Sum.
Angel. verb. Papa, N: 1
of the second Table, and in all Moral Law; and that those Commandments of
the second Table can neither be called Principles nor Conclusions, necessarily
deduced from Principles? And therefore (as they ever love that manner of
teaching) he did illustrate his Rule with an example, and dispensed in a
marriage between Brother and Sister, and has hoorded up so many In dulgencies
in one Barn, the City of Rome, that it is easy for any man in an hour or two,
to draw out pardons enough for 100000 years. How clear a witness of this
liberality is Leo the tenth? who only for rehearsing once the Lords Prayer,
and thrice repeating the name of Jesus (be it spoken here without horror) has
given three thousand years Indulgence. How profuse a Steward or Auditor was
Boniface, who acknowledges so many Indulgences to be in that one Church of
Lateran, that none but God can number them? Besides these plenary Indulgences
are given not only to the Franciscans themselves, but to their parents also,
and to any which dies in their habit; and to any which desire that they may do
so: and to those who are wrapped in it after death, though they did not desire
it; and five years Indulgence to those who do but kiss it. And at last,
Clement the seventh by a privilege first given to one Order (which since is
communicated to our Order, as the privilege of all other Orders are) gave to
any who should but visit a place belonging to them, or any other place if he
could not come thither, or if he could come to no such place, yet if he had but
a desire to it, All Indulgences which had been granted, or hereafter should be
granted in the universal world. And though it be true, that if in any of these
Indulgences a certain sum of money were limited to be given (as for the most
part it is) a poor man who could not give that money though he were never so
contrite for his sins, could have no benefit thereby: and though Gerson durst
call those Indulgences foolish and superstitious, which gave twenty thousand
years pardon for rehearsing one prayer, yet they do abundantly testify the
Popes liberal disposition, and that he is not so covetous in reserving sins
to himself; but if perchance once in an hundred years, some one of the scum of
the people be put to death for Sodomy; and that not so much for the offense, as
for usurping the right of the Ecclesia stick Princes, we must not much lament
nor grudge at that, since it is only done to discontinue and interrupt a
prescription, to gain which Title the Laity has ever been very forward against
the Clergy: for even in this kind of his delicacies, the Pope is not so
reserved and covetous, but that he allows a taste thereof to his Cardinals,
whom whom you once called Carpidineros (by an elegancie proper Moneytakers.
only to your Secretaries the Monks) in an Epistle which Theol. Niem. nemus
unio Tract 6. c. 29.
you writ to one of that College: for since the Cardinals are so compacted
into the Pope, and so made his own body, That it is not lawful for them
without Rod: Cupers de Eccles: univers: fol. 4.
license first obtained from him, to be let blood in a Fever, what may be
denied unto them? or what kind of sin is likely to be left out of their
glorious privileges. which are at least two hundred? Which Order the Pope can
Azor: par: 2. l. 4. c: 1. Moscontus de Maj. Eccl. Mil: c: 5. ibid: Idem c: 6.
no more remove out of the Ecclesiasticke Hirarchy, then he can Bishops; both
because Cardinals were instituted by God, and because the Apostles themselves
were Cardinals before they were Bishops. Whom also in their creation he styles
his brothers, and Princes Scappus de Iure non scrip: l: 1. c: 25.
of the world, and co-judges of the whole earth, and to perfect all, That there
are so many Kings as there are Cardinals. O fearful body; and as in many
other things, so in this especially monstrous, that they are not able to
propagate their species: For Azor: ubi supra.
all the Cardinals in a vacancy are not able to make one Cardinal more. To
these men certainly the Pope does no more grudge the plurality of sins, then
he does of Benefices. And he has been content, that even Borgia should enjoy,
this dignity, if he has heaped up by his ingenius wickedness, more sorts of
sins in one Act, then (as far as I know) as any the Popes themselves have
attempted: For he did not only give the full rein to his licentiousness, but
raging with a second ambition, he would also change the sek. Therein also his
stomach was not toward young, beardlesse boys, nor such green fruit: for he
did not think, that he went far enough from the right Sex, except he had a
manly, a reverend, and a bearded Venus. Neither stayed he there; but his witty
lust proceeded further: yet he solicited not the Minions of the Popes, but
striving to equal the licenciousnesse of Sodomites which would have had the
Angels; to come as near them as he could, he took a Cleargy-man, one of the
portion and lot of the Lord; and so made the maker of God, a Priest subject to
his lust; nor did he seek him out in a Cloister, or Quire; but that his Venus
might be the more monstrous, he would have her in a Mitre. And yet his
prodigious lust was not at the height; as much as he could he added: and having
found a Man a Clergy man, a Bishop, he did not solicit him with entreaties,
and rewards, but ravished him by force. Since then the Popes do out of the
fullness of their power, come to those kinds of sin, which have neither
Example nor Name, insomuch that Pope Paulus Venetus which used Plat: in vit:
Adr. I.
to paint himself, and desired to seem a woman, was called the Goddess
Cibele, which was not without mystery, since, prostitute boys are sacred to
that Goddess) and since they do not grant ordinarily that liberty of
practicing sins, till they have used their own right and privilege of
Prevention and Anticipation; This prattling fellow Machiavel, does but
treacherously, and dishonestly prevaricate, and betray the cause, if he think
he has done enough for the dignity of the Popes, when he has affoorded to
them, sins common to all the world. The transferring of Empires, the ruin of
Kingdoms, the Excommunications, and depositions of Kings, and devastations by
fire and sword, should have been produced as their marks and characters: for
though the examples of the Popes transferring the Empire, which our men so much
stand upon, be not indeed true, nor that the ancient Popes practiced any such
thing; yet since the Statesmen of our Order, wiser then the rest have found
how much this Temporal jurisdiction over Princes, conduces to the growth of
the Church, they have persuaded the Popes, that this is not only lawful for
them, but often practiced heretofore: And therefore they provide that the
Canons, Apologia pro Garnete.
and Histories be detorted to that opinion: for though one of our Order do
weaken that famous Canon, Nos Sanctorum, which was used still to be produced
for this doctrine, yet he did it then when the King of Great Britain was to be
mollified and sweetened toward us, and the Laws to be mitigated, and when
himself had put on the name Eudaemon. But let him return to his true state, and
profess himself a Cacodaemon, and he will be of our opinion. In which respect
also we may pardon our Cudsemius his rashness, when he denies the English
Nation De desperata Calv: causa, c. 11
to be heretics, because they remain in a perpetual succession of Bishops:
For herein these men have thought it fit to follow in their practice, that
translation which reads the words of Paul; Serve the time, and not that which
says; Serve the Lord. Rom: 12. 11
As for the injury which this petty companion has offered to our Order, since
in our wrongs both yours and the Popes Majesty is wounded, since to us as to
your Dictators, both you have given that large and anti^ent Commission, that we
should take care that the state take no harm, we cannot doubt of our revenge:
yet this above all the rest, does especially ve^ me, that that when he calls me
Prelate and Bishop (names which we so much abhor and detest) I know well that
out of his inward malignity he has a relation to Bellarmines, and Tolets
Sacrilegious Vow-breaking ambitions, by which they embraced the Cardinalship,
and other Church dignities: but herein this poor fellow unacquainted with our
affairs, is deceived, being ignorant that these men by this act of being thus
incorporated into the Pope, are so much the nearer to their Center and final
happiness, this chamber of Lucifer, and that by the breach of a vow which
themselves thought just, they have got a new title thereunto: for the
Cardinalship is our Martyrdom: and though not many of our Order have had that
strength that they have been such Martyrs, and that the Popes themselves have
been pleased to transfer this persecution into the other Orders, who have had
more Cardinals than we; yet without doubt for such of ours which have had so
much courage, new Crowns, and new Garlands, appropriate to our Martyrs, are
prepared for them in this their Heaven; because being enabled by greater means
they are fitter for greater mischiefs. We therefore lament the weakness of our
Laynez Ribadineyra Catal: fol: 60 and 100.
and our Borgia, who refused the Cardinalship offered by Paulus 4. and Julius
3. for in this place and this meeting it is not unfit to say they did so, even
amongst the ancient Romans Brisson de formul: l: (...)
when they sacrificed to you those sacrifices which offered any resistance, were
ever reputed unaccepted: and therefore our Bellarmine deserves much praise, who
finding a new Genius and courage in his new Cardinalship, set out his
Retractions and corrected all those places in his Works, which might any way be
interpreted in the favor of Princes. But let us pass over all these things;
for we understand one another well enough: and let us more particularly
consider those things which this man who pretends to exceed all ancient and
Modern Statesmen boasts to have been done by him. Though truly no man will
easily believe, that he has gone far in any thing which did so tire at the
beginning or midway, that having seen the Pope and known him, yet could never
come to the knowledge of the Devil. I know what his excuse and escape will be;
that things must not be extended infinitely; that we must consist and arrest
somewhere, and that more means and instruments ought not to be admitted where
the matter may be dispatched by fewer. When therefore he was sure that the
Bishop of Rome was the cause of all mischief, and the first mover thereof, he
chose rather to settle and determine in him, than by acknowledging a Devil to
induce a new tyranny, and to be driven to confess that the Pope had usurped
upon the Devils right, which opinion if any man be pleased to maintain, we do
not forbid him: but yet it must be an argument to us of no very nimble wit, if
a man do so admire the Pope that he leave out the Devil, and so worship the
Image, without relation to the Prototype and first pattern. But besides this,
how idle and how very nothings they are which he has shoveld together in his
books, this makes it manifest that some of every Religion and of every
profession have risen up against him, and no man attempted to defend him:
neither do I say this because I think his doctrine the worse for that, but it is
therefore the less artificially carried, and the less able to work those ends
to which it is directed. For our part we have not proceeded so. For we have
dished and dressed our precepts in these affairs with such cunning, that when
our own men produce them to ens^re and establish our pupils, then we put upon
them the majesty and reverence of the Doctrine of the Church and of the common
opinions: But when our adversaries allege them either to cast envy upon us, or
to deterr the weaker sort; then they are content with a lower room, and
vouchsafe to step aside into the rank of private opinions. And the Canons
themselves are with us sometime glorious in their mitres and pontifical habits
and sound nothing but mere Divine resolutions out of the Chair it self, and so
have the force of Oracles, sometimes we say they are ragged and lame, and do
but whisper with a doubtful and uncertain murmr, a hollow cloystral, or an
eremiticall voice, and so have no more authority than those poor men which writ
them: sometimes we say they were but rashly thrown into the peoples ears out
of Pulpits in the Homilies of fathers; sometimes that they were derived out of
such Councels as suffered abortion, and were delivered of their children, which
are their Canons before inanimation, which is the Popes assent; or out of such
Councels as are now discontinued and dead (howsoever they remained long time in
use, and lively and in good state of health) and therefore cannot be thought fit
to be used now, or applied in civil businesses; sometimes we say the Popes
voice is in them all by his approbation; sometimes that only the voice of those
authors from whom they are taken speaks in them. And accordingly we deliver
diverse and various Philosyphy upon our Gratian who compiled them; sometimes we
allow him the honor and dignity of Diamonds and the nobler sort of stones,
which have both their clearness and their firmness from this, for that they are
compacted of less parts and atoms then others are: and so is Gratian; whom for
the same cause, sometimes we account but a hill of many sands cast together,
and very unfit to receive any foundation. I must confess that the Fathers of
our Order, out of a youthful fiercenes which made them dare and undertake any
thing (for our Order was scarce at years at that time) did amiss in inducing
the Council of Trent to establish certain Rules and Definitions from which it
might not be lawful to depart: for indeed there is no remedy but that
sometimes we must depart from them: nor can it be dissembled that both the
writers of our Order, and the Dominicans have departed from them in that great
war and Tragedy lately raised at Rome about Grace and Freewill: For it is not
our purpose that the writings of our men should be so ratified that they may
not be changed so that they be of our Order which change them: so by the same
liberty which Demon Ioannes has taken in delivering the King of Britain from
the danger of Deposition; (because as yet no sentence is given against him) and
also from many other Canons which others think may justly be discharged against
him, it will be as lawful for us, when that Kingdom shall be enough stupefied
with this our Opium to restore those Canons to their former vigor, and to
awake that state out of her Lethargy, either with her own heat, intestine war,
or by some Medicine drawn from other places: for Princes have all their
securities from our indulgence, and from the slack and gentle interpretation of
the Canons: they are but privileges which since they are derived, and receive
life from us, they may be by us diminished, revoked and annulled: for as it was
lawful for Mariana to depart from the doctrine of the Council of Constance, so
it was lawful for Cotton to depart from Mariana, which notwithstanding, we
would have only lawful for our Order to whom it is given to know times and
secrets of state: for we see the Sorbonists themselves (which may seem to have
an Aristocratical papacy amongst themselves) though they labored to destroy
the doctrine of Mariana, did yet wisely forbear to name him or any other Jesuit,
which was a modesty that I did not hope for at their hands; since before I died
they made one Decree against me: Gretzer: Examen: speculi fol: 139.
but yet therein I think somewhat may be attributed to my patience and
providence; who knowing their strength and our own infancy, forbad all of my
Order to make any answer to that Decree of theirs: neither were we so Herculean
as to offer to strangle Serpents in our cradle. But yet since after that time
they have been often provoked by our men: (for I gave not so Iron a Rule and
Precepts to my Disciple as Francis did to his, who would not have his Rule
applied to times and to new occasions) certainly they might have bin excused if
they had bin at this time sharper against us. And if the Parliament of Paris
thought it not fit to carry the matter so modestly in their Arrest against
Mariana, but made both the Book and the Doctrine, and the Man infamous: what
should we say more of it, but that it is a Giant and a wild beast which our
men could never tame, for still it cries and howles, The Pope is bound
L'eschuffier, f: 25. Id: fol: 32.
to proceed lawfully and Canonically: and this they maliciously interpret of
their own Laws, and of ancient Canons, which they hope to bring in to use
again, by an insensible way of Arrest and Sentences in that Court. This then is
the point of which we accuse Machiavell, that he carried not his Mine so safely
but that the enemy perceived it still. But we who have received the Church to
be as a ship, do freely sail in the deep sea; we have an Ancor, but we have not
cast it yet, but keep it ever in our power to cast it and weigh it at our
pleasure. And we know well enough that as to sailing ships, so to our sailing
Church, all rocks, all promontories, all firm and fast places are dangerous,
and threaten shipwreck, and therefore to be avoided; and liberty and searoom to
be affected; yet I do not obstinately say that there is nothing in Machiavels
Commentary which may be of use to this Church. Certainly there is very much;
but we are not men of that poverty that we need beg from others, nor dignifie
those things with our praises which proceed not from our selves. The Senate of
Rome gave us heretofore a noble example of this temperance and abstinence,
which therefore refused to place Christ amongst their gods, because the matter
was proposed by the Emperor, and begun not in themselves. As for that
Particular wherein Machiavel uses especially to glory; which is that he
brought in the liberty of dissembling and lying, it has neither foundation nor
color: For not only Plato and other fashioners of Commonwealths, allowed the
liberty of lying to Magistrates Observat: in Cassianum, fol: 736. ex collat: 19.
and to Physicians; but we also considering the Fathers of the Church, Origin,
Chrysostom, Hierome, have not only found that Doctrine in them, but we have
also delivered them from al imputation and reprehension by this evasion, That
it was lawful for them to maintain that opinion till some definition of the
Church had established the contrary: Which certainly (though this should not be
so openly spoken of) as yet was never done. But yet we have departed from this
doctrine of free lying, though it were received in practice, excused by the
Fathers, strengthened by examples of Prophets and Angels in the Scriptures, and
so almost established by the Law of Nations and Nature; only for this reason,
because we were not the first Authors of it. But we have supplied this loss
with another doctrine less suspicious; and yet of as much use for our Church;
which is Mental reservation, and Mixed propositions. The liberty therefore of
lying is neither new nor safe, as almost all Machiavels precepts are so stale
and obsolete, that our Serarius using I must confess, his Jesuiticall liberty
of wild anticipation, Triha^es lib: 2. c: 4.
did not doubt to call Herod who lived so long before Machiavel, a
Machiavelian. But that at one blow we may cut off all his reasons and all his
hopes, this I affirm, this I pronounce, That all his books and all his deeds
tend only to this, that thereby a way may be prepared to the ruin and
destruction of that part of this kingdom which is established at Rome: for what
else does he endeavor or go about, but to change the form of Commonwealth,
and so to deprive the people (who are a soft, a liquid, and ductile metal,
and apter for our impressions) of all their liberty, and having so destroyed
all civility and re-publick, to reduce all States to Monarchies; a name which
in secular States, we do so much abhor, De la mess, fol: 358.
(I cannot say it without tears) but I must say it, that not any one Monarch
is to be found, which either has not withdrawn himself wholly from our
kingdom, or wounded and endamaged in some weighty point; hereupon our Cotton
confesses, that the authority of the Pope is incomparably less then it was,
and that now the Christian Church, (which can agree to none but the Romans) is
but a diminutive. And hereupon also it is, that the Cardinals, who were wont
to meet oftener, meet now but once in a week, Synta. Tholos: lib 15. c: 4. v: 7.
because the businesses of the Court of Rome grow fewer. To forbear therefore
mentioning of the Kings of Britain and Denmark, and the other Monarchs of the
first sort, which have utterly cast off Rome; even in France, our enemies are
so much increased that they equal us almost in number: and for their strength,
they have this advantage above us, that they agree within themselves and are at
unity with their neighbor Reformed Churches; whereas our men which call
themselves Chatholick there, do so much differ from the Roman Catholic that
they do not only prefer Councels, but even the King before the Pope, and ever
more oppose those their two great Giants Gog, and Magog, their Parliament of
Paris, and their College of Sorbon, against all our endeavors. Besides all
this, we languish also miserably in Spain, where Clergymen, if they Scap: de
Iure non script: l. 1. c: 6. Ibid: c: 16
break their fealty to their Lord, are accused of treason; where
Ecclesiastical persons are subject to secular judgment and, if they Ibid. c. 25
^e sa^rilegious, are burnt by the Ordinary Magistrate; which are doctrines and
practices, contrary and dangerous to us. And though they will seem to have
given almost half the Kingdom to the Church, and so to have divided equally:
yet those Grants are so infected, with pensions and other burdens by which the
Kings servants, (...) the younger sorts of great persons are maintained, that
this greatness of the Church there, is rather a dropsy then a sound state of
health established by well-concocted nourishment, and is rather don to cast an
envy upon the Church, then to give any true majesty to it. And even in usurping
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; the Kings of Spain have not only exceeded the
kings of France, but also of Britany; For (says Baronius of that King) there
is now risen up De Regno Sicil^*
a new head, a monster and a wonder: He Excommunicates, and he Absolves, And he
practices this power even against Bishops, and Cordinals. He stops Appeals,
and he acknowledges no superiority in the Sea of Rome, but only in case of
Prevention: And therefore, the name Monarch, is a hateful and execrable name
to us. Against which, Baronius has thundered with such viol^e, such ^ercheffe,
and such ^nesse, that I could hardly, add any thing thereunto, if I should
speak (unspeakable Emperor) with thine own tongue for he calls it an A^lterine
name, and a Tower of Babel, and threatens destruction to that King (though
himself were his subject) except he for, bear the name. In the mean time, he
resolves him to be a Tyrant, and pronounces him to stand yearly excommunicate
by the Bulla Coenae. Neither does he offer to defend himself with any other
excuse, when a Cardinal reprehended his fiercenes toward the King then this;
An Imperious zeal has no power to Resp. ad Card. Colum.
spare God himself. And yet he confesses, that this zeal was kindled by the
Popes special command, and by his Oath taken, as Cardinal. Neither has our
Bellarmine almost any other cause of advancing Monarchical government so much
as he does, then thereby to remoove all Secular men from so great a dignity,
and to reserve it only to the Church. It was therefore well done of that
Rebullus (who now begins to be known in this State) when having surfeted with
calumnies against the French Church and her Ministers, he has dared of late to
draw his Pen, and to join battle against a most puissant foreign Prince: he
did well (I say) and fitly, when he called Bellarmine and Baronius, The Sword
and Buckler Salmonees.
of the Roman Church. And I cannot choose but thank him for affoording the
Title of Sword to our Order; as well, because after so many Expositions of
those words, (Behold, here are two swords) which our side has gathered, to
establish a temporal Jurisdiction in the Pope, and which our Adversaries have
remooved, worn out, or scorned, this man has relieved us with a new, and may
seem to intend by the two swords, the Popes Excommunications, and the Jesuits
Assassinates, and King-killings; as also because he has reserved to our Order
that sovereign dignity, that as God himself was pleased, to defend his
Paradise with fire and sword, so we stand watchful upon the borders of our
Church not only provided, as that Cherubin was with fire and sword, but with
the later Invention of Gunpouder; about the first inventour whereof I wonder,
why Antiquaries should contend, whether it were the Devil or a Friar, since
that may be all one. But as (O unspeakable Emperor) you have almost in all
things endeavored to imitate God: so have you most thoroughly performed it in
us; for when God attempted the Reformation of his Church, it became you also to
reform yours. And accordingly by your Capuchins, you did reform your
Franciscans, which before we arose, were your chiefest Laborers and Workmen:
and after, you reformed your Capuchins, by your Recolets. And when you
perceived that in the Church God, some men proceeded so far in that
Reformation, that they endeavored to draw out, not only all the peccant and
dangerous humors, but all her beauty, and extorior grace and ornament, and
even her vital spirits with her corrupt blood, and so induce a leanness and
ill-favourednesse upon her, and thought to cure a rigid coldness with a Fever;
you also were pleased to follow that Hypocr: l. 4. Aphor. 57.
example, and so in us did reform and awaken to higher enterprises the
dispositions as well of the Circumcellions as of the Assassins: for we do not
limit our selves in that low degree of the Circumcellions, when we urge and
provoke others to put us to death; not of the Assassins, which were hired to
kill some Kings which passed through their quarter: so we exceed them both,
because we do these things voluntarily for nothing, and every where. And as we
will be exceeded by none in the thing itself: so to such things as may seem
mystical and significant, we oppose mystical things. And so lest that Canon;
That no Clergyman should wear Garrauca stat. Synod. N. 41
a knife with a point, might seem to concern us, by some prophetical relation,
we in our Rules have opposed this precept, That our knife be often whetted, and
so kept in an apt readiness for all Regul. Jesuit. cap. prefect. Refector.
uses: for our divination lies in the contemplation of entrails; in which, Art
we are thus much more subtle then those amongst the old Romans, that we
consider not the entrails of Beasts, but the entrails of Souls, in confessions,
and the E^trails of Princes in treasons whose hearts we do not believe to be
with us till we see them: let therefore this prattling Secretary hold his tongue,
and be content that his Book be had in such reputation as the world affords to
an Ephemerider or yearly Almanac, which being accommodated to certain places
and certain times, may be of some short use in some certain place and let the
Ru^s and (...) of his Disciples like the Canons of Provincial Councels, be of
force there where they were made; but only ours which pierce and pass through
all: the world, retai^ the strength and vigo^ of Universal Councels. Let him
enjoy some honorable place amongst the Gentiles; but abstain from all of our
sides: neither when I say, Ou^side, do I only mean modern men: for in all
times in the Roman Church there have been Friars which have far ex ceeded
Machiavel.

Truly I thought this Oration of Ignatius very long: and I began to think of my
body which I had so long abandoned, lest it should putrify, or grow moldy, or
be buried; yet I was loath to leave the Stage till I saw the Play ended. And I
was in hope that if any such thing should befall my body, the Jesuits, who work
Miracles so familiarly, and whose reputation I was so careful of in this
matter, would take compassion upon me, and restore me again. But as I had
sometimes observed, Feathers or strawes swim on the watersface,
Brought to the Bridge, where through a narrow place
The water passes, thrown back, and delayed;
And having danced awhile, and nimbly played
Upon the watery circles, Then have bin
By the streams liquid snares, and jaws sucked in,
And sunk into the womb of that swollen bourn,
Leave the beholder desperate of return:


So I saw Machiavel often put forward, and often thrust back, and at last
vanish. And looking earnestly upon Lucifers countenance, I perceived him to be
affected toward Ignatius, as Princes, who though they envy and grudge that
their great Officers should have such immoderate means to get wealth; yet they
dare not complain of it, lest thereby they should make them odious and
contemptible to the people: so that Lucifer now suffered a new Hell: that is,
the danger of a Popular Devil, vainglorious, and inclined to Innovations
there. Therefore he determined to withdraw himself into his inward chamber and
to admit none but Ignatius: for he could not exclude him who had deserved so
well; neither did he think it safe to stay without, and give him more occasions
to amplify his own worth, and undervalue all: them there in public, and
before so many vulgar Devils. But as he rose, a whole Army of souls besieged
him. And all which had invented any new thing, even in the smallest matters,
thronged about him; and importuned an admission. Even those which had but
invented new attire for women and those whom Pancirollo has recorded in his
Commentaries De rebus ^uper inventis.
for invention of Porcellan Dishes, of Spectacles, of Quintans, of Stirrups,
and of Cavi^ri, thrust themselves into the troop. And of those which pretended
that they had squared the Circle, the number was infinite. But Ignatius
scattered all this cloud quickly by commanding, by chiding, by deriding, by
force and violence. Amongst the rest, I was sorry to see him use Peter Aretine
so ill as he did: For though Ignatius told him true when he boasted of his
licentious pictures, that because he was not much learned, he had left out many
things of that kind, with which the ancient Histories and Poems abound: and
that therefore Areti^ had not only not added any new invention, but had also,
taken away all courage and spu^ from youth, which would rashly trust and nely
upon his dillgence, and seek no further, and so lose that (...) on^ preti^
(...) suoe of ^quity. He ^ed moreove^, that though (...), and others of his
Order, did use to gold P^ts and other (...) and here I could not ^huse but
wonder, why they have not gel^ed their (...) Ed^on, which in some places has
such obse^e Harlay defense des Jesuit. fol. 12.
words as the Hebrew ^gne, which is therefore also called (...), does so much
ahhor, that (...) (...) things can be ^ed in it, info^uch (...) (as one of them
very sub^y notes) the (...) of Venus is very seldom called ^hy that name in
(...) for how could (...) wood being not in (...) yet (said h^) (...) men do
not g^ld them to that p^rpose that the memory thereof should he abolished: but
that when themselves had first tried whether Tyberius his Spintria, and
Martialis Symphlegma, and others of that kind, were not rather Chymera's, and
speculations of luxuriant wits, then things certain and constant, and such as
might b^educed to an Art and method in licentiousness, (for Jesuits never
content themselves with the Theory in any thing, but straight proceed to
practice) they might after communicate them to their own Disciples and
Novitiates: for this Church is fruitful in producing Sacraments and being now
loaded with divine sacraments, it produces Moral Sacraments. In which, as in
the Divine, it binds the Laity to one Species; but they reserve to themselves
the diverse forms, and the secrets and mysteries in this matter, which they
find in the Authors whom they geld. Of which kind I think they give a little
glimmering and intimation, when in the life of their last made Coddesse,
Francisc^ Roman, they say, That the Bed where she lay Valla-der fol. 24.
with her Hisband, was a perpetual Martyrdom to her, and a shop of miracles.
But for all this, since Aretine was one, who by a long custom of libellous and
contumelious speaking against Princes, had got such a habit, that at last he
came to diminish and disesteem God himself. I wonder truly, that this
Arch-Iesuite, though he would not admit him to any eminent place in his
Triumphant Church, should deny him an office of lower estimation: For truly to
my thinking he might have been fit, either to serve Ignatius, as Master of his
pleasures, or Lucifer as his Crier: for whatsoever Lucifer durst think, this
man durst speak. But Ignatius, who thought himself sufficient for all uses,
thrust him away, and when he offered upward, offered his staff at him: Nor did
he use Christopher Columbus with any better respect; who having found all ways
in the earth and sea open to him, did not fear any difficulty in Hell, but when
he offered to enter Ignatius staid him, and said, You must remember sir, that
if this kingdom have got any thing by the discovery of the West Indies,
Matalius Metellus, praefat. in Osorium.
all that must be attributed to our Order: for if the opinion of the Dom^eans
had prevailed, That the Inhabitants should be reduced only by preaching and
without violence, certainly their 200000 of men would scarce in so many ages
have been brought to 150 which by our means was so soon performed. And if the
Law made by Ferdinando only against Canibals; That all which would not be
Christians should be bond slaves, had not been extended into other Provinees,
we should have lacked men to dig us out that benefit which their Countries
afford. Except we when we took away their old Idolatry, had recompensed them
with a new one of o^, except we had obtruded to those ignorant and barbarous
people, sometimes natural things, sometimes artificial, and counterfeit in
stead of miracles, and except we had been always ready to convey and to apply
this Medicine made of this precious American dung unto the Princes of Europe,
and their Lord, and Councillors, the profit by the only discovery of these
places (which must of necessity be referred to fortune) would have been very
^le; yet I praise your perseverance and your patience which (since that seems
to be your principal virtue) you shall have good occasion to exercise here,
when you remain in a lower and remote^ place, then you think belongs to your
merits. But although Lucifer being put into a heat and almost smothered with
this troop and deluge of pretenders, seemed to have admitted Ignatius as his
Lieatenant, or Legate ^ere, and trusted him with an absolute power of doing what
he would, yet he quickly spied his own error and danger thereby. He began to
remember how forcibly they use to urge the Canon Alius; by which the King of
France is said to have been deposed, not for his wickedness, but for his Paris
de puteo, de syndicat. de excess. regn.
infirmity and unfitness to govern: and that Kings do forfeit their dignity if
they give themselves to other matters, and leave the government of the State to
their Officers. Therefore Lucifer thought it time for him to enter into the
business, lest at last Ignatius should prescribe therein; by which title of
prescription he well knew, how much the Church of Rome does advance and defend
itself against other Princes. And though he seemed very thankful to Ignatius
for his delivery from this importunate company, yet when he perceived that his
purpose was to keep al others out, he thought the case needed greater
confideration; For though he had a considence in his own Patriarks Sophronius
cap. 45. Conse^uerat.
which had long before possessed that place, and in whose company (as an Abbot
said to the Devil, who after long intermission, now tempted him) he was grown
old, and doubted not but that they would defend their right, and oppose
themselves against any innovation which Ignatius should practice, yet if none
but he in a whole age should be brought in, he was afraid that this singularity
would both increase his courage and spirit, and their reverence and respect
toward him. Casting therefore his eyes into every corner, at last a great way
off he spied Philip Nerius: who acknowledging in his own particular no especial
merit toward this kingdom, forbore to press nearer the gate, but Lucifer
called to his remembrance, that Nerius and all that Order, of which he was the
Author, which is called Congregatio Oratorii, were erected, advanced, and
dignified by the Pope, principally to this end, that by their incessant Sermons
to the people, of the lives of Saints, and other Ecclesiastic Antiquities,
they might get a new reputation, and so the torrent, and general superstition
toward the Jesuits might grow a little remisser, and Iuke-warm, for at that
time the Pope himself began to be afraid of the Jesuits, for they begun to
publish their Paradox of Confession and absolution to be given by letters, and
Messengers, and by that means to draw the secrets of all Princes only to
themselves; And they had tried and solicited a great Monarch who has many
designs upon Italy against the Pope and delivered to that Prince diverse
Articles, for the reforming of him. Now the Pope and Lucifer love ever to
follow one another example: And therefore that which the one had done in the
middle world, the other attempted in the lower. Hereupon he called for Philip,
Nerius, and gave him many evidenoes of a good inclination toward him. But
Nerius was too stupid to interpret them aright. Yet Ignatius spied them, and
before Lucifer should declare himself any further, or proceed too far herein,
lest after he were farengaged, there should be no way to avert or withdraw him
from his own propositions (for he saw there must be respect had of his honor
and constancy) he thought it fittest to oppose now at the beginning. He said
therefore, that he now perceived that Lucifer had not been altogether so much
conversant with Philip, as with the ^esuirs, since he knew not how much Philip
had ever professed himself an enemy to him Vita Nerii-fol. 107.
For he did not only deny all visions and apparitions, Fol. 108.
and commanded one to spit in Mary's face when she appeared again, because he
thought it was the Devil; Fol. 212.
And drove away another that came to tempt a sick man, in the shape of a
Physician; Fol. 229.
and was hardly drawn to believe any possessings; but Fol. 19.
when three Devils did meet him in the way, to afright him, he neither thought
them worthy of any Exorcismes, nor so much as the sign of the Cross, but
merely went by them, as though he scorned to look at them, and so despighted
them with that negligence. It may be that he has drawn others into Religion,
but himself remained then in the Laity; in so much as I remember, that Fol. 26.
I used to call him The Saints bell, that hangs without, and calls others into
the Church. Fol. 313.
Neither do they which follow this Order, bind themselves with any vow or oath;
Neither do I know any thing for which this Fol. 163.
kingdom is beholding to him, but that (...) moved Baronius to write his Annals.

To all this Nerius said nothing, as though it had been spoken of some body
else. Without doubt, either he never knew, or had forgot that he had done those
things which they write of him. But Lucifer himself took the boldness (having
with some difficulty got Ignatius leave) to take Nerius his part: and proceeded
so far, that he adventured to say, That Baronius, Bozius and others, which
proceeded out of the Hive of Nerius, had used a more free, open, and hard
fashion against Princes, and better provided for the Popes direct jurisdiction
upon all kingdoms, and more stoutly defended it than they, which undertaking
the cause more tremblingly then becomes the Majesty of so great a business,
adhered to Bellarmines sect, and devised such crooked ways, and such perplexed
intanglings, as by reason of the various and uncertain circumstances, were of
no use: And that whatsoever Nerius his Scholars had performed, must be
attributed to him, as the fruit to the root. Ignatius perceiving that Lucifer
undertook all offices for Nerius, and became Judge, Advocate, and Witness,
pursuing his former resolution, determined to interrupt him lest when he had
enlarged himself in Nerius commendation, he should thereby be bound to a
reward. He therefore cried out, What has Nerius done? what has he or his
followers put in execution? have they not ever been only exercised in
speculations, and in preparatory doctrins? Are these books which are written of
the Jurisdiction of the Pope, to any better use than Physicians Lectures of
Diseases, and of Medicines? whilst these Receipts lie hid in Physicians books
and no body goes to the Patient; no body applies the Medicines to the Disease.
What good, what profit comes by all this? what part, what member of this
languishing body have they undertaken? In what Kingdom have they corrected
these humors which offend the Pope, either by their Incision or cauterising?
what state have they cut up into an Anatomy? what Sceliton on have they
provided for the instruction of posterity? Do they hope to cure their diseases
by talking and preaching as it were with charms and enchantments? If Nerius
shall be thought worthy of this honor, and this place, because out of his
Scholars writings something may be gleaned, which may be applied to this
purpose, why should we not have Bez^ and Caloin, and the rest of that sort here
in hell, since in their books there may be some things found which may be
rested to this purpose? But since their scope was not to extirpate Monarchies,
since they published no such Canons and Aphorisms as might be applied to all
ca^es, and so brought into certain use and consequence, but limited theirs to
circumstances which seldom fall out, since they delivered nothing dangerous to
Princes, but where in their opinion, the Soveraigntie resides in the People, or
in certain Ephory, since they never said, that this power to violate the person
of a Prince, might either be taken by any private man, or committed to him, and
that therefore none of their Disciples has ever boasted of having done any
thing upon the person of his Sovereign: we see that this place has ever been
shut against them: there have bin some few of them (though I can scarce afford
those men the honor to number them with Knox and Goodman, and Buchanan) which
following our examples, have troubled the peace of some States, and been
injurious to some Princes, and have been admitted to some place in this
Kingdom; but since they have performed nothing with their hands nor can excuse
themselves by saying, they were not able: (for wherein was Clement, or Ravillac
more able than they, or what is not he able to do in the middesof an Army, who
despises his own life? they scarce ever aspire, or offer at this secret and
sacred Chamber. Lucifer had a purpose to have replied to this: That perchance
all their hands which had bin imbrued in the bowels of Princes were not so
immediately armed by the Jesuits, as that they were ever present at all
consultations and resolutions: (and yet he meant to say this, not as sworn
witness, but as Lucifer himself, and the father of lies, in which capacity
he might say any thing.) But that it was enough that Confessors do so possess
them with that doctrine that it is not now proposed to them as Physic, but as
natural food, and ordinary diet; and that therefore for the performance of
these things, a Jesuits person is no more requisite, then that the heart of a
man, because it sends forth spirits into every limb, should therefore be
present in every limb: that when Brisson d^ formul. l. 1.
it was in use for the Consuls of Rome for the the safety of their Country and
army, to devote themselves over to the infernal God, it was lawful for
themselves to abstain and forbear the Act, and they might appoint any Soldier
for that Sacrifice: and that so the Jesuits for the performance of their
resolutions, might stir up any amongst the people: (for now they enjoy all the
privileges of the Franciscans, who say; That the name Reinsulk Manual.
Franciscan cap. 9.
of People, comprehends all which are not of their Order;) And that if this be
granted, Nerius his Scholars are inferior to none; with whose books (if all
the Jesuits should perish) the Church might content her self, and never fear
dearth nor leanenesse. This Lucifer would have spoken; but he thought it better
and easier to forbear: for he observed, that Ignatius had given a sign, and
that all his troops which were many, subtle, and busy, set up their
bristles, g^mbled, and compacted themselves into one body, gathered, produced,
and urged all their evidence, whatsoever they had done, or suffered. There the
English Legion, which was called Capestrata, which Campian led, and (as I
think) Garnet concluded, was fiercer than all the the rest. And as though
there had been such a second Martyrdom to have been suffered, or as though
they might have put off their Immortallity, they offered themselves to any
employment. Therefore Lucifer gave Nerius a secret warning to withdraw himself,
and spoke no more of him; and despairing of bringing in an other, began
earnestly to think, how he might leave Ignatius out. This therefore he said to
him: I am sorry my Ignatius, that I can neither find in others, deserts worthy
of this place, nor any room in this place worthy of your deserts. If I might
die, I see there would be no long strife for a Successor: For if you have not
yet done that act which I did at first in Heaven, and thereby got this Empire,
this may excuse you, that no man has been able to tell you what it was: For if
any of the Ancients say true when they call it Pride, or Licentiousness, or
Lying; or if it be in any of the Casuists, which profess the Art of sinning,
you cannot be accused of having omitted it. But since I may neither forsake
this kingdom, nor divide it, this only remedy is left: I will write to the
Bishop of Rome, he shall call Galilaeo the Florentine to him, who by this time
bath thoroughly instructed himself of all the Hills, Woods, and Cities in the
new world, the Moon. And since he effected so much with his first Glasses,
that he saw the Moon in so near a distance, that he gave himself satisfaction
of all, and the least parts in her, when now being Nuncius Sydereus.
grown to more perfection in his Art, he shall have made new Glasses and they
received a hallowing from the Pope, he may draw the Moon, like a Boat floating
upon the water, as near the Earth as he will. And thither (because they ever
claim that those employments of discovery belong to them) shall all the Jesuits
be transferred, and easily unite and reconcile the Lunatic Church to the Roman
Church: without doubt, after the Jesuits have been there a little while, there
will soon grow naturally a Hell in that world also: over which, you Ignatius
shall have dominion, and establish your kingdom and dwelling there. And with
the same ease as you pass from the earth to the Moon, you may pass from the
Moon to the other stars, which are also thought to be worlds, and so you may
beget and propagate many Hels, and enlarge your Empire, and come nearer unto
that high seat, which I left at first. Ignatius had not the patience to stay
till Lucifer had made an end; but as soon as he saw him pause, and take breath,
and look, first upon his face, to observe what changes were there, and after to
cast his eye to another place in Hell, where a great noise was suddenly raised:
he apprehended this intermission, and as though Lucifer had ended, he said:
That of Lucifers affection to the Roman Church, and to their Order, every day
produced new Testimonies: and that this last was to be accounted as one of the
greatest. That he knew well with how great devotion the Bishop of Rome did ever
embrace and execute all councels proceeding from him: And that therefore he
hoped, that he would reserve that employment for the Jesuits and that Empire
for him their founder: and that he believed the Pope had thought of this
before; and at that time when he put Parsons the English Jesuit in hope of a
Cardinalship, he had certainly a reference to this place, and to this Church:
That it would fall out shortly, that all the damages, which the Roman Church
has lately suffered upon the earth, shall be recompensed only there. And that
now this refuge was opened if she should be reduced into greater streights, or
if she should be utterly exterminated, the world would not much lament and
mourn for it. And for the entertainment of the Jesuits there, there can be no
doubt made at this time, when, (although their profession be to enter whether
Princes will or no) all the Princes of the World will not only graciously
afford them leave to go, but willingly and cheerfully accompany them with
Certificates, and Demissory letters. nor would they much resist it, if the Pope
himself would vouchsafe to go with them, and so fulfill in some small measure,
that Prophecy of his Gerson, De Auferibilitate Papae. Besides this, a woman
governs there; of which sex they have ever made their profit, which have
attempted any Innovation in religion; with how much diligence were the two
Empresses, Pulcheria and Eudoxia, solicited by the Pope for the establishing of
Easter? how earnestly did both Pelagius and the Pope strive by their letters to
draw the Empress to their side? For since Iulia had that honor given to her in
public coyns, that she was called the Mother of the Army, the Mother of the
Gods, and of the Senate, and the Mother of her Country: Why may not Women
instructed by us, be called Mothers of the Church? Why may not we rely upon
the Wit of Women, when once, the Church delivered over her self to a
Woman-Bishop? and since we are reputed so fortunate in obtaining the favor of
Women, that Women are forbid to come into e Rog. Jesuit. f^l. 73. lbid. fol. 47.
our houses; and we are forbid, to take the charge of any Nunns; since we have
had so good experience of their favour^ in all the Indies, or at least have
thought it fit, that they which have the charge to write our anniversarie
letters from thence should make that boast, and add something to the truth,
both because the ancient Heretics held that course in insinuating their
opinions, and because they which are acquainted with our practices, will think
any thing credible, which is written of us in that behalf, why should we doubt
of our fortune in this Queen, which is so much subject to alterations and
passions? she languishes often in the absence of the Sun, and often in Eclipses
falls into swounds, and is at the point of death. In these advantages we must
play our parts, and put our devices in practice: for at these times any thing
may be drawn from her. Nor must we forbear to try what verses and incantations
may work upon her: For in those things which the Poets writ though they
themselves did not believe them, we have since found many truths, and many deep
mysteries: nor can I call to mind any woman which either deceived our hope, or
escaped our cunning, but Elizabeth of England; who might the rather be pardoned
that, because she had put off all affections of women. The principal dignity of
which sex (which is to be a mother) what reason had she to wish or affect,
since without those womanish titles, unworthy of her, of wife and mother, such
an heir was otherwise provided for her, as was not fit to be kept any longer
from the inheritance. But when I, who hate them, speak thus much in the honor
of these two Princes, I find my self carried with the same fury as those
beasts were, which our men say, did sometime adore the Host in the Mass. For it
is against my will, that I pay thus much to the Manes of Elizabeth; from
scorning of which word Manes, when the King of great Britain writ it, I would
our Parsons had forborne, since one of our own Jesuits uses the same word, when
reprehending our adversaries, he says, That they do insult upon Heissius ad
Aphor Jesuit. fol. 135.
Garnets Manes. And yet this Elizabeth was not free from all Innovation; For
the ancient Religion was so much worn out, that to reduce that to the former
dignity, and so to renew it, was a kind of Innovation: and by this way of
Innovating she satisfied the infirmity of her sex, if she suffered any: for a
little Innovation might serve her, who was but a little, a woman. Neither dare
I say that this was properly an Innovation, lest thereby I should confess, that
Luther and many others which live in banishment in Heaven far from us, might
have a title to this place, as such Innovators. But we cannot doubt, but that
this lunatic Queen will be more inclinable to our Innovations: for our Clavius
has been long familiarly conversant with her: what she has done from the
beginning, what she will do hereafter, how she behaves her self toward her
neighbor kingdoms, the rest of the stars, and all the planetary, and
firmamentary worlds, with whom she is in league and amity, and with whom at
difference, he is perfectly instructed, so he have his Ephemerides about him.
But Clavius is too great a personage to be bestowed upon this lunatic Queen,
either as her Counceller, or (which were more to our profit) as her Confessor.
So great a man must not be cast away upon so small a matter. Nor have we any
other besides, whom upon any occasion we may send to the Sun, or to the other
worlds, beyond the world. Therefore we must reserve Clavius for greater uses.
Our Herbestus, or Busaus, or Voellus (and these be all which have given any
proof of their knowledge in Mathematics although they be but tastless, and
childish, may serve to observe her aspects and motions, and to make Catechismes
fit for this lunatic Church: for though Garnet had Clavius for his Master, yet
he profited little in the Arts, Eudaem. Joan. Apol. pro Garn^. c. 5.
but being filled with Bellarmines Dictates, (who was also his Master) his
mind was all upon Politics. When we are established there, this will add much
to our dignity, that in our letters which we send down to the earth (except
perchance the whole Roman Church come up to us into the Moon) we may write of
what miracles we list: which we offered to do out of the Indies, and with good
success, till one of our Order, in Acosta d^ procur. Ind. Salu l. 2, c. 9.
simplicity, and ingenuity, fitter for a Christian, then a Jesuit,
acknowledged and lamented that there were no wiracles done there. Truly it had
been better for us to have spit all those five Brothers, Acostas, out of our
Order, then that any one of them should have vomited this reproach against us.
It is of such men as these in our Order, that our Gretzer says, There is no
body without his Excrements, De studiis Jesuit. abstrus. c. 5.
because though they speak truth, yet they speak it too rawly. But as for this
contemplation, and the establishing of that government, (though it be a
pleasant consideration) we may neither pamper our selves longer with it now,
nor detain you longer therein. Let your Greatness write, let the Pope execute
your counsel, let the Moon approach when you 2 think fit. In the mean time let
me use this Chamber as a resting place. For though Pope Gregory Bellar. de
Purg. l. 2. c. 8.
were stricken by the Angel with a perpetual pain in his stomach and feet,
because he compelled God by his prayers to deliver Trajan out of Hell, and
transfer him to Heaven, and therefore God, by the mouth of Gregory took an
assurance for all his Successors, that they should never dare to request the
like again: yet when the Pope shall call me back from hence, he can be in no
danger, both because in this contract God cannot be presumed to have thought
of me, since I never thought of him, and so the contract therein void; and
because the condition is not broken, if I be not removed into Heaven, but
transferred from an earthly Hell to a Lunatique Hell. More then this he could
not be heard to speak: For that noise, of which I spoke before, increased
exceedingly, and when Lucifer asked the cause, it was told him, That there was
a soul newly arrived in Hell, which said, that the Pope was at last entreated
to make Ignatius a Saint, and that he hastened his Canonization, as thinking it
an unjust thing, that when all Artificers and profane Butchers had particular
Saints to invocate, only these spiritual Butchers, and King-killers, should
have none. For when the Jesuit Cotton in those questions which by virtue of his
invisible privilege he had provided for a possessed person, amongst others,
dangerous both to England and France, had inserted this question: What shall I
do for Ignatius his canonizing? and found at last, that Philip King of Spain,
and Henry King of France, contended by their Ambassadors at Rome, which of them
should have the honor of obtaining his canonizing (for both pretending to be
King of Navarre, both pretended that this right and honor belonged to him; and
so both deluded the Jesuits:) For D Alcala a Franciscan, and Penafort a
Iacobite, Pierre Mathier i. l. 1. Nar. 4
were by Philips means canonized, and the Jesuit left out. At last he
despaired of having any assistance from these Princes; nor did he think it
convenient that a Jesuit should be so much beholding Litera ejus ad Philip. 3.
to a King* since Baronius was already come to that height and constancy, that
being accused of some wrongs done to his King, he did not vouchsafe to write in
his own excuse to the King, till the Conclave which was then held, was fully
ended, lest (as himself gives the reason) if he had then been chosen Pope, it
should be thought he had been beholden to the King therein. For these reasons
therefore they labor the Pope themselves. They confess, that if they might
choose, they had rather he should restore them into all which they had lost in
France and Venice, then that Ignatius should be sent up into Heaven; and that
the Pope was rather bound to do so, by the Order which God himself seems to
have observed in the Creation where he first furnished the Earth, and then the
Heavens, Genesis 2. 4.
and confirmed himself to be the Israeiltes God by this Argument, that he had
given them the Land of Canaan and other temporal blessings. But since this
exceeded Genesis 17. 8.
the Popes omnipotence in earth; it was fit he should try what he could do in
Heaven. Now the Pope would fain have satisfied them with the Title of Beatus,
which formerly upon the entreaty of the Princes of that Family he had afforded
to Aloisius Gonzaga Vita ejus Epist. ad Paul. 5.
of that Order. He would also have given this Title of Saint rather to
Xaverius, who had the reputation of having done Miracles. Indeed he would have
done any thing, so he might have slipped over Ignatius. But at last he is
overcome; and so against the will of Heaven, and of the Pope, Lucifer himself
being not very forward in it, Ignatius must be thrust in amongst the Saints.
All this Discourse, I, being grown cunninger then that Doctor, Gabriel Nele (of
whom Bartolus L. 1. de ve^blig.
speaks) that by the only motion of his lips, without any utterance,
understood all men, perceived and read in every man's countenance there. These
things as soon as Lucifer apprehended them, gave an end to the contention: For
now he thought he might no longer doubt nor dispute of Ignatius his admission,
who, besides his former pretenses, had now gotten a new right and Title to the
place by his Canonization; and he feared that the Pope would take all delay ill
at his hands, because Canonization is now grown a kind of Declaration, by which
all men may take knowledge, that such a one to whom the Church of Rome is much
beholden, is now made partaker of the principal dignities and places in Hell:
For these men ever make as though they would follow Augustine in all things,
and therefore they provide that that also shall be true which he said in this
point, That the Relics of many are honored upon earth, whose souls are
tormented in Hell. Therefore he took Ignatius by the hand, and led him to the
Gate. In the mean time, I, which doubted of the truth of this Report of his
Canonizing, went a little out for further instruction: for I thought it scarce
credible, that Paulus Quintus, who had but lately burdened both the City of
Rome, and the Church, with so great expenses, when he canonized Francisca
Romana, would so easily proceed to canonize Ignatius now, when neither any
Prince offered to bear the charge, nor so much as solicited it: for so he must
be focred to wast both the Treasures of the Church at once. And from Leo 3. who
800 years after Christ, is the first Pope which canonized any, I had not
observed that this had ever been done: Neither do I think that Paulus Quintus
was drawn to the canonizing of this woman by any other respect, then because
that Rule which she appointed to her Order, was dictated and written by Valade.
eius fol. 57.
S. Paul: For though Peter and Magdalen, and others, were present at the
writing thereof, as witnesses, yet Paul was the Author thereof. And since St
Paul's old Epistles trouble and disadvantage this Church, they were glad to
apprehend any thing of his new writing which might be for them, that so this
new work of his might bear witness of his second conversion to Papistry, since
by his first conversion to Christianity, they got nothing: for to say that in
this business Paulus Quintus could not choose but be God, God himself to say
that he must needs have lived familiarly with the Godhead: and must have heard
Predestination it self whispering to him: and must have had a place to sit in
Council with the most Divine Trinity, (all which Fol. 5.
Valaderius says of him, is not necessary in this matter, wherein the Popes
for the most part proceed, as humane affections lead them. But at last, after
some enquiry, I found that a certain idle Gazettior, which used to scrape up
news and rumors at Rome, and so to make up sale letters, vainer and falser
then the Jesuits letter of Iapan and the Indies, had brought this news to
Hell, and a little Jesuitical Novice, a credulous soul, received it by his
implicit faith, and published it. I laughed at Lucifers easiness to believe,
and I saw no reason ever after, to accuse him of infidelity. Upon this I came
back again, to spy (if the gates were still open) with what affection Ignatius,
and they who were in ancient possession of that place, behaved themselves
toward one another. And I found him yet in the porch, and there beginning a
new contention: for having presently cast his eyes to the principal place, next
to Lucifers own Throne; and finding it possessed he stopped Lucifer, and asked him
who it was that sat there. It was answered that it was Pope Boniface: to whom*
as to a principal Innovator, for having first challenged the name of Universal
Bishop, that honor was afforded. Is he an Innovator thundered Ignatius? shall I
suffer this, when all my disciples have labored all this while to prove to the
world, that all the Popes before his time did use that name? and that Gregory
did not reprehend the Patriarch John for taking to himself an Antichristian
name, but for usurping a name which was due to none but the Pope. And could it
be fit for you, Lucifer (who in this were either unmindfull of the Roman
Church, or else too weak and incapable of her secrets and mysteries) to give
way to any fentence in Hell, which (though it were according to truth) yet
differed from the Jesuits Oracles? With this Ignatius flies upwards, and rushes
upon Boniface, and throws him out of his Seat: and Lucifer went up with him as
fast, and gave him assistance, lest, if he should forsake him, his own Seat
might be endangered. And I returned to my body; which As a flower wet with last
nights dew, and then
Warmed with the new Sun, does shake off again
All drowsiness, and raise his trembling Crown,
Which crookedly did languish, and stoop down
To kiss the earth, and panted now to find
Those beams returned, which had not long time shined.
was with this return of my soul sufficiently refreshed. And when I had seen
all this, and considered how fitly and proportionally Rome and Hell answered
one another, after I had seen a Jesuit turn the Pope out of his Chair in Hell,
I suspected that that Order would attempt as much at Rome.

An Apology for Jesuits.
NOw it is time to come to the Apology for Jesuits: that is, it is time to
leave speaking of them, for he favors them most, which says least of them; Nor
can any man, though he had declaimed against them till all the sand of the sea
were run through his hourglass, lack matter to add of their practices. If any
man have a mind to add any thing to this Apology, he has my leave; and I
have therefore left room for three or four lines, which is enough for such a
paradox; and more than Iungius, Scribanius, Gretzerus, Richeomus, Cydonius, and
all the rest which are used to Apologies, and almost tired with a defensive
war, are able to employ, if they will write only good things, and Bonar. in
Ampbitb.
true, of the Jesuits. Neither can they comfort themselves with this, That Cato
was called to his answer four and forty times: for he was so many times
acquitted, which both the Parliaments of England and France deny of the
Jesuits. But if any man think this Apology too short, he may think the whole
book an Apology, by this rule of their own, That it is their greatest argument
of innocence to be accused by us. At this time, whilst they are yet somewhat
able to do some harm in some places, let them make much of this Apology. It
will come to pass shortly, when as they have bin dispoyled and expelled at
Venice, and shaked and fanned in France, so they will be forsaken of other
Princes, and then their own weakness will be their Apology, and they will grow
harmless out of necessity, and that which Vegetius said Lib. 1. c. 14.
of Chariots armed with sithes and hooks, will be applied to the Jesuits, at
first they were a terror, and after a scorn.

FINIS.

