(...) ANd without proving what we say, but as saying and doing, which are two,
like to a cipher alone: and of more concernment these three witnesses in earth,
then supposed, what power endued with, whereof as insues in relation to the
three in the high Court of Heaven (Joh. etc.) they styled Judges of the Earth
(to wit) the grave and prudent Barons of Exchequer; Et hi tres unum, etc. Mr.
Baron Trevare, the Ancient of days in his likeness, His voice gone out into all
Lands, etc. Psalm. 19. The second like the Son of man, the azure clouds mixed his
Foot-Carpet; The third answerable to the holy Ghosts slow operation, Miracles
and Prophecy for a time ceased, or like that saying of theirs, Have not so
much as heard whether any holy Ghost, etc. committed to whose Ministry the
Mystery of Times and Seasons, by all the world slighted or derided, etc.
several days before whom this troublesome Trial appearing, of no mean
consequence, the Manor and Rectory of Pyreton, by what means and indirect
courses taken, thereto the King entitled, by juggling Projectors plots, an old
Outlawry revived, caused hereby to stretch it self out by their breathing into
it, etc. to overthrow a lawful Purchase and Ioynture, after enjoyed so many
years, waiting their opportunity, the widows Estate to cut it off, by such
trivial encumbrances sifted forth: the very Image of the Beast, Revel. 13. with
the Great-Seal faced forth, only paying His Majesty about a Mark yearly such a
costly purchase therein by his own officer born out, his Solicitor General.

Not unlike that dispute about Moses body, between the Archangel and the other
(the Tempter) reported by Jude, this Law point debated so often in open Court,
by the advantage taken of her imprisonment, that got into possession: So
passing from this to the Judges their charge for repairing this no slender
breach, appointed to stand in the gap, to take off the Lords heavy hand from
him, namely the King, by conjuring this Spirit down, raised up in his Name, a
lie in Samuels likeness: And how came to pass, for the sin against the holy
Ghost committed, showing also forgiven neither in this world nor the other;
witness the Archbishop, taking prophecy for no other then madness, gone to his
proper place from Towerhil: and yet deliverd not groaning so long in travel the
Kingdoms three, such distraction under witness in Ecclesiastical and Civil
affairs both. As not unknown to himself these, of her coming unto him without
manifestation not of a Commission in that case armor of proof, to give him a
taste or warning of his judgment at hand, the hand writing (Dan. 5.) served on
him in his gallery, was immediately by a reference answered under his hand
bearing date, 1633. October. etc. Whitehal, committed for that cause the space of
two years a close prisoner in the Gatehouse, even October. 23. when brought first
thither, honored with the same very day of Irelands Massacre, October. 23. and of
Keynton-fight, etc. stripped of all ever since, a cup whereof himself since has
drunk the dregs. This is the business that sleeps not.

Howsoever he fallen asleep, like them bidden to sleep on, etc. she though then,
and since armd with no few sad tokens of that kind come to pass on others no
obscure ones; witness the Dukes fatal month of August foretold.

With this for another observation, her Ioynture the Manor of Englefield
whilst she in the Gatehouse, bought by the Marquis of Winchester, how his of
Basing, such an Example not the like, unlucky Babel Towers, toward the increase
of widows and fatherless, made to kiss the ground.

And impeaced of treason in this kind; no light thing; about their neck a
meeter ornament what weight not unknown; then S. George a horseback. Yet for
making atonement in that case for such his Majesty's folly, like as when Jobs
captivity said to return, was appointed to pray for his three friends: So on
the other side, the aforesaid Judges three to make his peace, to turn his
captivisy away, fallen so low as hard to judge, whether exposed to the dunghill,
or the dungeons Slavery the greater or better Estate, unhapily by his own
seeking happened.

Nor his Name wiped out of this Record, once a good Confession made, afterward
makes as bad an end, opening the very YATES of Hell, like Balaam, loving the
wages of (...)


