OR, A Serious Enquiry For a SUITABLE RETURN, FOR Continued LIFE, in and after
a Time of Great Mortality, BY A WASTING PLAGUE: ( ANNO 1665.)

Answered in XIII. DIRECTIONS.

By THO. DOOLITEL.

Psalm. 116.8. For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears,
and my feet from falling.

9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living.

14. I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his people.

Isaiah 38.18. For the Grave cannot praise thee, Death cannot celebrate thee;
they that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy Truth.

19. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day, etc.

London, Printed by R. I. for ^ Johnson, and are to be sold by A. Brew^er, at
the Threee Bibles at the west end of St. Paul's, and R. Boul^er at the
Turks-head in Cornhill, 1666.

To such whom the Lord has kept alive in the time of so great Death by the
Plague in the Land, especially in the City of London.
THe design of these lines, is neither to commend the Author, nor the Book,
which in these few following sheets is presented to your view; the former being
as needless to them that know his Person, as the later to them that read his
Directions; but I would commend the Subject (being so seasonable) to your
perusal, and the Duties (being so necessary) to your Practice. It was the
saying of a Learned Divine, who had the honor of being made a Prisoner, as
well as Minister of the Lord, That it was great pity there were no more
Prisoners of Jesus Christ, to write songs of his love: I will not say I could
wish that more of our Citizens had in this late Dreadful Plague, remained in
this, then Doleful place, which to the Countries seemed more formidable than a
Prison; but I believe that many of you whose Calling and Duty did tie your
hands and feet, and shut you up in the City, have found such sweet experiences
of the goodness and love of God, that they will be recorded; And -- 65. will be
remembered by you with thankefulness so long as you live.

You have seen the Destroying Angel entering the City, and Death riding upon
the Pale Horse Triumphant in the streets, Arrows flying, the sword bathed,
Garments rouling in blood, and this grim Conqueror breaking in upon Houses
without resistance, taking Captive, Men, Women and Children, and clapping them
up in the Prison of the Grave, where they must remain fast bound in his chains
of darkeness, until the opening of the doors, by him who has the keys of the
Grave, who having Conquered Death himself, will at his appearance loosen the
Bonds of all Deaths prisoners, that they may stand before his Judgment Seat,
to receive their Final Dooms. In the midst of which slaughter and Captivity,
the Captain of your Salvation has stood by you, held his shield over you; set
his mark upon you, and given you singular experience of his Power and Goodness
in your preservation. You have been in a storm, God has shown you his wonders
in the Deep, and when so many Ships have been cast away before your eyes, and
so many Persons have been devoured by the cruel Waters, and your selves
environed with waves on every side, yet the Lord has kept you alive, like
Jonah in the Belly of the Sea, or made a way for you to pass through, when so
many not only Egyptians, but Israelites have been drowned; you have been in
the water, but the Lord has been an Arc about you: You have been in the fire
like the three Children, but the Son of God has walked with you, and
suppressed the violence of the fire, that it has not prevailed over you; you
have been like the Bush which Moses saw burning, but was not burned, because
God was in it. And when you look back upon those dark days, and black Bills of
Mortality, where you have had account of so many thousands dying for so many
weeks together: Do you not wonder at your strange escape? Do you not look upon
your selves, as Brands plucked out of the fire? And must you not acknowledge it
is the Lords mercy you are not consumed? You who have continued in the City in
the time of the Plague, when such throngs of people have been crouding out of
this world daily into another, have had singular advantages of looking into and
preparing for Eternity, which few think of with fixed seriousness, till they be
awakened by some dangerous sickness, whereby withal they are usually so
weakened in body and spirit, that they are rendered unfit for such cogitations;
but to be in such danger, whilst in so good health, and in such Leisure from
encumbring employments, I doubt not but it has effectually moved many of you
to soar a loft in your thoughts and Meditations, that you might take a view of
the other Country, which the Scripture does set forth, of the City which has
foundations, whose builder and Maker is God. I believe the wicked have had
dreadful apprehensions of the burning lake, of the Ocean of Gods wrath, which
every day they were ready to launch forth into, and that however some have been
hardened, and are as bad, yea worse than before; yet I hope others have been so
awakened with this dreadful Providence, that they have been effectually
persuaded to Repentance and Faith in Christ, who alone can deliver from the
wrath which is to come; I believe that others have had deeper impressions of
Eternity upon them, than ever they had in their lives, which the borders
thereof, on which they have been walking have given them so near and frequent a
prospect of; and I doubt not but all of you have made vows and promises to the
Lord of a Holy conversation, of leaving those sins your conscience at that time
upbraided you withal, and dedicating your lives to the Lord, if he would be
pleased to spare your lives: Take heed of dropping asleep again after you have
been awakned; of returning again unto sin after it has been imbittered; of
forgetting or abusing Gods mercy after such a wonderful preservation; retain
the same thoughts of sins evil and the worlds vanity, of the worth of true
Grace and Christ's beauty; retain the impressions you had of Eternity, when you
were so near it in your apprehensions; has God laid obligations upon you by
his preservations and deliverances? And have you laid obligations upon your
selves by your purposes and resolutions. Labor then to live up to your
obligations, and if you be at a loss, what return to make to the Lord: You have
by his Providence this little Book put into your hands to give you directions;
receive them not as the bare counsel of man, but (so far as backed by the
Scripture) as the Prescriptions of God, as if the Lord should speak to you from
Heaven, and say, This is my will, these are your duties, and see that you
perform them: Hereby you will both please the Lord, and rejoice the heart of
the Author, and him who is

Your servant in the Lord Thomas Vincent.

The CONTENTS.
THe Preface or Introduction, p. 1, 2, 3. DIRECTION I. Containing two parts,
viz. Since you live after this Plague, Be not worse, but Better. p. 4. I. The
first part of this Direction contains seven Questions, p. 5. Question I.
Whether wicked men wax worse and worse? p. 6. Six things premised for
Explication, p. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Proved by Scripture Instances, p. 12, to 17.
Proved by Arguments, p. 18, to 24.
Question II.
What are the several steps or gradations, whereby sin grows from a low ebb to
its highest actings? Or, Ten Rounds in the sinners Ladder to Hell, p. 24, to
35. Where, seven things about Gods hardening wicked men's hearts, p. 32, 33.
Question III.
Under what Dispensations wicked men wax worse and worse? p. 35. Viz. 1. Under
Gods Providence, in Prosperity* p. 36, 37, in Adversi^y 38. in Deliverances,
39, 40, 41, 42, to 46* 2 Under Ordinances, Word, Sacrament, p. 47, 48.
Question IV.
Why God is pleased to remove Judgments, though many men are worse than they
were before? p. 48, to 52.
Question V.
What are the aggravations of this great Impiety, to be worse, after Gods
sorest Judgments, than they were before? Answered in Ten particulars, p. 52, to
59
Question VI.
What are signs of a man waxing worse and worse? Answered in 14 particulars, p.
59, to 68 Where six restraints of sin, which keeping from sin do not prove
truth of Grace, yet sin against, do prove height of sin, p. 63, 64, 65
Question VII.
What Considerations may be useful to stop the stream of such men's wickedness
that are waxing worse and worse? p. 68, 69, 70 Seven Questions to such sinners,
p. 71, 72, 73, 74 Six Directions to such sinners, p. 75, 76 Eight Corollaries
from this first part of this Direction, p. 77, 78
II. The second part of the first Direction, Since you live, be better after
this Judgment than you were before, directed especially to the godly, p. 79
Where, Ten Lessons to be learned by those in the City, that (by reason of the
Plague) has been a great House of Mourning, p. 80 to 89 Ten Aggravations of
Gods Peoples sin, if they be worse in their spiritual condition after this
Plague, than they were before, p. 90, 91, 92 Seven Positions, p. 93, etc.
Seventeen Arguments to Gods People to be better, p. 97* 101
DIRECTION II. Since you live after this Plague, pay your Vows, and live up to
your holy Purposes and Resolutions, which you made in time of danger, and fears
of death, p. 102 -- 115 Where, Seven Reasons for care to keep your Resolutions,
holy Purposes and Vows, p. 108 Twenty Helps to perform your Resolutions, holy
Purposes and Vows, 115 Fourteen Aggravations if you come short of your
Resolutions* holy Purposes and Vows, p. 116, etc. Where, Eleven signs of a
Beloved sin, p. ibid.
DIRECTION III. Since you live, and are free from, or cured of your bodily
sickness, look after the cure of soul-sickness; take heed that you lie not
under spiritual Judgments, when temporal Judgment is removed, p. 142 1 Sin is
the souls sickness, in 6 particulars, p. 143, 144 2 Spiritual Judgments are
worse than temporal, in seven particulars, p. 145 -- 149 3 How a man may know
whether he be healed of Soul-sickness, in six particulars, p. 149 -- 152 4 How
a soul-sick sinner should do for healing, in 8 particulars, p. 153 The
excellency of Christ our Soul-Physician, in 5 particulars, p. 154, etc. 5 What
those must do whom Christ has healed of soul-sickness, to improve this Cure to
the glory of God, in 4 particulars, p. 158, etc.
DIRECTION IV. Since you live after this Plague, be eminently exemplary in the
capacity God has set you, p. 161 An humble Exhortation to Magistrates, whom
God has preserved, p. 162, 163, 164 Subjects Duties to Magistrates in 6
particulars, p. 165, 166 Ministers Duties whom God has spared in this Plague,
in 4 particulars, p. 167 -- 175 Peoples Duties whom God has continued to their
Ministers, p. 176 Governors of Families Duties, whom God has spared in this
Plague, in respect of Family Worship, p. 177 Where is showed 1 Why, in 8
particulars, p. 179, to 182 2 Wherein, in 5 particulars, p. 183 189 3 How, in 4
particulars, p. 190, 191
Duties of Husbands and Wives whom God has continued together after this
Plague, viz. Mutual Love, p. 192, 193 Where is showed What manner of Love it
must be, p. 194 195 Why they should thus love, p. 196 197 Wherein they should
manifest it, p. 198, 199
Duties of Parents whom God has continued to Children, in 5 particulars, p.
200 -- 206 Duties of Children, whom God has continued to Parents, What, in 7
particulars: Why, in 6 particulars, p. 206 -- 209 Duties of Masters and
Servants, In 5 particulars, p. 210 In 11 particulars, p. 211 -- 216

DIRECTION V. Since you live by Gods secret way of preservation, Watch against
secret sins, p. 217 Perform secret Duties, p. 217 Mind secret things in
public Duties, p. 217
Where, Fourteen Arguments against secret sins, p. 219 -- 231 Nine masked sins
detected p. 221, 222 Ten Preservatives against secret sins, p. 232, etc. Four
secret Duties, p. 235, 236 Six secret good things in Public Duties, p. 237,
238 Six secret sins in Public Duties, p. 239, 240

DIRECTION VI. Since you live after this Plague, be dead to the World, p. 241
Viz. To the Profits of the World, p. 242, 243 To the Honors of the World,
ibid. To the Pleasures of the World, p. 245 To the Wisdom of the World, p. 246
How a man may know, whether he be dead to the World, p. 247, 248, 249
DIRECTION VII. Since you live, be dead to sin, and be buried with Christ, p.
250 Believers are buried in 3 respects, p. 251 Two differences in burial of our
Friends, and of our Sins, p. 252 Five things included in the Burial of sin, p.
253, 254
Four things for Comfort to those who are buried with Christ, p. 255.
DIRECTION VIII. Since you live after this Plague, walk in newness of life, p.
256 What newness of life does not consist in, in 6 particulars, p. 257 What i^
does consist in, in Ten particulars, p. 258 The Excellencies of a New Life, in
10 particulars, p. 261 The Hindrances of walking in Newness of Life, in six
particulars, p. 264
DIRECTION IX. Since you live after this Plague keep upon your heart a constant
sense of Gods distinguishing Providence in preserving of you, p. 265 Six Helps
so to do, p. 267
DIRECTION X. Since you live, and many of your Relations dead, love God so much
the more by how much you have fewer Objects of your Love than you had before,
p. 270
DIRECTION XI. Since you live after this Plague, remember what Conscience did
condemn you for, in time of fear of death, and avoid it; what it did commend
you for, and do it, 271
DIRECTION XII. Since you live, after such danger of death, trust God for the
future, 273 What this trust is? 274 Eight Arguments to trust in God, 275, 276,
277 Six special times for trusting in God, 278
DIRECTION XIII. Since you live after this Plague, give thanks to God for your
preservation, 279 Three ways how we must praise God for continued Life, 280
Twelve Motives to praise God for continued Life, 282, etc. Six Helps to praise
God for Continued Life, 288, etc.

DIRECTIONS how to live after a wasting PLAGUE.
QUESTION: How should those that have been preserved by God from the Grave in
this time of Plague, live in some measure Answerably to so great a Mercy?
THis is a Case of general concernment, to those many thousands whom God has
kept alive in a time of Plague, which has swept so many thousands into their
Graves, whose bodies are now rotting in the dust, and whose souls are entered
into an unchangeable condition of happiness or misery, whose life is ended,
whose time is past and gone, who are now receiving their wages or reward,
according to what their state was found to be when the Plague removed them from
time into eternity, from this World into that, which now they must be in for
ever, without alteration or redemption. What Family is there in this great
City, or what person is there in all those families, that are not concerned to
enquire what signal and more than ordinary return they should make to God for
such signal and more than ordinary preservation from the gates of death: who
have walked upon the very borders of the Grave, and are yet alive, who have
been nearer the brink of Eternity, and in more danger of being cut down than at
other times, and yet are spared; and are numbered amongst the living, and not
reckoned nor made free amongst the dead.

It is the unquestionable and standing duty of all living to live to God, but
there is a super-added Obligation upon all those whom God has marked out for
Life, when the slaughtering Angel was going from Parish to Parish, from house
to house, to cut down those whom God had commissioned him to remove from hence.
Oh! should you not consider with your self, what it is that God expects at
mine hands? How would he have me for to live? and what would God have me to
do? What is the special work he has reserved me for? Has God laid the
Corpses of thousands in the Churchyards, and yet given me a little respit to
act for my precious soul, and for his glory? has he reprieved me for a while,
and am I not a living, walking Monument of his distinguishing Mercy, and
unwearied Patience toward me? When others are dead, I live; when others must
pray no more, hear no more, God gives me time as yet to do both, and all other
duties in order to my eternal peace. Thus should you reason your self into your
duty, and to a diligent Inquiry, What you should do to live in some measure
answerably to so great a Mercy.

But Reader, will thou first resolve in the fear and presence of that God that
has redeemed thy life from death, to make a conscientious use of any helps and
directions so to do? will thou indeed engage thy heart (before thou read
any further) to use thy utmost diligence in practicing and obeying what shall
be from the Word of God discovered to thee to be thy duty? yea, in the Name of
God I charge thee that thou do it, as ever thou would appear before the
Bar of God with comfort, and give a good account of this his patience and
Providence toward thee, and of these Lines which now thou read, that
neither the one nor the other rise up in Judgment against thee, as an
aggravation of thy sin, nor for the greater condemnation of thy soul. What do
thou say? will thou promise, and accordingly obey, or will thou not? If not,
better thou had dyed in time of Plague, and fallen with others into the same
common grave, than to outlive the Plague, and not outlive thy sin, to live
longer to add unto thy sin, and in the day of Gods patience toward thee, to
be heaping up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous Judgment of God: but if thou will, I shall by Gods assistance
proceed to resolve this Important Case, in laying down these following
Directions: which will also be of use to answer another Query, viz. How you may
know whether God has lengthened out your life in Mercy or in Judgment. If you
live according to these following Rules, God has spared you in mercy, if you
live contrary to them, and dye so at last, I fear your escaping this Judgment
will at last prove a Judgment to you. The first of these Directions will be
more general, the rest shall be more particular.

DIRECTION I.
Has God spared you in time of Plague, Then be better and not worse than you
were before. Those that before were bad, have now greater engagement to be
good; and those that were good before, are engaged by Gods merciful Providence
to them to be better; not only better than those that are bad, but better than
themselves that before were good. In time of Plague you did enquire for the
best Antidote, and for the best Cordial and Preservative, and should you not
now the Plague is thus ceased, enquire what is your best Return you are to make
to God, especially when in time of Plague, Gods Protection was your best
Preservative, and the Spirits Comforts your chiefest Cordials.

This Direction consists of two branches, and I will speak of them apart.

Before the Plague begun.
1 Be not worse than you were 2 Be better than you were
And indeed if you be not better you will be worse, as afterward will be made
appear. Now because it is to be feared that some men will be worse after this
dreadful, and devouring, man-eating Judgment, than they were before, I shall
more largely treat of this particular, The first p^rt of the first Direction
contains 7 Questions.
if peradventure God may by these Lines prevent in some so great an evil after
so great a Plague. Where I shall speak to these particular Questions.

Q. 1. Whether ungodly men do oftentimes wax worse and worse, and why? Q 2.
What are the several steps that men do take in sinful ways in their waxing
worse and worse? Q. 3. Under what Dispensations wicked men wax worse and worse?
Q. 4. Why God is pleased to remove Judgments, though many men are worse than
they were before? Q. 5. What are the Aggravations of this great Impiety to be
worse after Gods sorest Judgment than they were before. Q. 6. What are the
signs of a man that waxes worse and worse under all the Means that God does
use to make him better? Q. 7. What considerations may be useful to stop the
stream of such men's wickedness, that yet are waxing worse and worse?
SECTION I. Question First.
Whether ungodly men do often times wax worse and worse?
SOme wax richer, and some wax better, and all men wax older, and many wax
worser. 2 Timothy 3.13. But evil men and seducers wax worse and worse; deceiving
and being deceived. To increase in Riches is not simply evil; to increase in
Grace is surely good. This increase is commanded: 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in
Grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. It is
commended, 1 Cor. 1.5. In every thing ye are enriched by him, in all utterance
and in all knowledge. It is to be prayed for, Luke 17.5. Lord increase our
faith. Col. 1.9. For this cause we also, since the day we heard it, do not
cease to pray for you, and to desire you may be filled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding. Verse. 10. That ye may walk
worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the knowledge of God. But to increase in sin, and to grow in
wickedness, especially after men have seen Gods displeasure against sin, in a
wasting Plague, is an evil to be lamented, if we could, with tears of blood.
When instead of adding grace to grace, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7. they add sin to sin;
to Drunkenness they add Adultery; to Passion Malice, to Malice Revenge. Some
men make such progress in sin by little and little, till (as all the little
Channels meeting in one place) become a common Sewer of all filthiness, and
impiety; Sinks of sin and nasty dunghils of all uncleanness.

Let me premise these six particulars, and I will pass to the proof of this
first thing,

1. Six things premised, for explication.
That the Nature of man is wonderfully depraved, and in all men (except Christ)
equally sinful. For

First, All men are equally under the guilt of Adams first transgression.

Secondly, All men are equally deprived of Original righteousness.

Thirdly, All men have equally the seeds of all sin in their nature, all
naturally prone to all sin, Genesis 6.5. though by reason of the temperament of
the body, some men might be more inclined to one sin than to another, yet all
sin is seminally and radically in every man's nature, all men by nature are
equally tinder the curse of the Law, deserve the wrath of God, and equally
liable to the torments of hell, Ephesians. 2.3.

2. That every sin that men commit is of a damning nature, and though some sins
in comparison of others might be called little sins, yet in respect of the
great God against whom they are committed, no sin is small. Though degrees of
sin, and inequality of sinning, have greater degrees of torment, and shall have
inequality in sufferings, yet eternal death is the wages of the smallest sin.
Therefore let no man think, while I speak of the increase of sin, that he is
good, because he is not so bad as others grow to be.

3. That in the world there are several sizes and degrees of sinners, as in
the Church there are several sizes and degrees of believers. Pe^de^ haec
[peccati] differentia graduum (1) A respectu personae a qua admittitur. (2) A
g^nere and natura rei, (3) Ah intensione and remissione actus. (4) ratione et
modo patrandi. (5) A circumstantiis loci, temporis, etc. Ames ^ed. p. 65.
In the Church there are, Fathers, Young men, Children, 1 John 2.13. And Babes,
1 Pet. 2.1. So there are several sizes of sinners. Some moral men, some
openly profane: some are great swearers and great drunk^rds, Ringleaders to
sin; the Devils Lievetenants, provoking others to sin, and encouraging them
therein. Some are chief among sinners, Luke 19.2. Some drink in Iniquity like
water. Job 15.16. Some are drawn to sin, and some draw sin to them, and that as
with Cart ropes, Isa. 5.18. some commit sin, and tremble at it: and some commit
sin and rejoice at it. Prove. 2.14. some commit sin, and are terrified at it
when they have done it: some commit sin and make a mock and sport of sin, when
they have done it, Pro. 10.23. and 14.9. some commit sin with great remorse and
reluctance, and others commit sin with as great and eager greediness, Ephesians.
4.18.19. A dreadful text, Having the understanding darkened, being alienated
from the Life of God, through the Ignorance that is in them, because of the
blindness of their heart, verse. 19. Who being past feeling, have given
themselves over to lasciviousness, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
These are sinners of a great Magnitude, if you weigh the things spoken of them
(1) Having their understandings darkened. (...).
The word does either signify the faculty it self, or the ratiocination, or
reasoning of the understanding, and it is true in both respects, their
understandings are dark and ignorant, and their reasonings are dark and
obscure. (...).
(2) Being alienated from the Life of God, i. e. Vitam ^ Dei appellat, vitam
illam qua deus vivit in suis: quamque praecipit and approbat. Beza in loc.
That Life, that God commands and approves, they are too much acquainted with
a sensual, flesh-pleasing, swinish life: but they are utter strangers to an
holy, self-denying, sin-mortifying Life: because of the ignorance that is in
them, as a bruit does not know the life of reason, so sinners are ignorant of
the Life of God. (3) Because of the blindness, (more properly) the hardness of
their heart; (...). This word is sometimes rendered blindness, sometimes
hardness, because they are conjunct, a blind heart is a hard heart, and a hard
heart is a blind heart; it signifies the thick skin that covers the palms
of the hands of hard laborers, that they can handle nettles, and in that part
of their hand have no feeling of the stingings, as others are sensible of.
There is a thick skin has over grown the hearts of some sinners, that they are
(4) past (...).
feeling, unsensible as a stone, who are said to have their consciences feared
as with an hot Iron. But though they feel not their sin here, they shall feel
the torments due for sin in the life to come. The hideous howlings, and
gnashings of teeth amongst the damned, speak plainly that they feel the
punishment of sin. (5) Have given themselves over to lasciviousness, sometime
sinners are said to sell themselves to work wickedness, as Ahab, 1 King. 21.2^.
sometimes are said to give themselves to wickedness, which denotes their
constancy, and complacency in working wickedness, as when St. Paul commanded
Timothy to give himself to reading, he says, Give thy self wholly to them, 1 Timothy 4.15. (...). Be thou in these things, a man's heart is in those things he
is given to, a Scholar that is given to his Book, a drunkard that is given to
drinking, when his cup is in his hand, his heart is in the cup. He is in drink
is our proverb, when the drink is in him. God and Christ should dwell in their
heart, but their heart is in their sin, and sin is in their heart. (6) To
(...), is opera quaestus.
work, They work at sin as for gain, when it is the loss of the soul, that will
be the issue. Sin indeed is a hard labor, and greatest drudgery: sinners work
and damnation will be their wages; they should be working out their salvation;
but they are working out their damnation, they are Laboring for hell, and
taking pains to undo themselves; and what is it they are so much employed in;
(7) In uncleanness, in the extent and latitude of it, working all manner of
uncleanness, and that (8) with greediness, or with (...). i. e. quasi agatur de
lu^^n ita ut ^liu^ alium superare conte^d^t. Beza in loc.
covetousness. Wicked men are as eager after sin, as a covetous man is after a
good bargain, they are covetous to commit sin. But Beza, renders it Certatim,
contending and striving who may sin most, as if they could not get to damnation
soon enough, or sure enough.

4. That the reason why sin does not rise to its height in all men, is not from
themselves but from God. It is God that sets bounds to the Ocean of men's lusts
that they should no more overflow. God in great measure by restraining grace
dammeth up the fountain of sin, that it sends not forth so many streams as
in others it does. Genesis 20.6. -- for I also withheld thee from sinning against
me, therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. But some God gives up unto
their lusts, Romans 1.24, 26.

5. That men stand not at a stay, in virtue, or in vice, in holiness, or
wickedness: If a man does not increase in grace, likely he is decreasing, so if
a man be not mending he is growing worse; like rotten things every day are
worse and worse; more seared, if not softened; more resolved to sin if not
reclaimed. Of good it is said, Non progredi est regredi, not to go forward, is
to go backward; of wicked, I say, Non regredi est progredi, not to go backward
from sin, is to go forward in sin.

6. That wicked men might seem to mend in one thing, and wax worse in another,
and so they do not leave their wickedness, but only change it, as one that was
a prodigal and licentious, turns to be niggardly and covetous.

SECT. II.
THese things premised, I shall show that oftentimes wicked men grow worse and
worse; and therefore will appear that this advise is not unseasonable, after
such a thundering voice of judgment, as this Plague has been.

This will be manifest From Scripture, By Arguments.


Scriptures showing many wax worse. Nemo repent sit turpissimus, sed sensim
sine sensu.
First, The Scriptures evidencing this, that men oftentimes grow worse, and are
more wicked, are such as these, Psalm. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not
in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners: nor sits
in the seat of the scornful. In which Scripture there are nine words that set
forth the progress of men in sinning; and their coming up to the height of
wickedness gradatim.

Psalm. 1. v. 1. opened.
Three respect
Sinful Objects, Counsel. Way. Seat.
Sinful Actions, Walk. Stand. Sit.
Sinful Persons, Ungodly. Sinners. Scornful.

And every third of these includes the second, and the second includes the
first, non contra, every scorner is a sinner, and every sinner is ungodly, but
every ungodly person is not a sinner, i. e. (...), emphatically, as the word is
sometimes used, Luke 7.37. And behold a woman, in the City, that was a sinner,
i. e. a great and notorious sinner, and every such sinner is not scornful.
Sitting includes [standeth] and does suppose it, for a man must stand before
he sits in a wicked way; and standing supposes a man first to come into that
way, or to that seat in which he sits, but not contrary, a wicked man may walk
in that way in which he does not stand, and he might stand in that way in which
he does not sit, and so of the rest. Now here observe David's climax or
gradation, setting forth the progress of wicked men in sinning. First they
walk, then they stand, next they sit. First they are ungodly, then they are
great sinners, next they are scornful: For the fuller opening of this
Scripture to see men's growth in sin, I will review them.

First, The Objects, about which wicked men are conversant, which were noted to
be three,

1. Counsel, (...)Tam id quod consulitur, quam quod consilio efficitur. Bith.
Wicked men consult how they may satisfy their lusts, they deliberate how they
may get an opportunity to sin. Thus the malicious man studies revenge, and the
Adulterer contrives secrecy, Psalm. 36.4. He devises mischief upon his bed, and
the Devil is near his pillow to be his counselor.

2. Way, (...) Mos consuetudo, studium quae sunt quasi viae per quas incedunt,
versonturque. Bith.
Manner of life is set out by way, in Scripture, men's practices are their way,
a man that has a good trade and thrives therein, we say, he is in a good way;
and so the profession, and serving of God in such a manner is called a way,
Act. 9.2. so that a wicked man makes sin his profession and trade. Thus the
common drunkard by his daily wickedness professes himself a drunkard, that is
his way.

3. Seat, By frequent commission they settle themselves on their lees, then
fix their abode in the house of sin, They lie down and like swine wallow in
their iniquity, Psalm. 36.4. He devises mischief upon his bed, he sets
himself in a way that is not good: They first consult, then act, then settle in
their sin.

Secondly, The Actions which were also three.

1. They walk, (...) Ambulavit metaphorice usurpatur de vita, moribus and
actionibus.
they take delight in their sin as a man does in a pleasant walk; and as the
Devil (with whom they walk) in walking to and fro to tempt and devour souls:
a godly man might possibly step into a sinful way, but a wicked man walks
therein.

2. They Stand, Next they become obdurate and shameless in sin, they are not
ashamed of their oaths, and drunkenness, and open prophanations of the
Sabbath; a godly man might fall into sin, but he does not stand in it; he does
not persist in it, but wicked men will stand and justify themselves in
wickedness and plead for it.

3. They Sit, As men secure, will persevere in evil; a man that sits intends to
stay, it being a gesture more remote from motion than standing is.

Thirdly, The Persons, and these likewise are three.

1. The Ungodly, a man that sins and repents not is an Ungodly man, Septuagint,
(...).

2. Then they are Sinners, i. e. notoriously wicked as was before showed; (...)
Nomen plurale absque singulari, ex conjugatione Pihel deductum, idcoque
significationem intendit, ac Habitum denotat. ^i^lmer, in Psalm.
it signifies habitual sinners.

3. Then they are Scornful, will be scorners of reproofs, and scorners of the
way of holiness, and then are come to such height in sin, that Solomon forbids
to reprove them as men scarce reclaimed, Prove. 9.7, 8. (...) which the
Septuagint translate (...), Pests, Plagues. Tertullus the Orator called the
Apostle Paul, (...) a Pest, a Plague, pestilent fellow, Act. 24.5. but by the
Septuagint, scornful sinners are (...), the pests of a place. Thus from this
Scripture you have the progress men make in sin, accurately described by the
Psalmist.

Thus Cain waxed worse and worse, and did grow in sin, Genesis 4.

1. He dealt hypocritically with God, verse. 4. He brought to God of the fruit
of the ground, but kept back his heart. (2) He envyed his brother Abel, and the
grace of God that appeared in him, 1 John 3.12. and he offered to God and
persecuted his brother to death, Genesis 4.8. (3) He lies before an all knowing
God, speaking falsely, verse. 9. (4) He flies in the face of God, as if God had
charged him with that which was not his duty. Am I my brothers keeper? (5) He
despaireth of mercy, verse. 13. My punishment is greater than I can bear, or, My
sin is greater than that it may be forgiven. (6) He flies from God, verse. 16.
(7) He takes up with the pleasures and profits of the world without God, verse.
17. So Cain increased in wickedness.

So did Ahab, 1 King. 21.

1. He sees Naboths Vineyard. (2) He does covet it, and unlawfully desire that
which was another man's, verse. 2. and would have bought that which Naboth had
not a power to sell, because it was the Inheritance of his Fathers, verse. 3.
and Numb. 36.7. (3) He was discontent at Naboths answer, though he gave him the
Word of God as the reason of his denial ver. 4. (4) He does unfaithfully report
the words of Naboth, as is usual with wicked men to do, verse. 6. He leaves out
the reason of Naboths denial, Because it was the Inheritance of his Fathers,
(5) He was guilty of Naboths death, suffering Jezebel to use his Seal to effect
it, verse. 8. And Elijah the Prophet charge Ahab with his death, as being
guilty of his blood, verse. 19. (6) He takes possession of that which was none
of his own, and which he got with the shedding of innocent blood, contrary to
the command of God, Ezekiel. 46.18.

The like steps you might perceive in Jezebels sin, and if you trace her, you
will find her step by step to come up to an height of sin.

1. She approves of Ahabs unlawful desire, verse. 7. (2) She resolves to get by
violence what Ahab did sinfully desire, verse. 7, 8. (3) She makes her husband
guilty of blood by gaining his consent to that which he would not act with his
own hand, verse. 8, 19 compared. (4) She draws other men* and makes them
partakers of her sin; the Elders and Nobles, verse. 8, 9. (5) She causes two
wicked men to take a false Oath against Naboth. (6) She suggesteth the Charge
that should be brought against him, which was high and false, ver. 10. Let them
swear that Naboth did blaspheme God and the King; when indeed Naboth did
neither. (7) She prophanes Gods Ordinance, she proclaimed a Fast; she colors
her wickedness with Religious pretenses. (8) She obtains the murder of Naboth,
verse. 13. They stoned by Jezebels counsel an innocent man, to death. This was
the growth and gradation of Jezebels wickedness, till it became monstrous great.

So Judas increased in wickedness, and grew worse and worse.

(1) He was an hypocrite. (2) A Theife, Joh. 12.4, 5, 6. (3) A traitor to his
Lord. (4) He despaired of mercy. (5) He murdered himself.

The grows of sin is intimated in that expression of the Holy Ghost, Genesis
15.16. The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. It was increasing, but
their measure was not full, sin would increase In infinitum, but there is a
measure that a swearer, or a drunkard, and all wicked men shall fill up, and
then God will call them to an account, Mat. 23.32. Fill ye up then the measure
of your Fathers. Thus from the word of God I have shown that wicked men do grow
in sin, and wax oftentimes worse and worse.

SECT. III.
Secondly, ARguments drawn from Reason do evidence this, that wicked men are
apt to grow in sin; I will take up with three only, least I be too large in
this Direction. And they are taken,

First, A natura peccati, From the Nature of sin.

Arguments proving wicked men wax worse.
Secondly, Ab impulsu Diaboli, From the Instigation of the Devil.

Thirdly, Ab absentia contrarii, From the absence of that which should keep
them from sinning more and more. Removetur prohibens.

I. From sin.
This appears from the Nature of sin that is predominant in ungodly men, that
swayes, and Byasseth them in all their actions, and rules in them and
exercises authority over them.

1. Sin disposes the heart to sin.
One sin does incline and dispose the heart to sin again: The first sin
inclined all men to commit more, where grace is predominant, the heart is
inclined to love God, and to obey God, the general scope of such a man's life,
and the bent and inclination of his heart is toward God and duty, to grow in
grace, and become better and better. Now Contrariorum contraria est ratio and
natura. Sin does dispose the heart to sin, and to depart from God more and
more, Heb. 3.12. It makes the bent of the heart to Backslide further and
further from God, Hos. 11.7. It makes the heart set to do evil, Eccles. 8.11.
The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. As is the tide to
the boat, so is sin to man's heart.

2. Sin begets sin.
Sin is of a multiplying nature, as sin committed inclines the heart to the
iteration of the same sin, so one sin begets another, of another kind, as
drunkenness and gluttony, begets lust: and malice, revenge; as one circle in
the water multiplies to twenty, out of one root of a tree grow many arms, out
of one arm, many branches, out of every branch many twigs. From the same
fountain proceed many streams, from the same body of the Sun, many Beams. So
from one sin are many multiplied. So Adams first sin has multiplied
Innumerably.

3. Sin is linked to sin.
In wicked men there is a complication and a connection of sins, Sins thus
multiplied are linked one to another; and are twisted together, as there is a
chain of graces in a godly man, that if you draw one link you move the whole
chain; when you exercise Faith upon a promise, (suppose) of eternal Life,
this sets all his graces on exercise, as one wheel in a Watch moves all the
rest: Faith applying this promise, stirs up love to God that made the
promise, and has prepared the thing promised, it inflames holy desires after
it, and desires put on to diligent endeavors to obtain it; it begets a lively
hope, which earnestly, yet patiently waits for the possession of it. So there
is a concatenation of sin, therefore sin is compared to a body, in which all
the members by sinews and ligaments are knit together; Romans 6.6.
that though all the members do not grow, to an equal quantity, but some are
bigger, some less; yet all do proportionably grow; so though all sins in a
wicked man are not of the same magnitude, but in some drunkenness is greatest,
in some pride, in some covetousness, yet all sin is growing in them, and
therefore must necessarily be worse and worse: as unbelief makes a sinner
fearless of Gods threatenings, and fearlesness makes him secure, and security
hardneth his heart, and when his heart is hard, and his Conscience seared, he
will be very bad.

4. Sin infects the sinner.
Sin is of an infectious nature, an infectious disease does not only spread
unto others, as one man sick of the Plague may infect a whole Parish, but
gets nearer and nearer to his heart, and seizes upon his very vitals, that
he waxes sicker and sicker, and at last brings him to his grave: So one sin
does not only infect others, as one drunkard inticeth another to the same sin,
but sin encroacheth more into the sinners heart and affections, and brings him
more and more into bondage to it, and so makes him worse and worse, as a man
that was wont to take a cup too much, at length is brought to frequent
drunkenness, till at last it brings him to Hell and to damnation irrecoverably,
where he is as bad as he can be.

5. Sin is unsatiable.
Sin is of a craving and unsatiable nature, therefore those that would satisfy
their Lusts, must needs in length of time be very bad. There are four things
which are never satisfied, and never say, It is enough, Prove. 30.15, 16. and
sin may make a fifth: For though a man drudge under sin all his days, yet it
thinks the Sinner has not done enough for it. The Horse-leech has two
daughters, crying, Give, give: such a thing is sin, that never leaves sucking
the heart-blood of the Sinner, till it has sucked him to death. Sin cannot
cease to ask, and sinners know not how to deny; and they must be wicked indeed,
that will be as wicked as sin can make them.

I might run through the several kinds of sin, and show how they are never
satisfied: The Egyptians thought that the Israelites never made brick enough:
and sin thinks the sinner never is enslaved enough, that he never does obey
enough; but I will briefly instance but in three.

First, Covetousness is unsatiable: it never says, It is enough: It is not
satisfied with having, nor in seeing what it has, Eccles. 4.8. and 5.10. and
therefore puts the Worldling to go drudge again. Crescit amor nummi, etc.

Secondly, Revenge is unsatiable. Malice never thinks it has done enough, and
therefore puts on the malicious to consult, to contrive, and never to be at
rest till he has been more injurious to the person that is the object of his
malice.

Thirdly, Lust and uncleanness is unsatiable, and therefore such as are
addicted to it, and would have it satisfied, must be very wicked, Oculi sunt in
amore duces.
for they never do it. 2 Pet. 2.14 (...), having eyes full of the Adulteress,
the very looks of their eye betrays the lust of their heart; and it follows,
And cannot cease from sin, (...).
therefore will proceed to great Impiety.

SECT. IV.
II. Satan.
THat wicked men will grow in sin, appears from the instigation of the Devil,
who is unweariedly diligent to tempt unto sin, and to add one iniquity unto
another: and that because he rules in their hearts, and takes them captive at
his pleasure, 2 Timothy 2.26. A man will be very wicked, that will sin as often as
the Devil tempts. A man is never so bad, but the Devil would have him to be
worse; Judas was an hypocrite before, but yet Satan put it into his heart to be
more vile, in betraying Christ, Joh. 13.2. Satan tempting without, and sin
inclining within, Satan never ceasing to tempt, and Sinners not knowing how to
resist, will be growing (like the Crocodile from an Egg) to a stupendous
magnitude.

SECT. V.
Absence of Grace.
III. THat wicked men will grow in sin, appears from the absence of that which
should restrain them. If a man has drunk in poison, and has no
Alexipharmacum, or Antidote, his sickness will grow upon him. Wicked men want
that which should preserve them from sin; as

1. The Fear of God: This is that which causes a man to shun evil. Job 1.1.
Job was a man fearing God, and eschewing evil. Prove. 8.13. The fear of the Lord
is to hate evil. But where the fear of the Lord is not, there the floodgates
are pulled up: If the Devil tempt a man that fears not God to sport on the
Lords day, he will do it; to omit Prayer, he will do it; yea, if there were no
Devil to tempt him, he would run on in sin. This is brought in as the cause of
crying sins, Romans 3.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. Many sins there are enumerated,
and at the close of all is, There is no fear of God before their eyes. Abraham
dared not to trust himself with a people that did not fear God, Genesis 20.11.
Abraham said, Because I thought, surely the fear of God is not in this place,
and they will slay me for my Wives sake.

2. Wicked men want serious Consideration, that should keep them from being
worse; they do not seriously consider of Death and Judgment, of the Wrath of
God, of the Torments of Hell; nor of Gods Omniscience, that he always sees
them. Hos. 7.2. They consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness, now their own doings have beset them about, they are before my
face: Nor of his Omnipresence, that he is always with them and by them; they
consider not, If I sin, I shall lose my soul, and it will cost me bitter tears
or bitter torments: They do not weigh in their serious thoughts, the greatness
of their danger, the heaviness of Gods wrath, nor the eternity of the miseries
of another world. God complains of the want of Consideration as the great cause
of the height of sin, Isa. 1.2, 3, 4.

3. Wicked men want a firm assent to the verity of Gods Word, that they do not
verily believe the truth of Gods threatenings; but they have a secret hope that
it shall go well with them, whatever they do, and whatever God says. They
hear of the evil of sin, and of the torments of Hell, but they feel nothing for
the present, and fear nothing for the future, and therefore go on to add
drunkenness to thirst, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20, 21. And it come to pass when he
hears the words of this curse, that he bless himself in his heart, saying I
shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart, to add
drunkenness to thirst. Verse. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the
anger of the Lord, and his Jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the
Curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall
blot out his Name from under Heaven.

4. Wicked men want a lively tender Conscience, which should warn them that
they sin not, and accuse them, and threaten them with damnation, if they do.
Many have cauterized Consciences, 1 Timothy 4.2. Where Conscience is dead, or
sleepy, or feared, there iniquity will abound.

SECT. VI.
What are the several steps and gradations whereby sin grows from a low ebb
to its highest actings? Question Second.

THere are ten steps to the highest actings of sin, five of which are common to
good and bad, the other five proper to the wicked and ungodly. Many Hypocrites
may go half way with the godly in that which is good, but never (while such)
go quite through. So too often a man that is godly goes half way with the
wicked in sinning, but never goes quite through with them in all the
circumstances of sin, 10 rounds in the sinners Ladder to hell.
The rounds in the Sinners Ladder to hell are these ten: 1. Original
Concupiscence. 2. Temptation. 3. Inclination. 4. Consent. 5. Action. 6.
Custom. 7. Habit. 8. Hardness contracted. 9. Hardness Judicial. 10.
Consummation or final Impenitence.


Of these briefly in their order.

I. Natural Concupiscence.
Natural Concupiscence, or the Vitiousness of our Nature, which is in Infants,
this is as the Tinder or the Gunpowder whereby our Natures are apt to take
fire at the least spark. This is a sin, because it is the absence or privation
of that rectitude which ought to be in our Nature; it is a fruit and punishment
of Adams first sin, and an immediate consequent of the loss of our Original
Righteousness. This is fomes peccati: like to that wherewith the fire is
kindled or kept burning: called the Old Man, sinful Sin, the body of Sin, sin
dwelling, Law of Members.

II. Temptation.
Then there is some Temptation, solicitation, suited to this corrupt Principle,
either by the Devil or wicked men: or some Object presented to a man that might
stir up and excite this internal principle of Corruption in our hearts, and
though all men have the seeds of all sin, yet Satan observing men's different
constitutions has different baits, (as men have several baits, for several
fish) some he soliciteth to drunkenness, others to uncleanness, and others to
covetousness: Where note, that Satan has a wonderful advantage of us, which he
had not in our first Parents before the first sin; for there was nothing in
their hearts that was corrupt, and yet how did the Devils temptation together
with the Object set before their eyes, prevail over them! What the warm Sun is
to the stiff and frozen Serpent, it does enliven it, and then it sends forth
its venom, and uses its sting; that a Temptation, or an Object, proposed is,
to our corrupt Natures. Some call this Abstraction, a drawing the mind off
from good to evil.

III. Inclination.
Then there arises some Inclination in the soul, or an hankering of the heart
after that sinful Object; an entering into a patley with the Devil, minding of
the motion made by the Tempter, thinking further of the committing of the sin.
^am 1.14. is enticed, (...), the word signifi^th baiting, as men do bait for
fishes.
This is called Inescation, (as the Fish delights to play with the bait) or
Vitiosus motus, joined with some titillation or delight of the heart therein.
The first motions of the heart, that are primo primi, though they be
involuntary, and before consent of will, and the judgment against them, yet
are sins, (1) Because they are motus (...), disorderly motions of the heart;
Romans 7.7.14, 15, 16, 17.
(2) Because they be forbidden by the Law of God, and (3) Hinder our love to
God.

IV. Consent.
Next is the Compliance and consent of the will, yielding to the temptation, and
closing with the motion made concerning such an act upon such an Object. The
Will as queen and commander in the soul, makes a decree to close with the
temptation, and to close with and consent unto the solicitation to sin, upon
the understandings mistake in its comparative judgment, apprehending and
dictating to the will that to be good which indeed is evil, or the sensitive
appetite moving the will by the mediation of the understanding, allureth it
unto consent; and this is the conception of sin, Jam. 1.14, 15. But every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and entised, then when Lust
has conceived, it brings forth sin, etc.

V. Action.
When the Will has consented it lays a despotical or flat Injunction on the
Members of the body to execute and proceed to action, and this is the actual
commission of sin in the execution, in Imperate acts. Thus when Judas had
consented to betray Christ, he goes forth and covenants with Christ's
crucifyers, and betrays him. Thus the eye moves to behold, and the hand to
act that which the will consents to and commands. Thus far it is the
unhappiness of the people of God in their state of imperfection, to yield.
David had a principle of corruption, then an Object proposed, then wicked
suggestions arose or were injected into his mind, then his will consented, and
then proceeded to the actual commission of his after-bitterly-lamented sin.

VI. Iteration.
Then wicked men proceed to the frequent Iteration of the same sin, till it
becomes customary. A wicked man is drunk till it is his custom to be so, and to
swear till it becomes his custom to do so. This is a great progress made in
sin, it is great growth, and such will be hardly reclaimed. Jer. 13.23. Can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may you who are
accustomed to do evil, learn to do well. Aethiopem lavare is to labor in vain.
Ministers endeavor to reclaim men accustomed to swearing, and lying, and
drunkenness, and they preach in vain, and study and pray in vain, as to any
success usually upon such men's hearts. It is the commendation of a man to be
accustomed to a thing, if it be good, for a Christian to say, it is his custom
to pray; and a Minister, it is his custom to preach; though it is not good,
that the one pray out of custom, nor the other preach customarily: To have it
customary to perform holy duties is good, but to do them customarily is evil.
Thus it was Christ's custom, or he was wont to preach and teach the people. But
it is an aggravation to be accustomed to a thing if it be evil, and if it be
gross, it is a sign of a graceless person: Though some carnal men when reproved
for their often swearing, say, I thought no harm, it is only a custom I have
got, and I cannot leave it: A custom! why that is the aggravation and growth of
thy wickedness, and thou do as foolishly allege that to extenuate thy sin,
which indeed does aggravate thy sin; as a Thief accused before the Judge for
stealing should plead, it was his custom so to do. Now sin is become the
profession of the sinner, and he goes to his sin as customarily as an Artificer
to his Shop or Workhouse; but it is not the custom of Gods people to make a
custom of committing gross sins. David did to the wounding of his soul once
commit Adultery, but it was not his Custom so to do. Peter at one time did
deny his Lord, but it was not his custom so to do. It is not the custom of a
gracious person often to commit the same gross sin, but it is his custom often
to lament a gross sin but once committed. Therefore if it be thy custom to
commit gross sins, and thou art wont to do so, thou art gone beyond the people
of God in thy sinnings. Thy state is deplorable.

VII. Habit.
Customary commission of sin begets an Habit in sinning; whereby the love of
sin is more deeply radicated in the heart. Habits are got by frequent repeated
acts, and does add a greater facility to act; and such as are customary
sinners will soon be habitual Sinners, by frequent swearing they will have an
habit of swearing; by frequent drunkenness they will acquire an habit of that
sin, and what is habitual especially in evil things, is not easily lost.

VIII. Hardness contracted
Then Habitual commission of sin begets contracted Hardness of heart, and
fearlesness of all Gods Judgments and threatenings; and contracted hardness
added to natural hardness, is a great progress in sinning. Peccata sive sint
commissionis sive omissionis per multiplicationem diuturnam, in consuctudinem
ducta and inveterata, pravum habitum gignunt, ac quasi callum obducunt
voluntati simu^^c menti. Ames Med. p. 67.
Thy Conscience is seared, thy heart hard as the nether millstone; past feeling.
When Pharaoh hardened his heart, his sinning was great, Exodus 8.15. Now thou
stiffenest thy neck against all admonitions, Act. 7.51. and hardenest thy heart
against reproofs, Prove. 29.1. Now thou actest as if thou were above control,
and if thou could, would shake off the very Sovereignty of God. Exodus 5.2.
And Pharaoh (who was come up to the degree of hardness) said, Who is the Lord,
that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither
will I let Israel go. So hardened Sinners reply to Gods Ministers exhorting
them to let their sins and lusts go; saying (at least in their hearts) Who is
the Lord, whose Name you use? we know not the Lord, neither will we let our
sins go, nor our pleasures and profits go. Now thou say to the Lord,
Depart from me, Job 21.14. My tongue is mine own, who is Lord over me? Psalm.
12.4. Now thou gloriest in thy wickedness that is thy shame, Philip. 3.19. Thou
rejoycest to do evil, Prove. 2.14. and make a mock of Sin, Prove. 14.9. and
make a sport in doing mischief, Prove. 10.23. Oh if thou could vapor it
thus at the day of judgment, and make as light of torment as now thou do of
sin, if thou could brave it out thus before Christ at his coming, and
Russian like, bid defiance to an almighty God, and angry judge, thy case were
not so miserable, but thou can not, alas, thou can not do it: Now thou art
stout against the Lord, Mal. 3.13. But then thou shall sneake and crouch before
him.

IX. Hardness judicial.
Then Judicial Hardness is added to contracted Hardness, thou have hardened
thine own heart, and God will harden it also. Now when Natural, Contracted,
and Judicial, all meet in one man's heart, how hard must it needs be, and how
great a sinner is this man in the sight of God? you read sometime, Pharaoh
hardened his heart ^^mself, Exodus 8.15. and sometimes that God hardened Pharaohs
heart also, Exodus 10.20. So God gives men up to their own hearts lusts which
is a greater judgment, unspeakably greater than all bodily Plagues. Read Romans
1.21. to the end, Psalm. 81.11, 12. Rev. 22.11. Isa. 6.9.10. Hos. 4.14, 17.

But here conceive of God aright, when the Scripture says God hardneth men's
heart, it is not to be understood, as if God were the author of their sin no
more than the Sun can be the efficient cause of darkness, for how shall the
chiefest good be the author of the greatest evil. 7 things about Gods
hardening men's hea^ts.
For

1. God does not infuse any wickedness into their hearts.

2. Nor does God tempt them to sin, James 1.13. he may try them, but not tempt
them to sin.

3. God commands no man to sin, for Gods command would make it no sin, as in
the case of Abraham's Sacrificing his Son, or the Israelites taking the Jewels
and Earrings of the Egyptians: except such things as are intrinsecally evil,
as are hating of God, and blaspheming of God, and these things God cannot
command, as he is said that he cannot lie, Tit. 1.2.

4. God with greatest severity forbids men's sins, he charge you upon pain of
damnation, upon peril of Hell torments, that you sin not, but commands men to
repent, and mourn for sin, therefore does forbid them to be hard and stupid
under sin.

5. Neither does God cooperate, or concur to the wickedness of their
actions, though without derogation to Gods honor we may say, he does concur
to their wicked actions, For in him all live and move and have their beings,
Act. 17.28. Deus concurrit ad actum non ad malitiam actus.
The action materially considered (as it is an action or motion) is good, and
so God is the cause of it, but the action formally considered is evil, and so
God is not the author of it, as when you spur a lame Horse, you are the cause
that the Horse does move, but you are not the cause of his halting.

6. But God does permit and suffer men to harden themselves, he does not give
them preventing grace, but denies that (which he is not bound to give) which
would keep off this Hardness from them. So God is said to give men over to
their own wicked hearts, to let them alone, and leave them to their lusts, Romans
1.24, 26. and to give them over to a Reprobate mind, 2 These. 2.10, 11. 12. But
if some should say, bare Divine permission cannot be the reason why God should
be said to harden men's hearts, no more than he would be said to steal, because
he suffers men so to do. Some therefore add,

7. That Hardness of heart may be considered either as a sin, and so God is not
the author of it, or as a punishment, and so it may be from Excaecatio activa
tribuitur Deo, Satanae and homini scipsum excaecanti; satanas and Homo in ista
action gravissime peccant, deus autem justissime agit.

Strangius, de volun. Dei circa peccatum. p 819. Modi notandi sunt, quibus
dicitur Deus indur^re. (1) Quia Deus just deserit eos, a quibus desertus est,
suumque auxilium subtrabit aut denegat, privatque eos donis suis, quibus illi
perverse abusi sunt, idem. p. 824. (2) viam eis aperit, objecta and occasiones
subministrans, quibus illi flagitia exequantur, ut in perniciem suam ruant.
826. (3) Offert, confert, aut facit ea quae sua natura hominem ad bonum
converterent, atque ad illustrandum, and emollieadum volerent, sed abutentium
vitio fit, ut magis obdurentur. p. 827. (4) flagella, flagellorum remotio,
adversa, impiorum indurationem promovent, iisque pulsati inster ineudis sub
malleo magis indurescunt. p. 828.


God, as the same thing in diverse respects might be a sin, and a punishment of
former sin, and a cause of future sinning, so the same thing in diverse respects
might be from God, and from the creature: as Absaloms Rebellion against the
King was an heinous sin, as from him, yet it was also a punishment of David's
sins, 2 Samuel 16.22. But the Scripture asserts two things however, (1) That with
God dwells no evil, and he cannot be the cause of sin, and yet (2) expressly
says, that the Lord hardened Pharaohs heart Exodus 10.20. Though we know not the
manner, that does not lessen the dreadfullness of the judgment, but when God
does judicially harden, then men are almost ripe in sin and for hell.

X. Final impenitence.
When God has judicially hardened them, they let loose the reigns of their
lusts and now are fit for any wickedness, and stop not at the most abominable
and loathsome practices. Now they can blaspheme, and mock God, and deride
holiness, and act like incarnate Devils, when the people in Act. 14.8.11. saw
the wonderful works wrought by the Apostles; they said, The gods are come down
to us in the likeness of men, but when we see the most abominable, and sordid
practices of wicked men, might we not say, the devils are come up to us in the
likeness of men? When men are judicially hardened they will commit sins against
nature, Romans 1.24, 26. etc. And could wish there were no God; nay now they are
(when they have given themselves over to work wickedness, and God has given
them over too, when they say, we will be filthy, and God say, you shall be
filthy) eager and greedy after sin, they weary themselves in committing
iniquity, and yet are not weary of iniquity, and do even scorn at threatenings,
and mock at judgments, 2 Pet. 3.3, 4. Men walking after their own lusts, say,
where is the Promise of his coming, for since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. Is. 5.19. That
say, let him make speed, and hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the
counsel of the holy one of Israel draw nigh, and come, that we may know it.
Thus sinning with judicial hardness, and dying in final impenitency, are at
the bottom round, from whence they step into endless misery.

Thus you see how great a matter a little fire kindles; and from how small
beginnings some have proceeded to the very pitch and height of sin, that can
scarce be worse (save in the frequent iteration of the sins, that they commit)
for they have got into all kinds of sin, they are guilty of spiritual
wickedness, which the devil is, malice, enmity against God and goodness, etc.
and of corporal wickedness, as Adultery, Drunkenness, Gluttony, etc. Which the
Devil is not capable of committing, the Devil being only a spirit, but men
consist of body and spirit, and so may commit more sins for kind, than the
Devil himself can do. But God forbid that after such a judgment, amongst us
should be found such sinners, this will be an evil requital to the Lord for
his removing his sore judgment from us.

SECT. VII.
Under what dispensations do wicked men grow worse and worse? Question Third.

IN the general I answer, wicked men are the worse in all conditions that God
puts them into: more particularly they are worse and worse, Under
Gods Providence, Gods Ordinances.


First, Wicked men wax worse under all Gods Providence, whether Of
Prosperity, Adversity, Deliverances,


Prosperity makes the wicked worse.
I. Ungodly men are worse under their prosperity, when the world smiles upon
them, and when they have all that their carnal hearts can wish and desire: If
the Sun shine, it hardens the clay, and the more it makes the dunghill send
forth unsavory smells, Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness
and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God
leads thee to repentance, ver. 5. But after thy hardness and impenitent
heart, treasurest up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God. A wicked man is more hardened by Gods kindness to
him; Animus Iniquus beneficio fit pejor. A wicked heart is made worse by every
kindness. As, Christ fed Judas at his table, and he runs presently to betray
him. The more God abounds to them in common goodness, the more they abound
against God in multiplied wickedness. Neh. 9.16. ad 27. Psalm. 78.12, 17. Prove.
1.32. The prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Isa. 26.10. Let favor be
showed to the wicked, yet will he not learn righteousness: in the land of
uprightness will he deal unjustly, and will not behold the majesty of the Lord.
They are worse by prosperity.

1. Because they are thereby listed up with pride and carnal confidence; many
men the more rich, the more proud, and the prouder, the worser; the more their
riches increase, the more they set their hearts upon them, and the more a man's
heart is upon the creature, the worse he is. Prosperity is full of snares; and
we are apt then to forget God, and to lift up the heel against him. Deuteronomy.
32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, thou art waxen fat, thou art grown
thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which made him, and
lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. Here is great prosperity, and great
impiety; and God seeing how apt his own people are to be worse by prosperity,
does caution them largely against it, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18.

2. Wicked men are worse by prosperity, because then they have more fuel to
feed their lusts. Sodomites had fullness of bread, and that did feed their
uncleanness. They turn Gods grace into wantonness, and his mercies into fuel
for their wickedness. Those things which should be cords of love to draw them
to God, they turn to the nourishment of their sins against God, and desire
riches not that they may glorify God, but gratify their lusts, Jam. 4.3. The
more abundance of outward things a drunkard has, the more he is able to please
his palate with great abundance of the richest Wines; the more the adulterer
has, the more he bestows upon his harlot: and so the greater plenty, the more
they lead a sensual, brutish, flesh-pleasing life, and the more of that, the
worse they be.

3. Wicked men in prosperity are the worse, because they are apt to gather Gods
special love to them, from the common bounty he bestows upon them. Because the
world smiles upon them, they think God does so too: Because Gods hand is opened
to them, therefore they think they are engraven upon his heart, and think
Divine Toleration Psalm. 50.18, 19, 20, 21.
is Divine Approbation, when indeed it is a sign of Gods great displeasure, to
give prosperity to a man in a sinful course. God was angry with the rich man
in the Gospel, when he gave him more abundance than he knew how to bestow, Luke
12.18, 19, 20. and 16.19, 20. They are apt to think that is the best way, which
is the most prosperous way, Jer. 44.17. But we will certainly do what soever
thing goes forth out of our own mouth, to burn Incense to the Queen of heaven*
and to pour out Drink Offerings unto her, as we have done, we, and our Fathers,
our Kings and our Princes, in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem, for then had we plenty of Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil:
Verse. 18. But since we left off to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to
pour out drink Offerings unto her, we have wanted all things, and have been
consumed by the sword and by the famine. By prosperity they take encouragement
to proceed in their Iniquity.

4. Wicked men by prosperity are worse, because, they are apt to put far from
them the evil day, and the hour and thoughts of Death and Judgment, and the
Life to come: In health they have not serious thoughts of sickness; a wicked
man is too apt to think that the Sun of Prosperity which shines upon him, will
never set, nor be clouded. Psalm. 49.11. Their inward thought is, that their
houses shall continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations:
they call their Lands after their own Names. In Prosperity they think little of
death. Luke 12.19. And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have goods laid up for
many years, eat, drink, and be merry. They promise themselves a continuance of
their outward happiness, and so sin more freely and abundantly. Isa. 56.12.
Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. This
persuasion begets carnal security, and the more secure, still the worse.

SECT. VIII.
II. Adversity makes wicked men worse.
WIcked men are often times worse under adversity, judgments and afflictions
that do befall them, the more they are punished, the more they are hardened;
there is nothing in adversity and judgments, in sickness and plagues, in
poverty and distress, to make an alteration or a change in the heart of a
sinner from worse to better, except God sanctify it. The Plague upon the body
is not a remedy in it self to cure the Plague of the heart, for men love more
the plague of their hearts than they loathe the plague of the body. Possibly
outward Judgments may put a stop to some men's sinnings for the present, but
they will return to them afterward, except God speak effectually to their
hearts and consciences, as well as lay his heavy strokes upon the body.
Judgment to a sinner may be as a Bar to a Thief, it may stop him from the
present act, but does not change his heart; or as a storm to a Mariner, may
make him cast Anchour for the present, but still he retains his purpose of
sailing in his Voyage when the storm is over; they are oftener salve for their
eyes to show them their sin, than physic for their hearts to purge them out;
sinners in Judgments might declaim against their sin, but without a settled
purpose in their hearts to decline their sin; where there is Grace, Afflictions
work patience and submission; but where there is nothing but corruption, they
often work passion, and repining, not Repentance; the more God sent his
Judgments and his Plagues upon Pharaoh and the Egyptians, the more they
hardened themselves against God and his people; and by Gods Judgments were not
the better but the worse, Exodus 7.19. to 23. Isa. 1.5. Why should ye be smitten
any more, ye will revolt more and more. Psalm. 78.30. They were not estranged
from their Lusts, but while their meat was in their mouths, v. 31. the wrath of
God came upon them, and slew the fattest of them. V. 32. For all this they
sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous works. And as it was with the
woman that had an Issue of blood twelve years, in respect of her bodily
distemper, after great cost and charge and use of means, she was nothing
bettered, but rather grew worse, Mar. 5. 25, 26. so under Gods Judgments it is
with most wicked men, in respect of their spiritual state, they are nothing
bettered, but rather grow worse. And this appears,

First, Because in time of Judgment they are not separated from their dross*
Ezekiel. 24.13. In thy filthiness is lewdness: because I have purged thee (i. e.
God used purging Judgments) and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. God
has been purging our houses, but many have not been purging their hearts, but
retain their heart-filthiness still, and their life-wickedness still: If God in
Judgment say to such, You shall not be purged; their case is irrecoverably
miserable.

Secondly, Because they are not more serious in Religion than they were before;
either they omit it wholly as before, or are as dull and formal as they were
before.

Thirdly, Because they are not brought nearer unto God, but are rather removed
(were it possible) at a further distance from God than before. And the Reasons
of this are,

1. Because, When Gods hand is lifted up, they will not see, Isa. 26.11. they
look more to second Causes than to God. 2. Because they search not after the
sins that provoked God to so great indignation. 3. Because, if they do see
their drunkenness and whoredoms, and Sabbath-breaking, yet they will not be
humbled for them, nor forsake them.
SECT. IX.
III. Deliverances make wicked men worse.
WIcked men are oftentimes worse by Gods delivering them from Judgments and
calamitous distresses. Take a wicked man upon his sick bed, when God is shaking
him over the Grave, and threatening him with death, and affrighting him with the
terrors of Hell, you shall hear him acknowledge his sin, confessing his
drunkenness, his neglect of his soul, and you shall hear him, it may be, with
tears in his eyes promising, if God will raise him from his sickness, and trust
him with life and time a little longer, he will forsake his wicked company, and
profane the Sabbath no more; If God will but try me (says the sick, dying
man) how will I live, and what will I do, and how obedient will I be to the
Commands of God: And when God answers his desires in his restoration, he
performs not his Promise in his reformation, but is more wicked and more vile
than before. You might see this in Pharaoh, when the Plagues were upon him, Oh
then send for Moses, and let him entreat the Lord for me, and then I will let
Israel go: then he confesses, I and my people have sinned, but the Lord is
righteous. Though many wicked men, will not acknowledge nor confess their sin
in times of Judgment, so much as an hardened Pharaoh did. But yet when the
Plagues were removed he hardened himself more against God still. Read Exodus
8.8.15.24.28.32. and 9.23.27. So Nehem. 9.27, 28, 29, 30. And the Reasons are,

1. Because after Judgments removed, they are more secure, and think the
bitterness of death is past.

2. Because they break their promises made to God in time of Judgments, and so
their sin is greater, and their guilt is greater, and therefore they the
worser, of this more under another Direction.

3. Because Judgment is removed from them before they are purged from their
sin. When the Plaster is taken off before the sore is healed, it will be
worse: the course of physic is not continued, till the vicious humors are
dispersed and purged away; but Gods people desire the cure may be wrought,
before the Affliction be removed. But Pharaoh was for the removing of the
Plagues, but not the hardness of his heart.

4. Because they add Incorrigibleness unto all their former sins, and must
answer for all those Judgments that were lost upon them. Wicked men shall not
only answer for their Mercies, but for the Judgments God sent upon them to
reclaim them; Sinner, God sent the Plague into thy house, and then he looked
thou should have hastened to have thrown sin out of thy heart; but thou have
not done it: God did cast thee upon a bed of sickness, but thy bed of sickness
was not to thee a bed of sorrow for thy sin, thou howledst, and cryedst our of
thy loathsome running-sores, but not of thy filthy heart, and more loathsome
sins; thy body was pained, but thy heart not broken; thou have been punished
and delivered, but art not reformed: but know, the more thou have sinned, and
the more thou have been punished here, and yet sin still, the more shall thou
be tormented in hell. For these thou should look upon as means, which God
does use to bring thee to himself, and the more means thou hardenest thy self
against, the more is thy sin, and the more shall be thy misery.

Thus wicked men are oftentimes the worse by Gods Providence. But if this be
thy case that read these Lines, that wast a drunkard before, and wilt be
drunk more frequently now; that wast a lukewarm Formalist before the Plague
begun, but now thou art quite cold in the matters of Religion; I charge thee in
the Name and fear of the Eternal God, that thou presently bethink thy self,
what an aggravation this will be of thy continued and increased wickedness, and
that thou turn from it, least God turn thy body into the grave by some other
distemper, as an Ague, or Fever, or Consumption, though he did not by the
Plague. Oh think with thy self, God has taken away some of thy sinful
Companions, that were wont to be drunk and swear with thee, who if God should
bring them back again from the dead, would tell thee that they are damned for
their Drunkenness, and that they have been in Hell among Devils, and have felt
the wrath of God to be heavy and intolerable, for those very sins they have
committed in thy company, and thou with them: Would not they tell thee, if they
had thy time, they would pray, but swear profanely no more, if God had
suffered them to outlive the Plague; or would after death and trial of the
torments of Hell, entrust them with life again, they would be better. Remember,
some of them that the other day were drinking unto drunkenness in the
Alehouse, dying in final impenitency, are now damned with the Devils; that
some of them that the other day thou had by the hand, and drunkest unto in
the Tavern, and did sing and roar together at your Cups, are now howling and
roaring amongst the damned, and are scorched in those flames, and rolling in
that Lake of brimstone, where there shall be no mercy, no mitigation, no
cessation of their torments: And know thou, whoever thou art, that if thou do
not speedily return to God, if thou do not mend thy life, and that quickly
too, if thou do not repent and reform, and that quickly too, thou shall be a
companion with them in torments, with whom thou wast companion in sinning: It
was but a few days since, that they were with thee upon the earth, and if thou
art not changed, it will be but a few days hence, and thou shall be with them
in Hell, and when thou art there remember, once thou read such lines that
told thee so. Therefore, if thou art not resolved for Hell, be persuaded to be
better after such an awakening Judgment; if thou valuest thy soul, if thou
have any fear of Hell and Wrath yet left in thee, let it work to a speedy
Reformation. Tell me, what if God had set thee in some place, when five, six,
seven thousand dyed in a Week of the dreadful Plague (amongst whom no doubt but
many went to Heaven, and are now viewing the Son of God, etc.) that thou
might have seen, impenitent Drunkards, and impenitent Worldlings, and
impenitent Swearers, seized upon by Devils, and carried into torments, gone
crouding in at the broad gate into pains eternal and unspeakable, and could
but have heard their words, or perceive their apprehensions of their manner of
life upon the earth, how would this have affected thee? after such a sight as
this what would thou do? Be drunk still? would thou be a Sweater and a
Worldling still? a Formalist and Hypocrite still? then, if thou will be damned,
go on, who can help it? But rather return, repent, that thou might have
everlasting cause to admire God, that thou dyedst not in this Plague, till thou
repentest of thy sin, and wast prepared for another World.

SECT. X.
Wicked men are worse,
Secondly, WIcked men will be worse under the dispensations of Gods Ordinances.
But here I shall be the shorter, because it has been the Providence of God in
the late Plague that has moved me to this work, to which I would have my words
have more immediate reference. Many wicked men are oftentimes the worse

1. By the Word.
For the Word of God and the preaching thereof: Not that there is any thing in
the Word to make men so, but it is Sciendum est, Evangelium non perimere
quenquam* sed evangelii contemptum. Bez. in 2 Cor. 2.16.
accidental to the Word; it may be occasioned by the Word, but caused by their
own corruptions. Ministers might preach till they waste their strength, and yet
they will be Whoremongers and Adulterers still, they will be envious and
malicious still. The same Sun that softens the Wax, does harden the Clay:
Obed-Edom was blessed for the Ark of God, but the Philistines were cursed for
it. Ungodly men suck poison from the sweet Flowers of Gods Word, which yields
nourishment to the souls of Gods people. Weak eyes are the sorer if they look
upon the Sun. Naturalists observe, that the fragrancy of precious Ointments is
wholesome for the Dove, but it kills the Beetle; and that Vultures are killed
with the Oil of Roses. And St. Paul, that the Word is to some, the savor of
life unto life, and to others, the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor. 2.16, 17.

2. By the Sacrament.
For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. That which is to Believers, Calix Vitae,
a cup of Life, is to Unbelievers Calix Mortis, a cup of Death. Wicked men call
good evil, Grande id nefas, quando remedium, non modo, non proficit aegro sed
in venenum vertitur. Par. in 1 Cor. 11.
so they turn that which is good in it self, to be evil unto them. Donum male
utentibus nocet. Good becomes evil to those that use it not aright. St. Paul,
treating of the Sacrament says, Ye come together not for the better, but for
the worse, 1 Cor. 11.17. The red Sea saved the Israelites, but drowned the
Egyptians. And the reason why the Devil makes drunkards and profane swearers
so eager after this Sacrament (as our first Parents after the forbidden Fruit)
is, because he knows it will do them harm, not good; as a bad stomach full of
crudities turn the food received not into the nourishment of the body, but for
the feeding of their humors. As a man's Sea-sickness is occasioned by the
waves, but the foulness of his stomach is the cause thereof. They must needs be
worse, For (1) the Devil takes fuller possession of their hearts: When Judas
had eaten the sop, the Devil entered into him; that is a fatal morsel, when the
Devil follows it, Joh. 13.26, 27. (2) Their presumption and false hopes of
heaven are hereby strengthened; they think, if they do but receive, their sins
shall be pardoned, and their souls saved. (3) Their guilt is more increased,
because they are guilty of the body and blood of Christ. This is dreadful
guilt, this is a (...) fact. (4) They profane Gods Ordinance, and abuse
Christ's Institution. (5) They are thereby riper for temporal Plagues, 1 Cor.
11.30 (6) They eat and hasten their own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. But I dwell
not upon this, because I must pursue my design in reference to the late
providence in the dreadful Plague.

SECT. XI.
Question Fourth.
Why God is pleased to remove Judgments, though many men are worse than they
were before?
THat God should stay his hand, and put up his Arrows into his Quiver, and his
Sword into his sheath, and call in the destroying Angel, is indeed matter and
cause of great admiration; that when men sin still, God does not slaughter
still; when men provoke him still, that he does not by the Plague punish them
still: The sins that were offensive unto God at first, are amongst us still;
the sins continue, the Judgment removed: Oh stand and wonder at this, that
when Justice has cut down so many, that Mercy yet has spared so many;
especially if you seriously consider Gods holiness and purity, Gods justice and
severity, Gods infinite hatred unto sin, and that it is not the death of
thousands that can satisfy Gods Justice, nor the death of those that are gone
down into the grave, that have pacified Gods wrath for us that do yet remain
alive. What may be the Reasons?

1. Reasons are, 1. From God.
God has done this for his own Names sake: If you go to the Churchyards and
Burial places in and about the City, and see the heaps of dead bodies, and ask,
Why has God done this? We must answer, We all have sinned. If you go into
your houses and dwelling places, and find so many living, after so great a
Mortality, and ask, why has God done this? We must answer, It is for his own
Name sake. The Plague was inflicted because we had displeased him, but it is
removed because Mercy has pleased him: We had deserved the inflicting of it,
but could not merit the removing of it. In this late Providence Justice and
Mercy have been wonderfully magnified; Justice in removing so many thousands,
and laying them in their graves; Mercy in sparing so many thousands, and
maintaining them in life that have been so long walking in the Valley of the
shadow of death: This is, because God in the midst of Judgment has remembered
Mercy. Ezekiel. 36.21. But I had pity for mine holy Name, -- ver. 22. Therefore
say unto the house of Israel, thus says the Lord God, I do not this for your
sakes, O house of Israel, but for mine holy Name sake. So when God gives good
things, as well as when he removes evil, it is for his Name sake. God has
taken away your sickness and plague-sores, and given you health. Verse. 31. Then
shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings, that were not good, and
shall loathe your selves in your own sight, for your Iniquities, and for your
Abominations. V. 32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the Lord God, be it
known unto you; be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O house of
Israel. Oh if you have been spared for his Names sake, then let all the praise
of your life be unto his holy Name. But then you must not be worse but better
than you were.

2. 2. From the Elect converted.
God has removed his Judgment in answer to the Prayers of his people. Prayer
has been an ancient Antidote against the Plague, and many have been preserved
from the grave as a return to prayer; and so it has of old been prevalent for
the removing of the Plague: And therefore Magistrates commanding the people to
fast and pray, proceeded in Solomon's course to have it removed: 1 King. 8.37.
If there be in the Land Famine, if there be Pestilence -- whatsoever Plague,
whatsoever sickness there be. What must they do then? Verse. 38. What prayer and
supplication (prayer you see is a Panpharmacum, a remedy for every disease)
soever be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, which shall know every
man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house.
Verse. 39. Then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and forgive -- Prayer is
the remedy prescribed by Solomon, But what are the persons whose prayers shall
prevail for the removing of so sore a judgment? Not those that have
Plague-wishes so often in their mouths, but the prayer of any man, that
knows ( i. e. sees and is sensible of) the Plague of his own heart.

3. 3. From Elect unconverted.
God may remove judgments for the benefit of his Elect that yet may be
unconverted, and in mercy to them, who may be yet in their sins, God may stay
this Plague, it might be for some yet unborn, that may proceed from the Loins
of some that are now worse than they were before. The patience and
long-suffering of God is conducible to the conversion and salvation of Gods
Elect, 2 Pet. 3.15. And does lead men to repentance, Romans 2.4. Many
peradventure have not yet repented, whom God will bring to glory; and he that
has designed them to the end, will preserve them in life till the means have
been effectual to fit them for that end.

4. 4. From Reprobates.
God may spare some that are worse, by removing judgments, because as yet they
are not ripe enough for slaughter: The Ox is spared longer time, because not
yet fit for the Shambles. Thus God spared Jerusalem till they had filled up the
measure of their sins, Mat. 23.32. And so God exercised patience toward the
Amorites, till their iniquity was full, Gen 15.16 God may remove and keep off
judgment from some; and this may be in judgment to them, as he may in mercy,
deny some mercies unto some.

SECT. XII.
Question Fifth.
What are the aggravations of this great impiety, to be worse after Gods sorest
judgments than they were before?
THat many wicked men are so, we have showed before, and given the proof and
reasons of it, But woe to you whose case this is: Is this the return you make to
God? Is this the fruit of his patience and forbearance to you? Do you thus
requite the Lord? Oh foolish people and unwise! Deuteronomy. 32.6. Will you seriously
consider this evil frame of heart, and this ungodly practice in your lives, in
these following particulars?

I. Are you worse then you were before, then you are more like unto the Devil
than you were before, and the more unlike to God that made you. A man full of
all sin, and bent to every wickedness is called a child of the Devil, Act.
13.10. The Devil sins as much as he can, and thou do as wickedly as thou
can, Jer. 3.5. It is a folly in men to picture things immaterial and
invisible, and living, by things without life, (...). Vnium, quo qui laborat,
ad quodvis scelus, paratus est. Joh. 8.44.
material and visible; never send a man to view the picture of the Devil with a
cloven foot drawn by Art, the most exact and accurate lively picture of the
Devil (as a Devil, that is, as a sinner) is the worst of wicked men; and who
are worse than thou, that neither mercy can draw, nor judgment drive to God
and Christ?

II. The worse you grow, and the further you proceed in sin, the more impudent
you will be in the commission of it: The beginnings of sin are often done with
blushings of face, but the progress in sin is void of all modesty; then you
will be drunk and glory in it, then you will swear and not be ashamed of it,
Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination: nay, they
were not at all ashamed, neither could they blush -- Pro. 7.13.

III. The further thou proceedest in making progress in thy sin, the more it is
to be feared thou will never return, but if thou should, the more thou have
to sorrow for. It is but very rare that God brings those back that are come
up to an height of sin; sometimes he does, that none might despair; but very
rarely, that none might presume. It is to be feared thou art forsaken of God,
and he has left thee to thy self, when word, nor rod, can reclaim thee from
thy sin, nor put a restraint upon thee from waxing worse.

IV. The worse thou art after such a judgment, The sooner God will be provoked
to have on thy destruction by some other. God has not spent all his arrows in
the late judgment, he has his Quiver full still; and if thou go on when God
gives thee yet a space to repent, after so great a warning by the Plague, he
will ere long cast thee into a bed of trouble, Rev. 2.21, 22. Thy increased
wickedness is to Gods wrath, as the blast to the fire, will quickly blow it up
into a flame; though thy conscience is asleep, yet thy damnation slumbereth
not, 2 Pet. 2.1.3. while thou lingerest in thy sin, Gods judgments do not
linger, but are upon the wing; and the worse thou art, the sooner will they
befall thee, and be more heavy when they come. Jer. 48.16. The calamity of Moab
is near to come, and his affliction hastes fast.

V. The worse thou growest, the more thou heapest up treasures of wrath, and
every sin is adding to the pile of that fire by which thou must eternally be
burned; temporal judgments might quickly befall thee, but if they do not,
eternal damnation shall overtake thee; and the higher thou go in wickedness,
the lower thou shall sink and lie in hell; God will proportion thy degrees of
torments to thy growth and progress in sin. Now thou have a treasure of sin,
Mat. 12.35. And God has his treasures of wrath, Deuteronomy. 32.34. And as thou
layest in sin, to the treasury of sin, so God lays in wrath, to the treasury
of wrath. (...). In crastinum recondere, quo significatur homines dum
cupiditatibus suis quotidie indulgendo existimant se aliquod bonis suis
adjicere, tandem pro the sauro inventuros dei indignationem. Bez in loc.
Romans 2.5. Thy present preservation, is but a reservation to greater
indignation, then is discovered in a Plague. Tarditatem supplicii gravitate
compensabit deus. He will recompense the delay of thy misery and punishment,
with the weight and load of it, Job 36.13.

VI. To be worse and more wicked after so great a judgment, will be to slight
and set at naught the justice of God, when you have seen with your eyes the
dreadful heaps of dead Corpse, that it has made in every Churchyard. Have you
not seen that God is displeased with sin, and will you go on to do worse, as if
you would bid defiance to God, even when he is angry and displeased? Have you
not seen that there is wrath in God? and that justice will call sinners to his
bar by dragging them out of this world? And will you after all this go on to
sin against a just God, and as it were say, let justice do its pleasure, I will
have mine? this does aggravate your sin.

VII. To be worse after such a judgment, will be to sin against the Patience
and the mercy of God that has spared thee, and waits to see what thou will
do after such a visitation. The mercy of God is the attribute thou intendest to
appeal to, it is that which thou hopest in, but by this thy wickedness thou will turn mercy it self against thee, that which thou will make thy request
unto, must be the mercy of God, but this will plead against thee, and patience
will plead against thee. Lord, will Mercy say, when thousands dyed weekly in
London, I had pity upon this sinner and did spare him; when the Angel went
through the Streets and Lanes in London, I Mercy marked out this man for longer
life, but he abused me, and sinned the more. And I [shall Patience say] waited
some months or years after the Plague, to see if the mercy showed him, would
any thing work upon him, but I was abused too as well as Mercy: The longer I,
Patience, did lengthen out his life, the more he added to his sins, and
therefore now we, both Patience and Mercy, deliver him up into the hands of
Justice to deal with him according to his sins, and according to the wrong he
has offered unto us. Oh how will thy mouth be stopped when Mercy and Patience
shall plead against thee; sins against Mercy and protracted Patience, are
aggravated sins; and the pleadings of Mercy and Patience against a man, will be
the most piercing cutting pleadings.

VIII. The worse thou art, the more thou will have to answer for, and the
greater accounts thou will have to make when ever thou shall dye. The more thou
sinnest, the more sins shall thou find in the book of Gods remembrance, and in
the book of thine own Conscience, when thou shall be brought before the Bar of
God: So many sins committed before the Plague begun, and so many while the
Plague continued, and so many when it was stayed, and this sinner spared. When
it shall be set down in the book of God, such a sinner was drunk so many times
while the Plague was round about his habitation, so many Oaths he swore, when
he saw multitudes buried every day; so long the Plague was in the Parish where
he dwelt, and in the house in which he lived, and he never made one hearty
prayer unto God all that time: And such notorious sins, in and after a time of
a sweeping Plague, will multiply thy account and aggravate thy misery.

IX. To be worse after such Judgments, will be to add Incorrigibleness to thy
former wickedness: As before thou did show that thou had an unteachable
heart, so now thou declarest thou have an incorrigible heart: Thou would not
be instructed by Gods Word, neither will thou be corrected by Gods Rod; thou
did stop thine ears against Gods Word, and thou hardenest thy heart against
his Rod. But if thou will not be corrected by a Plague, thou shall be tormented
in the Infernal Pit.

X. To be worse after such a Judgment, will be high Ingratitude. Thy life was
the dearest thing thou have in the world (except the sin in thy heart) for,
skin for skin and all that he has he will give for his life, (except his sin,
and he will venture his life, and lose it too, before he will part with his
sin,) and has God kept thee, and is this thy thanks to God, to dishonor him
more, and to provoke him more? As if he had spared thee for no other end, but
to sin against him? Oh what is Ingratitude if this be not? Oh now for Gods
sake, and for thy precious souls sake, that as thy body has hitherto escaped
the grave, so thy soul may (if possible) escape the damnation of hell, Be
entreated, Sinner, to consider the evil of thy present practice, after such a
narrow escape of death and the grave: Oh will thou that art but briars and
thorns, set thy self against God that is a consuming fire? Do thou slight
the wrath of the Almighty, or despise his power, or contemn his Judgments?
Do thou think that thou can grapple with Omnipotency, and make thy party
good against Almighty strength? Did thou ever read of any one that hardened
himself against God and prospered? and do thou think that thou shall be the
first? who art thou? or what is thy strength, or what were thy Ancestors, that
thou do thus in pride and stubbornness of thy heart dare the great, eternal
God, who can look thee into hell, and frown thee in a moment into another
world? Sure, if thou had the knowledge of God, of thy self, of sin, of the
guilt of sin, of Hell and the torments thereof, thou would not thus proceed
to add these new sins to thy former old sins, but would fall down upon thy
knees, and cover thy face in the very dust before the Lord, in deep humiliation
for thy sins, and would own it as a Mercy so great, that cannot be
expressed, that the Plague has been so vehemently raging round about thy
habitation, and it may be has been upon thy body, and thou yet alive, and thy
body not rotting in a cold grave, nor thy soul roaring in a hot Hell? think on
this, this is Mercy; and will thou so abuse it?

SECT. XIII.
Question Sixth.
What are the signs of a man that waxes worse and worse under all the Means
that God uses to make him better?
MY purpose is not here to speak of the declinings of Grace in the hearts of
Gods people, which never is so much (because not total) to denominate them
absolutely bad, though they make them worse (because on the losing hand) being
compared with themselves, when better in the lively actings and daily increase
of grace; but of the growth of wicked men in sin and Impiety, which may be
discerned by these symptoms.

I. The less a man is attending upon God in the use of holy Means, the worse he
is. Thou wast wont to keep up a constancy, or at least a frequency in holy
duties, though thou never did perform them in a right manner, nor from a
right principle, nor for a right end; yet time was, that thou could not omit
them, but thy natural Conscience would reproach thee, and molest thy peace; and
though the performance of those duties in thy manner and way, did never prove
thee to be good, yet the total omission of them now, does prove thee to be
worse: inasmuch as thou have shaked off all form of Religion, and do not
profess thy self to be at all Religious, but have stifled Natural Conscience,
and laid aside a sense of a Deity, which before did stir thee up to do some
Homage unto God. Thou did pray, but now thou do not; thou did hear, but
now thou do not; it is because thou art worse.

II. The less thou lie under the common workings of the Spirit of God, the
worse thou art: Though thou hear and prayest as before, yet the Spirit of
God does not strive with thee as before: Thou wast wont to find thy heart
something affected, and to have some common convictions and relentings for sin,
and some purposes and resolutions to forsake thy sin, and leave thy wicked
ways and company, and almost persuaded to come over unto Christ; but now thou
art no more affected than the seat thou fittest upon, and the Pillar thou
leanest against; thou have quenched the motions of the Spirit, and he in wrath
has departed from thee, and leaves thee to the hardness of thy heart, and the
blindness of thy mind, and then thou must needs be waxing worse.

III. The more thou art found in the Iteration and Repetition of the acts of
sin, the worse thou art. Thou wast wont to swear but seldom, but now Oaths are
frequent in thy mouth: Thou wast wont to be drunk more seldom, but now it is
thy weekly, or thy daily practice; Iteration of sin is an aggravation of sin:
The number of thy sins, and the greatness of thy guilt is hereby increased, and
thou made worse.

IV. The more kinds of sins thou do usually fall into, the worse thou art.
Thou wast wont to swear, but not to be drunk, but now both: Thou wast wont to
be drunk, but wast not given to uncleanness; but now thou art; and to
uncleanness thou addest scorning at godliness, when sometimes thou seemedst to
approve it, and speak for it; and to thy scorning of godliness, thou proceedest
to the persecution of godliness, when before thou did pretend to favor and
to countenance it. Thou art increased in thy wickedness.

V. The fewer self-Reflexions, the worse thou art. Thou wast use to reflect
upon thy ways, and sometimes consider of thy deviations from the Rule of
holiness, and thy Conscience did check and did reprove thee; but now thou go
on and never look back, so much as to consider wherein thou go astray;
and though thou art more wicked, and more vile, yet thou have more peace and
quietness in thy ways. It is because thy heart is more hard, and thy
Conscience more seared, and thou worse.

VI. The greater Light thou sinnest against, and the more thou go on against
the Dictates of thy Conscience, the worse thou art. Conscience discovers to
thee the evil of thy ways, the wickedness of thy life: Conscience threatens
thee with damnation, with the loss of God and Happiness, and thundereth against
thee, and does disturb thee in thy sin, and yet thou go on against thy
knowledge, and do imprison the Truths of God; thou art worse.

VII. The more of thy heart and will is in thy sinnings than before, the worse
thou art now, than before. The more the will does give consent, and the more
the will does choose wickedness, the greater progress thou have made in thy
sinful courses. Though a Child of God does commit a sin, yet because his will
and the bent of his heart is against it, the lesser is the aggravation of his
sin: when he can say, The thing that I do, I would not, I allow it not. So,
when thou art wilful in thy sin, thou frequentest wicked company, and thou will
do it; thou prophanest the Lords day, and thou will do it, this makes thee to
be very bad. The more of resolution and purpose of heart, the more of the
choice and consent of the will in sinning, the greater is the sinner.

VIII. The lesser force divine Arguments have upon thy heart to keep thee from
sin, than before, thou art so much worser than thou wast before. Time was, that
Arguments taken from the Wrath of God, from the Torments of Hell, from
Judgment to come, from the Curses written in the Law of God, did awe thy
heart, and restrain thy hand from the open actings of thy grosser sins; these
were once the banks that dammed up thy wickedness, but now thou sleightest all
these, that Hell does not affright thee, and the wrath of God does not awe thy
heart; but the Spring and Fountain of sin within, is risen higher, and
overflowes these banks, and like water spreads it self, and diffuseth it self
in the general course of thy life.

IX. The lesser force humane Arguments have upon thy heart, to keep thee from
sin than before, thou art so much worser than thou wast before. Though
abstaining from sin upon such accounts, does not prove the truth of grace, yet
the committing of sin notwithstanding these, does argue growth of sin. Now
these humane Arguments that did formerly restrain thee, were such as these.

1. Shame amongst men. Thou had an Inclination to wicked company, but thou
wast ashamed to be seen amongst them; and therefore did not associate with
them. But now thou think it no shame, or if thou do, thou have a face of
brass, and an heart of stone, and blushest not. Thou art worse.

2. Care of Reputation. Thou wast tender of thy Credit, and good Name; and
though thou had a love unto some sins, that would have disgraced thee amongst
men, yet now thou will blot thy Name, and lose thy Credit, and sacrifice thy
Reputation to satisfy thy Lust.

3. Costliness of sin. Some sins are very chargeable, and call for great
expense; and thy love to thy Money, and natural affection to thy Wife and
Children, was a bar which did restrain thee from them: Thou would not feed
and satisfy thy filthy Lusts, because it would be chargeable to thee; thou
refrainedst from riotous Prodigals, because company with them would wast thine
Estate: But now thou think no cost too great, no charge too much, that thou
may have thy fill of sin, but tradest, and labourest, and workest, to get
something to maintain thy Lust, and wilt rather that thy Wife and Children
should want bread at home, than thou should not have enough to spend upon
thy sins abroad. Thou art now grown to an exceeding magnitude in sin, that thou
art monstrous to beholders.

4. Health of body. Such sins that tend to the impairing of thy health thou
would not commit: Thou did refrain, not so much because they would damn
thy soul, as destroy thy body. Thou thoughtest excessive drinking would shorten
thy life, and hasten thy death, and bring thee sooner to thy grave; that acts
of uncleanness would fill thee full of loathsome diseases, and leave some mark
upon thy body, whereby thou would be noted for an unclean adulterer. But now
thou will venture health, and life, and all that thou may more freely sin:
and the very food thou earest is now not only to nourish thy body, but to
provoke thee to lust. Verily thou art much worse than thou wast.

5. Fear of death. When the fear of God would not prevail to keep thee from
sin, yet fear of death sometimes has done it, and according to the strength of
the fears of death, have been thy restraints from sin: but now thou can think
of death, and speak of thy death, and yet act thy sin.

6. Displeasure of men. Thou have had dependence upon some that hate such sins
that thou love in thy heart, but because thou would not loose their favor
thou have bridled thy sin, but now thou layest the reigns loose upon the neck
of thy lusts, and wilt proceed to obey them, let who will be displeased
thereby. When thou will displease thy best friend, and them upon whom thou do
depend for livelihood and maintenance, that thou may please thy lust, it is
a sign that sin is very high in thy heart, any one of these formerly were a
sufficient bolt to keep thee from grosser sins, but now all put together are
too weak; a sign that sin is so much the stronger.

X. The more thou have had experience of the dreadful effects of sin, and the
more God has punished thee for thy sin, and yet wilt proceed, the greater
sinner thou art. God has punished thee with poverty as the fruit of thy sin;
with diseases in thy body, with horrors in thy conscience, with the death of
thy relations; when thou have tasted the bitterness of sin to set against the
pleasures of sin, when God has put wormwood and gall into thy sin, yet thou
art bent upon it: thou art very bad.

XI. The more thou justifiest and defendest thy self after the commission of
sin than formerly, so much the worser thou art than formerly. When thou wast
reproved, thou wast use to acknowledge thy sin, and to confess thy wickedness,
but now thou do plead for thy lust, and pleadest for thy evil ways, and
take the quarrel of sin upon thy self, it is a sign thy heart is more
wedded to thy lusts, by how much the more thou espousest its cause.

XII. When thou art more presumptuous in thy sinnings, and addest more contempt
of God, and pride and contumacy than formerly, the worse thou art. Sins of
presumption are scarlet sins, of a crimson dye; when a man sins against God,
and blesses himself in his wickedness, and presumes of Gods mercy, and
presumes upon the patience of God, a man that sins presumptuously makes a bold
adventure against express threatenings of the Law of God, and is mingled with
great contempt of God; it is no less than reproaching and despising of God
himself, Number. 15.30. But the soul that does ought presumptuously -- reproacheth
the Lord; and that soul shall be cut off from among his people, verse. 31.
Because he has despised the word of the Lord, and has broken his commandment;
that soul shall be utterly cut off: his iniquity shall be upon him.

XIII. The more mercies thou sinnest against than formerly, the worser thou art
than before. God has given thee more mercies, and multiplied many good things
upon thee, and yet thou committest more sins, than when thou had fewer
mercies; to make Gods mercy to be fuel for thy lusts, is an aggravation of
sinning, for as much as it is contrary to the end of mercy, which is to draw
men off from sin: every mercy thou receivest has a voice, and its language is,
repent of sin, return to God, Romans 2.4. God loadeth thee with mercy, and the
more thou pressest him down with thy sin; the more good, and the more merciful
God is to thee, the more vile and rebellious thou art against God, this is to
be highly wicked.

XIV. The more thou drawest others into sin by thy entisements or example than
before; so much the worse thou art. When thou art not content to sin alone, not
to dishonor God thy self, but drawest and incouragest others to do so also;
and so damnest thy own soul and others too; and make thy self guilty of the
blood of those thou allurest with thee into sin. The more sins thou committest
thy self, the worse thou art, and the more persons thou do influence by thy
sin to partake with thee, the worse thou art. Thus if thou will compare thy
self what thou art now with what thou have been formerly, thou might discern
how much more thou sinnest now than thou did before.

SECT. XIV.
Question Seventh.
What considerations may be useful to stop the stream of such men's wickedness,
that yet are waxing worse and worse?
BEcause I am loath to leave thee with a bare conviction, that thou art worse
than thou wast wont to be; I shall add a few considerations to press thee to
put a stop unto thy sinnings, hoping that though thou have gone far, yet thou
may return: while thou art out of Hell, thou art within our call, and within
the reach of Exhortation and reproof. God has called often to thee to return,
and yet thou have not returned, but art going on unto destruction. The Son of
God has called to thee, and said, How long will thou go on in thy Rebellion
against him that would redeem and save thy soul? he has told thee, if thou
do proceed thou must be damned, and said, the Mercy of God will not save
thee, and my Merits they will not, they shall not save thee, but if thou will
return to God, and come to me, here is mercy for thee, here is pardon for thee,
and I will give eternal life unto thee. The Spirit of God has often moved upon
thy heart, he has been often knocking at thy door, that thou would open
thy heart and let him in, and he would apply the blood of Christ unto thee, and
he would fill thee with better joys, and better pleasures, and better comforts
than thou ever foundest in the way of sin. But hitherto thou have stopped thine
ears, and stiffened thy neck, and hardened thy heart, and would not hearken
nor obey.

The Ministers of God have often wooed thee and beseeched thee with tears in
their eyes, and sorrow in their hearts, as if their happiness had been wrapped
up in thine, and as if they could not have gone to Heaven and been saved
without thee: while patience waited upon thee, they have been earnest with
thee, and now at last one unworthy to preach the Gospel, is a suitor to thy
soul, that thou would be divorced from thy sin and be married unto Christ;
as yet thou art out of hell, and art not yet reckoned among the dead, nor
numbered amongst the damned, as yet thou art not irrecoverably lost, this day
Christ is once more tendered to thee, in the name of God I once more offer thee
pardon and eternal life, upon thy repenting of thy sin, and turning unto God.

Oh that I could persuade thee, or if I cannot, as indeed I cannot; oh that God
would yet persuade thee? If I might be serviceable to thy soul, oh how should
I rejoice; if I did but know where thou do dwell, that have been wicked all
thy days, and now art reading of these lines, having a purpose in thy heart to
come to Christ, I would come to thee (as opportunity was offered) and beg upon
my knees, that thou would cherish those purposes, and be persuaded to what
conduces to thy eternal happiness: if tears and prayers would do it, I would
endeavor (though my heart is hard) to shed them for thee; if putting my hands,
under thy feet, and stooping to the meanest office of love unto thy soul,
would excite thee to let Christ into thy heart, how readily (by the grace of
God) would I be willing to it.

I beseech thee by the mercies of God, by the death of Christ, by the coming of
our Lord, by the love thou bear to thy self, as ever thou would see the
face of Christ with comfort, as ever thou would escape the damnation of
Hell, return at last, and though it be late, yet return at last. But if thou will not, let God be my witness, let as many as read these lines be my
witnesses, let thy own Conscience be my witness, that thou have been asked,
entreated, yea earnestly entreated to reform, and mend, and turn to God. But in
hopes that I may prevail, I beseech thee in the fear of God, give in a sober
and deliberate answer unto these following Questions.

First, Whether art thou going, while thou art waxing worse and worse? Do
thou know that Hell is at the end of the way in which thou art daily walking?
Do thou know, that if thou do proceed a little further, a little longer in
this course, thou will be among the Devils, those cursed Fiends of Hell? Or
do thou know it, and yet wilt venture to dance about the brink of a
bottomless pit? who has bewitched thee? or what has made thee mad, that thou
see thou art going unto Hell, and yet wilt venture on?

Secondly, Do thou believe the Scripture to be the Word of God, or do thou
not? And are the threatenings contained therein, true, think thou, or are
they not? Will thou say they be false, or that they were found out by some
Precisians, or are the workings of some melancholy brain? or that they were
found out by some Politician, to keep the world in awe? I would have thee know,
that to thy eternal sorrow thou shall find them all true, even to a tittle;
and to thy everlasting woe shall know the truth of Gods Word: When thou art
shrieking in the flames of Hell, and roaring hideously among the damned,
because of Gods eternal wrath; thou shall be convinced, that the wicked shall
be turned into Hell, that the Unbeliever shall be damned, and that it was true
which thou wast told, that without repentance there was no deliverance from
eternal condemnation.

But if thou do believe this Word to be true, what aileth thee then to live
as thou do? that thou actest quite contrary to what is contained in the Word
of God? Does not the Word of God in a thousand places cry down sin, and press
to holiness? does it not tell thee, the drunkard, the covetous, the
unbelieving, the liar, shall be damned? If thou never did observe such
places, take thy Bible and turn unto them. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Rev. 21.8. Heb.
12.14. Gal. 5.20. to 25. Col. 3.5, 6. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Mar. 16.16. Mat. 18.3. Luke
13.3, 5. Can thou read and believe these Scriptures to be true, and yet go
on in the practice of those things that the eternal, holy God does forbid upon
pain of eternal torments? Will thou be worse than thy very beast, which thou
can not force into the fire when he sees it before him. Shall I call out thy
Neighbors to behold a dreadful sight, viz. A man that knows he is in the way
to Hell, and yet will go on.

Thirdly, With what face or heart can thou hope (as thou do) that God will
pardon thy sin, or save thy soul, while thou persistest in thy wickedness, and
encreasest therein? Show me an instance of any one man in all the Word of God,
that was pardoned and saved, who repented not, and I will be thy slave for
ever. I know, great sinners have been saved; and I know, those that have gone
far have obtained mercy: Manasseh did, 2 Chronicles. 33.12, 13. Mary Magdalene did,
Luke 7. But then they turned unto God. Can thou say, there is any one now in
Heaven that did not repent, and believe before he dyed? or do thou think that
thou shall be the only man?

Fourthly, Whom do thou set thy self against? Or who is it that thou do
provoke? whose anger and indignation art thou daily kindling against thy self?
What art thou, that thus do sin? or what is God against whom thou sinnest?
do thou know thy self, and thine own weakness? And do thou know God, and
his Almighty power? art thou any better than chafe before the wind of Gods
wrath? art thou, any better than stubble before a consuming Fire? can thou
make thy party good against God? Then why do thou take thy bed, when he
lays his finger light upon thee? or why do thou complain and art so
restless under the pain of the toothache? why do thou roar so much under the
pain in thy bowels? and why do thou groan, when he makes thee sick? why art
thou sick, and why will thou dye, if thou can contend with God? But if thou
can not, poor Worm, thou can not; why then will thou proceed and increase
thy wickedness more and more, to provoke him more and more?

Fifthly, How can thou call thy self a Christian, while thou daily increasest
in thy sin against God and Christ. Christians have their denomination from
Christ, because they follow his steps, and own him for their Lord and Master:
Christ was holy, and so is every true Christian; Christ hated sin, and so does
every true Christian; Christ did the will of his Father, and thou art doing the
will of the Flesh and of the Devil. That which consists of a head of one
kind, and members of another, is monstrous. If any creature had the head of a
man, and the members were the members of a beast, it would be monstrous. Christ
is an holy head, and all his members united unto him are holy members;
therefore thou art none of them: Take it as thou will, thou art not a
Christian, that should not be thy Appellation; thou art more rightly called a
sinner, a Child of the Devil.

Sixthly, How can thou go unto thy Prayers and yet go on in thy sin, and
come to the Word preached, and hear drunkenness reproved, and go away and be
drunk? How can thou sit in thy Pew, and hear the Minister from God tell thee,
the drunkard shall be damned, and all thy Neighbors know thee for a drunkard,
and yet hold up thy head? Where is thy shame? art thou become impudent? where
is thy fear of God and his Word? art thou utterly hardened? where is thy
Conscience? is it quite seared?

Seventhly, Do thou think that God will never call thee to an account? Do
thou think that time will always last? do thou think thy soul shall live for
ever, and yet do that which will bring thee to an eternity of misery? and
expose thy self for a little momentany pleasure unto eternal torments? Thus I
have set before thee these Considerations, whereby thou may be brought to
bethink thy self, and at last enquire, What would you have me to do? I answer
thee:

1. Make a stand and pause a little with thy self, whether it be not so with
thee or no? and labor to convince thy self of the hainousness of thy sins, in
making such an increase and growth in sin.

2. When thou art convinced thus, urge it upon thy heart till thou feel it
begin to melt, and to be dissolved in thy breast. Use thy Reason for thy souls
good, after this manner: Oh God has been good to me, and I have been wicked
against God; God was always good to me, and I have been always evil against
God; God multiplied his mercy upon me, and I multiplied my sins against God; if
he had not given me bread to eat, I had dyed with hunger; and if he had not
given me drink, I had perished with thirst; but what he gave me for my
nourishment I have abused to gluttony and drunkenness; I have fought against
God with his own mercy, and made his goodness an encouragement to me in my
wickedness: He lengthened out his mercy, and I did lengthen out mine iniquity;
Oh what rich grace and patience is this, that I am not in Hell! Oh this was
long-suffering indeed, to bear so long with such a Swearer and Drunkard as I
have been; and when the dreadful Plague has taken away my Companions in sin,
yet I am left behind; Oh that it may be, that I may repent and turn to God!
Woe is me! I have been damning of my precious soul, and have spent my days
hitherto in dishonouring of a good and patient God.

3. Then resolve with thy self, that by the grace of God thou will forsake and
leave those practices, and wilt no longer continue in thy wickedness; say, Now
I see this is not my Way to happiness; swearing, and lying, and drunkenness, is
not my way to the Kingdom of God: The Devil has deceived me, and my Companions
have deceived me, and my own wicked heart has beguiled me; I will, by the
grace of God, I will do so no more; I am resolved I will do so no more: And
write down thy Resolution, that thou may have it under thine own hand, that
such a day thou did resolve to do so no more.

4. Beg of God that thou may be deeply humbled for what thou have already
done, and labor that thy sorrow may be proportionable to what thy sins have
been.

5. Make haste to Christ, and take him and receive him for thy Lord and
Savior, and submit to him upon his Gospel-terms, as willing he should rule
thee, as ever thou wast for sin to rule thee.

6. Then endeavor to be as good as thou have been bad, as holy as thou have
been wicked, as eminent for piety, as thou have been exemplary for iniquity;
speak for Holiness as much as ever thou did speak against it; and love the
ways of God as much as thou wast wont to hate them, and by persevering so to
do, thou shall find great mercy will be shown to thee, who have been so great
a sinner.

SECT. XV.
Corollaries from the first part of this Direction.
NOw I will draw some Corollaries from this first branch of this Direction, and
so pass on unto the second. Is it the Nature of sin to make men worse and
worse? and do wicked men usually wax worse and worse? Then learn,

1. The evil that there is in sin: There is a depth in the evil of sin that
cannot be fathomed, and a length in the evil of sin that cannot be measured;
that is very bad that makes men so in every condition, as grace is very good
that turns every thing for the best to them to whom it is infused.

2. Learn that wicked men are never from under a curse: Let their condition be
what it will, prosperity is a curse unto them, adversity is a curse, and
deliverances are in wrath. When they do increase in riches, they do increase in
sin; envy not the prosperity of the wicked.

3. Learn the bottomless depth of iniquity in a wicked man's heart: He was bad
twenty years ago; he was a grief to all the godly in the Town and Parish where
he lived, but yet he is many times worse than before.

4. Learn what abundance of guilt an old sinner goes with to his grave when he
comes to dye: He was bad when he was born, and worse while he lived, and worst
of all when he is to dye.

5. Learn the equity of Gods Justice in punishing a wicked man with eternal
torments for sins committed in time: For he sinned more and more as long as he
lived, and if he had lived longer, he would have sinned longer; and if he had
lived for ever, he would have sinned for ever.

6. Learn the overruling providence of God: that sets bounds to wicked men's
sins; if he did not restrain them, they would be worse, and do worse than they
do.

7. Learn, that natural men by the improvement of common grace, or the means of
grace, cannot work themselves into a state of grace, nor of themselves that are
bad, make themselves to be good; for we have showed, that without the special
and irresistible operations of the Spirit of God, wicked men grow worse under
the Administrations of the Gospel.

8. The folly of delays and procrastinations of repentance and turning unto
God: Wicked men think they can repent when they will, and though they have no
heart to turn to God for the present, yet they will hereafter; but he that is
not disposed to turn to God and repent to day, will find his heart more
indisposed to morrow, and the longer they put it off, the more unwilling and
unable they will be to do it hereafter. We have heard we must not be worse, now
let us see we must be better, and that is the second part of this first
Direction.

SECT. XVI.
The second part of the first Direction,
Has the Plague been raging, and you yet alive? then be better than you were
before. And here I especially direct my speech to those that had the grace of
God infused into their hearts, before this Judgment came upon us; that you
would improve this providence by being better than you were before; if
Drunkards and Swearers will not be better, yet be you; if sensualists and
flesh-pleasers will not be better, yet be you. It may be the wicked will be
worse, but will you be so too? If Gods people are not mended by his Judgments,
who will? and has God swept away so many thousands into another world, and
shall there be no good effect, or fruit upon neither bad nor good? God forbid?
London has been a place of great prosperity, a City of Feasting, and a place
of plenty of outward enjoyments; but in this last Sickness, God has filled it
with dolorous complaints by the many breaches made by death in so many families
and relations; God has filled it with pale faces, and sick persons, and
running sores; God has turned it into a place, an house of mourning. And
Solomon says, Eccl. 7.2. It is better to go into the house of mourning, than
to the house of feasting; for that is the end of all men, and the living will
lay it to his heart. Have not your houses been houses of mourning, some dead
out of most houses, and you are yet living; will you then lay it to your heart?
What should you lay to heart? Lay to heart the great Judgment that has been
amongst you. Lay to heart the sins that did provoke the Lord to lay his hand so
heavy upon you. Lay to heart the goodness of God in preserving you. The City
has been an house of mourning, but have you learned the lessons that are to be
learned in an house of mourning? Have you met so many dead Corpse carried in
the streets? have you seen the living laboring to carry forth their dead, and
yet not learned the lessons that are to be learned in such a place of mourning?
Where one is dead in a family, that before was an house of mirth and gladness,
it will turn it into an house of mourning and sadness, much more, when many
dead in one family; and this is the case of many families. God has been
teaching you many things at such a time, but is your lesson taken out? Oh, what
dull Scholars are we in the School of Christ that must thus be scourged to
learn our lessons, and yet have not done it? Consider, when God has turned
London, by reason of their dead, into an house of mourning, he has been
teaching you such things as these. Ten Lessons to be learned in this City that
has been a great house of mourning.


I. Verity of divine threatenings.
God has been teaching you the Infallible verity of divine threatenings. God
threatened our first Parents, Genesis 2.17. That if they sinned, they should
certainly dye, they and their posterity. This threatening was made some
thousands of years since, and it has been made good in all generations. Length
of time makes not void the threatenings of God; men read Gods threatenings, but
do not believe them, nor fear them, nor tremble at them. Many will not
practically believe that they shall dye, though they sin, and will not at all
believe they shall be damned, though they sin; but we see that men that have
sinned must dye, and wicked men shall feel that they shall be damned according
to Gods threatenings, but you have learned the truth of Gods threatenings in
this, and they are as true in all other respects; therefore do you that are
Gods people, learn the truth of Gods threatenings, when he says the Drunkard
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; and let this move your heart to pity them
that are such, that have a threatening of God, which is of undoubted verity, as
a flaming sword standing in their way to keep them out of the Paradise of God,
and be thankful unto God that you are none of these. Do you learn the truth of
Gods threatening, when he says, the hypocrite and unbelieving shall be cast
into the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21.8. and pity and pray
for them that are such, and bless God that you are none of them, and so are
taken from under the curse of that threatening.

II. Desert of sin.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you what are
the Wages of sin. You have often heard that death is the Wages of sin, Romans
6.23. The Greek word (...) there used, is a military term, signifying the wages
that is due to soldiers, intimating that death is as due to a sinner for his
service to the Devil, as pay is to a Soldier for his service to his General;
it comes from the word (...), which signifies properly, all kind of pleasant
meats that may be prepared or made ready by fire, so that all the delicates,
and dainty dishes that sin prepares for sinners, has a deaths head in them. Do
you learn this, and by this learn to hate sin more than you did before, and
watch against it more than you did before.

III. Man's mort^l^ty.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the
certainty of men's mortality. You have seen that this is the way of all flesh,
Josh. 23.14. 1 King. 2.2. and therefore learn to live as mortal, dying men
should live; you have seen that thousands have been carried from their houses
to their graves: And, Oh what manner of persons ought you to be in all manner
of holy conversation, after such a sight as this?

IV. The worlds vanity.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the worlds
vanity. You have seen what miserable comforters riches are to men in time of
Plague, and at an hour of death; you have seen death haling men from that which
they had set their hearts upon; you have seen death dragging men from their
riches, and from their pleasures, and has forced them to come away to the Bar
of God, and leave their riches behind them, and their pleasures behind them.
You have seen that riches could not go with them into another world, but left
them in a time of need. You have seen that those that loved riches, could find
no comfort in them when they stood in greatest need of comfort. You have seen
that what men have been laboring for, and scraping together all the time of
their health and life, death has come and scattered in a moment. Oh how weaned
should you be from the world, and the riches and the pleasures thereof, after
such a sight as this! Oh how much less should you afford the world, of your
heart and affections, of your love, desire, and delights that is so unkind to
dying men, even unto those that served it most, and loved it most. Oh do you
learn to deal so with the world, as you have seen the world to deal with
others, i. e. turn it out of your heart with as little love and pity to it, as
you have seen the world turn its followers out of it, and shake them off,
notwithstanding all their entreaties to abide and stay therein. The world may
now entreat you, that it might stay in your heart, and live in your love; but
hearken you no more to its entreaties, than it has hearkened unto others, and
you must expect the world ere long will deal with you, as it has dealt with
others; therefore part with the world, before you leave the world.

V. The uncertainty of all relati^ns.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the short
continuance of all relations: you have seen death taking Husbands from their
Wives, Parents from their Children, Ministers from their people, and so Wives
from their Husbands, Children from their Parents, People from their Ministers.
Those that had but one only Son. Plague and Death has stripped them of him,
and teared one relation out of the others bosom; fain they would have kept
them, but death would not suffer them; they wept and cried, but death would not
have pity on them, nor hear their cries, nor regard their tears, but said, this
is your child, but I must have him; this is your husband, but I must seize
upon him; God has given me a Commission, and I always use to do according to
the Commission I receive from God, if God will not spare you, in vain you look
for pity at mine hands. I (says death) am blind and cannot see the beauty of
your child, that has drawn out your heart so much toward him, I am deaf and
cannot hear your pleadings for the continuance of your child, or husband, or
friend; if God does not hear you, I cannot, and if God does not spare and pity
you, I will not, therefore I will smite him, and stick my arrow in his heart,
and dippe it in his lifeblood, and take him from you. Oh how many have thus
experienced the dealings of death! and you have seen it, and will not you learn
to sit looser in your affections toward your nearest and dearest relations?
You have seen death has seized upon them that were most beloved by their
friends, and perhaps did therefore do it, because they were over loved; and
took up too much of that love, and that delight which should have been more,
and would have been better placed upon God. Your lesson then is set down by the
Apostle, for I would not teach you by rott, nor without the book of Gods word,
1 Cor. 7.29. But this I say, Brethren, (...) When they set forth to Sea, V^la
da^t, when they have done their voyage, vela contra. hunt.
the time is short, or rolled up, or contracted; a metaphor taken from a piece
of cloth that is rolled up, only a little left at the end; so some. As
Mariners near the Haven wind up their sails, or make them less. When the sails
of time are thus contracted, it is a sign we are near the Harbor of eternity.
It remains, that both they that have wives be as though they had none, Verse.
30. And they that weep as though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though
they rejoiced not; and they that buy as though they possessed not, and they
that use this world as not abusing it, for the fashion of this world passes
away.

VI. Humility.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the lesson
of humility. How many humbling sights have you seen? every Corpse that you have
seen has been an humbling sight. It may be you have been proud of your beauty,
but have not you seen that beauty vanishes away when death comes; that
beautiful bodies by the Plague and Death have been turned into loathsome
bodies? and those that you have loved and been delighted to look upon, you have
been glad to have them buried out of your sight, when once dead. How many open
Graves have you seen, and those that have been nice and curious of their comely
bodies, have been interred, and given to be meat for worms, and to be a prey to
rottenness and putrefaction. Have you seen any difference betwixt the poor and
the rich, be^wixt that body that was fed with courser fare, and that which was
nourished with more delicate dishes? Have you not seen bodies that were made
out of dust, been turned to the dust, to be turned into dust, and will you be
proud after God has taken such an effectual course to teach you to be humble?

VII. Parity in ^^t ^^d afflictions.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you, that all
things fall alike to all, that the wise must dye as well as the fool, and the
good must dye as well as the bad. And though God has promised [conditionally]
preservation from the Plague unto his people, which has been literally
fulfilled to some of his, yet some of his have fallen in this general
mortality, God has been teaching of you, that though grace does deliver from
eternal death, yet not from temporal; though from the sting, yet not from the
stroke of death, that you (though godly) should be preparing for your own
departure out of this world.

VIII. Difference ^n the ^anner.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the
difference between the death of the wicked and the death of the righteous, that
though good and bad alike have dyed, yet they have not dyed alike. But as there
was a difference in their life, so God did make a difference in their death:
Have not you seen some wicked dye without any sense of sin, or fear of God, or
Hell? and some with terrors in their consciences? and have you not seen some
godly dye with peace and comfort, and giving good evidences of their hope of a
better life? that God has filled them with joys that they were going to their
Fathers house? and that the plague and death had not so much in them to
terrify and affright, as the hopes of heaven had to comfort and support their
hearts. It has been ground of great rejoicing to hear: how many of Gods people
in this plague did dye with joy and comfort? And should not y^u by such a sight
as this, be quickened in your service unto God, and ever while you live look
upon Religion as a real thing, that lets in such real comforts into their
hearts, who had real grace, in such time of real discouragements; after such a
sight as this, never think it a vain thing to serve God (though you must dye)
who comforts his peoples souls in the very gates of death?

IX. Folly of delays.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the folly
of delaying in the great concernments of another world; you have seen many
Drunkards did delay to repent and turn to God, but when death once came to
Arrest them, it would not stay till they had done their work. Have not you seen
many have been surprised by death; that those that thought they would repent
hereafter, and talked how they would mend hereafter, are gone down into the
grave before that time was come? and will not you after such a sight as this be
quickened to make more haste in doing of the work that God expects at your
hands? Have not you seen some that have talked what they would do the next
year, laid in the dust before this year is past and gone? God hereby would have
you learn not to boast of to morrow, because you know not what may be in the
womb of another day, nor what to morrow may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. God would
have you learn so to number your days that you may apply your hearts to wisdom,
Psalm. 90.12. God would have you learn to do your duty quickly, and to do it
with all your might, because it will be too late, when you are rotting in your
Grave, Eccles. 9.10.

X. Mortification.
In this great house of so great mourning, God has been teaching you the great
lesson of Mortification; you have seen how many dyed by sin, and should not you
be now dead unto sin, you should now in good earnest labor for the death of
sin. O be the death of your passion, and be the death of your lusts, and be the
death of your worldliness, especially be the death of your beloved sin, God
forbid that sin should be found alive in your heart after such a time of death
to so many thousand persons. Are so many dead and rotting in their Graves, and
shall not sin be dead and mouldring in your hearts.

These be some of the lessons God in his late providence has been instructing
you in, and if you can now do these duties better than before, it is some sign
that you are better than you were before, But yet because so great a providence
should not be slightly passed over, with but a little Improvement, I shall
take occasion to press you to be much better than you were before; before, God
saw a great deal of sin in his own people, and amongst Professors, much
censoriousness, and rash and uncharitable judgeing one of another, want of love
and affection, a great deal of pride in Apparel, pride in Diet, pride in
Furniture of houses, pride of Beauty, pride of Parts and Gifts; and God has
been staining the pride of all Families therein. God saw a great deal of
neglect of Family Duties in Professors houses, and customary, cold and dead
performance of them in others, and does it not concern all to see where they
have failed, and do so no more?

SECT. XVII.
I Know the wicked World thinks that professing people are too exact already,
and that they make more ado than is needful: But their Charge is,

1. False; for there is no man is so exact in his life as he ought. 2.
Blasphemous; for what do such but blame God himself in giving such strict rules
unto his people. 3. Malicious; Cain envyed Abel because his works were evil,
and his brothers good. 4. Diabolical; what could a Devil say more, or what is
this but to play the Devils part, in discouraging, discountenancing, speaking
against the pressing after the highest degrees of goodness.
But let it be your great care whom God has spared from the grave in this time
of Plague, that are such as truly fear God, and are truly good: On take heed,
that after such a preservation none of you might be found worse than you were;
for though those that once were truly good, shall never so decline as to be
[absolutely] bad, yet they may so far fail, that they may [comparatively] be
said to be worse. Here consider,

Ten Aggravations of Gods Peoples sin, if they be worse.
1. To lose any degrees of Goodness and Grace, is a grievous and a sinful loss:
If you had lost your life in this Plague, it might not have been your sin, but
you cannot be in the least degree worse than you were (after such a providence)
but it is a great sin: Because it is our duty to love God as much as we can,
therefore to lose any degrees of our love to God, is to come short of our Duty,
and therefore a sin.

2. To be worse in your spiritual condition, will be great unthankefulnesse to
God for his watchful Providence over you. If a man do a kindness for you, will
you be worse toward him than you were before? And will you deal worse with God
than with a fellow Creature?

3. To be worse in your spiritual condition after such preservation and
deliverance, will be displeasi^g unto God, and a grief unto him If God see his
Children love him less, and fear him less, and delight in him less, will it not
grieve him, and displease him? And had it not been better you had dyed, than to
live to be a grief to God? Had not you rather follow your Children to their
graves, than to see them live to be worse, and dishonor God? and will you yet
do so your selves? Is it not a grief to you, the more kindness you show unto
your Children, to see them the more undutiful to you? and will it not be so in
you to God?

4. If you be worse than you were in your spiritual condition, you shall have
less communion with God than you had before: and had not you better dye than
lose your communion with God? for what is your life without fellowship with God?

5. If you be worse, you will have less Comfort from God than you had before.
If you deny Duty to him, which you performed to him before, he will deny that
comfort to you, which he gave you before, and what will your life be, without
the comforts of God let down into your soul? is not his loving kindness better
than life? Psalm. 63.3. and what is life if you have no comfort in it? and where
will you have solid, lasting, suitable, satisfying comfort, if not from God?

6. If you are worse in your spiritual condition than you were before, and love
God less, and desire after him less, and delight in him less, you will have
less Evidences for Heaven than you had before, you will not so clearly see your
Interest in Christ, your title to his Kingdom, as you did before; and do you
live to blot your Evidences? Oh what an aggravation will it be to you, to say,
before the Plague I knew that God did love me, but now I doubt of it. Before I
knew, if I had dyed I should have been saved, but now if I should dye, I cannot
tell.

7. If you are worse than you were, you will have less experience of the
workings of God upon your heart, than you had before. You will not have such
experience of his quickening presence, nor of the powerful Operations of the
Spirit upon your heart; and what is it, if you feel the motions and acting of
life, if you do not feel the motions of the Spirit so much upon your heart?

8. If you are worse, you will dishonor God more than you did before, and that
you need not do, you did that too much before: And has God spared you to live
to his dishonor? I tell you, you had better dyed with others in the Plague,
than live after it to dishonor God.

9. If you have less of goodness than you had before, you will have more of sin
than you had before. If you love God less than you did, you will love something
else more than you did; if you have less faith, you will have more unbelief; if
you be less heavenly, you will be more worldly; if you be less spiritual, you
will be more carnal: And has God been using physic to purge out your sin, and
shall it be found more in you than it was before? Has God put you in the
Furnace, and does your dross continue, and increase? It is the nature of
contraries, the less there is of the one, the more there is of the other. If
the Sun be setting, darkness is approaching; if heat be expelled out of the
water, more cold is introduced; and so it is with your heart in respect of sin
and grace.

10. If you be worse, it will cost you much pains, and prayers, and tears,
before you will recover to be as good as you were before. You may lose that
with a little neglect, which you will not re-gain without great diligence. Thus
I have laid before you these Considerations, to prevent your being worse: But
that will not be a sufficient Improvement of this Providence, that you be not
worse in your spiritual condition, but you must be better: Not enough, that you
do not decline, but you must increase and thrive in grace and goodness. And
before I come to press you to be better, let me lay down these following
Positions; and the last shall bring me to my intended Work.

SECT. XVIII.
Posit. 1. THere are many that are really bad, and not so much as seemingly
good. There are many that do not profess any goodness; such are your open,
debaucht sinners, that give themselves up unto all Licentiousness and sin.

Posit. 2. That there are many that are seemingly good, that are not really
good. Many make a great show in Religion, that have no Religion in them. Many
pray much, and hear much, and talk of good things much, but are not good
themselves; and the misery of these is,

1. That they lose all their labor; for if they themselves be not good, their
praying is not good, and their talking of good things is not good: For, the
sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord, Prove. 15.8.

2. They have no real Communion with God who are but seemingly good: For, what
communion has light with darkness, 2 Cor. 6.13, etc.

3. They shall have no real reward, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Their goodness
is but seeming goodness, and their happiness is but seeming happiness.

4. They are seemingly like to God, but are really like the Devil.

5. They associate with Gods Children, but are none of Gods Children; for all
Gods Children are good.

6. They have no true peace, Isa. 57.21. But God has really preserved you from
death, and really kept you alive, therefore be not satisfied to be seemingly
good, but be really so.

Posit. 3. That there be many that are really good, that are not gradually
good, that have grace in truth, that have not grace in growth. Those that are
seemingly good are not so many as those that are openly bad, and those that are
really good are not so many as those that are seemingly good, and those that
are gradually good are not so many as those that are really good. Ever the
better the fewer, both for kind and degree. It is so in Naturals; not so many
Whales as lesser Fish; not so many Eagles as little Birds; not so many Suns as
Stars: And so it is in Spirituals; not so many strong men in Christ, as babes;
not so many tall Cedars, as there are Shrubs in Gods Lebanon. Now my purpose is
to exhort you (especially after such a Providence) to be not only really good,
but to be gradually good.

Posit. 4. That those that are gradually good, are yet imperfectly good, as
appears by the remainders of sin in the best; and would be evident by a
particular enumeration of their Graces, which is the best thing in the best
men; they know but in part, and they love but in part, and delight in God but
imperfectly, Philip. 3.9, 10, 11, 12.

Posit. 5. Those that are really good though imperfectly good, are truly
acceptable unto God. God will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench the
smoking Flax, Mat. 12.20. There may be a great deal of smoke where there is
but little fire, a great deal of sin where there is but little grace; but yet
it is pleasing unto God, if it be true; a little grace is of great value, (a
Pearl of small quantity might be of great worth) and better than a great deal
of riches, or of gifts; better than a strong Memory pregnant phantacy, solid
Judgment, quick Apprehension, voluble Tongue, or any such things; because the
least Grace is a pledge of Heaven, and so are none of all the rest.

Posit. 6. That when a good man does increase in goodness, he increases more
or less in all saving goodness. When any one sin is more mortified, every sin
is in some measure more mortified, and yet every sin is not equally strong,
because some sins are more deeply radicated, have been more strengthened by
frequent acts, and are more rooted in the constitution; so though addition be
made in every Grace, when a Christian grows better, yet every grace might not
be equally strong in the same Christian, because some grace may be more opposed
by the contrary sin, and some grace is drawn forth more into act and exercise
than the rest; yet as a Child grows in all parts truly though not equally;
so it is in a good Christian: And this I add, that you may endeavor to be
universally good, and universally better, better in Faith, and better in Love,
and Humility, etc.

Posit. 7. That those that are good should labor to be better, and those that
are better, should strive to be best. You should not rest in goodness positive,
but labor to have comparative goodness, and when you have it in the
comparative degree, you should aspire after superlative goodness: You see it is
so in other things; amongst Scholars men strive who should be the best Scholar;
and amongst Artificers, men strive who shall be the best Artificer; and now
after the Plague, you will perceive men to be more earnest in their Trading (I
pray God they may not exceed) to re-gain, what they lost for want of Trading:
And so amongst Christians, every one should strive who should be the best; and
to quicken and provoke you hereunto, lay these things to your heart. Consider,

SECT. XIX.
Seventeen Arguments to Gods People to be better.
1. YOu are not so good as once you were; I mean in your Primitive condition and
first creation, we had more goodness as we came out of the hands of God; then
we had good and no evil: And when God has restored us, we should labor to
come up as near to what we were in Adam, (though not by the same Covenant) as
we can.

2. You are not so good as you shall be. You were good in Adam, but you shall
be better in Heaven: In Adam we were perfectly good, in Heaven we shall be
perpetually good; and should you not labor to get as much of Heaven into your
heart as you can.

3. You are not so good as you ought to be, no, not by many degrees; you come
far short of what you should be in grace and goodness.

4. You are not so good as you may be: Though you cannot be so good as you were
in Adam, as you shall be in Heaven, as you ought to be upon earth, yet you may
be better than you are. You have not so many degrees of love to God, but you
may have more, nor such strong desires after Christ, but you may have more: How
weak is thy love! how cold are thy desires! how stupid is thy heart! not only
in comparison of what it ought to be, but of what it may be: Thou want many
degrees, Oh Christian, put on, there is much more that is yet attainable.

5. You are not so good, but you need to be better. If thou be no better, and
should come into some conditions, thou would be found not good enough to
go through the same as becomes the Gospel. Thou might be brought into those
straits, and assaulted by those temptations, that except thou have more
Patience, more Love to God, more Faith in Christ, thou will not be able to bear
them, nor resist them, as becomes a Child of God to do: Thy burdens might yet
be greater, and thy Duties greater, and thy Temptations greater, therefore thou
should hasten to be better.

6. You are not so good as others are, that have had but the same time, and the
same means, and Helps as you have had, nay some that have not had so much
preaching as you have had, nor such Examples as you have had, nor so much time,
that did set out for Heaven after you, that were bad while you were good, yet
have overtaken you, and gone beyond you: Oh Christian, thou art lagging
behind, put on, least thou should be last of all.

7. You are not so good, but you are as bad. You have not so much grace, but
you have as much sin; nay, is not your sin more than your grace? is not your
unbelief more than your faith? and your wandering thoughts in duty more than
your fixed thoughts in duty? and your dullness more than your liveliness? If
thou can say truly, it is not, do thou go and bless God that it is not so
with thee, while I must go and be humbled before God, because it is so with me.

8. The better you are, the more excellent you will be. Riches is not your
excellency, and Learning is not your excellency, and Grace is not your utmost
and your highest excellency, but the highest degrees of Grace is. Reason makes
a man differ from a beast; and the more rational a man is (by the improvement
of Reason) than others, the more excellent as a man (for a Fool might excel a
Wise man in riches) he is above other men: So Grace makes a Christian differ
from a man as such, and the better Christian he is than others, the more
excellent he is than other Christians are.

9. The better you are, the more like to God, who is the greatest, the
chiefest, and the best good. When we lost our goodness, we lost our likeness
unto God; and when God makes us good, he makes us like himself, and the better
God does make us, the more he makes us like himself: And should not this
provoke thee to be better? especially considering, to be most like to God, is
Thy greatest
Duty: The end of all the rest. Desires: Oh that I were more like to God.
Dignity: And therefore our dignity will be greatest in Heaven, because there we
shall be likest unto God.


10. The better you are, the more you shall have Gods approbation: And what
will it be to be approved of God! You may by seeming goodness have the
approbation of men, but you must be really good, if you will have the
approbation of God; and the better you are, the more he will approve you. God
observes the worst of men, but approves only of good men; and only the good
actions of good men, not their sinful actions, 1 King. 15.5.

11. The better you are, the more clearly you will see that you are good. Many
question, they are not good, and the reason of their doubt is, because they are
no better: That time you spend in complaining you fear you are not good,
improve in endeavoring to be better, and your doubts will be sooner answered,
and your fear expelled.

12. The better you are, the more profitable you will be to all about you. The
better you are in your self, the better it will be for your self, and the
better for all about you; the better you are, the more you will lay out your
self for God, and for the good of souls. Others shall be the better,

For your Counsels: You will be directing them how to do good.

For your Reproofs: You will be telling them when they do evil.

For your Example: You will lead them in the good Way.

For your Experiences: You will communicate to them how good God has been unto
you, and what God has done for you.

13. The better you are, the more inward joy, and the more established peace
you shall find. The great trouble of a Christian is, because he is no better;
be you better and you will have the lesser trouble within, though the better
you are, the more trouble you might have from men; but that's not so great
matter.

14. The better you are, the more glory you will bring to God. Herein is my
father glorified that you bear much fruit, Joh. 15.8. And what is your design
in the world, but to glorify God, and to do that, and be that which tends
most thereunto?

15. The better you are, the more you will credit Religion, and realize the
ways of God; it will appear that Religion is a real thing, when it has made
bad men good, and good men better. If there were nothing else to disgrace the
ways of sin, this would be abundantly sufficient to behold the great wickedness
of those men (how bad they be) that walk most therein.

16. The better you are while you live, the more undaunted you shall be when
you come to dye: The reason why we are so troubled in our sickness, is because
we were no better in our health; conscience then remembers at such a time I
sinned, and at such a place I fell, and in such company I defiled my soul; be
better in Health, you will be the better in sickness and death.

17. The better you are upon earth, the weightier your crown shall be in
heaven: Those that be truly good, shall have sure glory, but those that are
better, shall have more. There shall be no want of any thing to any one in
heaven, but yet some shall shine more eminently in glory, than others.

Thus I have dispatched this particular also, that you be better after such a
signal providence as this, for if you be not, this very thing will be a greater
Plague, than the Plague upon the body; and if you ask me wherein you should be
better? you must gather up that in the following Directions, which shall be
more particular; and such as may be useful to prevent men from growing worse,
which was the first thing, and helpful to promote this duty of being better,
which was the second thing I have spoken to.

DIRECTION II.
Perform your purpose, pay your vows.
Has God spared you in time of Plague, that you live in some measure answerably
to so great a mercy, carefully endeavor to live up to the purposes, and
resolutions and vows which you made to God in time of danger and distress. Good
purposes and holy resolutions, when observed and put in practice, are great
helps to an answerable return to God for his mercies conferred upon us; but
holy, Religious vows, being something more than single purposes and resolutions
( being a promise made to God with due deliberation, of something lawful in it
self, and in our power to perform, as a testimony of our thankefulness unto God
for some extraordinary mercy received, or expected, or deliverance from some
great evil in extraordinary danger and distress) do much promote a holy life,
whereby we may the better be enabled to walk in some measure worthy of what the
Lord in mercy has done for us, or given to us. In time of extraordinary
danger, or when we are in expectation of some extraordinary Mercy, we have the
example of the holy men of God in Scripture, to bind our selves to endeavor
to walk more close with God. So Jacob, Genesis 28.20. And Jacob vowed a vow,
saying, if God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and
will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on. Verse. 21. So that I come
again to my fathers house in peace, then shall the Lord be my God. And this he
was careful to perform, Genesis 35.2. Then Jacob said unto his household, and to
all that were with him, put away the strange gods, and be clean, and change
your garments. Verse. 3. And let us arise and go up to Bethel, and I will make
there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was
with me in the way which I went. Thus David made a vow to God when he was in
danger of his life, Psalm. 56.12. Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render
praises unto thee. Verse. 13. For thou have delivered my soul from death -- And
in the like danger, Psalm. 116.3. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the
pains of hell gate hold upon me: I found trouble and sorrow. Verse. 4. Then
called I upon the name of the Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul.
Verse. 6. The Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low, and he helped me.
Verse. 8. Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling. Verse. 12. What shall I render to the Lord, for all his
benefits toward me? Verse. 14. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now in the
presence of all his people.

And has not this been thy case, Christian Reader, did not the sorrows of
death compass thee about? Did thou not find trouble and sorrow? Wast thou
not brought very low, and received the sentence of death within thy self? Did
thou not then call upon the name of the Lord, and resolve thou would walk
before the Lord, if he would restore thee? and has not God delivered thy soul
from death, and thy feet from falling? Then pay thy vows to God, and perform to
him thy promise, and live up unto thy resolutions.

Tell me, what were thy purposes when thou heardest the Plague had entered into
thy Neighbors house, when it came unto the family nearest unto thine? What
were thy resolutions when the Plague did enter into thy house, and took one
away, and then another? What were thy holy, deliberate, lawful vows, when it
seized upon thy body? When thou betookest thy self unto thy bed, to sweat out
thy distemper? When thou foundest Risings on thy Body, Swellings and Carbuncles
in several parts, when the apprehensions of death did fill thy mind, and the
terrors of the Lord did fill thy heart, when thou thoughtest thou had not
many days to live, and that thou were near to death and another world, and
should certainly dye, if God did not preserve thee? What did thou think
then? And what did thou purpose then, and resolve upon then? Did thou not
determine with thy self if God would spare thy life, if God would give thee
health again, and try thee a little longer in the world, that thou would
walk more holily, and act for God more zealously? That thou would pray more
frequently and more fervently? That thou would mind the world less, and heaven
more? That thou would make Religion thy business, as long as thou should
live? Did thou not resolve that God and Christ, and things above should have
more of thy heart and hearty love? That thou would then forsake loose and
carnal company, and associate thy self with those in whom thou could discern
most of God, and walked most conscientiously before him? That thou would no
more take a cup too much, nor club in the Alehouse and Tavern, to the neglect
of duties of thy family at home. Did it not then trouble thee that thou being a
Professor, had been at nights drinking in the Tavern, when thou should have
been praying in thy family; that thy Wife and Children, though they have not
gone Supperless to bed, yet have almost every night gone prayerless to bed,
except they went apart to pray in secret. But did not then thy conscience tell
thee, that their performance of their duty would be no excuse to thee, when
thou should stand at the Bar of God, for thy neglecting of what thou ought
to have done? Did thou not then resolve, if thou should live, it should be
so no more? That thou would read thy Bible more, as well as look over thy
Shop-books daily? That thou would spend some time in secret before God,
whereas before thou wast use to waste it in thy pleasures, and taking of thy
worldly delights.

Deal plainly, man, with thy self, and do not flatter thy soul, and daube with
thy conscience, Was there not some such thoughts and purposes, and resolutions
as these in thy heart at such a time? And did thou promise and resolve in
jest, and not in earnest; God did afflict thee by the plague in good earnest,
and thou waste then afraid of death, and the grave, and judgment, in good
earnest! And did thou only purpose in jest, and resolve in jest, and play
with holy things when thou wast near another world? and dally with God, when
thou did not know but within an hour thou might have appeared at his Bar?
and been set before the terrible tribunal of the great heart-searching God? But
if thou wast in earnest with God, when God was in earnest with thee; if thou
wast in earnest in promising, be earnest in earnest to perform; if thou did
indeed resolve to reform when thou should be well, then reform indeed
according to thy resolution, since God has made thee well, and saved thee from
the Grave, to which thou wast so near, so very near.

Or if God has been so good to thee to preserve thee from the infection of the
Plague, amongst the many thousands that have been visited, that thou have not
been heart-sick, yet thou have often felt shootings, and pains, and prickings
up and down in several parts of thy body; and sometimes have had such things as
thou have thought to be symptoms of the distemper, and have apprehended it to
be approaching to thee, that has made thee hasten to thy bed, and make use of
thy preservatives, and thy cordials, that thou thoughtest thy self in real
danger, and wast possessed with real fears: What were thy purposes at such a time
as this? And what did thou resolve to do? And how to live, if God would
prevent the thing thou fearedst? Or had thou no such purpose in thy heart? No
such resolution in thy breast, that if thou livedst thou would be better? Was
thy heart indeed so backward unto good, that at such a time of fears and
dangers, thou had not so much as a purpose to be better? but if thou had
(and let thy conscience be thy witness, and the God of heaven that did fully
know the purpose of thy heart) then now perform, what then thy heart did
purpose to perform.

I am persuaded if the people in London (and in Country too) would live up
according to the purpose of their heart, in time of danger of the Plague, would
reform and mend as they did resolve to do, we should be much better than we
were before. Oh what a difference would there be in the frame of our hearts,
and in the course of our lives! What a change would there be in all our
practices? Those that were forward Professors of Religion, and were not much
more then Professors, would be zealous practisers of Religious duties; and in
order hereunto I shall to follow this direction, do three things.

1. Lay down some considerations why you should be careful to keep your
purposes, resolutions and vows.

2. Prescribe some helps how you may perform your purposes, resolutions and
vows.

3. Set down the aggravations of your sin, if you break your purposes,
resolutions and vows.

SECT. I.
Seven Arguments for care to keep o^r resolutions made in time of fear and
sickness.
1. GReat and constant diligent care should be taken in time of health, to keep
our purposes, to perform our resolutions, and to pay our vows to God, which we
made in time of sickness, and danger, and distress, if you consider these
particulars.

1. The heart is deceitful
That one great deceit of the heart of man does appear in this, in being forward
to purpose in our selves, and promise unto God, but are backward to perform. In
time of sickness, what resolutions do men make? what purposes have they in
themselves, to mend and turn to God, and seem to promise this with tears in
their eyes, and sorrow in their hearts, for the evil that is past and done, and
seem to others, and think verily themselves, that they promise in good earnest,
and mean to do as they do speak, and when they think the danger is past, and
their fears removed, do nothing less than what they promised: I have known some
upon sick beds so to promise, that they would be drunk no more, etc. and yet
when health has been restored, have returned to their wickedness: So did
Pharaoh promise fair when the Plagues of God were upon the Land, that he would
let the children of Israel go; but when the Plagues have been removed, he has
hardened his heart against them more than before; and this he often did. Exodus
8.8, 15. and 9.27, 28, 34, and 10.16, 17, 20.

Now this deceitfulness of the heart is yet in part remaining in the best of
men, and therefore you must be careful, else though you have promised, you
will never perform.

2. Sin is encroaching.
That sin is of a bewitching, encroaching and alluring nature; if it can
prevail, it will keep you from resolving against it; if you do resolve, it will
entreat you that you would not send it far from you, that your Resolution
might not be peremptory and universal, that if you resolve to banish it from
your heart, it might be only some of its members that are not so dear unto you,
and reserve the rest; or if it be peremptory and universal, that you will part
with all sin, it will contend that your Resolution may not be perpetual, that
you send it not away for ever, but only till your danger of death is over, and
your fears thereof are ceased, that then it may be received into your heart, be
your Favorite again; or if you do resolve to part with sin, peremptorily,
universally and perpetually, yet after a while it will solicit you to change
your resolution; or if you will not change it, it will solicit you to abate the
strength and vehemence thereof; and will come and offer you so much delight,
and so much pleasure, and so much profit, if you will not be so severe against
it. If you are not careful, it will encroach upon your heart, and insinuate
and wind it self into your love and delight, and allure your will into a
consent, first not to be so severe, next to indulge it, then to countenance it,
and then to renew its acquaintance, till it again become familiar to you.

3. Satan will assault.
That Satan will assault you, and set in with sin for its readmission. If he
cannot keep you from resolving, yet he will lay hard at your heart to break
your resolution: He will lay his snares and baits, and use his stratagems in
sins behalf; and come to you as he did to our first Parents, Genesis 3.1. He (i.
e. Satan) said unto the woman, Yea, has God said, ye shall not eat of every
tree of the Garden? So Satan comes unto thee, and says, Yea, have thou said,
thou will not be kind unto thy sin any more? have thou said, thou will be so
severe against thine Iniquity? If thou reply, I have said, I will not keep my
sin, lest God be angry with me, and send some soret Judgment upon me; he will
return to thee, and say, God will not surely be angry with thee to plague thee,
it may be thou may escape, or if thou yield now, thou might repent, and
renew thy resolution against it again, do it but this once, take but the other
Cup; play but the other game. If you be not careful to look to your
Resolutions, when sin, Satan, and your own heart do set against you, you will
certainly break them.

4. The world will interrupt.
The World will interrupt you, that you may not live up to your Resolutions
made to God in time of danger. This is another powerful Assaultant, for your
heart and affections; and will plead, If thou did resolve against sin, that
was unlawful, but the things that I have (says the World) are good, my Riches
are good, and my Pleasures are not absolutely evil, and my Profits are not
unlawful; if thou would turn off thy drunkenness, why should I be resolved
against? and if thou will shake off thy wicked company, yet what have I done,
that I must not be loved? Company-keeping (says the World) did impoverish
thee, but I will enrich thee, that did consume what was necessary for thy
Family, but I come with supplies for them, I will cloathe their backs, and I
will furnish their Table, and I will bring in Portions for thy Children, I will
make thee honorable and esteemed, and I will lay up in store for thee against
thy old age, when thy labor will be past: Thus will the World come in for
entertainment in your heart again, that though you resolved to spend so much
time in secret Prayer every day, if God would suffer you to live, yet this
worldly business comes to divert you, and another comes to take you off from
your resolved practice: If you consider what earnest suitors, Satan, sin, and
the World will be for your heart, and how your heart is as ready to yield, as
these are to solicit, your heart is as willing to have them, as these are to
have your heart, then without diligent care it is impossible to live up unto
good and holy Resolutions made in time of danger.

5. The difficulty of the things you have purposed and resolved to do, calls
for your greatest diligence if you would live up unto them. The more excellent
and difficult the work is we resolve to do, the more apt we are to flag and
faint, and come short in performance. Now it will appear that these things are
difficult, because They are Praeter Super Contra
Naturam.

First, The things you have purposed and resolved to do, are preternatural.
These things are, that you will love God more, and that you will delight and
joy in God more. Now those things are praeternatural which are added to another
thing (as an adjunct to its subject) so that it does not constitute the nature
of it, nor destroy it, but perfect it. Such a thing is Grace, that you have
resolved to get greater degrees of. Grace and Holiness does not constitute the
Nature of man, for a man without grace is a man; neither does grace and
holiness destroy but perfect Nature: Grace does not destroy the affection of
Love, but does correct it, and place it upon its proper Object; nor destroy our
Joy, but turns the stream of our Joy to empty it self in God, or rather to
fetch our Joys from God.

Secondly, The things you have resolved to do, are supernatural, above Nature;
it is not in the power of Nature to enable you to do what you have resolved
upon. You resolved in your time of fears and danger, to pray to God more
fervently; but Nature cannot help you to do this: To believe more steadfastly,
to love God more ardently, to walk with God more holily, but all these are
above the power of Nature; and must be wrought in you by the supernatural and
almighty power of God; and yet you did well to resolve to endeavor to do all
these, if you did remember to make your resolution, in the strength of Christ
to do this, by whose strength we can do all things, Philip. 4.13.

Thirdly, The things you have resolved to do are contra-natural, against
Nature, i. e. against corrupt nature: For our love to God does not destroy the
faculty or affection of Love, but perfect it and Innoble it, but it does
destroy our love to sin, and our love to the World, and the things of the
World. Now to do that which is against corrupt Nature is very hard, you will
find it exceeding difficult, it is swimming against the stream, and rowing
against the tide, that if you do not ply your Oar, you will be carried back.

6. You will meet with opposition.
The opposition you may meet withal from your nearest Friends, will make it
evident that there is need of your greatest diligence to make good your good
resolutions. You have purposed in your heart to spend more time for God, and
your soul, and for the life to come, if you do so as you have resolved, it may
be thy father, the Wife of thy bosom, thy fellow servants, will scorn thee and
deride thee, and set themselves against thee. Thou have purposed in thy heart
to reprove sinners for their Oaths and Drunkenness, and Profaneness, and if
thou do so, they will envy thee for thy pity, and hate thee for thy love; it
may cost thee dear, it may expose thee to trouble from men, and from those that
by bonds of Nature are nearest to thee, if thou will indeed come up in thy
practice in time of health and safety, to thy Resolutions, which thou did
believe was thy duty to make, in time of sickness and danger.

7. Concurrence of many duties re-quired.
The necessary concurrence of many difficult duties that you may perform the
purposes of your heart, in living in some measure answerable to the mercy of
divine protection in time of plague, calls for your utmost diligence and care,
else you will undoubtedly fail and come short of what you did resolve upon.
Where many Duties are to meet, and to be done as necessary Requisites to
another duty that makes this duty so much the more difficult. There are many
things to be done, if you will perform your Vows and Resolutions to be better,
without which it will be impossible, and these are such as Watchfulness,
Self-denial, Fervent Prayer, Frequent Examination, etc.


But these I reserve for their proper place, as Helps hereunto. But first I
would have you to believe the necessity of your utmost care and diligence to
perform your Purposes of an holy life. That man that thinks it easy to live up
to such Resolutions, will undoubtedly come short in putting them in practice.

SECT. II.
II. Twenty Helps for keeping our Resolutions.
I Come to the Helps to be prescribed for the better performance of your
Purposes and Resolutions of a holy, heavenly, Gospel-conversation, made in time
of your danger by reason of the Plague. If you would live up to your Resolution
of an holy life, then

1. Watch against your Darling sin.
Evermore take heed of your Beloved sin; take heed of that which is to you
Peccatum in delitiis; your darling Lust, which by way of special propriety you
may call your own. Keep a very strict hand over it, for if any sin undo you,
it is likely to be this, and if there be any sin that will weaken your
endeavors to live according to your purpose, it will be this: Beware of all,
but especially of this; maintain your holy warfare against the whole host of
sin, but especially fight against this as the General and Commander of all the
rest: Whether it be pride, or worldliness, or the pleasing of your sensitive
Appetite, or the Lusts of the Flesh, etc. That you may know what is your
Darling sin, take these signs.

Signs of a beloved sin.
First, That sin you have been more accustomed to, and has usually broken out
to the wounding of your soul, and disturbing of your peace above any other sin,
is your beloved sin.

Secondly, That sin that all other sins do wait upon and vail to, and bring in
their aid and assistance to maintain, is your beloved sin.

Thirdly, That sin of which you are most impatient of reproof; you can hear of
other sins, and be reproved for other sins, but if you are plainly dealt with
about this, you cannot so easily bear it, but you will find your corrupt heart
to bestir it self to find out excuses to extenuate it, and plead for it; that
is likely your beloved sin.

Fourthly, That sin is likely your Darling, when disappointments of the
fulfilling, and pleasing of it, is more grievous to your soul than the
frustrations of any other sin.

Fifthly, That sin is your Darling, which you have often found your heart
wishing it were no sin, when you wish that it had not been forbidden by God;
which you find your heart most unwilling to resolve against.

Sixthly, That sin is your Darling, which you are willing to be at any cost and
charges to maintain or satisfy.

Seventhly, That is your Darling sin, which you are most delighted in the
committing of, and had rather part with all the rest than with this; it is a
sign your heart is indeed married to that sin, when you will leave all to
cleave to this.

Eighthly, That sin is your Darling sin, which does most disturb you at the
Throne of Grace, and fill your mind most usually with distracting thoughts.
The Devil will divert your heart from God in holy Duties, and there is no sin
he can better make use of for this purpose, than what your heart is most apt
naturally to close withal.

Ninthly, That sin is your Darling sin, which does most interrupt you in your
chosen Solitudes, and Retirements for your souls concernment. It is not every
man, but some special friend that will join himself unto you, when he knows you
are retired for some special business.

Tenthly, That is your Darling sin which Conscience does most reproach you for
in time of danger and fears of death.

Eleventhly, That sin is your Darling sin, which usually lies down in your
thoughts at night, which your mind most thinks upon in the night when you
wake, and first endeavors to salute you in the morning.

Whatever sin this be, you must resolve to deal severely with it, if ever you
would keep your holy Resolutions: While you cocker this sin, and be too kind
toward it, you will not walk so close with God in time of health, as you
purposed to do in time of sickness.

And next to this beloved sin, be careful to mortify that sin that is next
unto it in your love. There is some other sin, besides the Darling (which is
chief) that the corrupt heart has some peculiar favor for; and if you ask
what sin that is? I answer, it is that sin which your heart is most apt to
change your beloved sin for, when you press your heart to forsake your Darling
sin: And that which was the second chief sin in your Soul, would be first, if
the former be taken down and suppressed.

2. And against Temptation.
Take heed of dallying with temptations, or playing with the baits of sin, and
be careful to abstain from the very appearance of evil; rather deny your self
of what is lawful, then play upon the borders of that which is unlawful, If you
always go as far as you may, you will sometimes go further then you should: If
you venture to the utmost, you will be in danger of transgressing and going
beyond your bounds. You will find the Devil and your own heart sometimes to
reason thus, so far thou may go, and yet keep thy resolution; so far thou
might venture, and maintain thy holy purpose; thou may go with such a one
into the Tavern, and yet keep thy purpose to be sober, thou may take another
Glass of Wine, and then another, and then another, and yet not break thy
resolution. Thus the Devil will play upon thee, and ply thee, step after step;
till he makes a prey of the peace of thy conscience, and has brought thee to a
violation of thy purpose, Principiis obsta, resist the first risings of the sin
thou have resolved against; thou have resolved to keep a constant course of
secret prayer every morning, but when thou risest, there is this business
offers it self to be done first, and then another, till thou do omit it and
neglect it, or there is this business which stays for thee, and that will make
thee first be slight and hasty, and over-short in the performance of it, till
at last it brings thee to neglect it. Beware then of the appearances of sin.

3. Sin is as odious to God when you are well as when you were sick.
Often press upon your heart, that sin is as odious unto God, and displeasing
unto him at one time as another, in time of health, as well as in times of
sickness and great mortality, when the plague is over, as when it was
slaughtering thousands in a week. Though God does sometimes manifest more of
his displeasure against sin, yet he always equally (because he always
infinitely) hates sin. If the thoughts of Gods displeasure, and the sight
thereof in the effects of it, did move thee to resolve and purpose against sin,
the believing thoughts of this when the Plague is over, will have some special
influence upon thee, to make thee endeavor to do according to the purpose of
thy heart in dying times.

4. Holiness in ac^, pleasing to God, more than in purpose.
Consider, Holiness is as pleasing unto God at one time as another, and if God
was pleased with thy purpose, it will be more pleasing if thou proceed unto
performance: The moving reason of your purpose in the time of your distress,
was that you judged it pleasing unto God; and would you please God at one time
by purposing, and displease him at another by nonperformance? Would you please
God at one time by resolving to reform, and displease him at another by
nonreformation? Sin and holiness is the same in the eyes of God at all times,
but it seems it is not so in thine; if sometime thou do purpose to forsake
sin, and at another do willingly commit it; if sometime thou approvest
holiness, and p^^^osest to follow after it, but at another time thou art remiss
in thy pursuit.

5. Sin is prejudicial, ^h^n you are well as when you were sick.
Work this upon thy heart, that sin is as destructive to thy soul, and
pre^udicial to thy peace and comfort, at one time as another: Though sometime
the circumstance of time might aggravate a man's sin, and make it more heinous
(as a man to be drunk upon the Lords day) yet sin committed at any time is
damnable, and sin loved at any time is damnable; though sometime we feel the
effects of sin, in sickness on our bodies, and terrors and fears upon our
consciences, and then have greater and more affecting apprehensions of the evil
of it; yet you can at no time (when you have your perfect health) lay sin in
your bosom, but it may sting you unto death. In your sickness you thought that
sin would undo you, that your evil actions would certainly damn you, therefore
you did resolve against it; think so still, and let those thoughts abide upon
your heart, and they will carry you in the strength of Christ, to live as you
did purpose.

6. Holiness in act will be sweeter to you, than only in purpose.
Work this upon your heart, that holiness in act, and a godly life in act, will
be more sweet unto your soul, than it was only in your purpose: And that a
holy life should be esteemed by you at one time, as well as another, because it
will be as sweet and profitable to you at one time as another; if you thought
it would be for your good, to purpose holiness, and to resolve to live to God,
and this did something quiet your heart, if you had dyed, that God had given
you a real and unfeigned resolution, and fixed purpose of heart to lead (as you
could with utmost diligence) a Gospel conversation, how much more will it be a
comfort to your heart to see your purposes end in performances, and your
resolutions come unto a real, thorough, continued Reformation. Get the same
thoughts of holiness in time of safety, as you had in time of danger; and this
will help you to live holily as well as to purpose so to do.

7 When you are well, you are still mortal.
Keep upon your heart a constant, daily sense of your own mortality, and of
your nearness to another world: What is the reason that men under sickness are
more apt to purpose to forsake sin, and to promise to mend and to reform, than
in time of health, but because they have greater apprehensions of death in its
nearer approaches unto them; and things as near do more affect, than things
apprehended as further off; and was it not the thoughts of the nearness of
death, and your daily danger of it, that did quicken you to resolve against
sin, and for God, and to wind up your resolutions something higher than at
other times? Why you have reason still to walk in daily expectation of your
dissolution, though the plague be stayed. If the plague be removed out of your
habitation, yet sin is not removed out of your heart; there is the meritorious
cause of death still in you, and there are natural causes of death still in
you, and you must as surely dye, as if the Plague were raging, and you may
as soon dye; we dye a thousand ways: death might be as near to you by some other
disease, and you may fall by some other disease, as so many have done by the
Pestilence; though you were not one of those that dyed eight thousand in a
week; yet you may be one of those that dye eight, or five hundred in a week.
Do not say the bitterness of death is past, that now there is no danger; do
not put far from thee the evil day. What if so many do not dye every week as
when thou resolvedst to be better, yet thou might dye every week. An
Apoplexy, or a Fever, or Dropsy might fetched thee to thy grave, who have
(through Mercy and Patience) escaped death by the Plague; think with thy self,
when thy heart is negligent of thy former purpose, When? and why was it that I
resolved to give my self more to a holy, heavenly life? When the Plague did
come nigh unto my dwelling, and because I thought every day I might have dyed:
Why it is my daily danger, if not by the Plague, yet by some other disease,
that will as certainly be the cause of my dissolution, as if it were the
Plague. Thou did purpose, because thou thoughtest death was near, then
perform, because death is still as near, yea it is nearer to thee now, then
when thou made this resolution; for the more days thou have lived since, the
fewer now thou have to live; it was near then, but to thee it is nearer now.

8. Believe judgment to come.
Frequently possess thy heart with serious believing thoughts of judgment to
come. When men, and when thou amongst the rest shall give an account to God of
all, thoughts, purposes, promises, vows that thou have made to God, to walk
before him in an holy life: But what account can thou give to God, when thou
have not performed what thou purposedst? If it was not good to purpose and to
promise to forsake thy sin, and live to God, Why did thou purpose? If it
were? Why do thou not perform? If thou fail now, thou will be self-condemned
at the bar of God: thy purposes and promises will be brought forth against
thee; and God will charge thee before all the world with breach of promise unto
him.

9. Gods eye is upon you.
Work this upon thy heart, that thou walk daily in the sight and presence of
that God that exactly does observe, whether thou art the same in thy practice
when thou art well, as thou wast in thy purpose when thou wast sick: God did
see thy purpose, and he did hear thy promise made in thy distress and time of
fears; and his eye is upon thee, to observe how thou live, and what thou
do; and do men keep their promises made to men (as some do from no other
principle then) because the eyes of men are upon them, to observe them, and
they would not lose their reputation by falsifying of their promise, and wilt
not thou much more perform thy promise unto God, when thou can never break
it, but when God is looking on?

10. Keep conscience tender.
Keep a lively and a tender conscience, and diligently hearken to its
admonitions, that thou keep thy purpose; cominations, while thou art purposing
to come short of thy purpose, and accusations afterward; if thy conscience is
not faithful unto thee, thou will be false unto thy promise, and fail of thy
purpose; but if it be, do not choke the voice of conscience, for it is thy
monitor and remembrancer to put thee in mind of the bond and obligation that
lies upon thee to a holy life, by virtue of thy own resolutions and vows in
time of great mortality.

11. Choose a choice friend.
Make a prudent choice of some wise and holy Christian for thy most intimate
associate: One that knows thy ways and practice most, that is most acquainted
with the manner of thy life, and has most occasion to be most in thy company
(supposing him to be faithful, prudent, pious) tell him what has been the
purpose of thy heart, when the terrors of the Lord were upon thee, not only
against sin in general, or in respect of holiness in general, but what was the
purpose of thy soul, and the resolution of thy heart against this sin (if it be
convenient) in particular, which thou have been most prone unto, and the
particular duty thou have resolved to be constant and diligent in, which thou
have found thy heart most backward to; and engage him as he loves thy soul, and
the promoting of the work of God in thy heart, that he will carefully observe
thee, and if he discern thee to be backward to thy duty, that he would admonish
thee, if forward to thy sin, that he would reprove thee; and in all deal
faithfully with thee; this would be an exceeding help to perform our promises
and purposes of holy living; and such a friend as this is to be prized above
his weight in gold; and such a friend as this, is better than a brother, if you
find him, let him not go.

12. Gods purpose always the same to you.
Seriously consider and work upon your heart, till you feel your soul affected
with it, that Gods purposes concerning you and your good, and eternal peace is
the same at one time as at another, and he performs all his promises which he
makes unto you: God does not one time purpose for to save you, and another
time purpose to condemn you; and why should you then be unconstant in your
purposes toward God, one time to purpose that you will serve him more, and
glorify him more, and at another time be careless to order your life according
to the intention of your heart. When you find your hearts begin to slink, and
go from the purpose and promise that you have made, press your self with
affecting thoughts of the Immutability of Gods purposes to you, and this might
help you to constancy in your purposes toward God.

13. Holy courage.
Steel your heart with an holy courage against all oppositions in your way of
performance: Take heed of slavish fears which enfeeble your resolutions, and
put a stop in the way of an holy life you have resolved upon; fear of danger
and of death made you to resolve to keep close to God, and yet your fear of
death, and fear of danger for holiness sake, will hinder your living up to
those Purposes and Resolutions. Fear of death natural and from God, was the
occasion of your resolving to practice an holy life; but fears of death
violent, and from men, will be the cause of your breach of promise so to do:
Therefore resolve to live up to your Resolutions, though loss of Estate,
Liberty, or Life, should attend you for so doing.

14. Zeal.
Fill your heart with an holy Zeal for Gods glory; and if you be zealous for
the glory of God, you will be courageous against all Impediments and
Obstructions of an holy conversation. Courage is opposed to slavish Fears, and
Zeal is opposed to Lukewarmness: And Lukewarmness is inconsistent with the
practice you have resolved upon. You have purposed to pray more fervently than
you were wont to do, but if your heart be as lukewarm in Religion, you cannot
do it; you have purposed to lay out your self more for the good of souls, to
endeavor to help others in their way to heaven, but if you be as lukewarm as
before, you cannot do more than you did before: But if your heart be enflamed
with zeal for God, more than before, you will perform all your Religious
undertakings with more life than before, you will pray with more life, and
preach with more life, and speak to men about the things of God and another
world, than you did before; and this is the performance of your Purpose.

15. Frequent Self-reflexions.
Be much in daily Reflections whether you live up to your Resolutions, or no.
Review your life every night, reflect upon your Duties, and the manner of
performance of them. Survey at night before you sleep the actions of the day,
whether they have been according to the Rule of Gods Word; what temptations did
assault you, and how you did resist them; what corruptions did rise in your
heart, and how you did subdue them; what Ordinances of God you have sat under,
and how you did improve them; what Talents God has entrusted you with, and how
you have employed them; what company you have been in, and how you did behave
your self. If you do not call your self frequently to account, you will live
below your Purposes, and not perceive it.

16. Renew your Purpose.
Be often renewing your Purposes and Resolutions for an holy life. Frequent
acts do beget and strengthen habits: Actually renew your Purpose to pray to
God, to walk circumspectly, to discourse of the things of God, and it will at
length be habitual to you so to do. If you find upon reflection and
self-examination, that your Purposes are weakened, and your heart draws back
from that pitch of holiness you did intend to labor after, bind your heart
thereto by the renewal of your Purposes. If you find you have broken your
Resolutions, do not resolve to continue so to do, but repair them. If the
Mariner be driven back by winds and storms, yet he keeps and renews his
purpose of sailing unto his intended Harbor. If a Traveller fall in his
Journey, he gets up and resolves to hold on his way.

17. It will bring great benefits.
Press your heart with the evils of coming short, and with the benefits of
living up unto your Resolutions. The evils of this, I shall speak to in the
third general Head that follows next in order. The Benefits of keeping the
purpose of your heart are many and great: Your sins will not be so many; your
sins will not be so strong, for Resolutions against sin that are firmly made
and carefully kept, do exceedingly weaken sin; and if you should sometime sin,
your sin will not be so great, when God does see you keep the firm purpose of
your heart against it, though sometimes you are overborn and bowed down, yea
and fall against the inclination of your will, and purpose of your heart.

18. Pray for strength.
Pray much to God for strength and power to perform your Purpose. You resolved
to pray more importunately unto God for mercy, but then you must pray to God,
to enable you to pray as you have resolved. Resolution is our duty, but
strength to perform them is not in our selves, but must be fetched from God,
and that must be by fervent, frequent Prayer. Pray that God would not leave
thee to thy self, that he would not forsake thee. Psalm. 119.8. I will keep thy
statutes; there is David's Purpose: Oh forsake me not utterly; there is David's
Prayer. As you must not purpose in your own strength, but in the strength of
Christ; so you cannot perform in your own strength, but in the strength of
Christ. If your resolution be strong against sin, and you rest in the strength
of your Resolution, and think you shall not sin, because you have strong
Resolutions against it, you will fail.

19. Mortify self-love and use self-denial.
Mortify Carnal self-love, and be very much in the exercise of self denial. If
you cannot deny your self of what is pleasing to the flesh, you will deny a
holy life. You must often deny your own wills, and your own desires, and
delights, your own judgments and reasonings, your sensitive appetite, and your
profits in the world, and hate all these in comparison of better things, and
when they stand in competition with God and Christ: If you love your pleasures
inordinately, and love your Liberty and your Life inordinately, your
resolutions for strictness of holy walking with God, will not abide, nor be
accomplished. The love of self, as well as of sin, is a great enemy to holy
resolutions.

20. Examples.
Often urge your heart with the Examples of the holy men of God recorded in the
Scriptures. They purposed and were careful to perform. Jacob vowed unto God,
and paid it. David vowed unto God, and paid it. Job made a Covenant with his
eyes, that he would not look upon Objects that should irritate his sinful
nature, and said, why then should I do it? Job 31.1. So do you say, When I
thought my self to be near the grave, I purposed to honor God more than I did
before, if he should spare me, why then should I not do it? I purposed to watch
against my sin, why then should I be careless?

Thus I have given you the Considerations to press you to be careful of your
Purposes; and Helps to the performance of them, next I come to the Aggravations
of neglecting to live according to your engagements in the time of sickness and
danger.

SECT. III.
III. Fourteen Aggravations of neglect to live up to our holy Resolutions.
THe Aggravations of the breach of your Vows and Resolutions made against sin,
and for holiness, when fears of death were upon you, do exceedingly heighten
and increase your sin; and because sickbed Promises are so seldom made good,
and sickbed Resolutions usually prove so ineffectual, I shall desire you who
have the Vows of God upon you, and who have resolved (if God would continue to
you l^fe) as God and Conscience, and it may be others, are witnesses of, that
you would weigh seriously as in the presence of God, the evil of breaking your
Vows, and being careless of your Resolutions.

1. It is great hypocrisy.
This is great hypocrisy, to purpose and not perform: You seemed in your
affliction to be affected with your condition, and to be afflicted for your
transgression, and to approve of an holy conversation, then you could weep for
sin, and now you work it; you could then lament it, and now commit it; then you
seemed to be changed from what you really were before when you lived in some
known sin; but now it appears that you have really lost that good which you did
seem to have, and made profession of in time of your sickness. It is usual with
Hypocrites to be best when they are ill, and to be worst when they are well.
Hypocrites have their good moods, are good by fits; sometimes pray, but not
always. Job 27.8. For what is the hope of the hypocrite, -- V. 10. Will he
delight himself in the Lord? will he always call upon God? i. e. He will not
at all times, and in all conditions pray to God; when he is sick, he may, but
when his sickness is removed, his Prayers are abated; It is a sign thy goodness
was as a morning cloud, and as the early dew, it is gone away. Hos. 6.4.

2. Double Iniquity.
This is double Iniquity; it is twisted wickedness: It is one sin woven with
another; it is not only double dealing, but it brings double guilt; if thou
had not made thy vow and resolution to pray frequently, it had been but a
single sin, if thou had been seldom in it, but now it is a double sin, and
has double guilt; that thou do omit to pray, this is one sin; that thou do
omit it, after thou have promised, and resolved and vowed to do it, this is the
other sin; and indeed is this thy mending in thy sickness and dangers, to be
doubling thine iniquity?

3. Crea^ ^olly.
This is great folly, Eccles. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not
to pay t^ ^o^ he has no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed: It
is folly to do that which is better be undone than done. Verse. 5. Better it is
that thou should not vow, then vow and not pay. In thy affliction thou
should have learned wisdom and not committed folly.

4. It is to lie to God.
This is to lie to God, to men: A vow is a promise made to God, Deuteronomy. 23.^3.
That which is gone out of thy lips, thou shall keep and perform even a free
will offering* according as thou have vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou
have promised with thy mouth. What is first called a vow, is after called a
promise, and if thou made this promise with thy mouth and did not really
intend the fulfilling of it, but did it, either to deceive thy self or
others; or (had it been possible) God himself, what is this but a lie? If the
words of thy mouth were not conformable to the thoughts of thy mind, that thou
spakest one thing in thy sickness, and did intend another; thou spakest not
as thou thoughtest, thou art guilty of a lie Oration, quando non est conformis
menti dicentis, dicitur falsa ethice quando non est conformis rebus, est salsa
logice.
ethical. But forasmuch as thy words do not agree to the things thou spakest
of, thou art guilty of a falsehood logical, both are bad, though the first is
worst. And is not this an aggravation of thy wickedness to lie to God when thou
art under his rod? Do not parents deal more severely with their children, if
they find them lying, when they are under the rod? Are we not like to
children, when they are scourged, will promise any thing to be spared, but
presently be found in the violation of their promise? But take heed how thou
lie unto God. Remember the fearful instance of Ananias and Sapphira, Act.
5.3. Peter said, Ananias, why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy
Ghost, and to keep back part of the price of the land. Verse. 4. Whiles it
remained was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine own
power? Why have thou conceived this thing in thy heart? that thou have not lied
unto men but unto God. Verse. 5. And Ananias hearing these words fell down and
gave up the ghost.

The like I might say of thy vow, before thou had made it, it was in thy
power, Deuteronomy. 23.22. But if thou forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee; but
if thou have vowed, God will surely require it of thee, and to slack to pay
would be sin in thee. Verse. 21. Why then have thou conceived this thing in thy
heart, to lie to the Holy Ghost, in making a vow and not paying, thou lie not
to men, but unto God. Oh fear and tremble least death should seize thee
presently, and thou fall down and give up the ghost. In thy vow thou lie unto
God, if thou do not pay, because we must vow only to God; for sacred vows
are a part of Religious worship, which must be given only unto God, Deuteronomy.
23.21. Eccles. 5.4. But in thy promises thou have made to men, thou have lied
unto men; and all this does aggravate thy neglect of coming up to thy vows and
promises in time of sickness and fears.

5. To sin against conscience.
To Neglect the keeping of thy resolutions and purposes against sin, and for an
holy life, is it not a sinning against conscience, and against knowledge? It
seems thy conscience has told thee, when thou resolvedst to pray more
fervently, that lukewarmeness in prayer was a sin, and yet now thou do not
strive against it, thy conscience told thee that the ways of God were the best
ways, and best for thee to walk therein, and yet now thou do not do it, thy
conscience has been so far enlightened to dictate this unto thee, and yet thou
go against the dictates of thy conscience; thou do not only sin with
knowledge, but against it, and sins against knowledge and conscience, are
aggravated sins, and such a sinner is an inexcusable, and self-condemned
sinner, Romans 2.1. did thou not condemn thy self in time of Plague, that thou
had taken no more pains for heaven, and for thy soul, that thou had prayed
no more, and lived no better? And what need we any further witness, when thine
own conscience will come in against thee?

6. It will make death terrible.
This will make death terrible indeed unto thee, when it comes in good earnest
to seize upon thee, and then thou shall find that the same purposes, and
resolutions will not quiet thee, when in former sickness thou have had them,
and in after recovery thou have neglected to perform them. Thy last sickness
will come, and death at last will come, and then thou will remember what vows
thou have made, and how thou did not pay them unto God, how thou have
resolved against sin and a wicked life, but have made no conscience of living
answerable unto them, and this will make thee much afraid to dye.

7. It is great unthankfulness for your life.
This will be great unthankefulness unto God for his preservation from, or
restoration out of sickness: To God belong the issues from death, but you deny
it to him. When Hezekiah was restored from his sickness (its thought the
plague) he was thankful unto God for his restoration, Isa. 28.19. The living,
the living, he shall praise thee, as I d^ this day; the father to the children
shall make known thy truth. Verse. 20. The Lord was ready to save me; therefore
we will sing my songs to the stringed instruments, all the days of our life, in
the house of the Lord. And is this to give thanks to God for preservation, for
restoration from sickness? Has God given you your life from the very borders
of the grave? and is this the fruit you return to God, not only not to be so
good as you ought to be, but not so careful as you purposed to be? Or do you
give thanks to God with your mouth that God has kept you from the grave, and
contradict it in your life? Your orall thankesgiving is nothing without
practical thanks doing: Or do you praise God in words and dishonor him in your
works, and do your lips acknowledge you are engaged to God for his protecting
providence, and do you so live as if you had received no such mercy from him,
and that your dependence were not now upon him? Is this your thanks to God to
break your word with him?

8. It will make you loose the benefit of affliction.
This will make you loose the spiritual benefit of your sickness and
affliction, to be worse by the mercies of God, is to have mercies in judgment,
to be better by judgment, is to have judgments in mercy: But when you live no
better, and are no better, nor endeavor to walk according to your resolutions
in time of sickness, it is a sign your affliction has not been sanctified to
you, that (as to spirituals) you are not benefited by it; God has put you into
the furnace, but you are not purified, your dross remains; God has corrected
you but you are not amended; If affliction had worked for your good, if you had
been bad, if would have made you good; if you had been good it would have made
you better. David could say, Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I
have learned to keep thy commandment, Psalm. 119.67. But you might say, in my
affliction I purposed to walk close with God, but after I have been afflicted I
go astray. Surely your heart is very bad, when afflictions made you not better,
and when mercies makes you worse.

9. It is to approve of sin after dislike.
What is this but to like of sin, and disapprove of stricktness of holiness,
after you have professed your dislike of sin, and approved of closest walking
with God: In your affliction you seemed to be sorry for your sin, but now the
affliction is over, you seem to be sorry that you were sorry for your sin; in
your affliction you seemed to repent that you had sinned, else why did you
resolve against it? When your affliction is removed, you seem to repent of your
resolutions against sin, else why do not you live and do as you did resolve?
what is this but to smile upon sin after your deliverance, which you seemed to
frown upon in time of danger of death and the grave? What is this but to find
sweetness in sin after you have tasted something of the bitterness of it? To
re-imbrace that which you seemed to have cast from you? and this is an
aggravation of the evil frame of your heart.

10. If thou had dyed in thy sickness thou had been damned.
What if thou had dyed in thy affliction, thou had gone to hell upon a
mistake, and perished for ever, when yet thou had some hope (though upon
false grounds) that thy condition was good, and that thou should have
obtained mercy: When thou wast sick or in danger, thou thoughtest thy condition
was good, because thou foundest thy heart to resolve to forsake thy sin, and
purpose to close with the closest ways of holiness, but if thou had then
dyed, thou would without doubt have been eternally damned, because thy
resolutions were not penitential resolutions, as appears by the fruit of them,
in my returning to thy sin again, and that thou did not indeed love God, and
his holy ways, for if thou had thou would nor so soon, no, never after
turned from them in the general course of thy conversation.

11. It encourages the devil to tempt.
This will encourage the devil to more frequent tempting of thee: For if by
temptation he can prevail with thee to do that which is contrary to thy
resolution; what hopes will he have to draw thee into sin, against which thou
have made no such particular resolution? If he overcome thee where thou art
strongest, what spoil will he make upon thee where thou art weakest? It is a
great advantage we give unto the devil, when we sin against our resolutions.

12. It provokes God.
This will be a great provocation unto God, when thou do sin, not only
against his Precepts, but against thy own purpose; not only against the
obligations he lays upon thy soul by Mercy and Afflictions, but against the
Obligations thou layst upon thy self by thy Purposes and Resolutions: And in
thy Affliction and fears did thou not apprehend God to be exceedingly
provoked, but thou must after he has preserved, recovered thee, go on, to
provoke him more.

13. Hinders Prayer.
If this neglect be found in thee who have the truth of grace, yet it will much
hinder thy confidence at the throne of grace, and stop the Influences of the
Spirit of God, and obstruct the illapses of the Spirit from descending upon thy
heart. When thou keep thy resolutions, and keep out of the ways of sin,
thou can go to God with an humble, holy boldness, and pour out thy heart with
much enlargedness before God, and there is sweet intercourse betwixt God and
thee, thou feel thy heart to burn in love to God, and thou perceivest God to
bear a love to thee; and oh how sweet is this unto thy soul! But when thou
neglectest to watch against sin, and to walk with God; when thou had resolved
to do both, when thou go to thy duty, thou will find Conscience reproach
thee, and thy heart straightened, and thy mouth stopped, and thy confidence
abated, thy heart much estranged from God, and God carrying himself as a
stranger unto thee, when thou art upon thy knees: And this is the bitter fruit
of a careless heart after heightened Resolutions.

14. Begets doubtings.
If this neglect be found in thee that have the truth of grace, it will much
occasion the doubting of the sincerity of thy heart. A Child of God may fail
and be remiss in prosecuting of his purposes sometimes, but if he be, it will
make him jealous of his own heart, and suspicious that it is not well betwixt
God and him; and is not that a sore evil, and much to be opposed and lamented,
which does blot thine Evidences for heaven? and will make thee question whether
thou have one dram of grace in truth conferred upon thee, infused into thee?

Thus I have finished this Direction also, showing how you may live in some
measure answerable to the great goodness of God in sparing you in time of
Plague, when so many thousands fell round about you: By being careful to be as
good when the Sickness is over, as you purposed and resolved to be when you
were in expectation of death, and waiting for your change and dissolution, when
the Arrows of God were flying amongst you, in the time of this sore Judgment
of the Plague.

DIRECTION III.
Since you live, look after the cure of soul-sickness.
Has God spared you in time of so great Contagion, that you live when others
are dead, or were you sick and are recovered? then Endeavor that the Cure may
be a through Cure, that your Soul be healed as well as your body, that there be
not spiritual Judgments upon your Soul, when temporal Plagues are removed from
your Body. You may observe, that such that came to Christ with diseased bodies,
Christ healed their bodies and their souls too; he took away their corporal
sickness, blindness, distempers, and the guilt of their sins too, Mat. 9.1, 2.
Many are delivered from a Corporal Plague, that yet are infected and in danger
of eternal death by the Plague upon their hearts: That remain under spiritual
Judgments, and Soul-sickness, when temporal Judgments and corporal sicknesses
are cured and removed. When St. John wrote to Gaius, he desired that it might
be as well with him as to his bodily health, as it was in respect of his soul,
and spiritual health, 3 Ep. John v. 2. Beloved, I wish above all things that
thou may prosper and be in health, even as thy soul prospers. But it may be
matter of our desire concerning those that remain alive, and are well after
this Visitation, that their souls may prosper and be in health even as their
body prospers. It is a greater mercy to have an healed soul in a sickly body,
than to have spiritual sickness remain in an healthful body: It is not so great
a Judgment to have the body full of Plague-sores, as to have the soul full of
reigning sins. If your body be cured and not your soul, the cure is but half
done: Therefore in speaking to this Direction. I shall show these things:

1. Wherein it appears that sin is the sickness of the soul? 2. Wherein it
appears that sin and spiritual Judgments upon the soul, are worse than
sickness, and temporal Judgments upon the body? 3. How we may know whether our
souls are healed of spiritual sicknesses? 4. What they must do that lie under
soul-sickness, that they may be healed? 5. What such should do, that are healed
of their soul distempers, to improve the Cure to the glory of God?
SECT. I.
I. Wherein does it appear that sin is the souls disease, and the sickness
thereof? In these particulars.
1. Sin is the souls sickness.
SIcknesses and diseases do abate and take away the Appetite. Sick men have not
the Appetite to their food as men in health have. So sin takes away the
spiritual appetite of the Soul, that it does not hunger after Christ, nor
thirst after righteousness, and hinders its feeding upon Christ, and the Word
of God, which is the spiritual food for the souls nourishment and growth.

2. Sickness and diseases do abate the strength and activity of the body. So
sin does weaken the soul, and all the faculties thereof, and does disable it in
all its actings to, and for God.

3. Sickness and diseases often fill the body full of pain, aches, and sores,
making men to cry out, Oh my head, and oh my heart, and oh my bowels, I am
pained, I am pained: So sin does fill the soul full of racking fears, and
perplexing torments and doubts, and sometimes make some sinners cry out, I am
undone, I am undone, I am damned, I am damned.

4. Some diseases do stupifie and make men insensible, and those are the worst.
So sin sometimes makes some sinners stupid and unsensible of their misery and
danger.

5. Sickness and diseases do take away men's delight in those things which men
in perfect health do take pleasure in. Sick men have no delight in the
pleasures of the world, and in the riches of the world, which other men find.
So sin takes away that delight in God and spiritual duties, and in heavenly
things, which those whose souls are cured do experience.

6. Sickness and diseases do spoil the beauty of the body: They spoil the
fairest complexion, and make the ruddy cheeks to become pale; and many diseases
bring deformity in the room of beauty. So sin does spoil the soul of that
spiritual beauty wherewith it was adorned in its first Creation, which did
consist in likeness unto God, so that now instead of the likeness of God, there
is nothing but blackness and deformity; that the soul that was comely and
amiable in the sight of God, is now become loathsome and abominable.

SECT. II.
II. Wherein does it appear, that Soul sickness and spiritual Judgments upon
men's hearts, are worse th^n sickness and temporal Judgments upon men's bodies?
Sickness of the Soul more dreadful than of the Body.
THough most men in the World look upon bodily sickness and corporal Judgments
to be more dreadful than sin upon their souls, yet if we take a right estimate,
and make a true judgment of both: spiritual Judgments are the greater evils,
In respect of the
1. Cause, or manner of conveyance. 2. Signs of greater wrath. 3. Subject, in
which they do reside. 4. Number, being many. 5. Effect, that they do produce.
6. Difficulty of cure. 7. Want of sense.


1. Spiritual Judgments and soul-sicknesses are greater evils than temporal
Judgments and sickness upon the body in respect of the cause, or manner of
Conveyance, which is by natural propagation, and so unavoidable. Sin is born
with us, it is derived from Parents to Children, from one generation to
another. There are some diseases that are conveyed from Parents to Children,
but this is not general, nor perpetual to all generations. But the propagation
of spiritual diseases is universal and general, it is constant and perpetual.
The seed of all sin is derived from Adam to all his Posterity.

2. Soul-sicknesses and spiritual Judgments upon men's hearts are Signs of
greater wrath than bodily sicknesses are. You may be sick of the Plague, and
yet God may love you; you may have bodily afflictions, and God may be at peace
with you, and because he loves you, he may afflict you. But spiritual
Judgments, as judicial hardness, blindness, are signs of Gods anger, yea his
sorest displeasure, yea (which is more) they are signs of Gods Hatred to such a
man that lies under them. Now that which does always argue Hatred in God to a
sinner, is worse than those things that might proceed barely from his Anger,
and sometimes from his Love: God loathes and abhorres that man, the plague of
whose heart is not at all cured.

3. Spiritual Judgments and soul-sicknesses are greater evils than temporal
and corporal sicknesses are, because they be spiritual, and have the heart and
soul for their seat and subject: As mercies are better that are spiritual, and
that are soul mercies, so Judgments and sicknesses spiritual are the greater
evils, because they are the disease of the better and more noble part of man;
that which does corrupt the soul, must be worse than that which does corrupt
the body, by how much the soul is more excellent than the body.

4. They are worse, because they are more numerous; there is more diseases in
the soul than in the body. If the body be diseased in one part, it may be well
in all the rest; if in more, yet not in all; if in all, yet your case is not so
bad: But there is no sinner but is diseased in every part; there are spiritual
distempers in all the faculties and powers of the soul, in the Understanding,
Will, Affections, Conscience, Memory, Fantasy: In the members of the body, no
part free: Nay there are many spiritual diseases in every faculty: in the
Understanding, there are many; ignorance, error, etc. in the Will many,
stubbornness, choosing the Creature and sin, before God, etc. In every
affection of the soul there are swarms of sin: In the heart there are
innumerable distempers, evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications,
thefts, blasphemies, false witness, Man. 15.19. Spiritual diseases naturally be
all in every man, and be in every part of every man.

5. They are worse in regard of the Effects. The effects of bodily sickness, at
the utmost, and the greatest, is but the death of the body; it brings the body
to the dust, and the grave, it does but separate from friends, and betwixt the
body and the soul. But the effects of spiritual soul-sicknesses (except they be
healed) are dreadful, and inconceivably great; great and dreadful in this
world, but greater and more dreadful in the world to come; they cause Gods
anger, they deprive the sinner of communion with God, they will separate
betwixt God and him for ever, they will bring the soul to the place of Devils,
and the torments of the damned.

6. They are worse in regard of difficulty of Cure. Bodily distempers may be
cured by the skill of man, in the use of natural means, but the sickness of the
soul with nothing but the blood of Christ: Of which more afterward.

7. They are worse in regard of the want of sense. Where one man cries out of
the hardness of his heart, and complains of the unbelief and earthliness of his
heart, there are many cry out of the sickness of their bodies. If their finger
does but ache, they are sensible of it; but though the whole head is sick, and
the whole heart is faint, and exceedingly distempered, yet they are not
sensible of it. Therefore, though God has cured the Plague of thy body, and
not the Plague of thy heart; if thy bodily disease is removed, but the sickness
of thy soul remain without cure; thy case is deplorable: And while thou art
rejoicing that thou have escaped the Plague, thou have more cause to go unto
thy Chamber, and be deeply humbled and mourn before God, for the Plagues and
Judgments that remain upon thy Soul.

SECT. III.
III. How may a man know whether he be healed of Soul-sickness?
THe cure of these distempers are but partial, yet so far are they healed, that
they shall not be the death of the soul. The cure will not be perfect till we
die. Death (we say) cures all distempers, and so it does those of the soul.
There is a double wound that sin does make, there is the wound that does
certainly destroy the soul, by hindering it from salvation and eternal life, and
there is the wound that destroys the peace and comfort of the soul. So there
is a double Cure, which Christ does work, the one for the safety and happiness
of the Soul, the other for the peace and comfort of the Soul. The first of
these we enquire after.

1. Signs of the cure of soul-sickness.
Every man that is healed of Soul-sickness, has been sensible of it: Sin has
been thy sorrow and thy grief, and the burden of thy heart; thou have groaned
under it as the greatest load, as the greatest evil in the world. Every man
that is bodily sick, and is sensible of it, and is unfeignedly willing to be
freed from his sickness, and desires nothing more, is not cured; but it is so
in spirituals: He that is sensible of sin, and is heartily, and unfeignedly
willing to part with his sin, as ever sick man was of sickness, is certainly
healed by Jesus Christ: But such as never found so much sorrow for sin, nor
sense thereof, as to make them willing to part with every sin, were never yet
cured. How can a man that is wounded, have his sore dressed and lanced, in
order to a Cure, and not be sensible of the smart and pain thereof? Or how can
he be healed, while the sword that made the wound, abides in it? It is as
impossible that man should be healed of his spiritual sickness and wounds, that
is not willing to part with sin, as for a man to be healed of his bodily wound,
while he will not have the sword pulled out that did make it. Sin caused the
wound and the sickness of thy soul, and if thou art not willing to part with
every sin, thou art not healed: thy soul is sick, and if thou do not feel it,
that is the worse.

2. Where the soul is healed the sin is killed; the life of sin is the death of
the soul, and that which is the life of the soul is the death of sin; if Christ
heal the soul, he wounds sin, he never heals both; if sin be wounded to death,
the soul is healed unto life; as in the body, the more health is repaired, the
more the disease is weakened; so the more the soul is cured, the more sin is
mortified.

3. Where the soul is healed, there grace is infused; sickness being removed,
health is restored. When Christ heals a sinners soul, he does not only
mortify the sin, but sanctify the sinner; when a man is restored from
sickness to health, that which made him sick is not only removed, but that is
introduced which makes him well; so when Christ cures the soul, he does not
only take down the power of sin, which did make him bad, but he infuseth that
which does make him good.

4. Where the soul is cured of the disease of sin, it is sick of love to Jesus
Christ; it is not only weary of sin, but exceedingly longs after the
presence of Christ, and communion with God, Cant. 5.8. I charge you, O
daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him, I am sick of
love.

5. Where the soul is cured of the disease of sin, it does receive Christ by
faith, when the Israelites were stung with the fiery Serpents, and looked up to
the brazen Serpent, they were certainly cured, Number. 21.8. Faith is an healing
grace, because it eyeth Christ the soul-Physician, and fetches virtue of
healing from him, Mat. 15.28. And Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman,
great is thy faith, be it unto thee, even as thou will. And her daughter was
made whole from that very hour. Mat. 9.2. And they brought unto him a man sick
of the Palsy lying on a head, and Jesus seeing their faith, said unto the sick
of the Palsy, Son be of good cheer thy sins be forgiven thee. The blood of
Christ is the healing plaster, and faith is the hand that takes it and
applies it unto the sore.

6. Where the soul is cured of the disease of sin, it is getting strength for
spiritual work, and employment, more and more; it is growing stronger and
stronger in grace and goodness, as a man whose distemper is broke, and going
away, he is recovering strength more and more to go about his calling and
employment, he is stronger to walk and work; he can endure cold, and bear
burdens more than before. A man that is spiritually cured is waxing in the
fruits of the spirit, and growing in all the graces of the spirit of God, is
more and more able to resist temptations, to perform duties, to bear
afflictions, and endure hardships for the sake of Christ. By these signs you
may discern whether your soul is cured, so far of the diseases it lay under,
that they shall not be its death and damnation.

SECT. IV.
IV. What should such do that are under soul-sicknesses, that they may be
healed?
1. How to be cured of soul-sickness.
YOU must be sensible that you are sick; he that does not feel himself sick,
will take no care about the means of health; it is those that are sensible of
sickness that will value the skill of the Physician, and send to him, and
desire his direction, Mat. 9.12. But when Jesus heard that, he said unto them,
they that be whole need not the Physician, but they that are sick.

2. When you are sensible of your soul-sickness, you must apply your self to
Christ, the great Physician of souls. It is Christ that comes to those that
feel themselves diseased, with healing under his wings, Mal. 4.2. It is he that
heals the brokenhearted, Luke 4.18. Christ heals us by his wounds, and
cures us by his stripes, Isa. 53.5. It is matter of admiration, and to many
past belief, that applying of Medicines to a sword, should heal the wound made
thereby; but this is above all reason, and beyond all dispute that the bleeding
wounds of Christ will be healing, to the bleeding wounds of the sinner; Christ's
Golgotha, is our Gilead, and that you may be the more encouraged to come to
Christ when you feel your self sick; consider

(1.) Christ the soul-^hysician.
Christ can heal every disease, and cure every wound; he has a salve for every
sore. There are some Physicians that can cure some diseases but not all, but
Christ when he was upon earth, did heal all manner of diseases, Mat. 4.23.
whether thy eyes be blind, or thy heart hard, or thy mind earthly, he can
open thy eyes, and soften thy heart, and make thee spiritual; yea though thy
sickness has been Chronical, of long duration, yet he can heal thee; yea
though thou art sick of a relapse (which is most dangerous) yet Christ can cure
thee.

(2.) Christ will heal your souls without putting you to any charge; though you
be poor and mean, and have nothing to bring to Christ, yet you may come for
healing, he will give you his advise and counsel freely, he will give you your
Physic (his own blood) freely, you have nothing and he expects nothing. The
woman that had been diseased twelve years, and suffered many things of many
Physicians and spent all, and grew worse, came to Christ and was presently and
freely healed, Mar. 5.25.

(3.) Christ will proceed in this cure with all compassion and tenderness; he
will not deal more roughly with you than is needful, he exercises bowels of
compassions while he is dressing his patient, or if he give you bitter po^ions,
or sometimes uses corrosives, he will be exceeding tender over you all this
while, Mat. 14.14. And Jesus went forth and saw a great multitude, and was
moved with compassion toward them, and he healed their sick.

(4.) Christ is a Physician that is always present with his Patients, to
observe what operation his Medicines have upon their hearts; if you are ready
to faint under the terror of a threatening, he is by you presently to administer
a cordial from the promise to uphold your swooning souls. Other Physicians
cannot be always present with all their Patients, but Christ is, Psalm. 34.18.
He is nigh to them that are of a broken heart, and saves such as be of a
contrite spirit: If your heart be broken, he is nigh to bind it up.

(5.) Christ can heal your soul-diseases thoroughly and effectually, and he
only can do it; others will but skin over your wound, but Christ will heal to
the bottom, Jer. 6.14. They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my
people slightly, saying, peace, peace, when there is no peace. Thus if you
consider what a Physician Christ is, you may be encouraged to come to him for
healing.

3. If you say you are so sick you cannot go to Christ, Send for him by fervent
prayer and he will come to you: Cry to him, O thou Physician of souls, I am
sick, so sick that I cannot come unto thee, and except thou heal me I am a dead
man* a damned soul. I beseech thee use thy skill, for that will save my soul
alive, put forth thy power for the curing of my diseases, Oh stanch this bloody
issue, else my soul will bleed to death; Christ never refused to come to any
sick soul that was importunate with him to come with healing under his wings.

4. If you would be healed, you must come to Christs-Hospital, i. e. unto
Christ's Ordinances, and this you may do; if you cannot come to Christ, yet you
may come unto his Ordinances, you may come and hear, you may attend at the
pools side, and at length he might come, and put you into the healing waters,
Mat. 21.14. And the blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he
healed them, Psalm. 107.20. He sent his word and healed them.

5. If you would be healed of your soul-sickness, you must follow the
directions and prescriptions of Christ your spiritual Physician. If you be
sick, and the Physician tell you what you must do, and prescribe you means, and
you set them in your window, or let them stand upon your table, and do not do
as he prescribes, you may dye of your disease; you must observe his advise, for
the time, when, and for the quantity, how much you must take, or else your
distemper will abide, yea and increase; Christ will tell you what you must do,
and if you follow his directions, your soul shall recover and be saved.

6. If you would be healed of your soul-sickness; you must not let slip the
time of healing; There is a time, a nick of time for healing, if you let that
pass, you will dye of your disease. The Impotent people that lay at the Pool of
Bethesda, were to observe the season when the Angel moved upon the water, and
he that stepped in at the very nick of time was healed, Joh. 5.4. There is a
time to heal, Eccles. 3.3. I pray God, this healing-time might not be past and
over to thee that read these lines. Cloze then with the present motions of
the spirit, if yet thou feel him working upon thy heart.

7. If you would be healed of your soul-sickness, you must take heed of those
things that will continue your disease; If a man will eat those meats that feed
his distemper, and is contrary to his health; he cannot rationally expect a
cure. You must take heed of those sins, that if you do indulge, will not only
hinder your recovery, but will increase your misery.

8. If you would be healed of your soul-sickness, do not undertake to be a
Physician to your self, nor go about to heal your souls, with any of your own
Medicines; you may heal your own body, but not your soul, we are too apt to be
Physicians to our selves, and to think to cure our soul-distempers by our
duties, and by our own performances. But this will never be.

SECT. V.
V. What must those do whom Christ has cured of their soul-sickness, to
improve this cure to the glory of God?
1. Directions to give to God the glory of our souls cure.
A Scribe the cure unto Christ, and not unto any means or instruments: if you
are cured of any bodily disease, you are not to ascribe it to your Physic, nor
Physician, but to the goodness of your God; so if you are cured of your
soul-diseases, you must not attribute this to praying, or to the Preacher, but
to Jesus Christ, Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their
arms, but they knew not that I healed them. Thus David blessed the Lord, who
healed all his diseases, Psalm. 103.2, 3.

2. Increase your love to Christ, who has healed the distempers of your heart;
will you not love that man that saved your life? and will you not love that
Lord, that saved your souls? especially when you consider the manner and means
of your cure. That he did it freely, and that with a Medicine of his own blood,
other Physicians make you Medicines of other things, but Christ of his own
heart blood; he died that you might live, and he was peirced, that you may be
spared.

3. If you are healed, take heed of falling into a relapse, take heed of
wounding your soul after healing; if you are healed go away and sin no more,
least a worse thing come unto you, Joh. 8.11.

4. If you are healed, direct others to the same Physician, you do so to your
acquaintance, that are sick of the same disease that you have been, you tell
them such a man is able and skilful, and he has cured the same disease in you,
and counsel and persuade them to go to him; do so in this case; you have a
friend, a neighbor, a relation in a sinful state: Oh speak to them to go to
Christ. Do thou hear any soul complaining, alas my wound it is incurable, and
my sorrow it is intolerable, my heart is sick, my soul is full of running
sores; and I pray, but have no help, and I hear, but have no cure; now direct
such a distressed sinner unto Christ, and from your own experience encourage
him to hasten unto Christ, from whom you have found such healing virtue.

And if God has healed thy body of the loathsome disease, in which thou
might have said with David, Psalm. 38.2. Thine arrows stick fast in me
(probable David was sick of the Plague, which is called the Arrow of God, Psalm.
91.5.) and thy hand presses me sore. 3. There is no soundness in my flesh,
because of thine anger -- 5. My wounds stink and are corrupt -- 7. My loins are
filled with a loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh. 11. My
lovers and my friends stand a loof off from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar
off. This (it may be) has been thy condition who read these lines; thy body
was full of loathsome sores, and God has cured thee, and which was worse, thy
soul was full of loathsome reigning sins, and God has healed thee; what now
does God expect at thy hand? but that since he has given health unto thy body,
and grace into thy soul, thou should use both unto his glory; which if thou
conscientiously and sincerely endeavor and practice, ere long thou shall be
received into the Arms of thy Lord, where there shall be no more sickness in
thy body, nor sin in thy soul for ever.

The Reader is desired to make the following Direction the Fourth.
DIRECTION III.
Has God spared you in time of Pestilence, then, if you would Live in some
measure answerable to so great a Mercy, Be Eminent in your place and Relation.
Be eminenth exemplary in the Place: Capacity, Calling, Station, or Relation
wherein God has set you. Every Rela^ion has some Duties peculiar to that
Relation; and every Calling and Capacity, wherein Divine Providence has pl^ced
you, has something wherein you may be peculiarly eminent: and, who knows but
God has preserved you for this end, that you may excel in the Capacity and
Condition God has called you unto: if your Condition be a Condition of
Prosperity, be eminent in Humility, Self-denial, and Charity; if of Adversity,
be eminent in Submission and Patience, in undergoing the Will of God.

But, that I may speak more Comprehensively and Distinctly, I shall consider,
that every one that is left alive (after this sore Judgment) stands in one or
more of these following Capacities or Conditions; in every one of which every
Man (whom God has spared) should now labor to be eminently exemplary: This
Capcity is, either Political Magistrates, or Subjects.
Ecclesiastical. Pastors, Flock.
Oeconomical. Conjugal Husband, Wife.
Parental, or Filial. Parents, Children.
Despotical, or Servile. Masters, Servants.




One of these every Person is, that is preserved from the Grave: and, if every
one would now endeavor in good earnest to do something singular (but
singularly good) for God, in his particular Relation, to do the Duty which God
peculiarly calls for, and excel therein, that you failed in, and came short of
before; this would be a good Improvement of the Mercy, and this would be in
some measure to walk up unto it.

SECTION I.


1. Magistrates and Governors for over us by God: Le^e, with humility and
reverence, mind you of your duty, and tell you, That God expects, and
requires, that since he has entrusted you with Authority from himself, and
given you Life, and preserved you from the Grave in the day of his sore
Visitation in the City, that, though your Place and Office did oblige you to a
less retired Life then many others, yet God has kept you from Death by
Infectious Diseases: Now, should you not inquire what you should do for God?
and, how you may improve your time and Talent for his Honor? should not you
punish Sin (that is so indeed) and Countenanc^ Holiness and Religion (that is
so indeed?) should not you be zealous for God, in punishing of
open-Prophaneness? and the horrid Oaths, that have cried aloud in the ears of
God, Men profanely Swearing by the Sacred Name of God; and Sabbath-bre^king,
and violation of the Holy Day of God? did not Nehemiah do so? Nehem. 13.15. In
those days saw I in Judah some treading wine-presses on the Sabbath, and
bringing in sheaves, and lading Asses, as also wine, grapes and figs, and all
manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath day: and I
testified against them in the day wherein they sold Victuals. Verse. 1 6. There
dwelt Men of Tire also therein, which brought fish, and all manner of Ware, and
sold on the Sabbath (as many did Fruit openly in some places of the Streets,
and in Fields about London) unto the children of Judah, and in Jerusalem. Verse.
17. Then I contended with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what evil
thing is this that ye do, and profane the Sabbath day? Ver. 18. Did not your
fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this
City? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath. Verse. 19.
And it came to pass when the Gates of Jerusalem began to be dark, before the
Sabbath. I commanded the Gates should be shut, and charged, that they should
not be opened till after the Sabbath: and some of my servants set I at the
Gates, that there should be no Burden brought in upon the Sabbath day. Verse.
20. So the Merchants and sellers of all kind of Ware lodged without Jerusalem
once or twice. Verse. 21. Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why
lodge ye about the Wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you; from that
time ^orth came they no more on the Sabbath. This Example is worthy your
Imition; and, oh how much good may you do, and how much Sin, and Dishonor to
God thereby might you preven^, if you do indeed obey the Laws of God, and
Execute the good Laws of this Kingdom, in that Case made and provided? Should
not you discourage Drunkeness, and Houses notorious for uncleanness? That
Taverns and Ale-(...) be not so much frequented? should you not be a Terror
unto the Evil? why Drunkenness and profane Swearings, and Brothel-houses are
Evil: indeed, for which a Land is made to Mourn: and, should not you be a
praise to them tha^ do well? Romans 13.3. Are not you Gods Ministers for good to
them that are good; and revengers, to execute wrath upon him that does evil?
and, can you w^^k worthy of so great preservation from the Plague, if you do
not cut down Sin, and encourage Godliness?

SECTION II.
2. Subjects Duties to Magistrates.
SUbjects, and People Governed: Many and strickt are the Pre^epts and
Injunctions of God upon People to their Magistrates; and, no less then
damnation is threatened, by God himself, to such as oppose themselves against
their Magistrates, Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers,
for there is no Power but of God; the Powers that be are ordained of God. Verse.
2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God;
and, they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Verse. 5. Wherefore
ye must needs be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake.
True Religion we see (from this Scripture) does oblige People and Subject, in
Duty and Obedience, to their Magistrates; and none will more Conscientiously
obey, than those that are most Religious: Obedience to Magistrates (from this
place) is required, because (1.) They are Ordained of God. (2.) They that
resist them, resist an Ordinance of God. (3.) Such as do so, receive to
themselves damnation. (4.) They are (appointed of God) to be a terror to the
evil, not to the good. (5.) Conscience is bound so to do. (6.) There is
necessity we should obey; We must obey, not only for Wrath, but Conscience
sake: Some might obey for favor, and some for fear, but true Religion teaches
Men to be obedient to Magistrates from Principles of Conscience. Strictness of
Holiness is reproached when it is asserted to make Men disobedient: Once more,
1 Pet. 2.13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man, for the Lords sake;
whether it be to the King, as supreme. Verse. 14. Or unto Governors that are
sent by Him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that
do well. Verse. 15. For so is the will of God, you should put to silence the
ignorance of foolish Men. Verse. 17. Honor all Men. Religion does not teach us
to deny civil Respects to men: Love the Brotherhood, fear God, honor the
King. Religion presses and obliges Subjects in duty to their Magistrate in
these particulars.

1. Obedience to their Laws and Commandments, Tit. 3.1. for their Laws and
Commands are to be according to the Laws and Commands of God.

2. Honor to their Persons, Romans 13.7. for they are Gods Vice oys, therefore
called Gods, Psalm. 82.6. For I have said ye are Gods, -- but ye shall dye like
men.

3. Loyalty, whereby we are bound to the uttermost of our power, to maintain
their Prerogatives, and preserve their Persons.

4. Prayer on their behalf; if God be angry with them we must intercede for
them, if they want any Blessings, we must make supplication for them; if they
lie under evil, we must deprecate those evils; if they find mercy from God, we
must give thanks for them; all this is in 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.

5. Tribute, Romans 13.7. For, for this cause pay you tribute also, for they are
Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing.

6. Subjection to their Penalties, Romans 13.4, 5.

This is to live in this capacity, to be peaceable, and rather take a thousand
wrongs, than offer one; and to live in that obedience as becomes the
Professors of the Gospel, that all may see that those that are obedient unto
God, dare not be disobedient unto those to whom, and wherein, God commands them
to yield obedience.

SECT. III.
Pastors and People; and the Protection of God over such, should engage them to
discharge their mutual duties, as those that would testify their thankfulness
to God for continuing them in that Relation. God has removed by the Plague
some ^inisters that the People shall never hear Preach more, and God has taken
some from every Congregation, of the People, to whom the surviving Ministers
shall never offer Christ and Peace unto any more, who are now out of the reach
of their reproofs, and exhortations: therefore such Ministers as yet have time
to preach unto the People, should improve that little time that God has given
them in so doing; and the People that yet have time to hear their Ministers,
should diligently do it, and improve their Ministry for the saving of their
souls. But more particularly.

First, Ministers that have escaped the Plague should be eminently exemplary in
a diligent performance of every work that God expects at their hands.

I. Ministers should be more in Studying.
As in improving time, in giving themselves more unto serious, closer studying,
that they may be more and more able for their Masters work, and more and more
eminent in converting and building up the Elect of God; to be more in their
Studies, than in the Streets; more at their Books, than at their pleasures; at
this they should be early and l^te, according to Saint Paul's charge to Timothy,
1 Timothy 4.13. Till I come give attendance to reading. Ver. 14. Meditate upon
these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to
all. Such as are to work for God and the saving of souls should be given to
Study and Medi^ation, that they may be more skilful and successful in their
work; they should be as much in their Studies, as any Worldling in his Shop;
Especially now such should study more (1.) the Word of God, which is to be the
matter of their Preaching. Such are more apt to study the Writings of Men, more
than the Word of God. (2.) Their own hearts, and the dealings of God with their
own souls, that they may first experience the sweetness, and power, and
efficacy of those truths they are to commend unto the People. (3.) The stare of
their Flock, and the condition of their People, who of them need to be
reproved, who of them need to be comfortes, and who of them be in doubts, and
how they may by their Preaching be resolved. They should study their People
more, that they may preach on such subjects, not that are easiest unto
themselves to speak un^o, but that are most suitable to their people, and so
most likely to be most profitable to them.

SECT. IV.
Praying.
SUch should be more in improving time in frequent, fervent Prayer. They should
pray, (1.) That God would direct their thoughts to the choice of that subject
which might be most useful to, and is most necessary for their peoples souls.
(2.) That God would assist them in their Meditations upon that subject, that
they may speak from thence those things that may be most convincing, piercing,
that they may meet with the Sins and Doubts of those they are to Preach unto.
(3.) That God would give them success in their Labors. (4.) That God would
give them a Door of Utterance, and assist them in the delivering of their
Message (which they have from God) unto the People: St. Paul was much in
Praying for the Churches, Ephesians. 3.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. Phil. 1.4. Col.
1.3.9, 10, 11. 1 These. 1, 2. 2 These. 1.11, 12. And in blessing God for the
Truth, and growth of Grace in the hearts of the People; as matter of his joy,
to see them holy, and eminent in holiness; to see them embrace the Gospel, and
walk according to it, 1 Cor. 1.4, 5, 7. Phil. 1.3, 4, 5. Col. 1.3, 4, 5. 1
These. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And looked upon such as his Crown and Joy, 1 These.
2.19, 20.

SECTION V.
Preaching.
SUch should improve the time (that God has given them from the Grave) in right
Preaching of the Word, and Administration of the Sacraments unto the People:
God has not spared them to Eat and Drink, and Sleep, and live at Ease; but to
be painful in their Work. God has laid (in this time) some of his Ministers in
the Dust; and, they are silent in the Grave, whilst others have opportunity to
speak for God, in Preaching to the People: and, God does expressly charge them
so to do, 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
kingdom. Verse. 2. Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and Doctrine: and, there is a
woe unto them, if they do not Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. and are described
to be such as are apt (as well as able) to Teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. And if they do
forbear to warn Men of their sins, those Men shall die, but God will require
their blood at their hands, Ezekiel. 3.18. And though God (in Judgment to a
People) may make his Ministers dumb, and cause their Tongues to cleave to the
roof of their mouths, that they should not be Reprovers to them, because of
their sin, Ezekiel. 3.26. Yet, such as are dumb, through Ignorance, that they
cannot, or through Negligence, that they will not speak to Men to save their
Souls, is a great charge of God against them, Isa. 56.10. His Watchmen are
blind, they are all ignorant, they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark;
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. Verse. 11. Yea, they are greedy Dogs,
which can never have enough: and they are Shepherds that cannot understand:
they all look to their own way, every one for his gain from his quarter. Verse.
12. Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with
strong Drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. And
God sharply reproves such for this neglect, Ezekiel. 34.2. Son of Man, Prophesy
against the Shepherds of Israel, Prophesy, and say unto them, Thus says the
Lord God unto the Shepherds, Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel, that do feed
themselves, should not the Shepherds feed the Flock? Verse. 3. Ye eat the Fat,
and ye cloth you with the Wool; ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the
Flock. Verse. 4. The Diseased have ye not streng^hened, neither have ye healed
that which was sick; neither have ye bound up that which was broken; neither
have ye brought again that which was driven away neither have you sought that
which was l^st; but with force and cruelty have ye ruled them: Verse. 18.
Seems it a small thing to you to have eaten up the good pasture, but you must
tread down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of
the deep waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? Verse. 19. And,
as for my flock, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and they
drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.

Ministers diligence in Preaching the Word (which, such should be awakened to,
much more by Gods late Providence) is pointed at by God, in those several
Names, and Appellations; with which, they, and their Work, is Metaphorically
set forth, as they are, 10 Appellations, showing the work of Ministers.
1. Laborers. Mat. 9.38. Therefore must not loyter, but should work as
day-labourers. 2. Builders, 1 Cor. 3.10. Must repair Gods Buildings. 3.
Husbandmen, 1 Cor. 3.9. Must Plow up the fallow ground, that they sow not among
thorns: they are Gods harvest-Men, and that is hard work. 4. Watchmen, Ezekiel.
33.7. Must see the danger, and endure the cold, and give warning. 5. Stewards,
1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Must deal to every one their portion. 6. Fathers, 1 Cor. 4.15. 1
These. 2.11. In begeting, and bringing up Spiritual Children for God. 7. Guides,
Romans 2.19. Must direct lost Men into their way. 8. Nurses, 1 These. 2.7. Must
seed the Babes in Christ. 9. Physicians, Jer. 13.12, 13. Must heal the
Spiritual Sickness of Men's Souls. 10. Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5.20. Must Parley
with Sinners, to make Peace betwixt God and them.


After such a Providence as this, those in this Office should labor to be more
in the most effectual manner of Preaching; as,

1. In Preaching with more self-denial; not seeking themselves, nor their own
Applause, but more the Glory of God, and the good of Souls: 2 Cor. 12.14. For,
I seek not yours, but you. 1 Timothy 3.3. Not greedy of filthy lucre. 1 These. 2.5.
For, neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloak of
covetousness, God is witness.

2. With more plainness to the capacity of the People; Not with enticing words
of Man's Wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power, 1 Cor. 2.4.
Lest such seem to Preach themselves, and not Christ; and to speak one word to
show the excellency of Christ, and ten to show the excellency of their own
Parts.

3. With more experience of the things they Preach upon their own hearts.

4. More particularly, coming down to the particular cases of the Peoples
Souls: Dolus latet in universalibus.

5. More compassionately; if possible, showing the greatest desire after the
Souls of them they Preach unto: When you stand in your Pulpit, remember, many
of them you Preached to the other day are now in their graves, and are entered
into Eternity; and, those that are before you must shortly follow after* you
have not long to Preach unto them; those that are now alive before you must
shortly die, and be damned or saved; be received to Glory, or thrust down to
Misery: such actu^l believing thoughts as these would move great compassion in
Ministers hearts unto their People.

6. More Livelily; as those that believe the things themselves which they
Preach unto others; remember you are Preaching to Men that must sho^^ly die,
and yet eternally Live: and, for ought you know, if you do not prev^il with
them by this Sermon, they may perish for ever: and, will you be lukewarm in
such a case of so great importance?

7. What is most necessary to the salvation of their Souls: Press more the
misery of Man by Nature; the necessity of seeing the evil; and be sensible of
the burden of their Sin; the necessity of Christ; of Regeneration; of Holiness
of heart and Life; of Justification by Faith in the blood of Christ; of
Judgment to come; of the happiness of Heaven; of the torments of Hell.

SECTION VI.
Living exemplarily.
MInisters, whom God has spared from the Grave, in the time of great Morrality,
should improve this Mercy in the manner of their holy Conversation; i^ (...)
Men's Lives should be the Application of their Doctrine, should press to
Holiness, and live sho^tly; press the People to Mortification of Sin, and
Self-denial, and be Examples to the People in this, else the People will not
believe that they think what they say, if they do not in some measure Live as
they say: Drunkards will not believe that that Minister is in good earnest, in
telling them, that Drunkards shall be damned, if he be one himself. Look
therefore to your Life, and copy out that pressed upon you, 1 Timothy 4.12. Let no
Man despise thy youth but be thou an example of believers, in Word, in
Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity. 1 Timothy 3.2. For a
Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife* sober, vigilant, of good
behavior; a lover of Hospitality, apt to Teach. Verse. 3. Not given to wine,
not a striker, not greedy of filthy lucre.

SECTION VII.
The Peoples Duty in hearing the word.
THe People whom God has kept alive should improve their Life, in attending
upon their Ministers; in inquiring the Law of God at their Lips; in mingling
the Word with Faith; in Conforming to the Truths of God, that are Taught by
them; and being obedient to them, as those that watch for their souls, Heb.
13.17. But more Particularly.

1. Come to Hear the Word of God with more Preparation then you were wont to
do; knowing it is the Word of God, and not the word of Men, 1 These. 2.13. as
that which does concern your Immortal Souls, and your eternal state in another
World.

2. Come with a more teachable heart than you were wont to do, submitting your
Reason to the Word that is Taught you; resolving to forsake every thing which
shall be proved to you to be a Sin, and to do every thing which shall be made
appear to be your Duty: Hear, that you may obey, and Practice what you Hear: Be
not Hearers only, but Doers of the Word.

3. Suffer not your M^ndes to be filled with so many distractions, in time of
Hearing, as they were wont to be; when you sit under the Preaching of the Word,
let not your Hearts go after your Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31.

4. Make particular Application of what does most concern your Souls, more than
you were wont to do: Hear for your selves.

5. Treasure up the Word (that you Hear) in your Hearts, and suffer not the
Devil to steal the good Seed (of the Word) out of your Hearts, nor the Cares of
the World to choke the Word of God.

6. Meditate more upon the Word of God after you have heard it; work it upon
your heart: Preparation before, diligent Attention in, and Meditation after
Hearing, will make you thrive more, and be more fruitful, by the Word Preached,
than you were for nerly, when you wholly omitted, or were more sl^ght in all
these.

SECTION VIII.
Governo^s of families must set up Gods Worship in their houses.
SUch whom God has spared alive (in this time of great Morrality) may be
considered in an Oeconomical capacity, as Persons constituting of Families; and
these may be considered as Governors, or those that are Governed: and surely
all our Families are concerned to inquire what Improvement those that are left
in Families should make of Gods Signal preservation of them: Has God swept
away some Families wholly, not a person left, and spared yours? does not this
call for some return you should make to God? Has not God visited your Family,
and taken away some of your Children, or some Servant, or some Friend out of
your house, and has spared you; has given life to so many whom he has so
eminently preserved: When God has sent the Plague into your house, he gave it
Commission to fetch such a one (in your house) to his or her eternal state;
but, gave it a Charge, it should not seize upon you, or, if it did, it should
not kill you: and, does not this call aloud to you, in all your Families, for
speedy thorough Reformation? Consider the dismal devastations made in some
Families; the total subvertion of others: and yet, that God should keep any
Families in the midst of his burning wrath; should not this make every person
inquire, What would the Lord have me to do? Now, the Governors should bethink
themselves, What is our Duty? and, the Children whom God has continued to
their Parents, What would God have us to do? etc. There is not a Member in a
Family but is greatly concerned to study what is the Duty which he should excel
in, according to the capacity and relation he stands in, in that Family: And
that, after such Family-Visitation there may be Family-Reformation, I shall
consider,

(1.) The Duties of the Family in general, in reference to their
joynt-Worshipping of God.

(2.) Their Duties in particular, in the relation in which they are considered.
For, when the Family in general, and every Member in particular Live up to the
following Duties, they will live in some measure answerably to so great
Preservation.

First, After your Families have been in such danger, and yet so many of them,
and so many in them are preserved; it must be your care to set up the Worship
of God in your Families; else you cannot [as a Family] walk answerably to so
great Preservation: What, has God not turned you out of your House by Death,
and will you turn the Worship of God out of your House? has God spared you
(think you) for this end, that there should be eating and drinking in your
Houses, and not Praying and Reading in your Families? That there should be
Working, and Laboring early and late, and no calling upon God? Is this to make
a Family-return to God? is this to give to him the Praise of his safe-keeping
of you in time of danger and distress? And, this is chiefly incumbent upon you
that are the Governors of Families, to call your Children and Servants
together (every Morning and every Night) to Worship the God of your Salvation;
the God that has wrought so great Deliverance for you. I beseech you in the
fear of God, nay, in the Name of the eternal God I charge you, that you
carefully, constantly keep up the Worship of God in your Families. And, that I
may follow this, I shall show you Why, Wherein, and How,
you must Worship God in your Families.

SECT. IX.
Why?
FIrst, The Reasons why you should set up the Worship of God in your Families,
are such as these;

1. From the example of the holy Men of God in Scripture, Josh. 24.15. And, if
it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will
serve; whether the Gods whom your Fathers served, that were on the other side
of the Flood, or the gods of the Amorites in whose land ye dwell; but, as for
me and my house we will serve the Lord. Some will serve the God of this World,
that is the Devil, 2 Cor. 4.4. some will serve their Bellies, which they make
their God, Phil. 3.19. and some will serve their unrighteous Mammon, which they
make their God; but, do you take up Joshua's Resolution, That you and your
house will serve the Lord.

2. From the Benefit that will come to you and your house, if you carefully and
constantly Worship God therein: God will take care of you and your family, if
you take care of his Worship therein. Genesis 18.17. And the Lord said, shall I
hide from Abraham that thing which I do? Ver. 19. For I know him, that he will
command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the way
of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham
that which he has spoken of him.

3. From the great evil that hangs over your family, if you should neglect the
Worship of God therein; God will curse your family, and his wrath shall be the
portion of you and your Children, if the worship of God be excluded from your
House: though God has spared you and your family in this late Contagion, yet
his Wrath is still hovering over your house, if you call not upon him, Jer.
10.25. Pour out thy fury upon the heathen that know thee not, and upon the
Families that call not upon thy Name. -- Fury is the utmost of Gods wrath: and,
this shall not be dropped only, but poured out upon your family; God will pour
down showers of wrath and fury upon those houses that neglect his Worship.

4. From equity; You would have all in your family disc^a^ge their duties which
they owe to you; you would have your children be obedient to you, and your
servants be dutiful to you, and do your work, and serve you; and, is it not
then reasonable that you and they should discharge your du^ies unto God? and
that you and they should serve the Lord? when you and they have more dependence
upon God, then they have upon you.

5. If you neglect your duty herein, you will be guilty of the blood of the
Souls of those that die in your family, and are damned for ever: you will be
bloody Butchers to the souls of your Children and Servants: God has committed
the care of their souls (in great measure) unto you, and, can you discharge
your trust that God has reposed in you, in the total neglect of your duty
herein? has not God charged you in the fourth Commandment, that neither you
your self should profane his day, and that you should see that neither your
sons nor daughters, neither your menservants, nor maidservants should
profane it; and, if they do, will not God require this at your hand?

6. The total neglect of Family Worship will be ^ flat denying God to be the
God of your family; that you take not God to be the Master of your family:
would not you say, That your Servants deny you to be their Master, if they deny
their Service to you? and, can you say, That God is the God of your house, if
you, in your house do not Worship him? Mal. 1.6. A son honors his Father,
and a servant his Master; if then I be a Father, where is mine honor? and* if
I be a Master, where is my Fear? -- if your Family disown God, God will disown
your Family; and, if God disown and cast you off, will not your family be a
miserable family?

7. If you neglect the worship of God in your Family, this will be a bad
example to those that go out of your family to constitute other families; when
your Children shall have families of their own, and your Servants shall have
families of their own, will not they be too apt to neglect them, as they have
seen you neglect yours? and so your sin will have an influence upon them, and
you will be, in some respect, guilty of the neglect of Gods Worship in your
Children and Servants families; but, if you be conscientious in your family,
you will be exemplary to them to do likewise.

8. God will punish your neglect of his Service to him with Family-Judgments:
if you do not make your house a house of Prayer, God will make your house an
house of Contention and Strife; an house of Railings and Quarrellings; and will
punish you with undutiful Children, and disobedient servants: for, how can you
expect that they should be good toward you, when you endeavor not to make them
good toward God? if you would press your Children and Servants to love God,
and obey and serve God, they would then obey you from a principle of
Conscience, and serve you, out of fear to God; they would be more faithful to
you, if you would call upon them to serve God: Might not God justly suffer your
Servants to purloin, and steal from you, when you and they do steal from God
that time for the World, which is due to God?

SECTION X.
Wherein
SEcondly, The Duties wherein you should worship God in your Families, are such
as these;

In praying.
In Praying unto God, and that (1.) ordinarily: And, your ordinary Praying unto
God in your family should be daily, and, that at least twice every day; every
Morning when you rise, and every Night, before you dismiss your Family to their
rest and sleep. Exodus 29.38. Now, this is that which thou shall offer upon the
Altar; Two Lambs of the first year, day by day continually. Verse. 39. The one
Lamb thou shall offer in the morning, and the other Lamb thou shall offer at
even: Though the Ceremonial part of this be abolished, yet the Moral abides,
and is perpetual: and, the reasons for daily Prayer in your families are
perpetual; as,

(1.) Four Reasons for daily prayer in families.
You have daily family sins, and therefore in your family you should daily
confess them, and beg the Pardon of them; that you and your family might not go
about your necessary occasions all the day, nor to your necessary rest at
night, with the guilt of sin upon your Souls. (2.) You have every day daily
wants, therefore you should daily beg supplies for your family: and, Christ
bids you pray, Give us this day our daily bread. (3.) You have family business
every day, and you should pray to God daily for his blessing upon your
endeavors, for the good of your family. (4.) You have every day family
mercies, and should daily bless God for them: when you wake in the morning and
find your house not fired in the night, is not this a family mercy? and, should
not your family be called together to bless God for this mercy? in the morning
you find your family all in health, none of them dead in their beds: and,
should not you, since you all live, all come together, and bless God, that
sleep was not turned into death, nor the darkness of the right into the
darkness of Hell to any of you? And, have you not many mercies every day, you
went out well about your employment, and you returned well, and God has blessed
your endeavors with success; and, should not you give to God the praise of his
Mercy before you sleep? or, if you have sustained some Losses, should not you
pray to God to sanctify them to you, and enable you patiently to bear them,
and submit to the will of God therein?

(2.) Or, Family Prayer is sometimes extraordinary, when your family lies under
some extraordinary affliction, or wants some extraordinary mercy, or have had
some extraordinary deliverance from evil and danger, then should you in your
family send up extraordinary Prayer and P^aises unto God: so did Esther and her
Maidens fast and pray, Esther 4.16. And I could wish that families apart were
more acquainted with, and more frequent in this du^y.

R^adi^g the Word of God.
In Reading the Word of God: This would be better then Cards and Dice. But, in
many Fam^l^es the Bible lies upon the shelfe all the week long, and scarce h^ve
it in their hands but when they take it to go to Church, and many scarce then
neither.

God has commanded you to acquaint your family with ^he wo^d of God, and, how
will you do it, if you never Read it to them, nor Discourse of it with them?
Deuteronomy. 11.18. Therefore shall you lay up these my words in your heart, and in
your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand, that they may be as
frontless between your eyes. Ver. 19. And ye shall teach them your Children,
speaking of them, when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by
the way; when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. View this Scripture
well, (ye Masters of Families) and be ashamed of your neglect of reading the
Scripture in your houses; you should talk of it at home and abroad, morning and
night when your Family should be with you. You should read the Scripture to
your Family for these Reasons:

1. 4 Reasons for reading Scripture in Families.
Because the Word of God is the spiritual food of the souls in your Family. It
is the bread of Life. It is milk for the nourishing of their souls, 1 Pet. 2.2.
It is to be preferred above their necessary food, Job 23.12. Now will you give
them bread for their bodies, and deny them bread for their souls? Their souls
can no more live without spiritual food, than their bodies can without
corporal. Take heed you deny not bread to your children and servants souls.

2. Because the Word of God is the spiritual Armor for the preserving your
Family from being robbed by your spiritual Enemies, the Devil, Sin, and the
World; You will have some weapon in your house to defend your self from
thieves. Why, the Devil will play the thief in your house, and will steal away
the souls of your Children, and will steal away the souls of your Servants, and
will you not put so much as a Weapon into their hands to defend themselves?
Your Children and Servants will be stolen away by the Spirits, if you arm them
not with the Word of God, which is the Sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17.

3. Because the more you read the Word of God to them, the better they will be
to you, and the better perform the duties of their Relation: You complain of
disobedient Children, why do not you read the Scripture to them more, to teach
them that God requires them to be obedient to you? You complain of bad
Servants, why do not you then read the Word of God to them more, that they may
know their duty better by reading the Scripture to them? Make them but good
Christians, and then they dare not, but be good Children, and good Servants.

4. Because the Word of God is able to make them wise unto Salvation; You would
have your Children wise to live in the World; you would have them wise to get
Riches, and a great Estate; You would have your Servants wise to do your work,
and to go about your business: And would you not have them wise for their
souls? Would you not have them wise for heaven and the Life to come? If you
would, then acquaint them with the Word of God, 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from a
child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto salvation, through faith which is in Christ Jesus. And he is wise indeed,
that is wise enough to save his soul.

Repeating things delivered in public.
In repeating what you hear in the public Congregation, in discoursing to your
Family what sin was reproved, and what duty was enforced, and what were the
Arguments and Motives thereunto. What Christ preached more publicly, he
repeated to his Disciples (which were as his Family) more privately, Mar. 4.10.
and 7.17. Mat. 13.36, 37. and the Apostle commanded Wives to ask their Husbands
when they came home, the things that were delivered in the Congregation, 1 Cor.
14.34, 35. This would keep your Children and Servants better employed on the
Lords day, than to be standing Idle at your doors, or walking sinfully in the
fields. This would make them profit more by the Word preached, if you would
repeat it to them, and use them to give account of what they hear.

In Catechizing.
In Catechizing of your Family, and teaching them the Principles and
Fundamentals of Religion: Man's Innocence by Creation, Man's misery by the Fall,
Man's Recovery by Christ, and the terms of the Covenant of Grace; the meaning of
the ten Commandments, what sin in them is forbidden, what duties are required;
this is Gods plain Injunction that you should do so, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7, 8, 9. and
the meaning of the Sacraments, Exodus 12.25, 26, 27. (1. 4 Reasons for
Catechizing in Families.
) To Teach them while they are young is a good means to make them good when
they are old, Prove. 32.6. Train up a child in the way he should go when he is
young, and he will not depart from it when he is old: but if you let them alone
till they be accustomed to do evil, it will be hard to reclaim them, Jer.
13.23. Quo semel est Imbuta recens, etc. (2.) This will be an effectual mean^
to keep them from being seduced, and led away with E^^ours and false Doctrine.
(3.) It will be great cruelty to the souls of your Children and Servants to
neglect it. Will you carry your self toward your little ones, as the Ostrich
does toward her young ones, Job 39.14. Which (speaking of the Ostrich) leaves
her eggs in the earth, and warmeth them in the dust. Ver. 15. And forgets
that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may break them. Ver. 16.
She is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers. -- (4.)
It would be to break your Vow which you made when you brought your Children
unto Baptism; Did you not promise they should forsake the Pomps and Vanities of
this World, and that you would bring them up in the nurture and admonition of
the Lord, and will you dedicate them to God in Baptism, and leave them to the
devil all their life after?

Consider I beseech you, it may be God in mercy and pity to your Childrens and
Servants souls has spared you in this Late-great Mortality; and consider
whether your conscience does not accuse you of great neglect toward some of
your Children and Servants which are now lying in their Graves; it may be there
has dyed a poor servant out of your house, which you never spoke to in good
earnest about the matters of his soul; or does not your heart wish that he were
with you again, that you may instruct and teach him, and will you do so to
those that do remain? it may be some of them that have died out of your house
are gone to hell through your neglect, and will you have no more pi^y upon
those that yet are with you? The other, now are out of the reach of your
Counsels and Instructions, but these are not, what was wanting in you toward
those that are dead and gone, make up to those that live and do remain.

In singing Psalms.
In singing forth Gods praises, in Psalms, and spiritual Songs; this is an
Ordinance of God, Ephesians. 6.19. Jam. 5.13. You must sing with grace, Col. 3.16.
Exercise your grace of joy in God, in commemoration of Gods benefits, of holy
desires, of Godly sorrow, as the occasion and the matter of the Psalm require;
this is the sweetest Harmony in the ears of God. You must sing with
understanding, with sense and feeling, and to the Lord, to his glory, as in his
presence; this would be more suitable for your Family, than Ballads, profane
and lascivious filthy Rymes, which you should not suffer under your Roof.

SECT. XI.
How (...)
THirdly, The manner how you should Worship God in your Family is chiefly to be
minded, for it is not any service that God will accept, you may keep up a
course of praying in your Family, and yet live very unworthy of the great mercy
of God in your wonderful preservation. Therefore,

1. Really.
In your Family worship God really and indeed, with your heart, and mind, and
all your strength; do not seem to pray, but pray indeed, in your Family. For
five Reasons.
For this end consider, (1.) The God whom you serve in your Families is God
indeed; he is a real God, therefore worship him indeed, and in a real manner.
(2.) The sins of your Families are real sins, your own sins are real sins, and
your childrens sins are real sins, and have real guilt, therefore confess them
really, and mourn and sorrow for them really. (3.) The wants of your Family are
real wants; you do not seem to want outward mercies, but except God supply you,
you will want them indeed. (4.) The supplies which God does give you are real
supplies: God gives you real health, and real food, and re^l clothing for
your Family, therefore be real in your Family Worship. (5.) You and your Family
are real in following of the World, you work in good earnest, and you buy and
sell in good earnest: And will you be real in the things of the World that
concern your Family, and will you not be real in your Family Worship?

2. Livelily.
In your Family worship God Livelily; not only with a true and sincere heart,
but with a lively heart, take heed of dullness and formality; take heed of
sleeping at your prayers. And here I would advise that Masters of Families
would not put off their duties too long in the Morning, till half the day be
past, nor too late in the Evening, when the Family will be more disposed and
inclined to sleep than to pray.

3. Cheerfully.
In your Family worship God cheerfully, go not to Family Prayer as a task and
burden, but as a great favor and privilege that you and your Children might
call upon God.

4. Constantly.
In your Family worship God constantly: Some will pray on a Sabbath night, but
it may be not all the Week after. Thus if you serve God in your Family it will
be a great step to your walking in some measure answerably for so great
preservation, and then it will be a good discovery that God has spared you in
mercy, to do him service in the Education of your Children, and not in
judgment, to the increasing of your sins only.

Thus far concerning the Duties of Families whom God has spared in this time
of Pestilence in general. Of the several Relations in a Family next.

SECT. XII.
SEcondly, If you will live in some measure answerably to so great a mercy, as
Preservation from death in a time of great Mortality, is, then fill up the
duties of your particular Relation wherein you stand. Relative sins are very
offensive unto God, and a great scandal to Religion. The first of these
Relations in a Family is,

Duties of husbands and wives, whom God has spared in this Plague.
First, Conjugal, betwixt Husband and Wife; and the great duty incumbent upon
them is mutu^l love, in which many are deficient, and many are excessive, it
being hard for such to let out their affections one to another so much as God
commands, and no more than God allows; and both these extremes will terrisie
conscience when such come to dye. And this sin is more usually seen when death
has broken this Relation, than while God continues them together; the
Surviver then sees he did not love his Wife, and the Wife, her Husband, with
that degree of love as that Relation called for, or with a greater degree than
was pleasing unto God, when the love of this Relation did diminish the love
they should have to God: And how many breaches has God made in this Relation
to punish the sin of both extremes? It may be thy love was Immoderate, and
therefore God has taken thy Relation from thee: Or it may be thy love was
deficient, and therefore God has taken thy Relation from thee. When thou w^st
sick, and thou thoughtest thou should have died, did not thy Conscience then
accuse* thee for one of these in thy Relation? And yet has God spared thee and
thy Wife, or thee and thy Husb^nd, then what conscience did reproach thee for
in this particular, if thou would answer Gods mercy in sparing of thee, let
this be reformed. There are many this day may be lamenting not so much the loss
of this Relation, as that they did not walk sutablie in this Relation while
they were in it, this being the sting of their affliction. Oh! methinks such as
God has continued in a Conjugal Relation in this time of great Mortality,
should look upon themselves now more engaged to perform their mutual duties
with more care and conscience than before. Such a one has buried his Wife, and
such a one has buried her Husband, but God has preserved you in your
Relation, you cannot live answerablie for this mercy but in a better discharge
of your mutual duties. How would you wish you had loved your Relation, Wife or
Husband, if God had taken either away by death, so do now when God continues
you both in life.

Because this conduces so much to an answerable return for so great a mercy I
will a little insist upon it. And in the general, if you would improve this
mercy, the direction is, that your love and affection be such one to another,
as is the love betwixt Christ and the Church. Ephesians. 2.25. Husbands, love your
Wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. And this love
of the Husband must be requited with the love of the Wife, for it is
reciprocal, Tit. 2.4. Teach the young women to be sober, to love their
Husbands. --

SECT. XIII.
BUT more particularly I shall speak to three things: What manner of love is
this Why they should have this Wherein they should manifest this
love one to another.



1. The properties of their love Superlative.
It must be a Superlative love, that is in respect of all sublunarie things;
though your love to God and Christ must be more than your love one to another,
else it does sinfully exceed, for if any loves Father or Mother, Husband or
Wife, more than Christ, he is not worthy of him, yet in respect of all other
persons and things in this world, it must be more, else it is sinfully
deficient; A man must love his Wife above all other persons, above his Estate,
or whatsoever is dear unto him in this world, and so the Wife. Thus Christ
loves his Church, and a believing soul, above all other persons, and the
Church reciprocallie loves Christ above all other things in the world.

2. Constant
It must be a Constant love, it must last as long as life in both do^n last. The
longer you live in this Relation, the more you should love. Length of time must
not wear off the commanded and allowed strength of your mutual Affection. Thus
Christ always love^ his Church, and the Church always loves Jesus Christ.

3. Holy,
It must be Holy love; from an holy Principle, obedience to Gods command; in an
holy manner, according to the Word of God; for holy ends, the glory of God,
etc. Carnal love, for carnal ends, is not the love that God requires in this
Relation, Thus Christ loves the Church, and the Church loves Christ with an
holy love.

4. Tender.
It must be a tender, compassionate, and sympathizing love; if God lay his
afflicting hand upon either, in sickness of body, in terrors of mind, the
other is to be tender, and to sympathize in those afflictions. If God lay his
hand upon both, in Poverty and want, they should not fret one against the
other, (which is too usual) but should both with tenderness of compassion
endeavor to bear the same burden, and make up that which is wanting in outward
enjoyments in the degree of their love. And this would lighten many burdens,
and sweeten the bitter Cup of affliction which God may put into both their
hands; as the want of Conjugal affection in many does make that heavy which is
light, and that bitter which is sweet. Thus Christ loves his Church, and
sympathizeth with her in all her afflictions, Isa. 63.9. Acts 9.4.

5. Forgiving love
It must be Forgiving love; that shall hide and cover the infirmities of each
from the world, every miscarriage in this Relation should not abate the
affection of one to the other. Sinful Infirmities must not be allowed of in one
another, because they must be faithful to each others souls, and yet they
should not be blazed unto others, because of the love to each others person.
Thus Christ loves his Church notwithstanding her sinful Infirmities; and
because he loves her, he is ready and willing to forgive her. But there is no
such retaliation of this Property of love in the Church to Christ, because he
has no such sinful infirmities: but there is no such husband in the world
besides Christ, and therefore in our case it is reciprocal.

SECT. XIV.
The Reasons of their love
THe Reasons why there should be such love and mutual Affection betwixt those in
a Conjugal Relation are such as these:

1. Because God commands it; and with gracious persons a command of God is
instead of a thousand Reasons. Before this Relation be entered into, persons may
lawfully look after attractives and motives of love, but when once they are so
rel^ted, this is sufficient reason (though there are others) why they should
love, Ephesians. 5.25. Tit. 2.4.

2. Because they are one flesh; He that loves his Wife loves himself, and she
that loves her Husband loves her self, Ephesians, 5.28, 29. It is unnatural in any
to h^te their own flesh.

3. Because the comfort of their life, and the sweetness of this Relation much
depends upon their mutual affection.

4. Because the Gospel will be much hindered by the want of this love in those
that make profession of it: The Gospel much suffers when wicked persons observe
that Professors fill not up their relative duties, Tit. 2.4. Teach the young
women to be sober, to love their Husbands, to love their Children. Ver. 5. To
be discreet, chaste, keepers at home, good, obedient to their own Husbands,
that the Word of God be not blasphemed.

5. Because else they will be more unfit for spiritual duties, either together,
or apart. When there are differences betwixt Husband and Wife, it is an
hinderance to them in their praying one with another, in their praying one for
another; want of this Conjugal affection, and breaches in this relation, has
often straitened the heart of the party offending at the throne of grace, and
this professing Husbands and Wives should be careful of, 1 Pet. 3.5, 6, 7. The
Apostle had exhorted persons in a Conjugal relation to discharge their mutual
duties, after the Example of Abraham and Sarah, and the reason he alleges is,
That your Prayers be not hindered.

6. Because else they cannot comfortably dye. Breaches in the duties of this
Relation, will make great breaches in our peace of conscience when we come to
dye. When you are to part at death, conscience will be lashing of you: God has
set thee (says Conscience) in such a relation, but thou have not had the love
of that Relation. God gave thee such a yoak-fellow, but thou di^st not live
with that affection as he did require, and now thy relation must be broken. Oh
the^, says the offender, if God would continue me a little longer in this
relation, how would I walk more sutably in performing the duties thereof better
than hitherto I have done; but do it now before death does part you.

SECT. XV.
Wherein they should manifest this love.
THe duties wherein those in a Conjugal Relation should manifest this mutual
affection, and they are such as are, either Proper to each. Common to both.
The Husband manifests his love in Direction in cases dubious. Protection in
cases dangerous, 1 Samuel 30.18. Provision of things needful, 1 Timothy 5.8.
The Wife manifests her love in Inward Reverence, Ephesians. 5.33. Outward
subjection, 1 Pet. 3.1.
The duties that are common to both do either concern. The body, or things
temporal. The soul, or things Spiritual.


1. In the affairs of this life they should manifest their mutual love one to
another, In Procreation of Children. Education of Children. Administration of
household affairs Times of affliction and sickness.


2. In the concernments of each others souls, or things spiritual, their love
should be especially manifested; Love to the soul is the Noblest love, because
the soul is the nobler part; to love the body and hate the soul, (as too many
do) is but cruel love. Their love is highest love, that love each others souls,
and this love is manifested, 1. In Reproving one another for sin; this is
greatest love; not to reprove is to hate, Lev. 19.17. So Job his Wife, Job 1.9,
10. So Abigail her Husband, 1 Samuel 25.36, 37. where you may observe both
Abigails Piety, she reproved Nabal: And her Prudence, when the wine was out of
his head. 2. In comforting one another under inward terrors; So Manoahs Wife
comforted him, Jud. 13.22, 23. 3. In Provoking one another to good works of
Piety, and Charity. This is the only allowed contention betwixt Husband and
Wife, who shall be best, and love God most, and do most good: but not to
provoke to wrath and wicked works, as Jezabel did Ahab, 1 Kings 21.7, 8, 9.
Wicked Husbands are usually very wicked,
when wicked Wives stir them up to do wickedly, ver. 25. 4. In Praying one with
another, and praying one for another. It is great love in such to improve their
interest at the throne of grace one for another.


Thus if you whom God has spared, and continued life unto, after thi^
Contagion, would resolve to live together, you would so far as concerns you in
this respect, live in force measure answerably to so great a mercy, else you
cannot. Has God spared you to be more unkind one to another? To be bitter one
against another? To grieve one another? Or do you think this is the Improvement
you should make of this mercy? God forbid.

SECT. XVI.
SEcondly, The next Relation I consider in a Family, is between Parents and
Children, whom God has continued after this great Mortality. God has taken
away Parents from others, and they are lest Orphans, but God has continued thy
Parents, Both, or one to thee. What does God require from thee in answer to a
suitable return for this mercy? God has taken away Children from others, and
bereaved them of those that were dear to them, but God has continued thine,
all, or some to thee, what does God require at thy hands in answer to a suitable
return for so great a mercy? It is that Parents and Children should fill up the
duties of this relation, else you can never walk worthy of this mercy. But more
particularly,

Duties of Parents whom God has continued to children, viz. Instruction.
First, Parents, if they would live answerable to his mercy of Children
continued to them, must be careful,

First, In instructing of them in the things of God: and training them up in
the ways of God, this is the duty of both Parents, Pro. 1.8. My son hear the
instruction of thy Father, and forsake not the Law of thy mother, Prove. 31.1.
The words of King Lemuel, the P^ophesie that his mother taught him. This
mothers might do when they are dressing of their Children. Do not think you do
enough if you make provision for your children, and get a portion for them: Let
me tell you, that is the le^st part of your duty, as hard as you think it is;
but, you must give them instructions, and that

1. Timelily, before they are accustomed to evil; they are born in natural
hardness, and, by frequent acts of wickedness they will contract habitual
hardness; and then, if God clap upon their hearts judicial hardness, your
Children are undone for ever: Children before they can go, can run from God;
and, before they can speak plainly, can speak wickedly: Teach them not to be
proud of their fine Clothes; teach them not Revenge, by giving you a stroke to
beat others; these be the buddings of Pride and Revenge in little Infants.

2. Instruct them frequently; They are apt to learn evil, but backward to learn
any thing that is good: There must be Line upon Line, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. You must
whet the things you speak unto them, that they may pierce their hearts;
frequently inculcate the same things upon them, and instill the knowledge of God
into them by little and little.

3. Instruct them affectionately; Let them perceive (when more grown up) that
they are matters of Weight and Moment, that you speak to them about: When you
speak of Heaven and Hell, of God and Sin, let them see that your hearts are
affected with what you say.

Correction.
Secondly, In Correcting of them for the evil of Sin: He that spares the Rod
spoils the Child: better you correct them here, than God damn them
hereafter: The Rod is as needful for your Children as their Food; Prove. 22.15.
Folly is bound in the heart of a Child, the Rod of Correction shall drive it
far from him. Do this,

1. Timelily; a young Twigg is flexible, and easy to be bent; break them of
wicked Words and W^ies betimes, or else they may break your heart when they are
bigger. Adonijah was David's D^^ling, an ^he was wanting in correcting of him,
and he Rebelled before he died, and usurped the Kingdom before his Fathers
death: 1 King. 1.5. Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I
will be King; and he prepared his Horsemen and Chariots, and fifty Men to run
before him. Verse. 6. And his Father had not displeased him at any time, in
saying, Why have thou done so? -- Too much indulgence will make undutiful and
disobedient Children.

2. Proportionably to their fault; Do not Correct a small offense over sharply,
nor an heinous sin too slightly; if you are too severe for a small offense,
they will hate you: if you are too indulgent in a great offense, they will
despise you. This was Elyes sin, that he did not correct the heinous sin, and
reprove the abominable practice of his Sons with greater severity: 1 Samuel 2.23.
And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for, I hear of your evil dealings
by all this People. Verse. 24. Nay, my Sons, for it is no good report that I
hear, ye make the Lords People to transgress. It is no good report! that was
too good a word for so heinous wicked Works: it was an abominable thing that
was reported by others, and committed by his Sons: But, see what God says to
Ely, Verse. 29. Thou honor thy Sons above me: and, God severely punished his
Children for their vile offense; and the Father for his so cold reproof, as you
may read in the following Verses.

3. Compassionately; do not Correct your Children in the heat of Passion, but
with bowels of compasion: when the Rod is in your hand, let there be tender
love in your heart.

4. Discreetly; Observing the temper and disposition of your Child which you
correct; if you Scourge, and frown upon one, as much as is needful for another,
you will discourage him; if you scourge not another, more than this, that is
more tender spirited, you will not break him: Correction is like a Medicine, in
which the Physician has respect to the constitution of the Patient. Children
are like Herbs, some, if you cut and tread will grow again; but, if you do as
much to other Herbs, you kill them.

5. Seasonably; There is much wisdom in Parents, in timeing their Correcting of
their Children; if you correct them for some faults before others, you will
discourage them; take the fittest season.

6. Penitently; When you correct your Children, judge your self first, and
repent for your own sin, or else you do but beat your self.

7. Believingly; When you exercise your child with the Rod, do you exercise
faith upon the Promise.

Prayer.
Thirdly, In Praying much for them; many pray for Children before they have
them, but neglect to pray for them when God has given them; as though their
being were a greater blessing than their well-being: you must add Prayer to
Instruction and Correction; for, it is not only your Instruction, nor
Correction, but Gods blessing given in to servent Prayer, that will make your
Children good. When you look upon your little Infants as they are sucking at
your breasts, or laughing in your faces, or playing in your arms; oh consider
the seed of sin that they have in their hearts! that they, by Nature, are the
children of wrath; and, when you go to pray for them, use such considerations
that might make your heart to mourn over them, and for them: When you consider
they are enemies to God, can you not mourn for them upon your knees? when you
consider they are lost children, except mercy find them; that they are damned
children except free grace save them: Can you not mourn abundantly, and pray
servently for them? Can you consider they are by Nature, without the Image and
Likeness of God, and not be grieved at the heart? that your child is a little
Traitor against the King of Heaven; a little Rebel against the glorious God;
and, will you not pray that his heart may be changed? Could you weep and grieve
if your Child were a Monster, if it had a body of one kind, and an head of
another; if it had an Arm too much, or a Leg too much, or little; why, its
misery is more by Nature then all this, and yet, can you not mourn in your
Prayers for him?

Choosing them a Calling.
Fourthly, In Choosing for them some lawful Calling and putting them forth unto
some Religious family: Choose not a Calling that has more snares and
temptations attending it, then usually others have; and place them in such
families, where they may learn the way to Heaven, as well as the way to be rich
in the World: If you put them forth to an ungodly family, you may loose all
your former labor in Instruction, Correction, and Prayer: for, will you give
your Child an Antidote, and then care not if he run into a Pesthouse, among
persons that have running Plague Sores; or, would you not judge it presumption
in any so to do, without a special call? but, the former is greater, and
higher, and more dangerous presumption than the latter; in as much as the death
of the Body of your Child is endangered by the one; but the damnation of his
Soul is endangered by the other.

Disposing them in Marriage
Fifthly, In careful disposing of them in Marriage* That you Match them to
godly Persons, and, if you can, into a godly family; or, to one that has
Religious Relations: Take heed of Marrying them to the children of the Devil,
though their outward advantage be never so much: Thus Abraham took care that
his son Isaac should not take a Wife of the Daughters of the Canaanites,
amongst whom he dwelt, Genesis 24.3. If you thus take care for your children, whom
God has continued to you in this great Mortality, you act, in this respect, in
some measure answerably to so great a Mercy.

SECTION XVII.
Duties of Children, whom God has continued to their Parents.
Secondly, Children, if they would live answerably in their Relation, to so
great a Mercy, as is, Gods sparing their Parents, and continuing them unto
them, must be careful of filling up the Duties of their Relation: and, the Duty
of Children is set down in Col. 3.20. Children, obey your Parents in all
things, for this is well-pleasing unto the Lord: In which observe, 1. The
Charge, Obedience. 2. The Persons charged; Children, younger, elder, poor or
rich. 3. The Persons to whom this obedience is to be given.

Parents, Father, Mother.
whether Poor, or Rich.


4. The extent of this obedience; In all things. 5. The limitting and enforcing
Reason, for this is well-pleasing to the Lord; therefore the all things are to
be limited to things lawful, else it would not please the Lord; but, they must
in those things, because it pleases God.


Now, if you that are Children would walk worthy of Gods Mercy, in sparing your
Parents to you in this contagious times, you must obey them in these
Particulars.

1. In receiving Instructions from them, in harkening to their wholesome Counsel
and Advice, Prove. 3.1. My son forget not my Law, but let thine heart keep my
Commandments, Prove. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. and 5.1, 2, 7. and 6.20. etc. and 7.1, 2, 3.

2. In submitting to their Correction, without murmuring and repining.

3. In being content with your Diet and Apparel that your Parents provide for
you.

4. In yiedling them sustenance and Maintenance if they come to Poverty, if you
be able to supply them; they gave you maintenance when you could not provide
for your selves, do you so for them, if they need, though you work hard to help
them, 1 Timothy 5.4. But, if any Widow have Children, or Nephews, let them first
learn to show piety at home, and to requite their Parents, for that is good and
acceptable before God. Though Children can never (fully) requite their Parents,
for they had their being by them; and, what if they have help by you in outward
things, you had your being by them, and that is more: Take heed of being
ashamed of your Parents, if they be poor, and you are raised to an higher
degree in the World than ever they were, but, to disown them would be impious.

5. In submitting to their choice of a Calling for you.

6. In disposing of you in Marriage: Change not your Condition without their
Consent, as Isaac, Genesis 24. and Sampson, Judge. 14.1, 2. Nay, Ishmael obeyed his
Mother in his Marriage, Genesis 21.21. and, will you be worse than Ishmael?

7. In all things, though they be cross to your humor, though it might not
please you, yet, if it please your Parents you must do it. But, that I may not
lay a snare for Childrens Consciences, and put a Staff into ungodly Parents
hands, to drive their Children to Hell, you must take this distinction of
[things,] viz. Things are either,
Simply good and necessary, and these must be done, though your Parents forbid
you; as Praying, Reading Scripture, etc. Simply evil and unlawful, and these
must not be done, though your Parents command you; as to play, or work upon the
Lords day, to lie and defraud in dealing. Neither good nor evil in their own
nature (though every thing is good or evil, considered in all circumstances)
and, in all these you must obey your Parents.


And, the reasons of this obedience to your Parents, are such as these.

1. Reasons for these Duties.
Gods command, Ephesians. 6.1. Children, obey your Parents in the Lord. V. 2.
Honor thy Father and Mother, which is the first Commandment with Promise; That
is the first Command with Promise in the second Table; for, there is a Promise
in the second Command of the First Table, of showing Mercy unto thousands, etc.

2. This is right, or justice; Ephesians. 6.1. Thou had thy being and thy
education by thy Parents, therefore it is justice thou should obey them.

3. Christ's Example; He was obedient to his Parents, Luke 2.51. And he went
down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject to them.

4. Gods Judgments upon disobedient Children: Absalom Rebelled against his
Father, and God cut him off in the very act of his Rebellion.

5. It is pleasing to God: If it were in any thing that would displease God,
you must not do it; for you must please your Heavenly Father rather than your
Earthly, but, if it be pleasing unto God, you must not deny it; you please God,
when you please your Parents in things lawful.

6. God might punish you with disobedient Children hereafter, if you are
disobedient to your Parents now: Thus Children also will walk so far
answerably to so great a Mercy, as Gods sparing their Parents to them, if they
thus obey them.

SECTION XVIII.
THirdly, The next Relation I consider in a Family, is, the Relation of Masters
and Servants, whom God has spared in this great Mortality; and, if you would
live in some measure answerably to this Mercy (as, it is a Mercy to some to
have Servants; and, it is a Mercy to others to have Masters) then you must fill
up the duties of your Relation.

Duties of Masters whom God has continued to Servants.
First, Masters Duties are set down, Col. 4.1. Masters, give unto your Servants
that which is just and equal, knowing, that ye also have a Master in Heaven:
where you have, 1. The Charge that is given, to do that which is just and
equal. 2. The Persons to whom this Charge is given: Masters. 3. The Persons
unto whom this justice and equity must be shown: Servants. 4. The Reason to
enforce it; knowing that ye have a Master in heaven. There is no Man, that is a
Master, but he has a Master, and that is God.


1. Masters must not impose upon their Servants any thing simply unlawful, that
is not just; to Work, or carry Burdens upon the Lords day, without necessity,
etc.

2. Masters must not impose upon their Servants things above their strength,
though they be lawful, this is not just.

3. Masters must not deny their Servants convenient Food, nor their due Wages,
this is not just.

4. Masters must not turn away their Servants when they are sick, who served
them when they were in health and strength, without their consent; this is not
just.

5. Masters must not deny them necessary time for the performance of their
necessary duties unto God, this is neither just nor equal: It is but equity if
Servants spend their time in your service, that you should allow them some time
for the Service of God, and the saving of their souls: for, to wear out their
Bodies in serving you now, and, for want of time to Read and Pray, to have
their Souls damned hereafter, would be a very unequal, unjust, and
unreasonable thing.

SECT. XIX.
Duties of Servants whom God has continued to Masters.
Secondly, Servants, if you would live answerably for the Mercy of God, in
sparing you, then perform the Duties God requires at your hands toward your
Masters. The Duty of Servants is set down, Ephesians. 6.5. Servants, be obedient to
them that are your Masters, according to the flesh, with fear and trembling, in
singleness of heart, as unto Christ. Verse. 6. Not with eye-service, as
Men-pleasers, but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the
heart. Verse. 7. With good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to Men.
Verse. 8. Knowing, that whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he
receive of the Lord, whether he be bond or free. To this the Apostle adds;
Servants, obey in all things your Masters, knowing, that of the Lord ye shall
receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.22,
23, 24, 25. in both which places the Apostle meets with the usual defects of
Servants in their Relation; which are 1. Half Service. 2. Eye Service. 3.
Hypocritical Service. 4. Profaneness in Service. 5. Irreverence in Service. 6.
Grudging in Service. 7. Baseness of mind in Service.
To these are opposed Service 1. In all things. 2. Not eye-service. 3. In
singleness of heart. 4. In the fear of God. 5. Trembling. 6. From the heart,
and with good will. 7. A glorious reward.


1. Servants must do all the service they owe unto their Masters; not to do one
thing, and leave another undone, but, you must obey in all things, i. e. lawful.

2. Servants must not give eye service; That is, only in their Masters sight
and presence, but must be as careful of their Masters business in his absence,
as if he were looking on them: they must not do their work as those that are
serving Men, who cannot always see them, but as the servants of Christ, serve
him, who believe, that he always sees them: and, let Servants remember, that
though Masters do not always see them, yet God does.

3. Servants must perform the Works of their Masters service in singleness of
heart, with uprightness, and without dissimulation; they must not be hypocrites
in Men's service, as they must not in the Service of God: Servants must do all
from obedience to Gods Commands, and yield therefore obedience to wicked
Masters in lawful things, 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants, be subject to your Masters
with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the froward. So,
to poor Masters, though they can give them but mean wages.

4. They must do it in the fear of God: As the servants of God must pray in the
fear of God, and hear in the fear of God; so they that are servants to Men,
must do their work in the fear of God: then, they must not Curse and Swear at
their work, nor talk sinfully, nor speak or sing obscenely.

5. Wi^h reverence to their Masters, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many servants as are
under the yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all Honor, that the Name of
God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed: If thou serve a poor Master, yet, being
thy Master, thou art bound to honor him; else, thou will be a reproach to the
Name of God, and his Doctrine.

6. They must not grudge the Service they do, but do it from the heart, and
with good will: Servants hearts must not be set upon their Masters business,
they cannot give away their heart from God: but, they must do their Work from
the heart, i. e. willingly, cheerfully.

7. They must not only aim at the wages they have from their Masters; that is
poor, and low, and sordid to work and labor for such a reward; but, as those
that know, if they do their service, (be it never so mean and servile) in
obedience to Gods command, and for his glory, they shall have a reward in
Heaven: God will reward the mean service of a poor servant with an eternal
Crown.

8. They must be faithful in their Masters business; they must not purloin,
steal, and secretly convey away any thing of their Masters Estate, Money or
Goods; or sell it at under-rate to his Masters real prejudice and damage, by
private contract between himself and the buyer, to consider him for his cheap
Bargain. Tit. 2.9. Exhort servants to be obedient unto their own Masters, and
to please them well in all things, not answering again. Verse. 10. Not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity, that they may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior in all things. When thy hand is in thy Masters Box, and thou
art pilfring away his Money, to Game, to keep Company, or spend any way without
his knowledge, this is Theft; and, God sees thee, though he do not: and, if
thou have purloined, or stole any thing, thou art bound to restore it, if thou
can, and, to confess thy fault and be humbled, and do so no more.

9. They must be frugal for their Masters; that, though they steal nothing from
them, yet they may sin, by suffering their Masters Goods to be wasted; as Food
to be cast away, and many things to be spent and consumed when there is no
need: this is not to show all fidelity to your Masters. So Jacob, Genesis 31.36,
37.38, 39, 40. That which was torn of beasts I brought not unto thee; I bare
the loss of it: of my hands did thou require it, whether stolen by day, or
stolen by night.

10. They must not answer again out of a murmuring spirit, nor give word for
word; that, if their Master rebukes them for their sin, they must not speak as
fast as he: nay, though a Master should speak Wrathfully, and in unjust Anger,
yet they must not Answer Perversely to them again, but with meekness and
silence (except they require, or give leave) go about their Employment,
committing their cause to God, who will right them, if their Masters wrong
them, Col. 3.25. But, he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he
has done: and, there is no respect of Persons. God regards not Men's outward
conditions; he regards not the Mistress more than the Maid: nor the Master more
than the Man; but judges righteously betwixt the greatest and the meanest.

11. They must remember, when they are obedient in their Masters Service, they
are serving the Lord Christ: What a poor servant does in servile Labor, in the
meanest, lowest employment, he is serving of God: and, this might sweeten to
him more difficult and unpleasing Work.

Thus I have done with this direction, in which all Men, in one capacity or
other, herein considered, are concerned to make improvement of Gods Preserving
of them in time of so great Contagion; by being eminently exemplary in the
Conditions, Capacity, Relations, wherein they stand; which, if they do (
caeteris paribus) they live in some measure answerable to so great a Mercy.

DIRECTION V.
Watch against secret sins.
Has God spared you in a time of Pestilence, then if you would live answerable,
diligently watch against secret sins, and let your special care be about the
hidden and secret things in Religious Duties. God has kept you in his
Chambers, Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut
thy doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment until the
indignation be overpast. God has hid you from Judgment in the secret Chambers
of his Protection, and will you hide your sins in the secret corners of your
hearts? Or will you allow your self to sin because you are in your secret
Chambers? Or will this be to live worthy of Gods secret Protection of you, to
commit secret sins against God? That you are preserved this is visible; all
that see you walking in the streets know this: But Gods way of preserving you
was not only by visible means, as Antidotes and Cordials, but by the invisible
Guard of holy Angels, Psalm. 91.10. There shall no evil befall thee, neither
shall any Plague come nigh thy dwelling. Ver. 11. For he shall give his Angels
charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. Ver. 12. They shall bear thee
up in their hands: lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. The reason why you
have been preserved is, because God has caused you to dwell in the secret
place of the most high, and has made you to abide under the shadow of the
Almighty, Psalm. 91.1. When the Pestilence was walking in darkness, and the
Arrows of the Almighty were secretly shot and flying abroad, He kept you in
the secret of his Pavilion, Psalm. 37.5. For in the time of trouble he shall
hide me in his Pavilion: in the secret of his Tabernacle he shall hide me, he
shall set me upon a rock. As all visible means would not have been effectual
for your preservation, without Gods secret and invisible watching over you: So
abstaining only from visible sins, and performing only that of duty, which is
visible, will not be a suitable, nor answerable return for this great mercy:
Therefore my advice unto you is, that as Gods goodness to you has been in a
secret way of preservation, so your care should especially be about secret
things, and that in two respects. In abstaining from secret sins. In
maintaining secret duties.


Abstain from secret sins.
First, Be careful to abstain from secret sins. Do not cherish sins in your
hearts and thoughts, though they should never proceed to outward act: For a man
whom God has kept in time of Plague, might be no open Swearer, no visible
Drunkard, nor live in open wickedness, and yet might walk unworthy of Gods
mercy to him. And here I shall answer these two Questions.

1. What are those Considerations whereby a man should urge his heart to
abstain from heart and secret sins? 2. What are the helps and means for
inabling of a man to abstain from heart and secret sins?
Quest. 1. What are those Considerations whereby a Christian should urge his
heart to abstain from heart sins, and secret sins; not to let into the secrets
of his heart what he can, by watchfulness prevent, and not to allow that which
notwithstanding all his diligence he cannot prevent. For there is great
difference betwixt having sin in the heart, and regarding or allowing sin in
the heart, Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart the Lord will not hear
me. A Christian may have, yea, cannot in this life but have sin in his heart,
but this (not allowed, but groaned under, and lamented for,) shall not hinder
the audience of his prayers, nor the salvation of his soul. But the regarding
and allowing of it will prevent both.

Considerations to watch against secret sins. God sets secret sins in the
light of his countenance.
SECT. I.
Considerations to keep you from secret sins.
GOD sets your secret sins in the light of his countenance, Psalm. 90.8. You can
never sin so secretly, as to hide your sins from God. Study well these
Scriptures, Psalm. 139.1, to 17, verse. Jer. 23.24. Heb. 4.13. Prove. 5.21. For
the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his
goings. Whether your ways are good or evil, open or secret, they are before
the eyes of the Lord, (...) recta e regione, right over Gods eyes. He
pondereth, (...) He weighs them in scales; and many of our actions he finds
to be too light. There are some sins so secret that other men might not know
them; and some are so secret that a man might not know them himself; as sins of
Ignorance, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors? Cleanse thou me from
secret faults. But no sin can be said to be secret in respect of God; Others
see some sin in you, you may see more in your self; But God sees all: because
he is omniscient.

But there ^re many sins which are so secret that we our selves see them not:
The causes of this are 1. Imperfection of self-knowledge. 2. Excess of
self-love. 3. Decei^fulness of sin. 4. Closeness of sin. 5. Want of
watchfulness.


But there is no sin can be hid from God, for God sees the Nature, Number, and
Aggravations of secret sins.

Many indeed have vailes for their sins that they may not be discerned by men,
but God looks through them: Let me instance in these following sins, that
appear to men in the shape of grace, but in the sight of God are manifest sins:
Or sins veiled and masked with plausible pretenses of good, yet are naked to
the sight of God.

1. Masked sins detected.
Pride covered with humility; A proud person often appears in the shape of an
humble man. In abasing of himself, discommending himself, that another may
commend him, crying down himself, that another may cry him up; by dispraising
himself he would force and wrest a commendation from other men: But if he
discommend himself, do you discommend him too; if he say such a thing was
meanly done, if you say, you think so too, a proud man cannot bear it; he
cannot hear another say of him what he says of himself: But this secret pride
God sees.

2. Hypocrisy masked with Zeal; Many seem to be forward in good ways, and
zealous in good works; but Self is the end, 2 Kings 10.16. Come see my Zeal,
etc.

3. Secret love of the World, covered with pretense of care for their Family;
Many have a cloak for the hiding of their covetousness; of which you read, 1
These. 2.5. For neither at any time used we flattering words, nor a cloak of
covetousness, God is witness; this is seen by God.

4. Secret hatred against men's persons, covered with pretended zeal against
men's sins, or covered with plausible expressions of love and amity. Judas had
murdered Christ in his heart, and yet calls him Master with his mouth, and
kisseth him, Mat. 26.49. Many have words smoother than oil, yet have hatred
sharper than swords, Psalm. 55.21.

5. Vainglory hidden from men by pretended charity; Many will do good, relieve
the poor, help those that be in distress, but they aim at esteem amongst men.
Matthew. 6.1, 2, 3, 4.

6. Self-interest hidden from men by pretense of the good of men's souls, and
the glory of God; so a preaching hypocrite may pretend to lay out himself for
the good of men's souls, and yet may use his Ministry only as a trade to get a
living by it.

7. Blasphemous hard thoughts of God, might be hid from men by speaking good
words of God.

8. Inward murmurings repinings against Gods Providence, may be hid from men
by words of great submission to the will of God.

9. Inward fleshy lustings of heart, and contemplative uncleanness, may be kept
secret from men by chaste discourse. He may love the presence of a person that
is occasion of such secret uncleanness, and commit adultery in his heart, and
the person not know of it, and the offender speaking chastely all this while:
But I warn you in the name of God to strive against these sins, for though they
are secret to men, yet God sets them in the light of his countenance. There are
three eyes upon you when you are in secret, viz.

1. The eyes of Angels good and bad, and they may see much of your secret
wickedness.

2. The eye of Conscience, and this may see more secret sin, than the Angels
see in you, the very thoughts of your heart.

3. The eye of God, and his eye sees more than the Conscience, 1 John 3.20.
And this view that God has of thy secret sins when he sets them in the light
of his countenance has these four properties.

4 Properties of Gods view of secret sins.
First, It is a clear and distinct view; God sees all the evil there is in thy
secret sin. We have a confused sight of sin, and a dim sight of sin: we see not
so much evil in the greatest sin as there is in the least: We see not so much
evil in open Profaneness as indeed there is in a vain thought: But God sees
all distinctly. What a man has before his eyes, that is a suitable object, at
an equal distance, and having a necessary medium he sees distinctly.

Secondly, It is a full view; As God sees all the evil in any one secret sin,
so he sees all thy secret sins. Man may know none of them; thou know some
of them, but God knows all. When thou turnest thy back to go into secret to
commit sin, Remember then, thou art before Gods face.

Thirdly, It is a constant view; What we have seen with our eyes might be quite
razed out of our memories, but not out of Gods knowledge; and when God is said
to remember our iniquities no more, it is not to be understood of real
Oblivion, but gracious remission.

Fourthly, It is a judicial view; If we speak of the secret sins of an
hypocrite or a wicked man, then God sets them in his sight, as a Judge sets
before him the crimes of a Malefactor, that they may be read; he accused,
convicted, and executed. If we speak of the secret sins of Gods people, God
sets them before him as a Father does the miscarriages of his child, not to
disinherite him for it, but to correct him and chastise him.

These are the properties of Gods viewing our secret sins, and shall not this
move thee to watch against them, and abstain from them? Or have thou not done
that in secret in the sight of God, which thou would have been ashamed to do
openly in the sight of men? There are six comfortable expressions (among
others) which the Scripture uses, to set forth Gods free pardon of our sins,
viz. That he Casts them behind his back, Isa. 38.17. Blots them out, Isa.
43.25. Casts them into the depths of the Sea, Mic. 7.19 Remembers them no more,
Heb. 8.12. Will be merciful to our unrighteousness, Heb. 8.12. Hides his face
from our sins, Psalm. 51.9.


There are also six terrible expressions (among others) which the Scripture
uses to set forth Gods displeasure against men for sin, viz. That he Writes
them in a book, Rev. 20.12. Seals them in a bag, Job 14.17. Remembers them,
Hos. 7.2. Marks them, Psalm. 130.3. Will visit them, Jer. 14.10. and 5.9. Sets
them in the light of his countenance, Psalm. 90.8.


If therefore there be any thing in the believing thoughts of Gods viewing your
secret sins, (as doubtless there is very much) be careful that you abstain from
them, and not allow your self in them.

SECT. II.
Secrecy is no security.
TO keep you from secret sins consider, That secrecy in sinning is no security
to the sinner; This is a consequent of the former, because God sees you in
secret, therefore you are not safe, though your sin be secret. You may secure
your credit and reputation awhile, by keeping your sin secret from men, but not
your happiness and salvation. While your sin is secret you may not be
reproached for it by men, but you shall be damned for it by God, if it be
allowed and not sincerely repented of. Many shall be openly damned for secret
sins. Read Psalm. 64. throughout.

It is a sign of sincerity.
This will be a notable discovery of the sincerity of thy heart, if thou dare
not allow thy self in secret sins. An Hypocrites greatest care is conversant
about things visible and manifest, viz. His Conversation, Profession, or Open
transgressions, these are visible.

But the things that are secret and hid from the eyes of men, in those he is
careless and negligent. But a true child of God, though he is not careless of
his conversation, yet he is especially mindful of his affections, and of the
secret frame of his heart, and of the sins that lie lurking within him.

God judges not by outward appearances.
Consider, God does not esteem of men by what they seem to be to others, but by
what they really are. God does not judge as man judges; Men judge of the heart
by the actions of the life but God judges of the actions by the heart. Men
judge of that which is secret and invisible by that which is open and visible,
but God judges of that which is open and visible, by that which is secret and
invisible, Mat. 23.27. Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye are
like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Ver. 28. Even so ye
also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. Luke 16*15. And he said unto them, ye are they which justify your
selves before men, but God knows your hearts: For that which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God. A man might be
applauded for that by men, for which he shall be condemned by God. That which
might set a m^n high in the estimations of men, might be an abomination unto
God.

To allow secret sin is great ^mp^iety.
It is heinous Impiety for a man to encourage himself to sin because he is in
secret. 2 Kings 17.9. And the children of Israel did secretly those things that
were not right against the Lord their God. -- There are many great sins wrapped
up in this, As,

1. Damnable Infidelity; They believe not God sees them, Psalm. 94.7, 8, 9. 2.
Desperate Security; They hide God from their eyes, and then think they are
safe. 3. Deep Stupidity; A degree further than the former. 4. Daring Insolency;
It is bold presumption to sin before Gods face.
Secret sins provoke God
Secret sins do provoke God as well as open sins; God is not like the sinner
that has better thoughts of sin, because it is secret: The openness of sin
might add something to the eclipsing of Gods glory, and to Gods dishonor, but
it adds nothing to Gods hatred of sin, because Gods hatred to sin, as sin, is
infinite.

And grieve the Spirit.
Secret sins will grieve the Spirit of God; And causes him to withhold his
influences from thy heart, and to withdraw his presence from thy soul. As,

1. Secret sins will cause the Spirit of God to withdraw his witnessing
presence, and to suspend his testimony. 2. They will cause him to withdraw his
comforting presence, that thou shall not have those joys that thou wast use to
find when thou wast more careful to watch against secret sins. 3. They will
cause him to withdraw his quickening presence, that thy heart will be left more
dead, and more dull, and thy affections will be more flat and cold. 4. They
will cause him to withdraw his Assisting presence; that thou shall not be so
able to perform duty, to resist temptation, to bear affliction. Thus secret
sins will make you great losers by gr^eving and quenching the Spirit of God.
And destroy your peace.
Secret sins will exceedingly disturb the peace of thy Conscience, They will
make great gashes in thy soul; they will wound surely, they will wound s^ely
and deeply; They may make thee go with a sorrowful heart unto thy grave; They
may cost thee many a groan, and sigh and tear, many a prayer and strong cry to
God before thy peace may be restored, and thy Conscience healed, and thy heart
bound up. They may be the breaking of thy bones, and thy heart too, that thou
may think God is thine enemy.

H^nder grace.
Secret sins will hinder the growth of thy grace; A constant cours^ of allowed
secret sinning, argues the Nullity of grace; and secret sins, through
carelessness (...) by Gods people, will hinder much the increase of grace. They
will be like a frost to the blossom; Like a Worm and Caterpiller to the fruits
of the Earth. Secret sins by experience you will find will much hinder your,

1. Faith; That you shall not believe so steadfastly. 2. Desire; You shall not
thirst after God and Christ so strongly. 3. Love; You will not love God and
Christ so Ardently. 4. Delight; You will not delight in God so frequently. 5.
Hope; You will not hope for Heaven so livelily. 6. Evidences; You will not lay
claim to heaven so confidently.
And fervent prayer, and prevent audience.
Secret sins will hinder your fervent praying, and will stop the Audience of
your prayers. They will exceedingly damp your affections at the throne of
grace, and make you sneak in the presence of God, that you cannot have that
liberty and confidence in prayer, because Conscience will be interlining thy
prayers, and say, Thou prayest against this sin, and yet thou did not watch
against it, but did knowingly commit it. They will stop thy mouth that thou
can not speak, and they will stop Gods ears, that he will not hear, Psalm.
66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

Do harden.
Secret sins will harden thy heart, and make thee more prone to commit open
sins. They will strengthen the evil habit of sin, and make thee more incline to
visible transgressions, and increase the propensity of thy heart to greater
evils. Thus Judas giving way to secret covetousness did ripen the Inclination
of his heart more and more to betray his Master.

Stop communications of Gods secrets*
Secret sins will stop the Communications of Gods secrets to thee; There are
some secrets of God, which he does not communicate to any man in this life,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong to the Lord our God: but things revealed
belong to us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of
this Law. But there are some secrets of God that he does reveal unto his
people, and to those that make conscience of secret sins, Prove. 3.32. But his
secret is with the righteous. Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. The Revealed things of the
Gospel are secret things to wicked men; the Gospel is hid to them, 2 Cor. 4.4.
Regeneration is a secret to them. Faith in Christ is ^ secret to them. The
joys of the Spirit, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost are things hidden from
them. But if you dare not allow your self in secret sinning, you shall have
many secret Intimations of the love of God unto your soul; many secret illapses
of his Spirit into your heart.

If you make conscience of secret sin, you shall have an open reward.
If you make conscience of secret sins you shall have an open reward. What
Christ says concerning secret duties, Mat. 6.6. But thou when thou prayest
enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee
openly. This is true also of abstaining from secret sinnings, God will reward
you openly.

In these you have least help from others.
Be most careful against secret sins because in these thou have least help, and
least assistance from others. If thy sin be visible, thy friend may reprove
thee, and he may help to recover thee. If thy sin be visible, thy enemy may
reproach thee for it, and that may occasion thy repentance. But if thy sin be
secret, thou will not have these helps nor occasions of repentance; and
therefore where thou art least capable of advantages and helps from others,
therein be the greatest friend unto thy self.

Thus if you would walk answerably for Gods hiding of you in the secret of his.
Tabernacle in time of danger live not in a course of secret sins; and for your
help herein I shall next proceed to the second Question. viz.

SECT. III.
WHat are the helps and means for the enabling of a Christian to abstain from
heart-sins, and secret sins. Que. 2. Helps against secret sins. God his eye.


1. Fill your mind with actual, believing thoughts of Gods all-seeing eye. When
you are tempted to sin in secret, consider God sees you: All the thoughts of
your heart, and all the motions of your affections are known to him, 2 Cor.
4.2. But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, nor handling the Word of God deceitfully, but by manifestation of
the truth, commending our selves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
Psalm. 139.11. If I say the darkness shall cover me, even the night shall be
light about me. Ver. 12. Yea, the darkness hides not from thee, but the night
shines as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. It is
the Atheism and Infidelity of men's hearts that encourages them to sin, because
it is secret.

2. E^e judgment to come.
Firmly believe, and often think of the judgment to come. Then will God make
manifest every secret thing; The thoughts of the heart shall then be revealed.
If thou would not have thy secret sin produced at the last day, and published
before all the world, do not commit i^, (...) 12.14. For God shall bring every
work i^to ^dgmen^, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it
be evil. Romans 2.16. In the day w^ God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus
Christ, according to my Gospel. 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore judge working before the
time, until the Lord come, who both shall bring to light the hidden things of
darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the hearts, and then shall
every man have praise of God.

3. Deep hatred.
Get a deep ro^ted hatred in thy heart to sin. He that hates sin truly will not
indulge himself in committing sin secretly: For true hatred of sin will set the
soul with strongest opposition against it, at all times, and all places: Hatred
to sin as sin, will be to all sin, whether open or secret. He that hates a
Toade, will hate it in his Chamber or Closet, as well as in the Field; yea, the
nearer it is to him (if in his Bed) his hatred is raised so much the more: and,
the nearer sin is to your heart, the more you should hate it. He that can sin
secretly, when he will not openly, it is not because he hates the sin, but
because he hates the disgrace, which that sin would expose him to before Men.

4. True fear.
Possess thy heart with the true fear of God: Fear of shame, and lessening our
esteem among Men, might keep from open sins; but the fear of God does steel and
Antidote the heart against all sins: When our restraint from sin is terminated
in God, it will be a general preservative against all sorts of sin.

5. Uprightness of heart.
Get, and increase in uprightness of heart; the more of sincerity, the less in
secret sinning. Hypocrisy is consistent with a constant course of secret sin,
but sincerity of heart does diminish the acts and habits of sin.

6. Design Gods approbation.
Make it your great design to have the approbation of God: He that does hunt
after the commendation of Men, will be good when Men do see him; but, he that
seeks for the approbation of God, endeavors to be good at all times, and in
all places: Romans 2.29. But, he is a Jew, which is one inwardly, and
Circumcision is that of the heart, in the Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose
praise is not of Men, but of God. 2 Timothy 2.15. Study to show thy self approved
unto God.

7. Be watchful.
Be very watchful over your heart when you are alone: and over your outward
Senses when you are in Company. He that does not diligently watch, will
frequently sin: there will be many secret stirrings of Unbelief in your heart,
and of Pride, and of Vain-Thoughts, either injected by the Devil, or arising
from the Corruption in your own heart: A secret enemy must be watched more
narrowly, and so must secret sins.

8. Suppress first motions of sin.
Suppress the first motions of sin: crush this Cockatrice in the Egg: do not
dally with secret Temptations unto Sin: abstain from every appearance of secret
sins: If you are too much given to contemplative Uncleanness, avoid such things
as may occasion it, as beholding of Objects, etc.

9. Sense of Gods love.
Get a deep Impression of Gods kindness and mercy into thy soul: Many of Gods
Mercies to thee are secret Mercies, which none can infallibly see in thee, but
thy self: as Grace, and the love of God shed abroad in thy heart: and, let the
sense of Gods secret love to thee keep thee from secret sinnings against God,
then will thou say with Joseph, when he was tempted to secret uncleanness, Genesis
39.7, 9, 10. How can I do this great wickedness and sin against God?

10. Secret duties.
If you would be kept from secret sins, be much in secret duties: He that has
all his duties abroad, will have a nest of secret sins at home: And this brings
me to the second general Head about secret Good.

SECTION IV.
Secret duties.
SEcondly, Maintain secret Duties, and especially mind the secret things of
Public Duties: this part consists of two Branches, Maintain secret Duties.
Mind Secret things in Public Duties.


I. Keep up a constant course of secret Duties: Be much with God when you are
alone: Let not all your Religion lie without doors: especially be much in the
Practice of these four Duties in secret.

1. Be much in secret Prayer: This has been the practice of the holy Men of
God, so Jacob, Genesis 32.24. And Jacob was left alone: and there wrastled a Man
with him, while the breaking of the day. In this you have the Example of Christ
himself, who was much in secret Prayer, Man. 14.23. And when he had sent the
Multitudes away, he went up into a Mountain apart to Pray, and when the evening
was come he was there alone. You have some secret burdens upon your heart, you
have some secret and hidden workings of sin in your soul, which is not
convenient for you to express in the hearing of others; take time then to do
this when you are alone in secret: You have the command of Christ also for this
secret duty, as well as his practice and example, Mat. 6.6.

2. Be freqent in self-examination in secret: When you are alone, be much in
conversing with your self, and often in looking down into your own heart,
enquiring after the truth of grace, and your growth therein: after the
Mortification of sin, and your growth therein: Psalm. 4.4. Stand in awe and sin
not: commune with your own hearts upon your bed, and be still. Commune with
your self, whether you set a due valuation upon the means of Grace: whether
you thrive in holiness, according to the time and means that you have had:
Commune with your self, whether your Conversation be suitable to your
Profession, and, as becomes the Gospel: whether you are fit to die, and
prepared for another World: in your secret Chamber commune with your own hearts
about such things as these.

3. Be much in secret Reading of the Word of God: A Worldling, when he is
alone, will spend much time in Reading over his Writings, his Bonds and Bills,
his Leases and Acquittances: and, will not you take as much pains in secret
reading of the Word of God, which are the Writings upon which you must both
build your Evidences for Heaven, and try them by.

4. Be much in secret meditation: When you are alone, let your thoughts be
dwelling upon the Life to come, in thinking of your future happiness; Oh, what
Inward warmth may you have, when you are alone, if you would but fill your
mind with some believing fore-thoughts of the Life to come.

SECTION V.
II. Secret things in Public duties.
Mind secret things in Public Duties: As your preservation is visible, but
(as I have noted before) the most effectual means of your preservation were
secret and invisible: you have not seen the way that God has taken in keeping
you; he has secretly kept you by his Power; he has given a secret Charge to
his Angels over you; So, let your Duties (that God requires should be Public
and Visible) be so: But then, let your principal care be about the secret and
invisible things of public and visible duties.

The secret and invisible things in public duties, which we are to mind, are
Good, Bad.
I will instance in six of each of them.

Six things in a gr^cious heart in public Duties, are secret and invisible.

1. The communion that a gracious heart has with God in public duties, is
secret and invisible: You may hear a Man's Expressions, and you may see his
Tea^es, and he^r his Groans, but, whether he have true communion with God, is
such a secret, that none can know but himself.

2. The joys that a Christian has in public duties, are secret and invisible
joys: expressions of joy and praise may be heard, and outward discoveries of
joy there may be* but this joy it self is a secret thing: Whether you have
indeed true spiritual joy in public duties, none can know but your self.

3. The principle that puts a Man upon public duties, is a secret and
invisible thing: Whether you Pray or Pre^ch, or do any public duty, out of a
Principle of love and fear of God, is such a secret, that none can tell but
your self.

4. The manner, in which public duties are performed, is a secret and
invisible thing: Whether there be the exercise of Faith, and Repentance for
Sin, and love to God, and desire after Spiritual things, is such a secret, that
bystanders cannot know.

5. The end a Man propounds unto himself in public duties, is secret and
invisible: Whether a Duty be done for the glory of God, for the good of others,
for the enjoying more communion with God, for more strength against sin, or
whether it be for self-interest, and carnal ends, is only known to a Man's own
Conscience: Your duties Men may see, but your end they cannot see.

6. The peculiar aim and design of a gracious soul, in public duties, against
some peculiar sin, and secret corruption, is a secret and invisible thing: a
Man may be heard to pray against a bosom, darling lust, but, whether his
design is to get down the power of this sin, is only known unto himself. These
be the six things in public duties that are secret, which you must especially
labor after in all such duties.

SECTION VI.
Secret evils in public duties to be avoided.
SIx things in public duties, that are evil, but yet secret and invisible: as
there has been some secret danger which you have been in, when you have not
discerned it, and, some secret infection God has kept you from; so in public
duties (the same may be in secret duties also) there are some secret evils you
are to watch against.

1. There may be secret unbelief lurking in the heart, when a Man in Prayer is
pleading particular Promises with his mouth: you may hear a man urge the
Promises of God for removal of evil, for obtaining of good; but, whether he act
faith upon these Promises, or whether there be not in the mean while secret
unbelief, doubting of the truth of this Promise, or especially of the
application of it to himself, is known only to himself, it is a secret to
those that join with him.

2. Hypocrisy in public duties is a secret thing: Whether your heart be
upright and sincere with God, or false and hypocritical, is a secret unto
others; yea, sometimes it is such a secret that might not be known by a Man
himself.

3. Inward-heart-Pride in public duties is a secret thing: A Man may be full
of self-loathing-expressions, and of humble gestures, and yet his heart might
be lifted up with spiritual pride, and self admirations, and towering thoughts
of his own worth and excellency, and suitableness and freedom of expression,
and a by-stander cannot perceive it.

4. Dullness and deadness of heart in duty is a secret thing: A Man might h^ve
lively expressions in public Prayers, and seeming warmth of affection, and
such things that might affect and warm the hearts of others; and yet his own
heart be dull and lukewarm, yea qui^e cold in that duty.

5. Wandering thoughts, in public duties, are secret things: A man may use the
Name of God, and the Attributes of God, and yet his thoughts may be upon
something else: others may see you engaged in the duty, and see your outward
gestures, but are strangers to the secret wanderings of your mind.

6. The inclination of the heart to sin, in public duties, is a secret thing:
A Man may confess sin, and bewail it with Tears, and beg for power against it,
and yet he may have a secret inclination of heart to this very sin, and secret
purposes of heart to keep it, and a secret fear, least God should hear his
Prayers, which he makes against this sin; Whether you hate that sin in your
heart, which you bewail with your Tongue, is known only to your self: and, if
indeed you know it your self, it is a good degree of self-knowledge. Thus, as
God has kept you in an invisible manner, and most by invisible and secret
means, and preserved you from secret and invisible danger that you have been
in: If you would live in some measure answerably to so great a Mercy, you must
have a special care of minding the secret and invisible things in Christianity,
and abstain from secret and invisible sins.

DIRECTION VI.
Since you live after the Plague, be dead to the World.
Has God spared you in time of Pestilence; Then be dead unto the World, and to
things below: Take heed that you do not return with too great an eagerness
after the Affairs of this world; as if you had not seen such sights, as you
have seen, of Death, and the vanity of the World: You are not dead in your
Grave; let this Mercy move you to be dead to the World, and sinful Affections:
You are living in the World, but, you must be dead to the World. It is to be
feared, that there are many will be as eagerly bent after the things of this
World, as they were before; notwithstanding the Course that God has taken by
smarting Judgments, to weane them from the World: That will be like unto a
Stream stopped and dammed up; when it gets over the Banks, and the obstruction
is removed, runs down with greater force. God has put many by their way of
Trade, for some Months; Now take heed, that through overmuch eagerness, to
regain what loss you have sustained by the forbearance of your Calling, you do
not let out too much of your heart and affections upon these things; nor give
them more of your time, than you can well allow from the necessary Duties of
Gods immediate Worship, and the things that do concern the state of your
Souls in the life to come. Be dead to the Profits, Honors, Pleasures, Wisdom,
of this World.

SECTION I.
1. To the Profits of the world.
SHould not you be dead to, and take heed of returning, in your love, back again
unto the Riches of the World, after such a Judgment as this has been? To
prevent an over-eager pursuit of the Riches and Profits of this World, when (by
the removal of this Judgment) you have opportunity of returning to your
Callings; consider.

1. Are corrupt^ble. Hurtful.
The Riches of this world are corruptible riches; they are perishing treasures:
Silver and Gold are things corrupting others, and are corruptible in
themselves, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. But, you have an incorruptible Kingdom and Crown
before you to strive after, reserved in Heaven for believers, and for those
that are so vehemently set for Heaven, that they will take it by force.

2. Unprofitable.
The riches of this world are unprofitable riches; therefore be not too eager in
your pursuit of unprofitable profits: They cannot profit you in tim^ of
g^eatest need. Have not you had the experience of the unprofitableness of
riches? that they are unprofitable (1.) For diverting of Judgments, or removing
evils that come upon you; whether temporal, as Sickness, Plague, Death; or
spiritual, as Hardness of Heart, Blindness of Mind, Terrors of Conscience;
none of all these can be removed by worldly riches. (2.) For the procuring of
good; whether temporal, for the Body, as Health in time of Sickness, or Ease in
time of Pain; or spiritual, for the Soul, either Grace, or Comfort, or Glory;
if Conscience be wounded, they cannot heal your Consciences, nor comfort your
Hearts.

3. Hurtful
The riches of this world are oftentimes hurtful to the owner and possessor of
them, Eccles. 5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun,
namely, riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. Grace and Christ can
never hurt you: but, your riches may, by being clogs to your affections in holy
duties; by being snares and temptations to you in your converse in the world;
by increasing your account, when you have not well improved them.

4. Uncertain.
The riches of this world are uncertain riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. after you have got
them, you may presently lose them: The loss of outward riches may arise,

1. By Men; by Force and Power; by fraud and deceit. 2. By Casualty; your
Houses may be consumed with flames of Fire. 3. By Gods secret Curse, Hag. 1.6.
-- He that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.
5. Easily valued.
The riches that Men get in this world, are easily valued: A Man's Estate is
easily computed; But there are riches in Christ, which are unsearchable: seek
and search after more of them, Ephesians. 3.8.

6. Unsatisfying.
When you have got them they will not satisfy your desires, Eccles. 5.10.

II. To the Honors of the World.
Should not you be dead to the honors of this World, which will be a bait to
many after such a Judgment? Should not you, who are yet alive to behold the
Graves of some Honorable Persons, now in the dust, call off your heart from
seeking after them? Have you not seen, that Death respects not the Honorable
more than the Ignoble? the Reverend and Esteemed no more than the Mean and
Contemptible? Those that have Honorable Names and Titles, Honorable Friends
and Relations, Honorable Callings and Employments, Honorable Preferments and
Enjoyments, are equalized in the Grave with others: And, have not you seen some
fall? and, heard of others in this Judgment, and yet, after all this, set your
heart upon the Honors of this world?

III. To the pleasures of the World.
Should not you be dead to the pleasures of this World, which will be snares
for others? Should you, after such a Judgment as this, give your self to live a
sensual flesh-pleasing life? and spend your time in needless delights and
recreations? when you have heard so many dying Men complain of the loss of
time, when they were well, and the want of time when they came to die? Consider
what these Pleasures be, that you are so much addicted to; that such sadning
sorrowful sights, that you have seen, will not we^n you from them: Nay, when
Gods smarting Rod upon your own body, by the Plague, will not imbitte^ your
worldly pleasures and delights; but, you will go out of such a dreadful
Judgment of God, to your Gamings and Sports; to the pleasing of the flesh, in
satisfying the lusts and desires thereof, in acts of uncleanness.

Consider these (1.) are short pleasures, they are but for a little while; they
are passing away while you are at them: But, these short pleasures may bring
you to eternal torments and endless woe, Heb. 11.25. Choosing rather to suffer
afflictions with the People of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season. (2.) By giving up your selves unto these Pleasures, you deprive your
selves of the Pleasures of Gods House in his Ordinances, which others drink of,
Psalm. 36.8. (3.) You deprive your self of the Pleasures of Gods House above in
Heaven; of the Rivers of Pleasures which are at Gods right hand for evermore,
Psalm. 16.11. (4.) These pleasures are more brutish pleasures, and do but
delight the more brutish, i. e. sensitive part in Man: The rational Soul, as
such, is not delighted in the pleasures of the Flesh, in eating and drinking, a
Horse does find pleasure in this as much as you; and some unreasonable
Creatures herein do excel you. (5.) They are empty, and unsatisfying pleasures:
they do not fill, content, nor satiate them that give themselves most to follow
after them.

IV. To the wisdom of the World.
Should not you be dead to, and take heed of resting in the wisdom of the
World; in the attainment only of Humane Learning; after you have seen the
Learned die as the Ignorant; and the Wise Man as the Fool: Humane Learning is
more desirable than Riches and Honors, and the Pleas^res of this World; but,
yet it is not to be acquiesced in, without the knowledge of God in Christ.
Notions in Learning will never deliver from the Torments of Hell: many learned
sinners have gone to eternal Misery, and their torments there are greater than
the torments of the Ignorant, and unlearned: the vanity of the wisdom of this
World, compared with the knowledge of Christ, appears, in that

1. It cannot redress the sinfulness of the thoughts, nor help against the
vanity of the mind: The wise and learned Heathens became vain in their
imaginations, Romans 1.21.

2. It does not prevent sinful elections, and choice of the will: Men of great
knowledge choose the World, and Honors, and Ease, and Preferments before
Christ.

3. It does not remedy a sinful Conversation: Many know things to be evil, and
yet do them; and so is an aggravation of their sin, and will be of their misery.

4. It does not season Men's communications, nor prevent corrupt Discourses; but
makes them more witty, and able to scorn Godl^ness; jest with Scripture, and
deride the Professors of the Gosspel: But, the knowledge of Christ, i^ is (1.)
the sweetest knowledge. (2.) It is the surest knowledge; being by the Revelation
of the Spirit of God: (3.) It is saving knowledge: Thus take a true account of
all the things; the best, the most excellent, the most desirable things in this
world; and you will see no reason why you should wholly spend the residue of
that time, which God has ^ent you from the Grave, in such an eager pursuit of
any thing of this life.

SECTION II.
BUt, that you may know, whether you (yet living) are dead to the things of
this world, I shall give you this general Character, viz.


If you carry your self toward the world, as those that are dead to God, do
carry themselves toward God, then are you dead unto the world: and, this
general is resolved into these particulars.

1. Signs of a Man that is dead to the world*
Those that are dead to God, they see no real excellency in God and Christ; but
they see something more in the things of the world: they see more excellency in
their Gold and Silver; in their Profits and Preferments; in their Pleasures and
Delights: so, if you are dead to the world, you do not admire the Choicest and
the Chiefest things that are therein; but, do see more real worth in God and
Christ, and one dram of Grace; then in all the Mines of the most precious
things in Nature: and, in your practical judgment do account them but dung and
dross in comparison of the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. Those that are dead to God, do make choice of the World, and the things
thereof, before God: The will, following the ultimate comparative, practical
dictate of the understanding, in wicked Men, does choose Earthly things before
God and Christ: For, though their absolute judgment might be for God, yet the
comparat judgment (all circumstances considered) is for the world; and their
will does make choice of it accordingly: So, if you are dead to the world, you
make choice of God for your chiefest good, and greatest happiness. For, though
you may, in your absolute judgment, look upon the Things of the world, used
with moderation, and kept in their proper place, as good; yet, in your
comparative judgment (all circumstances considered) you do ultimately conclude,
That God is better in himself and for you, yea, in both respects, and your will
does choose him accordingly.

3. Those that are dead to God, though they may Pray to God, and talk of God,
yet they do this as though they did it not: and Pray, as if they Prayed not:
God has their Tongues, but, the world has their Hearts. So, if you are dead
to the world, though you may talk of the world, and Trade in the world, yet you
do all this as if you did it not: You buy as if you possessed not; and you use
this world as if you used it not: and, though the world may have your hands,
yet God has your heart.

4. Those that are dead to God, they are not troubled at the loss of God, nor
rejoice at the tidings how they may have the enjoyment of him; So if you are
dead to the World, you are not chiefly troubled at the loss of these things,
nor count it so great matter of joy, if you have them and enjoy them. A man
that is dead to God desires the world, and let who will look after God: So a
man dead to the world, desires God, and let who will look after the World as
his portion, and his chiefest happiness, he will not.

5. A man that is dead toward God, is not restrained from sin by Gods most
terrible threatenings; though God threaten him with eternal death and
everlasting damnation, with the loss of heaven and eternal happiness, if he
persist in his wickedness, and continue in sin, yet fear of the punishment of
loss, nor of the punishment of sense, will not awaken him to Conversion and
through Reformation. So a man that is dead toward the World, all the
threatenings of men, that he shall have inflicted upon him, diverse penalties,
loss of goods, liberty, life, yet all this is not cogent to bring him in to a
course of sin, and to do wickedly.

6. A man that is dead toward God, is not drawn nor allured with the precious
and most glorious promises of God to do that which is good; Though God promise
him heaven and eternal happiness, the pardon of sin, and his favor, yet all
this moves him not to come to Christ, nor forsake his sins: So a man that is
dead to the world, all the offers, preferments, enticements of the world to
allure him into sin will not prevail, he is dead to these things; and offers
and over^ures of the greatest things move not a dead man. Thus you may try
whether you are dead to the world or no. You live in the world, even after such
a devouring Pestilence, you cannot live answerably to this great mercy, except
you be dead to the World.

DIRECTION VII.
Since you live, after this Plague, be dead to sin, and be buried with Christ.
Has God spared you in time of Pestilence, then now be dead to sin, kill your
sin, and solemnize the funeral of your lusts; because you live after such a
judgment, such a mercy does oblige to the death and burial of sin. You are not
buried with others in their graves, but you should be buried with Christ, Romans
6.4. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Ver. 6. Knowing this that our old man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve sin. In which Scripture are set down these things. viz*

1. The parts of Sanctification, Mortification, Vivification.
2. The cause of our Sanctification, viz. communion with Christ in his Death,
Burial, and Resurrection. 3. The Testimony and Pledge of it, our Baptism. 4.
The growth and progress of Mortification; we should aim at the total
destruction of the body of sin, by the Crucifying, Destroying, and Burial of
sin.
You have seen the death of thousands, and you have seen the Burial of
thousands, to all these add one more Funeral, and that is the Funeral of your
sins. Do you outlive this Judgment, and shall your sins do so too? God forbid.
This would be to live altogether unanswerably to so great a mercy. You live,
but your sins should be dead in you, and you unto your sins, Romans 6.11.
Likewise reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin: but alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Though you live, yet must you be buried.

Now Believers are buried in three respects: Believers are buried in 3.
respects.


1. In respect of their good names, as they are reproached by the wicked; The
throats of the wicked are the Sepulchers, or burial places of the good names of
Gods people; this is part of a Believers sufferings.

2. In respect of Self-denial. Believers must be no more taken with the things
of this World (so far as to draw them from God) than a person dead and buried
and lying in his grave.

3. In respect of the Mortification of sin, and these two last are our duty;
and of this last I would speak a little, following the Metaphor, in which there
is some difference, and some agreement in the burial of our sin, and in common
burial.

2 Differences between the burial of our friends and our sins.
The difference in these Respects.

First, We bury our friends weeping for their death, desirous of their life,
wishing, o^ that this my Friend had not died; oh that I could have kept him in
life: But we must bury our sin rejoicing, as those that are glad of its death;
Not weeping because sin is dead, but that it once did live.

Secondly, We bury our Friends with hopes that they shall rise again, and live
again: But we must bury our sins with hopes they shall never live more; never
return to them more.

The resemblance holds in these particulars:

1. 5 Resemblances.
The Burial of sin supposes the death of sin; Never any man yet buried his sins
alive: For while sin does live, it is in the heart as in a Throne, and not as
in a Grave.

2. The Burial of sin supposes the ceasing of the love of sin, that we see not
that beauty and comeliness in sin, as we did when it was alive. A man that loves
his Relation, while he lived, put him in his bosom, yet will not do so when he
is dead; a man while he loves his sin, will never bury it.

3. The Burial of sin includes the removal of it out of our sight, and as much
as may be out of our thoughts. We love not to look upon dead friends, nor many
times to think or talk of them, who while they lived were pleasing objects to
our eyes, and the delightful matter of our discourse. While Sarah lived she was
beautiful in Abraham's eyes, but when dead, he desired to have her removed out
of his sight, Genesis 23.4. I am a stranger and a sojourner with you, give me
possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my
sight. The presence of sin is a trouble to you when it is dead, and you would
have it out of your sight; and this removal of sin, when dead and buried has
these three properties.

First, It is a total removal, the whole body of sin, and all the members of it
are buried; Death might arise from the disease of some particular part, but
burial covers all. He that makes a show of the burial of sin, and yet keeps any
in his heart as his love and delight, has indeed buried no sin: For who does
so bury his friend as to keep any of his members in his house?

Secondly, It is a voluntary removal; when one is dead, we make it matter of
our choice to have him buried: Yea, we look upon it as a sore evil and great
annoyance to have burial denied to our dead friends: So it is your choice to
bury your sins, and the thoughts of not having them buried is a great trouble
to you.

Thirdly, It is a perpetual removal; we bury our friends so, that we would not
have them taken up again and brought into our house: So you bury sin, never to
have it brought back to live again in your heart. One that has buried his sin
does earnestly desire it might be removed out of the sight of God, by free
pardon; out of the sight of his own eyes, by the evidence of the pardon; and
out of the sight of others, by leading a contrary Conversation.

4. The Burial of sin includes the rotting of the old man in its grave, the
mouldring of it, and the daily wasting of it, as dead Corpse buried in the earth
do consume and wast daily. Though a body buried does not presently totally
consume: Many years after the burial, if the grave be opened, you may find the
bones and the skull; the relics of sin in the heart of a Child of God, are
but as the bones and the skull, but the body of sin is destroyed.

5. The Burial of sin includes, the loss of the power and authority that sin
had in the heart while it was alive. Though a man were never so potent while he
lived, yet when he is dead and buried, he has no more power nor jurisdiction.
Though thy sin did sit as a Lord, and rule in thy soul while it lived, yet
being dead and buried, its dominion cease.

Now if you are buried with Christ, these things will be a comfort to you, viz,

1. Those that are buried with Christ are most comely in the sight of God;
Comfort to those that are buried with Christ.
A man that is naturally dead and buried, is not so with us, but he that is
spiritually dead to sin, is beautiful in the eyes of God.

2. Those that are buried with Christ have converse and Communion with God;
those that are naturally dead have no more converse with us, but a man has no
Communion with God, till he is buried with Christ.

3. Those that are buried with Christ are past the hurt of death; As those that
are naturally dead have past through all that death can do unto them; if you
are buried with Christ, though you must come under the stroke of death, yet the
sting of death is taken out.

4. Those that are buried with Christ shall be raised at the last day, and
shall for ever live with God and Christ, and with holy Angels and Saints in the
Kingdom of God, Romans 6.8: Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we
shall also live with him. Thus if you would live in some measure answerably to
Gods mercy in preserving of you from death and the grave, that you are not
buried yet with others, you must die to sin, and be buried with Christ.

DIRECTION VIII.
Since you live after this Plague, walk in newness of life.
Has God spared you in the time of Plague, that you yet remain among the
Living? If you would improve this mercy, then Live to God, and walk in newness
of Life. God has not spared you that you should live to your self, or to the
flesh, or that you should walk in your old courses: But your duty is now to
live to God, and to lead a new Conversation. God has brought you to the
borders of the grave, and to the very confines of another world, and shaked you
over the grave, and has recovered and restored you, and has as it were given
you a new life, by reprieving you from the gates of death when you were so near
unto it, Romans 6.4. That like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of
the Father, so we should walk in newness of life; and the equipollent phrases
of this new life are, To walk with, before, and after God. To walk after the
Spirit, Romans 8.1. To serve God in newness of spirit, Romans 7.6. To walk as
children of light, Ephesians. 5.8. To walk in the ways of God, Psalm. 119.3. To walk
circumspectly, Ephesians. 5.16.


That you may, being spared from the grave, lead a new life, I shall show you
The signs or nature of it. The excellencies or dignities of it. The Impediments
and hindrances of it.


SECT. I.
THe nature of, or that which is included in, newness of life, does not consist
in these things.

1. What newness of life does not consist in.
It does not consist in some new notions, or new speculations, which you had not
before, a new light might be made in an old house. New speculations may consist
with an old Conversation.

2. It does not consist in a newness of a bare resolution to lead a new life;
this is but in order to it, though, if it be real, it is a good step toward
this walking.

3. It does not consist in a bare performance of some new duties which you did
not before; an old course of sin may consist with the external performance of
some New Duties, as Praying, Reading, etc.

4. Nor in a bare keeping of some new Company; though this is to be desired,
that many would forsake their old wicked Company; or if God has taken thy
wicked Companions away by death, thou would not make choice of those that be
as bad.

5. Nor in New discoursing of spiritual things; A man that was wont to swear,
and reproach, and blaspheme the name of God, might now talk of God with others,
and yet not lead a new life.

6. Nor in forbearing of many old sins, which before you lived in; you were
drunkards before, but not now, I would more were so changed, but yet this comes
short of this newness of life; which does include these things following.

In what consists newness of life.
To walk in newness of life, supposes a new saving knowledge, a new sight, and
a new judgment of things. No man can lead this new life with his old judgment
which was corrupt, judging that good which was evil, and that evil which was
good, 1 Pet. 1.14. As obedient children, not fashioning your selves according
to the former lusts, in your Ignorance. There must be a new sight and new
discovery of these things: 1. Of God, and his Excellency. 2. Of Christ and his
Sufficiency. 3. Of ^in, and it^ Deformity. 4. Of the World, and its Vanity. 5.
Of Grace, and its Necessity. 6. Of Heaven, and its Felicity. 7. Of Hell, and
its extremity of Woe.


Till a man has new eyes, and has his understanding opened to see the nature
of all these things, otherwise than he did before, he will not walk contrary to
what he did before; if he see no more of Christ, nor in the Attributes of God,
nor in Grace, he will still flight all these and undervalue them; if he have
the same admiring apprehensions of the World, and sees as much beauty in
(deformed) sin, he will love it still, and delight in it still. There must be
new light, and new saving knowledge before there can be a new life.

newness of Principle; a man with his old Principle can never lead a new life.
A man in old courses may live according to the Dictates of a natural
conscience, according to old customs, but he that leads a new life must have a
new Principle of love to God, a new Principle of true fear of God, he must have
new strength from Christ, a new heart and new affections.

vigorous actings of this new Principle, and living in the exercise of these
new graces infused into the heart, in the exercise of new love to God, of new
desires after Christ, of new sorrow for his sin, of new hatred to his sin. To
walk is to exert a principle of motion into act.

with new works, and to have all things done according to the Rule of new
obedience. His old work was to please the flesh, but his new work is to please
God. His old work was chiefly to get riches and increase therein, his new work
is to get grace and more of it. His old work was to obey the commands of sin,
his new work is to obey the commands of God.

new Rule, not according to the practices and examples of wicked men, but
according to the rule of Gods Word, according to the example of Christ.

new ends; his end is not now self-interest in the world, not his own
estimation amongst men, not his preferment in this world; old ends are
inconsistent with a new life: But this man's end is the glory of God; all the
actions of his life are ultimately resolved into this, and all is, in
subordination unto this: He trades for this end, that God may be glorified; he
prays, and preaches, he reads and studies, that God may be glorified.

newness of objects, about which he is conversant; such as keep their old
course of life look no higher than worldly objects, the honors, and the
pleasures and the profits of this world: But such as are risen with Christ, to
walk in newness of life, have proposed to themselves new objects, things that
are above; God, and Grace, and Heaven, things that are invisible to the eyes of
carnal men.

as Christ did after he was risen from the dead, i. e. in our measure. Christ
did not incumber himself with the things of this world, after his resurrection,
he did not converse with the men of this world, neither must we use their
company out of choice. Christ aft^r his Resurrection waited for his Ascension
into glory: So if we will walk in newness of life, we must have our
conversation in heaven, and be continually expecting our dissolution and our
translation into glory.

new manner; to do al^ religious duties, to pray, and to hear in a new manner.
Before he prayed lukewarmly, and with a dull, and hard, and unbelieving heart,
but now more fervently, more livelily; Though the matter of his duties might be
the same, yet the manner is new.

making progress in all these, walking is a progressive motion; it is to
continue, and to persevere in the ways of holiness: Not to decline nor to go
backwards, not to return or walk back again to old wickedness.

SECT. II.
The excellen^ies of a new life.
THe excellency and dignity of a new life is very great, and for your greater
encouragement to walk therein I shall instance in some of them.

1. A new life is a life according to the New Covenant which God has made with
fallen man. Men that walk in old sinful courses, continue the Covenant they
have made with sin and Satan: But a man that walks in newness of life, is a
man that has entered into a New Covenant with God, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart
also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put into you; I will take away
the stony heart (...) of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. Ve^
27 And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statu^es,
and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them; And to walk thus in Gods Statutes
is to walk in newness of life.

2. A new life it is the most rational life. When the Prodigal left his old
ways, and took up a new course, he is said to come to himself, Luke 15.17. Men
act most unreasonably when they act wickedly.

3. A new life is the sweetest and most comfortable life; There are sensual,
carnal, brutish delights in the ways of sin, but there is much terror and
bitterness in a wicked course, always at the end of it. Such as lead a new
life, they have experience of the comforts of the Spirit, of the joys of the
Holy Ghost. All these new ways (so called as opposed to his former ways, else
the best way is the oldest way) are ways of pleasan^ness, and all these paths
are p^^ce.

4. A new life it is the noblest life, we then live according to the highest
elevation that we are capable of in this life. Nay, it is a life nearest to the
life of glory.

5. A new life is an evidencing life; it is an evidence of the great and
glorious things that are brought to light by the Gospel, all full of delighting
comfort. A new l^fe (t^king in all the particulars before set down, showing the
things included in it) is an evidence,

First, Of our Election; his new life is a fruit of Gods ancient love, Ephesians. 1.4.

Secondly, Of a new robe of righteousness put upon us for our justific^tion.

Thirdly, Of P^r^on of old sins.

Fourthly, Of our Union with Christ; we could not le^d a new life, were we not
engrafted into a new stock.

Fifthly, Of the sincerity of our hearts, and the truth of grace.

Sixthly, Of our sure title to heaven, to the new Jerusalem that is above.

6. A new life is ^n encouraging life; it will be an encouragement to a man to
go ^o God in his greatest straits; it will encourage a man with boldness to
look death in the face when it comes.

7. It is the most profitable life to our selves and to others; we shall be
giving to others a good example, if we lead new lives, whereby they may be
drawn to an holy Imitation. A new he^rt you may have, and that may profit your
self, but a new life will be profitable to others as well as to your self.

8. A new life is the only life that honors God, and that does credit the
Gospel, and the Profession that we make. To live in an old course of swearing,
and lying, and Sabbath-breaking, is to dishonor God: but if you walk in
newness of life, you will promote the great end for which you live, i. e. the
glory of God; and the excellency of any thing is according to its sutableness
and tendency to the attaining of a man's ultimate end, it is a new life that
only glorifieth God, therefore a new life is the only ex^ellent life.

9. He that leads a new life has a new guide to direct him in his holy walk;
the Spirit of God will be your guide to show you the way that you ought to go:
Though (to you) it may be a new way, yet you shall not lose your way, because
the Spirit is your guide.

10. He that leads a new life is taken into new relations. God is now his
Father, and the Son of God is now his Lord, Head, Redeemer, Brother and all the
people of God are now related to him in the bonds of grace. These things and
many more may be said in commendation of the excellency of a new life: which
appears to be so in the eyes of carnal men (who have walked after their old
hearts) when they come to dye, that they then resolve if God would spare them,
they would lead a new life.

SECT. III.
Hindrances of walking in newness of life.
THe hindrances of walking in newness of life are many, and very great, that it
is not an easy thing for any man to lead this life.

1. The Old Serpent is a great enemy to this New li^e; he has old stratagems,
and old devices and snares to divert them out of this way.

2. The Old Principle of corruption remaining in our hearts is a great
Impediment to this new life. It is working still in us, to walk in the old
ways of pleasures and delights; the Old man within will still strive hard to
hinder this New life without.

3. Old sinful Company will hinder you in your new manner of life; they will be
tempting, and enticing, and persuading you, to come to your old games, and your
old delights; It will be hard to live a new life amongst old sinful Companions.

4. Slavish fear of men is a great impediment of walking in newness of life; it
may be thou might displease thy Father, thy Master, the Friend upon whom
thou do much depend, if thou should forsake thy old wicked life, and
become a new Creature, and lead a new life, thou would meet with new
troubles; but, fear God, and his Vengeance more if thou walk in thy old course
of sin, and keep thy old heart, then be filled with slavish fear of men, if
they should deny their old favor, and friendship to thee, because thou walk
in newness of life.

5. Flesh-pleasing; and being too much over-powred by the sensitive appetite.

6. Spiritual sloth: For, a New Life has many new difficult duties.

Thus, if you would improve this Mercy, that God has spared you; you must live
to God, and walk in newness of life.

DIRECTION IX.
Since you live after this Plague, keep upon your heart a sense of this Mercy.
Has God spared you in time of so great Contagion; Then keep upon your heart a
constant sense of Gods distinguishing Providence, in his preservation of you.
Let not length of time (if God give it you) wear off the greatness of this his
Mercy toward you; if you forget Gods goodness, you will not walk worthy of it:
This was the sin of the People of Israel, for whom God did such great things,
Psalm. 78.10. They kept not the Covenant of God: and refused to walk in his Law.
Verse. 11. And forgot his Works, and his Wonders that he had showed them. Psalm.
106.21. They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt.
God has done great wonders for you, in preserving of you in the valley of the
shadow of death: God has not given you over unto death; God has not laid you
in the Grave, where you would soon have been forgotten: do not you lay Gods
Mercy, toward you, in the grave of oblivion; nor bury his mercy (of saving you
alive) in forgetfulness: David laid a charge upon his Soul, that he should not
forget the benefits of the Lord toward him, Psalm. 103.2.

Set down therefore, and Record your danger, what it was; Such a Month in such
a Year the Plague was nigh my dwelling; it came into my house, it took away so
many of my Children and Servants, but God spared me: he took away the Wife, the
Husband of my bosom, but God spared me; yea, it was upon my Body, so many
Plague-Sores were running at once, and God delivered me from the Grave, and
from the very jaws of death: and, will you forget this while you live?

That you may have, and keep a sense of Gods mercy to you, in preserving of
you, consider these few particulars.

1. Helps to be sensible of the Mercy of life.
Consider you had deserved the Plague, and death by the Plague, as well as those
that have fallen into their Graves thereby (and it may be more too) do not
think that those that have died were greater sinners than you, Luke 13.2. And
Jesus answered and said unto them, suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners
above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things. Verse. 3. I tell
you, nay, but except you repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Verse. 4. Or,
those eighteen, upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell and slew them; think ye that
they were sinners above all Men that dwelt in Jerusalem, Verse. 5. I tell you,
nay, but extept ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish: Do you think, that
those, whom the Plague has slaughtered, that they were greater sinners then
all that dwelt in London? Take heed of such conceptions: Or, if many have
fallen in this judgment, that were of worser Lives than you; yet, none have
f^llen that had worser Hearts than you naturally h^ve: Nay, have not your sins
been capable of greater ^ggravations than the sins of many D^unkards, and
Swearers, and profane Persons, that did never sin against a God that pardoned
their sins; that did never sin against such love* nor after such experiences of
the working of Gods Spirit upon their hear^s as you have had? Nay, consider,
that you are not likely ^o do God that service, nor bring to God that Glory,
that some of them might have done, that are now in their Gr^ves, if God had
spared them; and yet God has lengthened out your life: Oh, what an Obligation
should this be to you to remember Gods Mercy, that you had
Plague-deserving-sins, but yet you had not the Plague! that you have
death-deserving-sins, and yet you are not dead!

2. Consider you had a Body as liable to Infection as many others had; There
were such natural causes in your Body, that might have laid you in your Grave,
if God had not prevented it: and, did not you suck in the same Air as others
did, yea, as others breathed out, and yet God has kept you?

3. Consider you had no better Preservatives, nor Cordials, then many others
had, that yet by the Plague are laid silent in the Grave, and are now resting
in the dust; and others, that now are dead, used the same means as you did,
and it may be more, and better too, and yet God denied his blessing to the use
of those means that were more probable to prevent Infection then yours were;
by this you may be convinced, that it was the hand of God that has preserved
you: and therefore by this, you should be obliged to remember, and keep upon
your heart a sense of Gods mercy toward you.

4. Consider you have been in more visible danger; and, when you were called,
did venture further then many others did: some were more reserved, and kept
from Company more than you have done; being called to Duty, where Visited
Persons have been, as to help them that were sick of this Distemper, etc. and
yet some that lived more retiredly, and kept themselves more close, were
Visited, and are dead, and yet you have escaped, this is the finger of Divine
Providence, and will you let the sense of this wear off from your heart?

5. Consider that you have been more weakly, and more infirm of Body then many
of them that the Plague has removed: Many that were more likely to outlive
you, are cut down before you: Many that were strong, and of healthful
constitutions, are laid in the Dust; while you, (that have been waiting for
your dissolution many Months, or Years, because of the infirmity of your Body,
and the frequent distempers that have been upon you) are preserved.

6. Consider how great a Mercy your praservation is, not only to your self,
but to those to whom you are related; You have many little Children, that are
not able to help themselves, nor to provide for themselves; that in all
likelihood would have been exposed to hardships and to want, if God had taken
you from them: They are sharers in this Mercy of your Preservation; and, the
more are concerned in it, the greater the Mercy is; and, the deeper and more
lasting sense it should make upon your heart: The thoughts of your Children did
increase your fears and trouble, when you were in danger; and, should not the
consideration of this, advance the greatness of the Mercy, of being continued
to them.

DIRECTION X.
If you have fewer objects of love left you, love God so much the more.
Has God spared you in time of Pestilence; when he has taken away many of your
own Relations, then, the fewer objects you have for your love now, the stronger
let your love be toward God then it was before: In ste^d of murmuring against
God, that you have lost those whom you did love; the greater let your love be
to God, since you h^ve not so many for to love. Love l^id out upon many
objects, is the weaker; bu^, love united, and spent upon one object, is the
stronger: As those, that have but one only Son, love that more, then those that
have more do love any; because their love is divided amongst them all: It may
be God had too little of your love, and it was ^n offense, and grief unto your
God, that the Crea^ure should have that love which was due unto himself; and
therefore he has cut off the S^re^es, that you may get nearer to the Fountain.
Thy Relation had more of thy affection then came unto his share; and therefore,
in stead of Murmuring, be more in loving of thy God; and this will be to live
answerably to Gods Correcting, and Afflicting of thee, in the loss of thy
Relation, and to his Mercy in sparing of thy self: And, look what Relation it
is that is taken from thee* while thou survivest; and get clearer evidences
that God will be in stead of that Relation to thee, and be better to thee than
that was: Have thou thy Husband removed by this Contagious Disease, now make
out more to God, that he would be an Husband to thee? Have thou lost thy
Children, or thy only Son; see more diligently, that God has bestowed his
only Son upon thee, and this will much satisfy, and quiet thy heart? Has God
done thee any wrong, if he has taken thy only Son from thee, and has given
his only Son to thee. Thus, since you did survive others that are taken from
you, improve your Affliction, and your Mercy, in being advantaged in
Spirituals; and, this will be to live in some measure answerably to Gods
dealing with you.

DIRECTION XI.
Since you live, remember what were the actings of conscience in time of
danger, and live accordingly.
Has God spared thee in time of Plague, then see what it was that thy
Conscience did most accuse thee, or commend thee for, when the Plague was nigh
thy dwelling, or thou wast in fear and danger, and order thy life accordingly:
What sin was it that thy Conscience did reproach thee for, in a time of danger,
and in fears of death? whether of omission or commission; public or secret;
of what nature soever it was: and let it be the design of thy heart, in the
course of thy life, to mortify that sin, and keep it under; that thou
carefully avoid the occasions thereof: that, when death shall certainly come,
and conscience shall have no more occasion, or just ground to reproach thee,
thou may see, that God in mercy did prolong thy days, till thou had got
the victory over, and the pardon, and the evidence of the pardon of that sin.
What was it in thy fears, and when thou wast in expectation of death, that
Conscience did approve in thee? it did then approve thy diligence in thy
Family, go on in this still; it did approve of thy strickt and holy walking
with God, go on in that which was good, and thy rightly enlightened Conscience
did commend in thee; and, this will be to live in some measure answerably to so
great a mercy, as is Gods preserving of you in a time of such a wasting Plague.

DIRECTION XII.
Since you live, after you have been in such danger, trust God for the future.
Has God spared you in such a time of so great Mortality and Contagion, then
learn to trust your self, and all your Affairs with God for the time to come:
You have lived in time of danger, and have been in hazard of your life* and yet
God has preserved and kept you: God has called some to abide in the City,
because they could not remove their habitation without neglect of duty; for,
where our duty lies and where our work is, that God calls us unto; there we
may trust God, though our danger be never so great; because, while we are in
our duty, we are in our way, and God has promised to keep us in all our ways
in time of Plague, Psalm. 91.11. Many had opportunity of retiring into the
Country, without neglect of duty, without running away from duty (those that
went from their duty and work, which God expected they should there have done,
have cause to be humbled for their slavish fears of death, and great distrust
in God) and, the use of means, for preservation, is not inconsistent with
trusting in God, but is supposed and included in it, else it is not trusting in
God, but presumption; but many were obliged to abide upon the place, and God
has preserved you amongst them: Oh, what an obligation and encouragement is
this for you, for the time to come, to put your trust in God, in the use of
means, in a way of duty; and, the more you are able to commit your self to God
in future dangers, the more you do improve this Providence of God in preserving
of you.

But, because we need all helps and supports for putting our trust in God, I
shall lay down some considerations to help you more and more to trust in God;
premising first the nature of it, that you may perceive what it is, that you
are exhorted to, when persuaded to trust in God.

Description of trust.
Trusting in God is a special fruit of faith and hope, whereby the soul looking
upon God in Christ, through a Promise, is in some good measure freed from
fretting fears, and cutting cares, about the removing or preventing of some
evil, or the enjoying or procuring of that which is good.

1. It is a fruit of faith; for therefore a Man trusts in God, because he
believes, and is persuaded of the truth of what God says, and believes the
performance of his promise, and so it is called fiducia fidei.

2. It is a fruit of hope; for therefore I trust in God, because I hope it
shall be with me according to his Word: If I had no hope of this, I could not
trust in God, and so it is called fiducia spei.

3. This trust has God in Christ, through a Promise, for its object; We trust
in God, through Christ, eying the Promise: For, the Promise of God, is the
foundation of our trust in God, and the Promise of God draws forth the hearts
of his People to trust in him, Psalm. 119.42. -- I trust in thy Word.

4. The effect of this trusting in God is the quietation of the heart, and a
freeing of the Soul (proportionably to the degree of his trust) from fretting
fears, and cutting cares about good and evil, to be avoided or procured, Psalm.
56.3. What time I am afraid I will trust in thee. Verse. 4. In God will I praise
his Word; in God I have put my trust, I will not fear what Flesh can do unto me.

The Arguments for the moving you to trust in God, for the future, are such as
these.

1. 8 Arguments to trust in God.
Will not you trust in God after such rich and full experience that you have had
of Gods taking care for you? Has God cared for your life, and will not you
trust him for Food and Raiment? experience is a great support for confidence in
God, 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver, in
whom we trust that he will yet deliver us. When David had had experience of
Gods delivering him from the Lion and the Bear, he trusted in God to deliver
him from the hands of the uncircumcised Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.37. When thou
have been in danger, God has kept thee; and when thou have been in sickness,
God has restored thee: and, if it be good for thee, he will do so again.

2. Will not you trust in God that is All sufficient and Allmighty, able to
deliver you from any evil, able to bestow upon you any thing that is good? He
can remove your fears, and he can fill your desires: According to your
persuasions of a Man's ability to help you ( caeteris paribus) will your trust
be in him, 2 Cor. 1.9. For we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we
should not trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. That God
that can raise the dead, may be trusted in any case or condition: You have
found him able.

3. Will not you trust in God, that is so willing to do you good? you may
acknowledge Gods all sufficiency to be a support for your trusting in him, but,
the doubts that you find in your Soul, whether God be willing to do you good,
is a cause of your (too frequent) distrust in him: You must believe that God is
a God of mercy, and ready to do for his People, whatsoever he sees conduces
to his glory and their good: and, you may know his willingness by his promises,
which are various, according to the condition that you are, or may be in: You
have found him willing, and yet will you not trust him?

4. Will not you trust in a God, that is faithful in all he says? He declares
his willingness to do you good, to supply your wants, to preserve you in
dangers, by his promise: for, a Promise of God is a declaration of his will,
for the bestowing of some good thing upon his People through Christ, and his
will and purpose he will never change, and his Promise he will not suffer to
fail: Will you trust a Man that is faithful to his word, and not God?
especially after you have found him faithful in performing promise unto you.

5. Will not you trust in God that is infinite in Wisdom, and knows how to
order all your affairs? when your condition is altogether intricate, and you
know not how to wind your self out of difficulties, then your wise God can do
it, 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation. --
And, will you not trust a God that is able and willing, and faithful and wise?
especially after you have experienced all these in God, in the late dangers and
fears of death that you have been in? or, shall these qualifications of power,
willingness, faithfulness, and wisdom in Men (in their measure) be a ground of
your putting civil trust in them; and, shall not all these, that be in God
without measure, be a ground of your putting Religious trust in him?

6. Will not you put your trust in God, since it is his due, it belongs to him
of right? it is a part of your Spiritual Homage which you owe to God: Religious
trust does so belong to God, that it will be Idolatry to place it in any thing
besides, Psalm. 115.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. It does so properly and solely belong to
God, that it is a Periphrasis of God to be the confidence of all the ends of
the earth, Psalm. 65.5. Give to God the things of God, and give to the Creatures
no more than belongs unto them: You have nothing else to trust to, you must not
place Religious trust in men; not in great Men and Nobles, Psalm. 118.8, 9. nor
in Riches, 1 Timothy 6.17. not in Horses and Chariots, Psalm. 207. not in your own
Righteousness and Religious duties, Ezekiel. 33.13.

7. Will not you trust in God who is so nearly related to you? Men are apt to
trust too much in their e^rthly Friends and Relations: We put civil trust and
confidence in our near Relations, because of the affection that they bear unto
us: Thus Children trust to their Parents, and Wives in their Husbands, and one
Friend in another; God is your Father, your Husband, and your Friend, and yet
will you not put your trust in him?

8. Will not you put your trust in God for smaller things, since you trust him
for the greatest? you trust in God to deliver you from the torments of Hell;
and, will not you trust him to deliver you from far lesser evils? you trust in
him for Pardon, and for eternal life; and, will you not trust in him for
smaller matters? Will you trust him wi^h your Soul, and not with your Body? for
Eternal Life, and, not for Temporal? would you trust a Man for thousands, and
not for Pence? especially, when the Providence of God extends to the smallest
concernments of his children, even to an hair of their heads, Mat. 10.30.

When must we put our trust in Go^? In general I answer; At all times, Psalm.
62.8. Trust in him at all times, ye People; pour out your hearts before him:
God is a refuge for us. In Particular, trust in God,

1. Six special times to trust in God.
In time of Sickness and Affliction upon your Body, Job 13.15. Though he slay
me, yet will I trust in him. 2. In time of outward Wants; in the loss of all
things, 1 Samuel 30.3, to 7. Hag. 3.17. 3. In time of Desertion; when you have
not the smiles of his Face, Isa. 50.10. 4. At the hour of death commit your
Souls to him; trust him with your Soul, Psalm. 31.5, 6. 5. In times of greatest
inconstancy, Psalm. 46.1, 2, 3. 6. In times of Evil Tidings, Psalm. 112.7. He
shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.
Thus, if you trust God more because of the experience you have had in Gods
keeping of you, you do, in this, improve this Mercy.
DIRECTION XIII.
Since you live after this Plague, give thanks to God.
Has God spared you in time of so great Mortality; Then give thanks to God,
and the Praises that are due unto him for so great Preservation: Every Person
should be very thankful unto God, that has kept him alive; and every Family
should sound forth his Praises: You spent time extraordinary, in seeking God by
Prayer, in your Closet, in your Family, that he would preserve you; and, has
God done so, in answer to your Prayers? and, will you not spend some time
extraordinary in, and with your own Family in thankful acknowledgments of Gods
love unto you, and his care over you? Oh set some time apart, every Family whom
God has preserved, or so many that are left in every Family, in solemn
praisings of God for his signal preservation vouchsafed unto you. In the time
of your trouble, you called upon God, he has delivered you, and now you should
glorify him, Psalm. 50.15. and God is glorified by you when you offer praises
to him, Ver. 23.

In the pressing you to the practice of this Direction, I shall do three things:

1. How, or with what, must those that are preserved from death in time of
Plague give thanks to God, or glorify God for this mercy? 2. With what
Arguments should the people of God that are spared press themselves to give
praises to God? 3. What course must such take to get a thankful heart for so
great a mercy?
SECT. I.
3 Ways you must Pra^se God with your Tongue.
HOw, or with what, must those that are pre^erved give thanks to God?

This must be done three ways:

1. You must praise God with your tongues: Your lips must show forth his
praises, Psalm. 51.15. Your tongue must sing aloud of Gods righteousness and
mercy. For this end God has preserved you, Psalm. 30.11. Thou have turned for
me my mourning into dancing: thou have put off my sackcloath, and girded me
with gladness. Ver. 12. To the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and
not be silent: O Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. By [glory]
David means his tongue: The Tongue is the glory of a man, it being his
privilege above all Creatures, with the tongue to form articulate words,
having distinction of sound, for the communicating of the conceptions of his
mind unto others. Thus we should praise God by speaking of his excellencies and
perfections of his nature, of his works and ways, of his dealings with us, of
the danger he has delivered us from, of the good he has given to us, of the
salvation he has wrought for us.

2. Heart.
You must praise God with your heart as well as with your tongue; for as prayer
for mercy with the tongue, without the heart will not be profitable to us, so
praises with the tongue for mercy received, without the heart, will not be
acceptable unto God. To praise God with the heart, is the very heart of our
praises. Thus David, that before called upon his tongue to bless God, does also
elsewhere call upon his soul to do it, Psalm. 103.1. Bless the Lord O my soul,
and all that is within me, bless his holy name. God blesses us, by giving good
things unto us, Ephesians. 1.3. We bless God, when we do thankfully acknowledge the
good things we receive from God. You must then stir up your soul, and all that
is within you unto this great work of praise for so great Preservation.

3. Life.
You must praise God in your lives, and by your works and conversations; You
must not only speak Gods praises, but you must live to his praise; you must do
it with life, and in and by your life. Life is the mercy I call upon you to
praise God for, and you must do it by your life. You may praise God with your
lips, and not with your hearts, but if you do indeed praise God with your
heart, you will also do it by your life. If you will give thanks indeed, you
must live thanks. The best thanksgiving is thanks-doing. Thus if you would be
thankful for the life of your children, show it by your religious care in their
holy Education; That God might not say of you, I spared such a man's Children in
time of Plague, and afterward he brought them up to dishonor me, and to sin
against me; if you would be thankful for your own life, then lay it out in holy
walking with God.

SECT. II.
12 Arguments to thankfulness for life.
WIth what Arguments should the people of God urge their own hearts thus in
tongue, in heart and life, to praise and glorify God for his preserving of
them? Work your heart hereunto with these following Arguments. Consider,

1. Should not you thus praise God for your preservation from danger by the
Plague, Who did make this one of your Arguments to prevail with God by prayer
in time of danger to preserve you? Did not you reason thus with God in time of
sickness? Lord lengthen out the life of thy servant, Psalm. 6.4, 5.
O Lord deliver my soul, O save me for thy mercies sake, for in death there is
no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall give thee thanks? What profit is
there in my blood, when I go down into the pit? Psalm. 30.9.
Shall the dust praise thee? Shall it declare thy truth? The grave cannot
praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: Isa. 3^.18, 19.
They that go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth. The living, the
living he shall praise thee. Were not these your pleadings at the throne of
grace? And did not you promise to God, and purpose in your heart, that if God
would spare you, you would celebrate his praises? And shall not there be a
correspondence betwixt your actions when you were in fears, and your actions,
when your great danger (by the Plague) is over?

2. Should not you thus praise God for your preservation, Who have such
examples for your practice, recorded in the Scripture. When Hezekiah had been
sick and was recovered he sang forth the praises of the Lord, Isa. 38.19, 20.
When David had been in danger of death and was delivered, he deliberates with
himself what he should return and render to the Lord, Psalm. 116.12, 13 etc.
What shall I render to the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? I will take
the cup of Salvation, and will call upon the name of the Lord. Ver. 17. I will
offer unto thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving -- For your imitation consider
David's practice, (1.) He propounds a case of conscience. Since I was brought
low and the Lord has helped me; since the sorrows of death have compassed me
about, and God has delivered me, what shall I render? What must I do? What
return must I make? And he presses himself to this by four forcible Arguments,
in these words, for all his benefits toward me. He considered,

First, Benefits received. Kindnesses call for acknowledgments; favors are
obliging. We must give thanks in, and for afflictions, much more when we are
delivered. I deserved judgments, but benefits have been my receipt.

Secondly, The Author of them, [His] benefits; The kindnesses of men should not
be forgotten, much less the benefits of God. Your life is a benefit, and God is
the Author of it.

Thirdly, The Number of them; [All] his benefits; they were many, not a few.
Three things are innumerable: Gods mercies to us, Our sins against God, The
evils that good men suffer,
Psalm. 40.5, 12.

Fourthly, The Person to whom they were given: For all his benefits to [me.]
Has God indeed given such mercy to me? Has God continued life to me, so vile,
so unworthy, Oh what shall I render? (2.) He resolves this case propounded; I
will take the Cup of salvation; I will offer the sacrifice of praise. God has
taken from you (for the present) the Cup of death, which was to so many a Cup
of trembling; Mat. 20.22, 23. Jer. 16.7.
he has removed your Cup of affliction, and instead thereof has given you a
Cup of Consolation, and a cup running over with variety of mercies, and will
not you take the Cup of Salvation, Psalm. 16.5.
and offer the Sacrifice of praise? Do you see David (in the like case) so
diligent and inquisitive what to render, and so peremptory and resolute, to
offer praise to God, and will not you go and do likewise?

3. Is not this the noblest work you can engage in, to praise God, and to
celebrate with thankfulness the greatness of his mercy and goodness? It is the
work of Angels to be praising God; and when you take your flight into heaven,
and are perfectly removed from sin, sorrow, suffering, temptation, wants, you
shall do nothing else but love, and praise, and admire God? And will you not in
the mean while accustom your self to that work on earth, which shall be your
employment in heaven? And will you not take occasion hereunto, by so great a
mercy as God at such a time as this has vouchsafed you?

4. Is not God most worthy of your highest and your heartiest praises? You were
not worthy of Gods mercies, you were not worthy of life, but God is worthy of
the best of your praises, were they as perfect as the Hallelujahs of the Saints
in heaven. God indeed is above all praise, Neh. 9.5. But yet he is pleased with
his peoples praising of him.

5. Will you praise the efficacy of your Antidotes, and the skill of your able
Physician, by whose help you have been (under God) preserved: And will you not
be much more in praising of God, for your safety, when without his blessing all
had been ineffectual? Will you praise the Instrument and means, and say, I had
an able Doctor, and not the principal cause of your preservation, and say, I
had a good God.

6. Will not you praise God for his mercy toward you, no, not for your life,
when this is all that God requires at your hands, that you should be th^nkful
for your life, and thankfully improve it for his glory? You cannot make a
requital, but God expects some return; you cannot make a retaltation, but God
looks for some retribution: And will not you think an alms ill bestowed upon
that beggar, that will not give you thanks? And will not life be continued to
the aggravation of your sin, if you are not thankful for it?

7. Is not this a duty that will well become you? A Christian does then act
most like a Christian when he is praising God, in tongue, in heart, and life,
Psalm. 33.1, 2. and 147.1. Praise is comely for the upright. Three things are
very comely, To weep as a Sinner, to walk as a Saint, to rejoice as a Son.

8. Will not you give to God the glory of his preserving providence, when if
you do not, (that are Gods people) none else will? The wicked that are spared,
they will not, they cannot praise God; they will dishonor him, they will speak
to Gods dishonor, and act to Gods dishonor, so that if you do not praise God
for his sparing so many alive, none else will: And shall God be without all
thankful acknowledgments of his remembering mercy, in the midst of judgment? God
forbid: That amongst all the thousands that are spared, there should be none
found, making some thankful return to God. This number will be but small;
amongst the Ten Lepers that were cleansed there was but one found thankful. If
you would not have God to lose the glory of his providence, then you must be
the men that must honor him for it. Many wicked men were not found praying to
be preserved, much less will they be found praising, when they are preserved.

9. Have you more cause to bless God for life than others have, and yet will
not you do it? Your life is more sweet and comfortable to you, than the lives
of wicked men are, or can be, forasmuch as you have those comforts with life,
and that Communion with God in life, that wicked men have not: They live only a
natural life, and have only the sweetness of natural life, but you with this
life have also the comforts of an higher life, and yet will not you bless God
for it? They are delivered from the Grave for a while, but not from the wrath
of God too; from the Grave, but not from the danger of hell too, but so are
you: And have you so much cause to bless God for life, and will you want an
heart to bless him?

10. Is this the most effectual way to have life continued to you, and yet will
not you do it? To have life continued will be, to be thankful for it; else God
(finding you unthankful) when the Plague is over, might commission death by
some other distemper, to take that from you, which you would not be thankful
for.

11. Is not life the sweetest of all earthly mercies, and more to be prized,
and yet will not you be thankful to God for it that has so signally continued
it unto you? Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for his life:
And yet will not you give thanks to God for life? What earthly thing will you
be thankful for, and what mercy upon earth will you make returns to God for, if
not for life?

12. Do you find unthankful Men placed amongst the greatest rank of sinners,
and yet will you be unthankful? Unthankful Persons are numbered among
Blasphemers, Covetous, Disobedient to Parents, such as are without Natural
affection; false Accusers, Despisers of those that are good, etc. 2 Timothy 3.2,
3, 4. and, will you yet be unthankful, and that for your Life? Thus, by these
considerations you should press your heart to give Praises to God for this so
great Preservation.

SECTION III.
III. 6 Helps to thankfulness for life.
WHat is the course that those that remain, after this Judgment, should take, to
be thankful to God, and to render Praises to him for the Preservation of
themselves, and those of their Relations continued to them?

Take these Rules.

1. If you would render Thanks to God in Tongue, in He^rt and L^fe, for this
Mercy, then get a right judgment of the worth and greatness of the Mercy, that
you, and some of yours are continued after this Visitation. Those that do not
prize a Mercy, will never be thankful for it: What a Mercy is life to you, that
are not yet assured of the love of God? What a Mercy is life to you, that are
not yet certain of the Salvation of your Souls? or, if you are sure of Heaven,
yet is life to you a great Mercy; that you have time to do the Works that God
has appointed you to do. Consider also what a Mercy it is to have your
Children continued, that you may yet Instruct them, and Pray for them; that you
may see Christ formed in them before you or they do die.

2. If you would be thankful for life, and have an heart to render Praises to
the Lord, for your own, and your Relations; consider, how uncomfortable your
Life had been, had God continued you, and taken away your nearest Relations;
and, how uncomfortable your Life would have been, had God continued them only,
and taken you away from them: You may consider while you live, the Discomforts
of your Relations, and the sorrow of their hearts, if God had removed you by
death; What an uncomfortable Widow would your Wife (now) have been? what
uncomfortable Orphans would your Children [now] have been! You have enough
before you, and amongst you, that are sad Instances of this: Oh, consider this,
and it will be a means to make you thankful, and to give to God the Glory of
your Preservation.

3. Retain in your memory the greatness of this Mercy, when you have
apprehended how great it is; a forgetful person will be an unthankful person:
When David would have his Soul to bless God for his Mercy, he lays a charge
upon himself not to forget the Benefits he had received, Psalm. 103.2. Bless the
Lord, oh my Soul, and forget not all his benefits: Record Gods Mercy to you
herein, and get it imprinted on the Table of your heart: forgetfulness is a
great hinderance to every duty; as, some Men forget their sins, and they will
not be humbled for them: Some Men forget Gods Mercies, and they will not be
thankful for them: some forget both, and are neither penitent nor thankful. So,
to remember some things, and forget others, is very injurious to Men's Souls;
as, Some remember Gods Mercy, and forget their sins: and these presume. Some
remember their sins, and forget Gods Mercy: and these despair. But, it is best
to remember both our sins and Gods Mercy: the one will make us humble, and the
other thankful.

4. Let the Relations that God has continued unto you, have a room in your
heart and affection, according to the measure that God commands: He that has
Children spared, and has not suitable affections for them, will not, cannot be
thankful unto God for the continuance of their lives, and so Husbands and
Wives: but, then you must love them, and your own life, but according to the
measure that God allows: For, to love any of these, your Relations, or your
Life immoderately, will not be to be thankful for them, but to abuse them, and
make Idols of them: Let your own Life and your Relations have their allowance
of your love, but no ^re.

5. Pray to God for a Praising Thankful heart for this Mercy. God gives us all
our Mercies, and God must give us a Thankful heart for these Mercies, else we
cannot give to God the glory of them: When you were in your danger you were
afraid, least God should deny you life, when you Prayed unto him for it: but,
are you as afraid, least you should not have an heart thankfully to improve it,
when he has granted it unto you? You Prayed for life, now Pray to God to make
you thankful, and thankfully to improve it:

6. Labor to keep your Graces lively and vigorous: To Praise God is a lively
Work, and a dull heart cannot do it: You must love God for his Mercy, if you
would Praise him for his Mercy: You must delight in God, if you would Praise
him: the more lively your graces are, the more sweet and comfortable your Life
will be; and, the more comfort you have in life, the more your heart will be
engaged to give God the glory of it: and so shall you be found amongst those
few that do endeavor to live in some measure answerably to so great a Mercy,
as Preservation from the grave, in a time of Plague.

FINIS.

