Ludit, sed neminem lo dit mea Musa jocosa
Quoga, videt, ridet, nec retinere queat
Englished.

My merry Muse does jest, but non abuse
It laughs at what it sees, nor can it choose


Sequitur post nubila Phoebus.

Et prodesse solent, and delecture Poetae.

Printed for M. Wright at the Kings head in the Old Bayley. 1662

Donne's SATYR. CONTAINING 1. A short Map of mundane Vanity 2. A Cabinet of
Merry Conceits. 3. Certain pleasant Propositions, and Questions, with their
merry Solutions and Answers.
Being very Useful, Pleasant, and Delightful to all; and Offensive to none.

By Jo. Done.

London, Printed by R. W. for M. Wright, at the Kings Head in the Old-Bailey,
1662.

To the Right Worshipful, and his very good Friend, Sir Francis Edwards
Baronet, and to his truly virtuous Mother, the right Worshipful Lady, Sicely
Edwards of Shrewsbury, in the County of Salop, Widow, the Author entirely
wishes the full accomplishment of their choicest desires both here, and
hereafter.
Right Worshipful,
AS after sickness, health; after restraint, liberty; after sorrows, solace;
after pain, pleasure; after showers, sunshine; after wars, peace; and after
melancholy, mirth is the more musical, sweet, acceptable, delightful, and
pleasant to the full possessour and free enjoyer thereof; so in regard of the
many and manifold pressures, oppressions, plunderings, exilements,
imprisonments, and inutterable injuries and wrongs many millions have for these
many years of late undoubtedly endured, if they were right Royalists; and
wherein your Right Worshipful Father Sir Thomas Edwards late deceased (I am
confident) did not escape scotfree: I have presumed to present to your
favorable Censure, A Cabinet of merry Conceits, which I penned at some
interims of leisure for mine own private recreation then, but for yours now;
wishing that you may be as pleasant in the perusing of them, as I was in the
composing of them. Wherein I have pretermitted divine matters, for, non
ludendum cum sanctis; remembering that the Fly playing with the candle had his
wings clipped for his over boldness: nor have I intermeddled with State Affairs,
for, quae supra nos, nihil ad nos; not forgetting Aesops Wolf, who prying into
the Lions den, had his skin pulled over his ears for his presumption. Nor have
I pointed at any particular persons by (Critick-like) traducing his good name;
or (Cinick-like) carping at his carriage and conditions; for I never liked of
such an one as Horace hints at, -- duminodo risum
Excuciat sibi non hic cuiquam parcit amico.
So he may shake with laughter where he goes,
He does not spare the dearest friend he knows.
Since this late, though long desired thrice happy Alteration, far beyond the
expectation of humane wit, (for therein was digitus Dei, the visible power of
the invisible Divine Providence perspicuously manifested to all the world) very
many, and those great ones too, who though they had the cream of the former
times, have clean turned Cat in pan, and would have all, (if it might be) they
find such sweetness in it. Indeed it was long since a remarkable Machiavilian
Maxim, that qui nescit dissimulare, nescit vivere, (i. e.) who cannot
dissemble cannot live; which though it were a Heathenish speech, yet was never
put more in practice then in these Phanatick times; for he that cannot
metamorphose his shape like Proteus, vary his hiew like the Polypus, change his
color like the Cameleon, bear two faces under a hood like Janus, comply with
every Planet like Mercury, vary and change like the Moon constantly, turn with
the Weathercock, adulate with Aristippus, equivocate with Synon, dissemble with
Gnatho, hunt with the Hound, and hold with the Hare, carry fire in the one
hand, and water in the other; and in a word, who cannot temporize at all times,
with all persons, and in all places, that man knows not how to look or live in
this hypocritical, perverse, and crooked Generation. I remember a Jest, as I
heard fathered upon Dr. Pearn a Cantabrigian, in the time of Hen. 8. in whose
Reign there was much chopping and changing in matters of Religion, and still
this Dr. temporiz'd and turned with them at a hairs breadth; who being a
notable bone Companion, and invited to a great Feast, after dinner was ended,
he very pleasantly culled out a Gentlewoman there to dance with him, whom after
a little tracing he highly applauded for her exquisite dancing; (as indeed she
merited no less) she thanking him for her undeserved commendations, retorts
this jear upon him; Truly Mr. Dr. I must ingeniously confess I can dance
indifferent well, but I cannot turn so well as you: whereat the whole company
then present laughed very heartily. Another Gentleman in an eminent Office at
Court in the same K. Henry's Reign, kept ever a correspondency with the times,
let them turn how they would he weighed not, when as others that had a more
tender conscience were displaced and lost all; which some well observing, asked
him how he could hold in such difficult times as those were: Pish, (quoth he)
ye are all fools, ego ex salice fio, non ex quercu; I am made of the tractable
and pliable Willow, and not of the inflexible and stubborn Oak. Wherein the
loyal Royallists rightly resembles the Oak; for as the well-rooted Oak will not
be easily overturned by any violent storm, or furious tempest whatsoever; so
the well gounded Royallist will not be moved, much less be carried away with
every whisling wind of any vain, erroneous, and false doctrine, but like
Aristotle's Quadratus, in utrumque paratus, come weal or woe, prosperity or
povery, he continues still the same. The Oak was formerly by the Heathens
dedicated to Jupiter, and so termed Jovis arbor; but we may now more properly
call it, not Jovis, but Jehovae arbor, not Joves, but Jehovahs tree; for the
Royal Oak, by the special Divine Providence proved a most happy Asylum, and
sure succor and refuge to his most Sacred Majesty, when his innocent integrity
was most eagerly pursued after by those raging and ravening, blood-seeking and
blood-sucking Wolves, (palliated in fair and specious sheeps clothing) to be
utterly devoured by them. Now right Worshipful, in that I well know, that I
shall have some mocking Momus, carping Zoilus, and snarling Cynick (whereof no
age is free) censoriously to traduce, and despitefully to writhe and wrest the
sense and meaning os some of these my harmless Lines; I tender these my
pleasing pains to your Worship as my Mecaenas, to secure and shrewd them under
the tutelary Patronage of your Worships protection, as under Achilles
sevenfold Buckler, from the inevitable darts of calumniating tongues. In an
assured Confidence whereof, I am

Your Worships most humbly devoted Servant, to be commanded, Jo. Done,
Salopiensis.

A SHORT MAP OF Mundane Vanity.
Vanitas vanitatum, and omnia vanitas.
Vanity of vanity, and all is vanity.
1. Of Mundane Vanity.
WHen Solomon had tried all variety
Of mundane pleasures, even to full satiety;
And after thoroughly weighed the worlds condition,
And therein man's: concludes with this Position,
All that man can in this wide World inherit,
Is vain, and but vexation of the spirit.
2. Of the World.
The World's much like a fair deceitful Nut,
Whereto when once the knife of truth is put,
And it is opened, a right judicious eye
Finds nothing in it, but mere vacuity.
3. Of the same.
The World's a Book, all Creatures are the Story,
Wherein God reads dumb lectures of his glory.
4. Another of the same.
Earth is the womb from whence all living came,
So is it the tomb, all go unto the same;
And as at first all naked thence were born,
So as naked thither all at last return;
Unless they carry thence a winding sheet,
To hide their weak frail nakedness, most meet.
5. Another of the same.
When Aloxander had subdued almost
This spacious Globe, and therein every Coast,
He asked his Tutour Aristotle, whether
There were more Worlds to conquer altogether:
Who answered, there were many worlds beside;
Whereat ambitious Alexander cried:
Which shows this great world is far lesser than
The small heart, in the little world of man.
6. Of man the little World.
The whole course of man's life compared may be
Unto an Interlude, or Comedy:
The World's the Theater, or Stage whereon
Some part or other's acted by each one;
One acts a Prince, which in great pomp does shine,
Another personates a grave Divine;
This acts a curious Courtier neat and gay,
And that a Clown, or Jeaster in the Play.
This an hard Lawyer pleading at the Bar,
That a rich Merchant that had traveled far;
This a bold Soldier that his fortune tries,
A Doctor that which cures all maladies:
This a Shopkeeper selling sorts of wares,
And that a Plowman full of carks and cares;
This a rich Usurer, which of gold has store,
A Beggar that, which goes from door to door.
In fine, some act this part, and others that,
And some present (indeed) they know not what:
To this a long, to that a short part's cast,
But short or long, they all come off at last:
Nature has a Catastrophe intended,
Death says the Epilogue, and th'Play is ended.
7. Of youthful Love.
Love's an entaged frenzy of the Brain,
Which makes one extreme sick, yet feels no pain;
H'as all his parts, yet puts them to no function,
He pines away, and yet's in no consumption:
He has a heart, yet's heartless, sees, yet's blind,
Not mentis compos, yet he has a mind.
He labors not, and yet no rest he takes,
He ofttimes waking sleeps, and sleeping wakes;
He laughs and weeps, sighs and sings presently,
He Is in good health, yet ready for to dye:
He Is loose, and yet in close captivity,
Wounded yet whole, sick yet well, bound yet free:
He Is an inanimate without a Soul,
In that another body has it whole.
He Is like a moving mere Anatomy,
Or like a seeming living Mortuary;
He leads a living death, and dying life,
'Cause whom he loves, he cannot have to wife.
Thus 'twixt despair and hope, both night and day,
His careful careless time he drives away.
8. Of Lust.
A Leacher's of a Leeches nature right,
The which in sucking sets his sole delight;
Its very eager at a fluent vein,
Still sucks and vents, and vents and sucks again:
And he like Hanibal can never rest,
Whether he lose the field, or get the best.
9. Of Ebriety.
Drunkards like one sick of the Dropsy lies,
The more he drinks, the more for drink he cries;
And when h'as more then well his hide can hold,
Yet still he thirsts for more, and more fain would.
10. Of Avarice.
A Miser's like the dog, which with a bone
Swum over the water, whilst the sun clear shone;
Greedy of more, he at the shadow catches,
But brought naught home; so do most miser wretches:
Such pinch and pine their belly and their back,
And though they have too much, yet more they lack.
11. Of Frugality.
A frugal thirsty man compare one may,
T'a fasting Eve, before an Holy Day;
His fasting over night makes others fare
The next day better for what he did spare.
12. Of Prodigality.
A Prodigal is like a stormy shower,
Which if impetuously it down do pour,
It Is soon gone; so the faster he does spend,
The sooner he brings all unto an end:
For it is a Philosophic Axiom sure,
Nothing that is violent can long endure.
13. Of Gluttony.
A beastly Glutton's like a Cormorant,
Which when of Fish he lights of a great haunt,
It greedily ingurgitates such store,
That it is fain to cast some upon shore:
So when this all-devouring Glutton puts
More offas in his full farc'd foul fat guts,
Then his o'reladen Panch can well contain,
He loathsomely ejects it out again.
14. Of Hypocrisy.
A formal Hypocrite is every way
Directly like an Actor in a Play;
Who (what e're the spectators of him deemeth)
Is not the same which then in show he seems.
15. Of Astrology.
Plato did say, that he did wonder much,
(His censure of Astrologers was such)
That they on one another did not smile,
When e're they met, they used such fraud and guile;
And that Impostor with his subtle fictions,
And with his Perhaps ambiguous war-predictions,
Lapt up his quaint mysterious Dilems slily,
But now his own side knows he did but lie lie.
16. Of Theology, or Divinity.
Theology's like Moses shining face,
So veiled, vile Atheists cannot view its blaze;
But to such as thereof make just account,
It Is like to Christ transfigur'd on the Mount.
17. Of the Law.
Law's a Meander, Labyrinth, or Maze,
Wherein though men do scrutinize each place;
Yet betwixt hope, despair, and fear, and doubt,
A silver clue at laft must guide them out.
18. Of Physic.
Physick's a ship pump to force water thence,
By leaks procured through Pilates negligence;
Want of which pumping, and of cauking chinks,
(If any be) the ship and all soon sinks.
19. Of Humane Knowledge.
All humane knowledge when it comes to trial,
Is like the Storks meat in a clofe mouthed vial;
The Fox looked, liked, licked, longed, (but not a pin
The better) he never touched the meat within.
20. Of Learning.
Learning's a trimming for to set out brave
The homely plain apparel Nature gave.
21. Of High Birth.
High Birth is but a mere vainglorious brag,
At first fetched from some Misers muncorn bag.
22. Of Beauty.
Beauty's a flower in prime of morn affected,
And in declining noon a blast rejected.
23. Of Honor.
Honor's a shadow which the follower flies,
And such as from it haste, it after hyes.
24. Of Pleasure.
Pleasure's a short sweet dance of joy and gladness,
With sport begun, soon done, and ends in sadness.
25. Of Pride.
Pride's a mere meteor made of slightly matter,
A soapy bubble raised of wind and water;
The richest silks that pride can wear, worms gave them,
The comeliest corpse that pride can bear, worms have them.
26. Of Ambition.
The ambitious man a ladder first does clime,
But (heedless) never looks back at any time;
The Devil steals the staves away amain,
For to prevent his coming down again:
When he sees no way thence, but he must fall,
He tumbles down, and breaks his neck withal.
27. Of Applause.
Applause is but a puff of wind which blows,
Now here, now there, as each one's fancy goes.
28. Of Marriage.
Folks wedded are like guests at a great feast,
Having well fed would gladly be releast;
The unmarried fain would in their rooms be placed,
That (hungry) they of their good cheer might taste.
29. Of Riches.
Riches puff up the owner, like the Ass
Which did with Queen Tomyris statue pass;
The people to her glorious Image bowed,
The Ass thought they him adored, and so grew proud.
30. Of Poverty.
A poor man's like an Almanac that is gone,
Quite out of date, cast by, nor looked upon;
Or like as Aesops poor old Lion was
Of all beasts scorned, as much as of the Ass.
31. Of Venery.
As a thief in a Candle never does cease,
Till it by running wastes the candle grease;
So frequent Venery exhausts soon all
Man's life, preserving moisture radical.
Of the four Ages of Man.
32. 1. Of Infancy.
The Infant at's first entrance to this light,
By's piteous cries and tears foretells right,
He Is come into a world of grief, not laughter,
And (if he lives) will feel much more hereafter.
33. 2. Of Youth.
Youth's ape-like apt, to play with, and rejoice
In babies, bables, rattles, gauds, and toys;
Its wild, rash, rude in every enterprise,
Bruit-like incapable of good advise.
34. 3. Of Manhood.
Manhood is like a roaring raging Sea,
Wherein as waves and surges, night and day
Some loss or cross, some sorrow, grief, or pain
Straight follows in the others neck amain.
35. 4. Of Old Age.
Old Age is the mere Map of Miseries,
And Receptacle of all M^ladies;
No use of the five Senses it retains,
Except the sense of Feeling of all pains,
36. Of Man's Life.
The whole course of man's life is every way
Directly (if we note) but as one day;
The same things, or the like, we daily plain
Do re-act over and over, and over again:
Why do we not (as cloid) then loath this light,
Because life never so bitter still is sweet.
37. Another of the same, and of the brevity thereof.
Man's life's compared to many things I find,
For Job does similize it to the wind;
James to a vapor, Esaias unto grass,
David t'a shadow, Paul unto a race;
Some to a sleep, and others to a dream,
And some to the swift running of a stream;
Some to a Poast, some to a shuttle flung,
Some to a span, some to a tale or song;
Some to a bubble in a shower of rain,
Which soon is up, and soon is out again:
Some to a Cobweb, as soon marred as made,
And some to a fair flower which soon does fade;
All which (with many more) do show (in brief)
The swift celerity of Man's short life.
38. Of Man.
Man's at his birth a poor small red worm sprauling,
A silly slimy creature brought forth brawling;
Man's at his death a pale worm in a sheet,
Wherein worms breed, worms feed, meat for worms meet.
39. Of Death.
Death is the Haven whereat all alive
Must with their voyage good or bad arrive.
Mors ultima linea rerum.
FINIS.
Roundhead. I Am clome so high, I fear that I shall fall.

Cavallier. I look hard for a day shall pay for all.

The Wheel of Fortune then, but now by Divine Providence, (blessed be God for
it) whereon was a CAVALLIER ascending, and a ROUNDHEAD descending. Roundhead.
Lo I Am on top of Fortune's Wheel,
Each minute ready down to reel;
And if the Wheel but once turn round,
I shall lie level with the ground;
Then if I happen to be poor,
I am but as I was before:
For (as some say) the Eagles plumes,
All feathers with them mixed consumes;
So some ill gotten Goods will waste
All others that are with them placed:
And if the Goods that I did plunder,
Do never prosper, it is no wonder;
Nor let there any that do wrong,
Think for to thrive or flourish long.
So from the Church who holds her due,
The same severely after rue;
And such as Sacrilege commit,
Have never good success with it:
For who e're had Tolossus Gold
The same unhappily did hold.
Thus God will plague us as we have deserved,
And as we others served, we shall be served.

Per quod quis peccat, per idem punitur and ipse. Cavallier. Lo I Am at
Fortune's lowest pitch,
Now very poor, who late was rich;
Yet as Seas ebb, and flow amain,
As Sun does set, and rise again;
As sorrows for a night endure,
So joys come in the morning sure.
And as God suffered once the Devil,
To do good patient Job much evil,
For he against him furious mad,
Robbed him at once of all he had;
Yet not long after all his trouble,
God added to him all things double:
And what was done (the Scripture says)
Was but for trial of Jobs faith.
So I know my Redeemer lives,
The Lord is he that takes, and gives;
He wounds, he heals, he kills, he cures,
From him comes what ever Man endures.
He in due time my pain will ease,
And cause these Civil Wars to cease.
Thus God at length will raise Us from the dust,
Who in him with a steadfast faith do trust.

Heu passi graviora, Deus dabit his quoque finem. For these Verses (which were
sent to a Gentleman and miscarried) I lay long time in Prison in Marshal
Hoptons House, the Year before the last great Sickness in Shrewshury. Anno Dom.
(...)

Place this between folio 14, and 15.

A CABINET OF Merry Conceits.
1. Of the Sun. Sit mihi Sol solus.
THe Indians do adore to this day even
The Sun, and Moon, and all the host of heaven;
Ascribing unto these the growth and birth
Of all Oars, Mines, and Metals in the earth:
Yet Sol the chief of Deities they hold,
For by his influence is their precious Gold
In pregnant Tellus fruitful womb engendered,
That Mammon of this world so dearly tendered;
The brightness of whose luster does so blind
Some Worldlings eyes, that God they never mind:
And though those Pagans as a God do prize him,
Yet to a Devil some do similize him.
The Devil's termed in Scripture, Prince of th Air, As thus.
And rules three Regions there main large and fair;
And does not the Sun sway with greater power
Through all those spacious Regions every hour?
Nay there old Phoebus with one eye espies
Far more then he with all his Argos eyes.
The Devil can by Gods permissive might
Transform himself into an Angel bright;
And does not somewhere the resplendent Sun
Do every day as much, at morn or noon?
Satan the Earth does compass to and fro,
And so does Sol, (as all the world does know)
For he to see us daily does not cease,
Then goes at night to the Antipodes.
The Devil Lucifer has his name right,
Of his distributing and giving light;
And yet a thousand Devils such as he
Cannot give half the light as Sol (all see)
That master Devil Beelzebub of flies,
The Idol God, (for so his name implies
In Hebrew) though of swarms he has great store
Buzzing about his Offerings evermore;
Yet Sol breeds more of them in one of's Regions
Then he, and of his Devils many Legions;
And did but the Indians note the many evils
Sol them procures, they would count him worst of devils:
For with his scorching beams he daily burns them,
And into the black shape of Devils turns them;
And they do see that only for their Oar
They Have been by Spaniards plagued so grievous sore,
That they confessed they would rather go to hell,
Then unto heaven with Spaniards there to dwell.
They therefore as a Devil should abhor him,
Rather then as their chiefest God adore him;
And as a fiend they rather should defy him,
Then as their dearest friend so deifie him.
2. Of the Sun Tavern.
One staggering out of the Sun Tavern came,
And being far in drink, and out of frame,
A friend him meets and greets, but not a word
This stupefied Sot could him afford;
And if he did, (a wager might be laid)
He would not stand to any thing he said;
His face being foully fleckt, and both his eyes
With drink main red, his friend to him thus cries,
I know where you were late I Will hold a gun,
For your face shows that you were in the Sun.
3. Of the Moon Inn or Tavern, and of the Moon in the Eclipse.
There was an Host which the Moon Tavern held,
Cornuto called, and there he long time dwell'd;
And his Wife's name was Phoebe, very rare
For beauty, and they called their Dog star
Phoebe (according to her name) was light,
And other the male Planets did delight,
To visit her, for they are all given to ranging,
As Venus, and as Phoebe are to changing.
The House was set forth in such curious wise,
It seeem'd an heaven, or earthly Paradise;
The lower rooms shone with various radiations,
Caused by reflection of some Constellations:
The Chambers like the spangled Canopy
Were decked with stars delightful to the eye:
The twelve Signs were drawn neatly 'bout the bed,
Cornuto lay, and Aries over his head;
It chanced that Jove and Mars did both there meet,
Jove with fair Phoebe, Mars with Venus sweet:
Hermes comes in, and asked for Mars and Jove,
Cornuto told him, they were both above;
He stealing up there spies out Mars and Venus
In amorous embraces Crurium tenus:
Goes in another room, and there descries
Light Phoebe, and bright Jove betwixt her things.
This brave (quoth he) yet they do but their function,
For Planets will be always in Conjunction;
And I my self (indeed) I needs must say,
At other times have done as much as they:
And going to Cornuto, asked if he
The Moon in the Eclipse did ever see.
Cornuto answered no; but he would fain,
Quoth Hermes come, and I will show you plain;
Let Us steal up softly lest the Dog Star bark,
Peep through that chink, see what is done there in dark.
He spied, and looked on Hermes very sad,
I Have seen a sight (quoth he) makes me horn mad,
I Have often heard, but never so much did heed
But a man in the Moon I saw in deed.
He was in motion there between her hips
And that was sure the cause of the Eclipse.
4. Of Charles Wayne.
A Gentleman some Neighbors did invite
To his house to sup in a Winters night,
And whilst each one in order told his Tale
About the fire over a Cup of Ale,
It chanced some bricks came tumbling down, whereat
Afraid, all fell over one another flat.
And some went out the matter for to see,
Quoth one that then was of the company.
Look, look I pray, do not you see Charles Wayne
And the three Horses over the chimney plain;
So that its very like some horses hoof
Struck down those bricks that loosly stood aloos.
For if the Wayn it self had then gone over
It would have battered down abundance more;
And then it is like (for which we have cause to pray)
Not one of us had gone alive away.
5. Of Galaxia, via lactea, or the milky way in Heaven.
One asking whence, and upon what occasion
This heavenly Sign had first his appellation;
Another to him merrily replied,
That at the latter end of Christmas tide,
The Gods and Goddesses then each with either
Agreeing for to wasle altogether;
Fair Ganimedes was by Joves command
As messenger dismissed out of hand,
To fetch some milk, who coming back again
With a great bowl, the Dog Star barkt amain;
And he being sore afraid lest it would bite him,
The Moon then being under cloud to light him,
He at a star, for want of light, then stumbled,
And therewith fell, and all the milk down tumbled;
So that e're since that time, till this day even,
Star-gazers called the milky way in Heaven.
6. Of Ignis fatuus, commonly called, Will of the Wisp.
This Ignis fatuus in the darksome night,
With his round rolling eye-deluding light,
The amazed traveller leads through bust and brakes,
Over hedge and ditch, through pits, and ponds, and lakes;
He knows not what to think, or do, or say,
Or whether's better for to go or stay:
And it infatuates so his stupid brain,
He cannot hit the right way home again.
7. Of certain Constellations in Heaven.
One telling that besides the Planets seven,
There Is a great number of strange signs in heaven;
As the Pleiades, Charles wain, Orion,
Castor and Pollux, Tiger, Dragon, Lion,
Arcturus Yard, Boots, Pelican,
The Dolphin, Galaxia, and the Swan,
The Bull the greater, and the lesser Bear,
And the Dog star unto them very near;
One hearing him said flat, he would not believe it,
Although for real truth he out might give it;
Did you e're see or hear, (quoth he) say right,
The Dog Star bark, Bull roar, or those Bears bite.
For in the Moonshine I Have often looked and waited,
Yet never saw Bull or Bear by that Dog baited.
8. Of a falling Meteor.
An Astrologian in a moonshine night
Taking the altitude of a stars height
With His Jacob's staff erected toward the sky,
It chanced a Meteor fell down instantly,
At which a Country Clown a great shout making,
His Jacob's Staff then for a Crossbow taking,
Thinking he would hit a star, unto him says,
You Are a brave marks-man, O well shot In Faith.
9. Of the Shadow of the Gnomon of a Dial.
Upon the Gnomons shadow if you spy all
It shows how swift time goes, and we must dye all.
10. Of the World turned round.
Copernicus did take a world of pains
Having a whimsie in his whirling brains,
By strange fantastic Arguments to prove
The Heavens to stand still, and the Earth to move;
Yet of late days his words for truth were found
For they stood still, and then the world turned round.
11. A dark Riddle proposed to blind Homer by some Fishermen.
In Thickets, Groves, and Bushes now and then
I do pursue my Game with Beagles ten;
Those that I catch, of life I do deprive,
And those I cannot catch I keep alive.
12. Of a Cuckold.
A Citizen of London, and his Bride
Sitting at door together in Cheapside,
And seeing some acquaintance by them pass,
Being lately where a merry meeting was;
(Quoth he) of Cuckolds yonder I discover
A dozen right, for I did count them over.
(Quoth she) are they so many just, do you know
-- You are an odd man sure in saying so.
13. Another of the same.
A Man and Wife upon the Seashore walking,
And merrily to one another talking,
(Quoth he) if Cuckolds all in the Sea were cast,
A monstrous number would be drowned at last.
As sure as death there would (she did reply)
Yet therein you speak unadvisedly;
For if you e're desire to see that day
First learn to swim, I hold it the best way.
14. Of two Inns, the King's Head, and the Crown.
A Widdower and Widow lived in Town;
He at the King-Head, and she at the Crown.
It chanced they made (the better for to thrive)
Between them a Conjuction Copulative:
Yet (for a while) they being matched each to either,
Knew not at which Inn best to live together;
But seeing the King's Head and Crowns separation
Had caused great distractions in this Nation,
She left her Inn, at his her life to lead,
And so the Crown came right to the King's Head.
15. Of the Watch.
One got up to make water in the night,
Felt for a pot, at last on one did light;
Which he found brimfull underneath some beds,
And out he casts it on the Watchmens heads;
We are the Watch, (said they) you are much to blame
To Abuse use us so, (but he knew not the same)
The Watch (quoth he) then you did watch in vain,
Else you would escaped Zantippes shower of rain:
The Proverb now is verified right,
Harm watch, harm catch, for it proved so to night;
The watchmen well appeased with this his jest,
Bids him good night, he wishes them good rest.
16. Of two fellow Travelers.
Two old Comrades their fortunes went to try.
Vowing to one another faithfully
To ^old together whilst that they had breath,
And never to part asunder till their death;
It chanced whilst they were in a desert walking,
And there about some serious matters talking,
A furious Bear pursues them eagerly,
Away for safeguard of their lives they fly;
The one (more active) climbs a tree apace,
And the other (weary) fell down on his face:
The Bear full gorged did not then on him pray,
But sented at him, and so went his way:
At length he rises up, but sore afraid,
And he that from the tree came to him, said,
I prithee tell me true, what said the Bear,
Whilst he even now was whispering in thy ear;
Of such a knave he charged me to take heed,
That will forsake his friend in his most need.
17. Of a drunken Fiddler.
A Fiddler playing at a merry meeting,
Was got foul foxt, by fuddling more then fitting;
And casting his Crowd careless on his back,
Forgot to tie the case, but left it slack;
From thence he had not many furlongs gone,
But lost his Crowd, for which he made great moan;
I Am quite undone (he cries) I will go spill me,
For if I e're go home my wife will kill me:
Quoth one that met him fully in the face,
Alas (poor wretch) I pity thy sad case;
My Case (said he) is not to be lamented,
For here it is, but I Am much discontented:
I Have lost my Fiddle, and my Fiddlestick,
Which makes me out of Tune, and very sick.
18. Of two great Travelers, the one Welsh, and the other English.
Shentilemen,

You Will scarce believe when her tells where has been
And what her in her days has known and seen.
For her has seen Plym-hymons famous mountain,
Whence fair Sabrina first derives her fountain;
Which like an Eel creeps wrigling diverse ways,
Until it wind her self into the Seas.
Her was on top of mighty Promentories,
And of them her can tell stupendous stories:
Caverna Castle. Mologolve, Brythen:
Then you may think to heaven that her was nigh then.
So was her in a Cave quite under ground,
The furthest end whereof could never be found:
And there her heard some speak a language strange
Which from the worlds foundation never did change
Much like our language which Comrage we call,
So old none knows its first original.
Then all that hear her, hence may gather well,
Her once was near to Heaven, and hard by Hell.
Nay more^her saw (though some will think her jest)
Of Eagles (bright Apollo's Birds) a nest.
So her has seen (by Got her tells no lies)
Far more then ever did Caesar with both his eyes.
Well, cousin Daffee, has her told out her tales,
Of all that her has known and seen in Wales.
For her has gone no further all this while,
Though that her Hearers her would fain beguile.
I Have been on Pymhills top, main steep and pitch,
And bottom too of the Castalian Ditch:
The main strong raised Rousellian walls I scall'd,
By the Rotundoes late immured and palled.
I Have been on Mons Gilberti large and fair,
Reaching nigh the mid Region of the Air.
So I at Fons Bituminis have been,
Which casts forth Pitch, a rare thing to be seen.
If I of all I Have seen should tell a Story,
Then Daffee would say, I did it for vain glory:
Yet one thing very strange I Will here recite,
Which I till now had even forgotten quite.
I traveled once to so remote a Land,
That-I could with the palm of my right hand
TheCavern stop, from whence the Wind does blow
And to the self-same place I soon could go.
Nay ( Daffee) had thou been with me, I suppose
Thou might have stopped the place then with thy Nose.
(Quoth Daffee) I pray thee say no more; for I
Know now thou tell a Kelwith, that is a lie.
19. Of Thieves robbing a poor House:
Some Thieves unto a very poor House came
By night, intending for to rob the same;
A neighbor at that time who them detected,
Told them, nothing was there that they expected:
And laughing said, that they were much to blame,
And for to rob the Spittle it were a shame.
What can ye see at midnight here (I pray)
For I can here see nothing at midday.
20. Of the Dog in the Manger.
The Dog will not eat Hay himself, nor suffers
The hungry Ox when he to eat it offers:
So a Miser hoords, but uses not his Gold,
Nor will let others use it, that fain would.
21. Of angry Morris.
Gwen-clean like a truly loving wife,
Went for to see her Morris end his life.
And when the halter was about his neck,
She to him called, and with hand did beck.
At length he spying her out, asked what she would have
Nothing (good Morris) only this her crave,
That her would tell her quickly with all speed,
Tell her, where her shall sow the Turnup seed:
What turnups, now the Hangman will turn of her;
What a poxs ails her, did her come to scoff her.
Quoth she, no by her troth, her swear and vow,
But her does see, Morris is angry now.
22. Of a certain uncertain Drunkard.
'Cause I to speak with thee no sooner came,
Thou on my slackness layest all the blame;
I came not in due time (I needs must say)
Thou should have named some other time of day.
Would I Would come early that same day to thee,
Or the next day as soon as I could see;
In twilight late this matter is begun,
So by thy drunk'ness nothing will be done.
23. Of Mariners who cast over Shipboard a Friar, to whom they were confessed.
Whilst fwelling waves arise, with blustering storm
And angry seas the wearied ship enorms;
Doubtful devotions in each Sea-mans thought,
Crying out alas, our sins this evil brought.
Of Passengers, there was among the rest
A Friar, to whom their faults they all confessed:
But when they saw the Sea no whit asswag'd,
And that the Ship nigh sunk, so sore it raged:
No news (quoth one) that it to sink begins,
So laden with the burden of our Sins.
Let Us cast o're-board this Friar, on whom we lay
Our Sins, and let him bear them hence away.
His words are liked; he is Jonah's like cast over,
And straight the ship went lighter then before.
Hence learn how heavy our offenses are,
When that a ship their burden could not bear.
24. Of one not able Nosed.
Stood thy Nose in the Sun, thy mouth open quite,
Thy Teeth would tell what time of day it is right.
25. Of a long Nosed Fellow.
A witty Wagg invited to a feast,
Lights of a long Nosed fool could bear no jest;
who said (good friend) if you will but open your mouth
And hold your Nose directly to the South
Whilst the Sun shines, your Nose may for a Cock
By your Teeth serve to tell what it is a Clock.
At which the guests began to laugh apace,
But long Nose was sore vexed at the disgrace;
That both fell to foul words, from words to blows,
And all the matter often was in the Nose.
To make it short, long Nose was beat at length,
For the other proved to have the better strength:
Quoth he, I Have Noses cuft, broad, stiff, and strong,
Yet never knew any that held out so long.
26. Of a Wry-Nos'd Fellow.
A straight Youth lighted in the company
Of one whose Nose extremely stood awry;
Quoth he, Sir, I would fain know of what stuff
Your Nose is made (if you will not take it in snuff.)
Mine Is made (said he) of grisle, flesh, and blood.
And (till't grew wrong) as right as thine it stood.
I think (quoth the other) thine's no waxen Nose,
Nor is it made of Dowe (as I suppose)
Yet this I Will boldly say, and justify,
Say what thou will, thy Nose is made a Rye.
27. Of a foul Gentlewoman.
A young Man walking after a spruce Lass,
Who just before him on the way did pass;
Liked so well of each outward lineament,
That to salute her, he was fully bent.
She being o're-took, her Feature he well eyed,
And finding it but homely, thus replied:
Had I liked you as well before, I vow,
As I liked you behind, I Would kissed ye now.
The maid thus jeered, returns him back his jest;
Then you may kiss (quoth she) where you like best.
28. Of an old Gown.
A ruffling Royster flaunting up and down,
Lights of a Lass, with a rich, but old Gown;
He tenders her his service at her feet,
With cringes low, and conges neat and meet:
Pardon my boldness (Mistress) 'pray in this,
Your Vestures admired hem I prostrate kiss.
For the antiquity thereof, (quoth she)
If that, and only that, the reason be:
With my Posteriors you may make as bold,
For I am sure that they are full as old.
29. Of a lusty Lad, and a bonny Lass.
One met a couple on the high way side,
Who double on a little Titt did ride;
Quoth he, sweet Sir, and you fair lovely Lass,
Whither I pray ye do ye this way pass?
She him returns this answer courteously,
Unto a merry Meeting, here, hard by.
He notes the Horse, which then did puff and blow,
Quoth he, I muse poor Titt how thou do go;
For thou'st a huge great knavish load I find,
But that thou carriest very light behind.
30. Of a merry Bachelor.
A merry Bachelor commonly would call
Such as unwedded were, Good Fellows all;
And those for married men that he did know,
Under the name of Honest Men did go.
It came to pass He himself did wed a wife,
Whose scolding made him weary of his life;
Some friends who heard thereof (perchance) did meet him,
And by the name of Honest man did greet him.
Quoth he, as I Am an honest man, that Name
Does vex me, yet I Will not deny the same:
For were I a Good Fellow (tell ye plain)
I never would be an Honest Man again.
31. Of a bad Half-Crown.
One having a suspected Half-Crown piece,
Showed it his friend, and asked him his advise;
Who viewed it well on both sides in his hand,
Quoth he, this horse does on no hillock stand;
Nor has it any fetters that I see,
Yet I can York it otherwise, said he:
The Man on horse back (as I note him here)
Resembles right an honest Cavalier,
And looks just like the Royal King of Scots;
But the Horse (I doubt) is troubled with the bots.
32. Of two stealers of Hay by night.
A Barge-man in Hay harvest late at night,
With weary toilsome labor spent outright,
Creeps in a Cock of Hay quite over head,
And there fell fast asleep as in a bed.
Two knaves who used to steal Hay thither came,
The master and his man (whom I could name)
Went fair and softly to some Cocks of Hay,
The man takes that wherein the Barge-man lay;
And for to bind it hard he was not slack,
But lifting often it almost broke his back.
Quoth he, and swore, It weighs the Devilish and all,
I am scarce able with it for to crawl:
So much the better (fool) his master says;
For it has in it the more, the more it weighs.
At last to a Rail hard by, he him betakes,
And rests him on it, at which the Bargeman wakes.
Oh! quoth the Bargeman: the other never stays,
But (frighted) throws down all, and runs his ways.
The Barge-man thought for some fault done that day,
The Devil by night was carrying him away.
Which was worse feared it is hard for to discover,
For both were sore afraid of one another.
33. Of a Neck of Muttor.
One riding on his journey late at night,
Got to his Inn at length, and there did light;
He calls for meat: what The House did then afford,
Was straightwayes set before him on the board.
A little Neck of Mutton there was found,
With an huge deal of Pottage compast round:
He lo^oking on it, begins to doff his clothes,
Unbuttoms him, and off his doublet throws.
Some that were by, at his strange humors smiled,
Others thought surely that he was stark wild.
Quoth he, to swim this Ocean over I Will strive,
Till at the Isle of Mutton I arrive.
34. Of a Horse-shooe found.
A Tinker found a Horse-shooe on the way,
Quoth he, it is a sign of good luck to day;
He ties it on his one side very fast,
And from thence many paces had not past,
But one shot off a Piece; the Bullet glanced,
And hit his Horse shoe right (as then it chanced.)
I see (said he) Arms may do good, in case
They Are set but where they should, in the right place.
35. Of a Beardless old man.
One met a fellow in whose withered face
Old age had furrowed many a wrinkled year;
Yet made a Balk on's chin which is the place,
That Nature does adorn with bushy hair.
Small Beard replied, I pray you hold your tongue,
My Beard will come out shortly ere't be long.
36. Of Conjugal Discord.
When Man and Wife between them disagree,
They fitly unto Snails compared may be,
One house, at one time, never holds two Snails,
Nor man and wife, when each with either rails:
And when these Snail-like, fet but out their horns,
They to their neighbors make themselves mere scorns.
37. Of Wars.
In Music strings of various tunes agree
To make one sweet melodious harmony,
Yet men who play upon them with their hand,
One with another still a jarring stand,
Which most displeasing every way appears
To God, and Angels, and all good men's ears:
For the Devils are the Instruments of jars,
And the base Viols of Gods wrath are wars.
38. Of one that sent a half Cheese to his Son at Oxford.
I Have sent to you a Moon, not a Sun round,
No circle such can in our Pole be found.
('It Is like it was from the Welsh Poole.)
39. Of diverse sorts of bad Cheese.
Cheese that is snow-white or that has Argos eyes,
Methusalem's years, or Mary Magdalens cries:
Or Esau's hairs, or Lazarus scabs all over,
That Cheese is naught, I love it not therefore.
40. Of Wine mixed with Water.
Thetis and Bacchus mixed here in a bowl,
The Goddess mild the mad God does control,
Where though the liquor look pure, clean, and fine
The Watrish humor is above the Wine;
The which resembles right some female reaches,
Who as Viragoes, love to wear the Breeches.
41. Of a Watch.
A Gentleman after his wife deceased,
To marry his Cook-maid his fancy pleased;
To whom he gave a Watch: it chanced so,
That what a Clock wast by it she would know.
But how to handle it she skill did lack,
And thinking on the going of the Jack,
And dressing meat, (her former place) quoth she
TO a Servant, here, Wind up this Jack for me.
42. Of Suspicion.
Conceit has a main stroke in matters most,
Seem but to hurt, though no hurt's done, you are lost:
So the Crotonians did Philoleon flay,
Through false surmise he would the Tyrant play.
43. Against Astrologers.
Whilst Astrologians (whom the vulgar error
Counts Prophets) put the about thy birth in terror,
Whilst some Stars fawning, others frowning are,
Thy wavering mind hangs still 'twixt hope and fear;
If welfare come, 'twill come, do what Stars will,
And an unlooked for good, best pleases still.
If ill shall hap, unknown, its best of all,
And in mean while make use of what does fall:
But I do charge thee even in Fate's despite,
To pass the time with pastime, and delight.
44. Of Eschines the Poet, who calculated his own Nativity Inevitabile Fatum.
The Poet Eschines would needs go try,
To calculate his own Nativity;
At length by search he found the day and hour,
When his Birth Planet had prevailing power:
And too soon to his sorrow did decry,
That he a strange disastrous death should dye.
And when the time of this his death drew near,
For to avoid all danger, dread and fear,
He gets up before break of day, to see
If that his Fate prevented so might be;
And sitting bare in open field, remote
From House or Tree: It chanced an Eagle got
A Shellfish, which he found upon Seashore,
He mounts the skies, and with it hovers over
Poor Eschines bald Pate, which for a stone
The Egle took, the Shellfish down is thrown;
Which from on high descended down amain,
Fell right on's Pate, and clove his scull in twain.
45. Of Harm watch, harm catch.
A silly Fly the subtle Spider caught
In the irretiating Web he wrought;
The Spider eager on the Fly to prey,
Is caught, and killed, e're he could get away:
So, a pit to dig for others some begin,
And after they themselves do fall therein.
Hamon a Gallows made for Mordecai,
Whereon himself was hanged without delay;
Which to the Proverb fitly gives place,
Harm watch harm catch; which coms often so to pass.
46. Of a Picture well drawn.
I Have thought often of thy piece, since I last saw it,
That any one so to the life could draw it;
Who looks on it, and then views thee aright,
(If that he owe not to the Artist spite)
Will say, no egg to egg can liker be,
Then that Effigies does resemble thee.
47. Another of the same.
So truly in this Frame, is drawn thy face,
That its no Frame now, but a Looking-glass.
48. Of a Picture ill drawn.
The Portraicture your Limbner lately drew,
Is liker unto any one then you.
49. Of two remarkable Female Murderers.
King Herod had his Table stained sore,
So had Flaminius his, with humane gore:
Like Minions the like Murders did procure,
The one a Dancer, the other was a Whore.
The difference this, the Whore the guilty killed;
The guiltless blood was by the Dancer spilled.
50. Of Herod and Herodias.
Herodias daughter before Herod dancing,
Where she should have displeased, to please it chancing;
He drunk what with love of his Concubine,
And what with height of pride, and heat of wine.
Ask Maid (he said) I Have sworn, ask you of me,
If half my Kingdom, I will give it thee.
The lewd Girl by her lustful mother led,
Quoth she, then give me here John Baptists Head.
The King is sad, and to consent is loath,
But needs he must, thereto engaged by Oath.
O murthring mother, stepdame to thy daughter!
whom thou train'st up to dance, and men to slaughter
O faithful King, too faithful thou herein
Had thou been perjured, less had been thy sin.
51. Against Wives.
Amongst all mortal Creatures Nature sent,
Most men cry out, that nothing then these Wives
Does them more vex, perplex, and discontent,
And make them all more weary of their lives.
Thus each one says (he but says) for he matches,
And when he is buried six the seventh he chatches.
It seems then they are bewitching needful evils,
At best fair Angels, and worst foul Devils.
^^ Another aganst against the same.
A Wife is in(...)ay useful be
Would she dye quickly, and leave all to thee.
53. Of one that had a bad Wife, past comparison.
Friend thou'st a bad wife always, if thou beat her,
She Is worse; but worst if you do well entreat her:
But she would be good would she dye, better lickly,
Dyed she thou living; best would she dye quickly.
54. Against men twice married.
Who having buried one Wife, weds again,
He swims twice shipwrackt in the Ocean main.
55. Of a Widdowers Resolve.
I once on seas, now safely got to shore,
Never mean to venture shipwreck any more.
56. Against drinking Healths.
Of drunken healths the more there is in your belly,
The less health you will have after I can tell ye;
A thousand such healths fall unto your share.
And much good do it ye, I for one health care:
Its health to drink no health in any kind,
No true health in a drunken health I find:
For diverse drinking healths have sicker grown,
So minding others health, quite lost their own.
57. A good Resolve for Health.
A reserved Gentleman that late refused
To drink the Kings Health, thus himself excused
I Will pr^y for the Health of my dread Sovereign,
And for mine own, all other Healths refrain.
58. Another of the same.
I Will drink to you no Healths, but wish you many;
A dry Health is the healthiest Health of any.
59. The dangerous Gradation of a Drunkards Cup.
1. The first Cup's for necessity indeed,
2. The second more for pleasure, then for need:
3. The third for neither, but for mere excess;
4. The fourth inebriates him with drunkenness.
5. The fifth makes him a quarrelling to keep;
6. The sixth does set the stupid Sot asleep:
And if he lies and dies in that strange fashion,
Its to be feared he has drunk his own damnation.
60. How Roaring first came up in fashion.
The first that I ever heard of to this hour,
That brought up Roaring, was about the Tower,
By a bonny bouncing, Roaring Megg of note,
Who'd a bold brazen face, and monstrous throat:
For twenty Barrels could not overcharge
Her huge vast pregnant belly, 'twas so large;
And when she was discharged, she then did roar,
You might have heard her thirty miles and more.
The drousie Lions hearing this, awaked,
And roused, they roared, until the Tower shak'd:
The Bears at Paris-Garden hearing plain
The Lions roar, they likewise roared amain.
At the Bears roaring (as it does appear)
The Organist at the Globe could not forbear
With his melodious deep-mouthed noise, from bawling;
Nor could be kept the Children from squaling:
So that ever since that din, and hideous noise,
There Is every where a Rout of Roaring Boys;
And when these meet, they will have their guns about them,
And reason good, they cannot roar without them.
And if they drink not Healths to our Charlemaine,
Let them never meet, nor drink, nor roar again.
61. A Jeer on a Servant.
One took some Flies out of a Cup, and when
He himself had drunk, he put them in again:
My reason is (quoth he) to tell thee true,
I love not Flies, but may be some here do.
62. A good decorum to be observed in drinking of Sack.
In drinking Sack you may observe this gage,
Look on it, when you are twenty years of age.
At thirty smell it, but thereat not stay;
At forty, taste a sip, and so away.
At fifty, drink it, but excess refrain:
But when you are sixty, pour it down amain;
For jovial Sack with heat does Youth inrage,
And it revives cold blood, in dull old Age.
63. Of Bibulus, an incurable Drunkard.
The Doctor blear-eyed Bibulus did advise
To forbear Wine, lest that he lost his eyes:
His Doctor he (with much ado) obeyes,
And wholly Wine forbears for certain days.
But after thirsting when the Wine he minds,
Gets out, and true the Doctors words now finds:
And coming to the Wine, thus to his Eyes
(Even almost lost for want thereof) he cries,
Now ye my trusty Eyes that brought me hither,
Drink and adieu, both my sweet guides together.
His taste and smell are gone, the color quite
Of Wine begins to fail, so does his sight:
Yet for this loss, it somewhat eased his mind,
That he would not left one drop of it behind.
64. Of the Signs of Bacchus and Venus.
Why has not lovely Venus her fair Sign,
As well as drunken Bacchus God of Wine;
Since she as commonly is set to sale,
In Town and Country, as Wine, Beer, or Ale.
Answer.
But who knows in what mode she should be dressed,
To please so many various fancies best.
She in Apollo's Temple (as it is said)
Just at the entering in was thus portray'd;
On the one side looking smiling, cheerful, glad,
On the other melancholy, dull, and sad:
In which strange draught was showed a world of wit,
For first and last her humors right did fit.
Some drew her rich attired, young, fresh and fair,
With smiling countenance, and curled hair;
And two Doves by her both together billing,
Which shows to kiss and clip she is ever willing.
Some like her lively naked drawn, like Truth,
A form best liking lustful-wanton youth:
But of all others that form should be slighted,
Because in Lying she is so much delighted;
For of her sex of old it has been said,
Believe no Woman, no not when she is dead.
Some think her drawn with naked breasts does fit her
Whilst Cupid aims with bow and shaft to hit her:
And of this Pourtraicture a many like,
For she will stand, if any one will strike.
And some will have her drawn half in, half out,
Within a River, tickling of a Trout:
For they alike (as Fishermen can tell ye)
Love to be grop'd, and tickled 'bout the belly.
The Courtier likes her drawn in her black beaver,
With her neat Ostrige-Plume, and ^anting feather;
In her silk Gown, or satin, richly deight,
With her fine linens starched, pure clean and white;
And with light corks under her heels, which show
She Is light from head to heel, from top to toe.
The Country Clown would have her drawn, and put,
Sitting astride, like Bacchus on a Butt;
Crying aloud, her ware for to discover,
Spigots and Faucets, one within another:
Showing to all, that to her will approach,
She has a Butt ready for to set a broach.
The Inn-holder would have her naked stand,
Holding of an Hay-bottle in her hand:
And most like wondrous well of this conceit,
For It shows she is both for horse and man good meat.
Yet some do hold it were not much amiss,
To mode her in the form that Fortune is:
For they are very like in each degree,
As the one is blind, so the other cannot see.
As the one is ever wavering like the wind:
So the other most inconstant all do find.
As the one assists all such as boldly venture:
So the other helps such as a Sconce dare enter
In the low Countries. So both jump in this,
That no faint heart did ever fair Lady kiss.
As the one no idle persons can abide:
So the other none who 're not well occupied.
Take of these dressings which ye think the neatest,
Yet she can paint her self the most compleatest.
65. Of a Girl who feigned a Rape.
A Youth (by chance) alone espied a Lass,
Thinking the place fit for his purpose was;
He hugs her to him forcibly with kisses,
Aiming lasciviously at further blisses.
She struggles with him, and most angerly,
Pressed the strict Law, that Ravishers should dye.
Yet he persists, pricked on with lustful heat,
By fair entreats to gain her, or by threat:
She won by fair means, nor by foul; apace
Cries out, kicks, bites, and scrats him by the face.
The Youth with wrath enraged, as much as lust,
(Quoth he) and will thou be a Bedlam just:
Now by this Sword (and drew't out thereupon)
Lie fair, and hold thy peace, (or I Will begone)
She straight yields, of that sad word sore afraid;
Then do, yet still I Am done perforce, she said.
66. Of Mars and Venus.
Stout warlike Mars does wear a waving feather,
So does fair lovely Venus altogether;
It Is like light Venus her light feather wears,
In token of the love to Mars she bears:
So a large feather is by Vulcan born,
But its but a Bull-feather, that is a horn.
67. Of a Cuckold.
When that the wife does wrong her wedlock bed,
Why wears the man the horns? 'cause he is the head
68. Of Hector dying.
Cast me out dead (ye Grecians) any where,
For Hares the corpse of a dead Lion fear.
69. Of Zisca dying.
Brave Zisca a Bohemian Captain stout,
Did terrify his foes all round about:
Yet Death whom none besides could foil in field,
At last made this undaunted Champion yield.
But note his brave Resolve; even at his death,
For when that He must needs resign his breath,
He charged his Soldiers that He would be flayed,
His Skin dressed, and thereof a Drums-head made;
That an Alarm he might be ever giving
To's foes, when he was dead, as when was living.
70. Of a Dwarf.
Thou Pygmey, lest some Crane catch thee away
In midst of the Town, its best for thee to stay.
71. Another of the same.
Poor Perpusil to avoid all mortal strife,
In a small Spinners Cob-web ends his life.
72. Of Mizaldus.
Mizaldus was so light (as stories say)
That he with every wind was born away:
And to prevent his falling in the street,
He still wore leaden soles under his feet.
73. Of a foul Doudy.
Nigra, who says you are brown does judgment lack;
No, no, thou art not brown, for you are cole black:
Cole black, said I; no, you are as black as ink,
For thou wilt in each brown paper heart soon sink.
As ink, said I; no, thy smooth jet complexion,
If touched, attracts the straw of each affection.
As jet, said I; no, you are as black as pitch,
Who fingers thee, cannot his hands thence twitch.
Thou passest all (I speak it for no evil)
For you are (indeed) as black as is the Devil.
74. Another.
Nan's like a Swan, both without and within;
Her Clothes milk-white, and Cole black is her skin.
75. Of a most exquisite lovely Lady.
Sweet lovely Lady, fairer far then Flora,
Purer then the Air, and fresher then Aurora;
Neater then Maia, and then Cynthia brighter,
Thy skin more soft then down of Swan, and whiter;
The curled purled tramels of thy hair,
Are then Arachne's twine, more small, more fair:
Thy mild and serene front, and smooth-slike brow,
Like pure white polisht Ivory does show.
Corruscant beams dart from thy piercing eyes,
Thy blue veins clearer then the azure skies;
The commixt colors of thy cheeks encloses
The ceruse lillies, and vermilion roses.
Thy coral lips to kisses sweet entices;
Thy breath more fragrant the the Arabian spices.
Thy Paps like snowie hillocks do appear,
In midst thy nipples like two rubies clear.
The air proceeding from thy quavering tongue,
Is like the harmonious Sirens chanting song.
Thy hands milk white, thy fingers long and slender,
Thy nails thereon like pearls, pure, neat and tender.
Thou can indigitate all Instruments
Of various sorts, to curious sweet contents.
Thou with a fluent tongue can discourse neatly,
Can coniey, cringe and complement completely.
Thy feet to music neatly thou advancest,
By fine alternal motions when thou dancest.
In fine, you are an accomplished Lady right,
In absolute Perfection of delight.
Happy those lips who have favor but to kiss thee,
The Earth's glad to enjoy thee, and Heavens sad to miss thee.
And if he happy be, whom thou but kissest,
Then he is most blessed whom in bed thou blissest.
76. Of the City of London.
London, that chief Metropolis of State,
In the County of Middlesex is situate;
And such as are of Middle-sex are neither
Right male, or female, but are both together:
No marvel then, if they in that late brawl
Were Newters, right Hermophraditical.
77. Of a Wedding Ring.
It was a custom in the times of old,
The Groom to give his Bride a Ring of gold.
I hold it fitter that the Bride should bring hers,
And put it on the long'st of the Groom's fingers.
78. Of the same. The Bride.
I have a Ring that is right, then do not linger,
On trial to will best fit your longest finger.
79. Of one who married three Wives, and never a good one.
Thy two wives dead, thou did the third wife marry,
Yet none of all the three but did miscarry:
Wherefore thou do not only at them chide,
But condemned the whole Female Sex beside.
Yet would thou but this matter weigh aright,
Thou toward them would mittigate thy spite:
For seeing they were all three alike inclined,
Even from thy birth, thy Fates thee them assigned.
If then thy birth has destined thou shall be
A Cuckold, how should thy wife hinder thee.
T'another she would bin chaste, that with thee's naught
So on thy Fates she rightly lays the fault.
80. Of a very light one.
Were thou as swift of foot, as light in mind,
An Hare in open field thou'ldst turn and wind.
81. Of lavish Largus.
Largus sold lately all his Lands away,
And on a sudden fell into decay;
He was ingenious, and industrious too,
But when that Fortune frowns, all will not do.
For he changed clods of clay main cunningly,
For good red gold, yet does not thrive thereby.
82. Of ones Portraicture exquisitely drawn.
Festus is mute, his Picture meditates,
It hits him right, he right it imitates.
83. Of Homers Iliads.
When that blind Homer wrote about the jars,
Caused by the Grecian, and the Trojan Wars;
He may b'excus'd if lies he then did frame,
For he was no eyewitness of the same.
84. Of Socrates, and his wife Zantippe.
Grave Socrates, whom former learned Ages
Voted the wisest of the seven Sages,
Had to his wife a most notorious scold,
Zantippe named, (as Histories have told.)
This Socrates invited to a feast,
Some of his friends, to Dainties of the best:
But they were somewhat long at Disputation,
As was the Athenian Academick fashion.
At last he brings them, whom he did invite,
In part some former kindness to requite;
And bids them welcome, wishes them sit down;
But she at him does rail, on them does frown.
Thou great Foolofficer, what, must I stay
For thee, and thy Foolofficers, all day:
'Twere a good deed, for that which ye do call
Conspute, to make ye kiss the Hares foot all.
Pray look here. All the meat baked, roast, and boiled,
By your long staying at Conspute is spoiled.
But he to answer her did not desire,
Knowing it would add but fuel to the fire:
They fall too, and whilst she does scold and curse,
Their meat they season with most sweet discourse.
But she for sullenness would neither eat,
Nor bid them welcome, whilst they were at meat.
So dinner being ended, he and they
Each other resalute, and go their way:
Which she observing, ran up stairs apace,
And searching here and there in every place,
Lights of a Piss-pot underneath a bed,
And threw it fully on her Husbands head.
It Is brave (quoth he) by Jove I looked for this,
Nor had I cared for it had it not been piss:
For after fearful thundering we see lickly
A mighty shower of rain does pour down quickly.
85 Of two hot Fellows, at a cold Custard.
A company of Country Bumkins takes
Each one his Sweetheart to the merry Wakes;
Where they had curds and cream before them set,
Fritters and Tansies, good as e're was eat;
And curious Cakes which had of fruit great store,
Choice Sillabubs with Sugar hill'd all over;
And many other Cates exceeding dainty,
Whereof the Country can afford great plenty:
Amongst all which a Custard they had got,
Which looked but cold, yet was it monstrous hot.
One clapped a spoonful in his mouth, there turned it
Often up and down, but it so extremely burnt it,
That with the heat thereof it caused apace,
The very tears to trickle down his face.
Which one of's fellows noting, asked him why
He that so late did laugh, so loon did cry.
I weep (quoth he) to think that the last meat,
A friend of mine (going to be hanged) did eat,
Was a cold Custard. Pish, and is that all,
The other said, Come, Sirs, let us to it fall;
So scoups a spoonful, which burnt him so sore,
He cried as fast as the other did before.
A mischief on it (quoth he) I Am burnt extreme,
With that accursed Custard, and scall'd Cream;
But I Am most vexed (since thou did belie him)
That when thy friend was hanged, thou'st not hanged by him.
86. Of two Tallow Chandlers.
Two neighbor Chandlers at an Alehouse met,
And having Pots and Pipes before them set;
Amongst a deal of speech that then they had,
At last they fell in talk about their Trade.
Quoth one of them, I Have Candles burn so pure,
Light one t'shall a long winters night endure;
And they for colors are so curious rare,
That with the Rainbow, they may well compare.
Pish, quoth the other, who e're notes but mine,
Will say, they purely without sparling shine;
No wasteful thief does keep them company,
Nor can he find the least mote in their eye;
But chiefly he that heeds what light mine cast,
And for what long continuance they do last;
Will say, my worst surmounts your best as far,
As does the Moon an ordinary Star.
For light but one on Monday, fix it fast,
It burning still to the weeks end shall last;
And though you think this like a Lie does sound,
Yet I will prove it true, I Will lay ten pound.
87. Of a Black Smith.
A merry fellow came to a Smith's shop,
And wished him (then main close at work) to stop.
I will not stop (quoth he) I tell thee plain,
Not for the great Mogoll, nor King of Spain.
Quoth the other, if thou knew'st as much as I,
Thou would leave off thy work immediately.
There Is one now with thy Wife subagitating,
What then (quoth he) I pre thee hold thy-prating;
I Will have my heat out, let them to it and spare not,
If all such whores and rogues were hanged I care not
88. Of four sorts of our gracious King Charles the Seconds Friends.
There are four sorts of our Kings seeming Friends,
And all for their own by-sinister ends.
1. The first, because he cannot drink refrain,
Does drink Healths often to his Sovereign.
2. The next addicted much to ban and swear,
Would thereby thought to be a Cavallier.
3. The third sort for their King bears Arms about them,
A good cause why: they cannot live without them.
4. The fourth, under pretenses specious fair,
Is late turned for their King to fall to prayer.
Yet though these al do thus, drink, swear, fight, pray.
They Are not right for our King, I Will boldly say.
89. Of Fucus.
Fucus by long use, having cunning gained,
Two Steeds on purpose, of two natures trained:
For the one, a Fowl for swiftness could surpass,
And the other was more slow then any Ass.
He sends to wars the one, that was so slack,
E're sound of Trumpet the other brings him back.
There Is many such have horses slow, and swift,
For their own special ends, at a dead lift.
90. Of the Fox sore sick, and the Lion.
Whilst that the Fox lay sick within his hole,
A loving Lion came for to condole
His woeful case, for so it did appear,
He was in a foul case that stunk for fear.
The Lion said, I pray thee Fox be sweet,
For senting thou wast sick, I came to greet
And make thee whole, which I shall do e're long,
If I do once but lick thee with my tongue.
Dread Sovereign, I Am not worthy to be lickt
But from your Graces favor to be kicked;
For Sequestrator-like, in Town and City,
I Have plundered all their Poultrey without pity:
There Is not a Turkey, Goose, Cock, Hen, nor Duck,
But from them sometime I a plume did pluck;
For which this sickness fell upon me sure,
An Epidemick Curse who can endure.
With a quotidian Fever I am troubled,
And since-your Grace came here my pain is doubled:
Your sight did fright me quite out of my wits,
And put me in these quaking, shaking fits.
If that thy fits come thick, I Will not deceive thee,
Its a sure sign that they will the sooner leave thee:
Then let me tell thee once more, I Will assure thee,
If that my tongue but lick thee, it will cure thee.
O let this fit (good Doctor) first be past!
And your Receipt (if needs) I Will take at last.
For with your harmless tongue I find no fault,
But doubt some neighbors near it, for they are naught
91. Of coy Phillis.
Kiss me thrice Phillis, if you will not thrice,
Kiss me as often as you have lips, that is twice:
You Will give, and take one only kiss, not twain;
Take your own Back, or give me mine again.
Well, well, nice Phillis, seeing you will not pollute
Your pure lips with profane, I Will cease my suit.
Yet though you're coy to kiss in open view,
In private you will kiss, and smuggle too.
92. Of two Brothers, the one careful, the other careless.
There was a widow had two sons, the one
A painful Be, the other a dull drone;
For the one was used to rise at break of day,
The other, long time every morning lay.
It fortuned that the earlier riser found
A purse, whilst he was walking over their ground.
He brought it home, and gave it to his mother,
Who went and showed it to his sluggish brother.
Look here (quoth she) what good luck has bested
Thy brother, whilst you are lurking in thy bed.
He being by his mother thus upbray'd,
Laughed thereat heartily, and to her said;
Who ever lost it, wishes out of doubt,
That he had kept his bed, and not gone out.
93. Of two Maidservants falling out at a Couduit.
Two Servants at a Conduit fell out sore,
And called each other arrant queen and whore.
At last from words they fell to kicks and spurns,
To bite and scratch, and all about their turns:
Robin the Devil (for some so him called)
And Bate, both neighbors, whilst they fought and brawl'd,
Stood looking on, and thought it pretty sport,
To see them fight in such unseemly sort.
One wished that Bate would part them. No, quoth he
Now let the Devil part them both for me.
94. Of two Night-walkers.
Two Pot-companions walking late at night,
The One well to live, but the other foxt outright:
It chanced that both turned to a Conduit side,
From whence the water dribbling still did glide:
Quoth he that first had done (my loving friend)
Come let us be gone, I pray thee make an end.
(He that was foxt, of th'Pipes dropping never wist,
Thinking (whilst it so dropped) he had still pist)
I, when Gods Pleasure is, (to the other said)
I have not ended yet, and there still staid.
The sober said, come now or I Will begone.
I, when Gods pleasure is, I Will come anon.
Why then farewell: and there he left to stay,
(I, when Gods pleasure is) till break of day.
95 Of a large Promiser, and slow Performer.
Some Mariners by Eolus wind's commotion,
In danger great of Shipwreck on the Ocean,
Did invocate their most affected Saints,
And to them made their prayers and complaints.
Among the rest, one on this said occasion,
Did make a solemn vow, and protestation,
That he would offer to the Virgin Mary,
(If she to Land him safe and sound would carry)
A fair Wax-Candle full as big, and vast
In length and thickness, as the ship's mainmast.
One hearing him thus vow, thereat did storm,
And swore 'twas more then e're he could perform.
Peace fool (quoth he) if I come safe to ground,
I Will make her glad of one of nine In The pound.
96. Another of the same.
The mountains traveled as they would burst in sunder,
At last comes forth a mouse; was it not a wonder,
So the Ocean main did travel long, at last
A silly shrimp upon the shore was cast.
97. Of the uncertainty of Life.
If thou knew'st certain that thou should not live
To a weeks end, thou would weep, wail, and grieve:
Yet being uncertain for to live a day,
Yea not an hour, how can thou sport and play.
98. Another.
I not condole the dead, but those who are living,
To whom the fear of death, gives cause of grieveing.
99. Of two Beggars, the one blind, the other lame.
The Fates to two poor wretches showed great spite
This they deprived of feet, and that of sight;
These both well matched, the blind the lame sustains,
So both their grievance ease with mutual pains.
This where he would, with the others eyes goes to,
That what he would, with the others feet does view
100. Of the same otherwise.
There Is nothing better then a faithful friend,
Who may thee comfort, in thy losses lend:
The blind and lame, both Beggars, do agree,
And enters in firm league of Amity,
To help each others frail infirmities,
The one with lame feet, and the other with blind eyes.
The blind man bears the lame man's legs on's back,
The lame man's eyes the blind man does not lack.
Weak force united helps much now and than,
These two imperfect, make one perfect man.
True love in great Kings Courts but seldom stays,
When in poor simple Cottages it swayes.
101. Of a Blind and Lame man that found an Oyster on the Highway.
A blind man bearing a lame man abroad,
It chanced they found an Oyster on the road:
That one should have it, neither would agree,
Nor yet to part it, would well pleased be.
The blind man said, 'twas found by help of's feet,
Not so, the lame alleged, but by his sight.
So arguing a long time each with either,
At last they thus concluded both together;
That the next person which on that way came,
Should wholly arbitrate and end the same.
And as things oft-times strangely come to pass,
So the next which that way came, a Lawyer was.
They open to him the Case, and tells him, He,
To end that strife, the only man must be.
He opes the Oyster, eats it up, and calls
Them wrangling fools, and them returns the shells.
Such subtle sleights by Lawyers often are cast
On Clients, who have naught but shells at last.
You shall have Costs and Charges they will pretend,
When as you will find but mere shells in the end.
102. Of a Bedlam.
A Bedlam with a huge horn at his side,
Did beg drink for himself, and Bess his bride.
The Host gave him drink, and asked how long he had
A wife, (quoth Tom) e're since I first was mad;
The Host asked him then how long the Horn he carried,
Quoth Tom I think e're since I first was married:
But did thy madness from those thoughts proceed?
Quoth Tom they did, Sir, Sir they did indeed:
And did but others know the Horns they had,
They would as I, be Bedlam-like horn-mad.
103. Of one who lay all night on the ground.
One who had lain all night on the hard ground,
Rising, under his back a feather found;
He makes most sad complaints, and heavy mones,
And cries out, O my sides, my back, my bones:
I wonder how such can sleep quietly,
Who on whole beds of feathers use to lie;
For I who had but one under my back,
All night no ease, nor any rest could take.
104. Of the Fox and the Wolf.
A Fox got out before the break of day,
And questing up and down to find his prey,
Lites on a deep Well in a Country Town,
Which had two buckets that went up and down;
The Fox expecting somewhat there to find,
Leapt in the one, which soon him down did wind:
But finding naught, was there with grief confounded,
Being hungry, cold, and wet, and well nigh drowned.
The Wolf more eager then the Fox of prey,
Hies hot-foot after him without delay;
And coming to the Well, casts down his eyes,
Where the Fox fishing for some frogs he spies;
Reynold, what do thou there. (Quoth he) offish,
I Have here great store, as good as heart can wish.
Say so, sweet Cuss; but how shall I get thither,
Leap in that bucket, and thou wilt soon come hither.
Se leaps into it, the wheel turns round amain,
Which brings him down, and Reynold up again.
As soon as he was there he did begin
To tread for Eels, but could not find a fin.
Ah! I see Reynold, I am now betrayed,
There Is no truth in the words that thou have said.
And now I call to mind the horrid crimes,
And bloody deeds, I Have done at several times;
The fawns, foals, calves, pigs, kids and harmless lamb
The Rams and Ewes, their render sires and dams,
Which I have murdered without all remorse,
But now for all, with me they will take a course.
All these do wound and gall my guilty soul,
Which I alas, do here too late condole:
Nay, I Have done worse then these an hundred fold,
But now they will plague me for the new and old.
I sure enough (quoth Fox) thy woeful case
I do lament, being lately in thy place.
Then after me there is none made inquisition,
There sink or swim, none pitied my condition,
But only thee (Cuss Wolf) my faithful friend,
For whom I Am bound to pray till my lives end.
Ah me! (quoth th'Wolf) what shall I do, for I
With cold and hunger here am sure to dye,
Unless some draw me up, and then they will bang me
Most cruelly, if that they do not hang me.
Cuss Wolf, I see some coming; now adieu,
I must be gone for fear they will hang me too.
This the worlds course in Country and in Town,
One's rising up, and others falling down:
And so the quondam case just like appears,
Between the Rounheads and the Cavalliers.
105. Of one staying over long for Water.
A Servant staid too long at fetching water,
Her Dame main hot, and angry at the matter,
Said (out of doubt) she is gone for it to Hell,
And there for ever she does mean to dwell.
One standing by, and hearing her say so;
Said, of all places, thither she would not go,
Unless the Devil were in her limmally,
Because that Well's main deep, and deadly dry;
For when for water Dives there did long,
He could not get one drop to cool his tongue.
106. Of Rotundo.
Rotundo in the woods hid certain Chests,
Paused, and at tokens of the place he gests;
As soon as on a tree he spied a Rook,
Hanged there (quoth he) I need no further look;
But store of marks deceived him coming back,
For not a tree his tokens then did lack.
107. Of Sim Simpleton.
Sim wedding of a wife, thought sure to light
Of the strait way that led to Heaven right;
But at the entering he (too late) could tell,
He was in the broad way that led to hell:
For he the gate found open, large, and wide,
And elbow-room enough on either side:
Sym liked the way, for proving smooth and easy,
Should seem the simple Sot loved to be lazy.
108. Of Cardinal Bellarmine. Bellarminus; quasi, Bella, arma, minae.
Who but the name of Bellarmine conceits,
Will find it intimates, Wars, Arms, and threats:
And so resembles right the Roman Church,
Who for Wars, Arms and Threat still lies in lurch.
Instead whereof (their great Goliath stout)
And his huge host of Philistines to rout,
Like David's (pleasing to Gods eyes and ears)
Let our meek Churches Arms be Prayers and tears.
109. Of one Swan a Tailor.
One Swan had Pressing Irons great and small,
Which Geese all Tailors commonly do call.
His Geese on Silks and Sattens grazed so fast,
They left but a small remnant at the last.
Though's Geese were like unto another man's,
Yet I can prove that all his Geese were Swans.
110. Of Oliver the Great, and Mr. Peter's the Apostate.
That proud usurping Oliver the great,
Who once sat Phaeton-like in Phoebus seat;
Took coach on purpose for his recreation,
Attended on with great solemnization.
Peter's being one of that perfidious train,
It chanced an unexpected shower of rain
Fell suddenly, which wet them grievous sore,
Great Oliver his Coach-boot looking over,
Called Peter's, and did wish him take his Coat,
(Which was a mighty favor you may note)
But he his proffer wittily refused,
And humbly prayed, therein to be excused;
Saying, I would not my Lord (though I Am nigh drowned)
Be in your Coat, Sir, for a thousand pound.
Which he seared; for the times straightway altered,
Peter's with others, was hanged, drawn, and quartered.
111. Of three Oxford Scholars, and an ancient Gentleman.
Three Oxford Scholars to a Tavern came,
A while for to make merry at the same;
And finding there one stricken far in years,
Did set upon him all with flouts and jeers.
The first man said, that to salute him came,
God save ye good old Father Abraham;
The second with a pretty conjey meets him,
And with God save ye Father Isaac, greets him;
The third to jeer him in the self-same guise,
God save ye good old Father Jacob, cries.
The Old man thus flouted by them altogether,
Says, I Am not Abraham, Isaac, Jacob neither,
Wherefore forbear your flouts I you do wish,
For I indeed am Saul the Son of Kish,
Who for to seek my Fathers Affes came
From far, and here have found three of the same.
112. Of two Lovers, and their Sweetheart.
Two Younkards chanced to get a pretty Wench
Between them at a private Alehouse Bench,
And that because they could not have her both,
And for to part with her were very loath;
They to fall out about her did begin,
Because that neither with her could fall in;
So that at last they fell from words to blows,
And out one of them in a fury goes,
Saying to the other, if thou dare come here
I vow I Will give thee a good box on th'ear.
But he that was within said, tell thee true
I Will not come out if thou would give me two.
113. Of a new born Babe dying.
I dyed as soon as in the world I came,
Deprived of Baptism and without a Name;
In Book of life then nameless me record,
For my hope's only in thy Name (O Lord.)
114. Another of the same.
When I was born, I had a full intent
To stay a while, but noting how all went
In these sad times, the clean contrary way,
With very grief I could no longer stay.
115. Of an old Woman.
A poor old woman went to gather sticks,
TO a wood hard by, and there a burden picks:
And thinking on the aches, griefs, and pains,
The cold and hunger daily she sustains;
The losses, crosses, troubles she is sure,
(Though that her time be short) for to endure.
She wished for Death, and for him (often) did call,
That he would come, and free her from them all.
Death as a ghost new risen from the grave,
Comes to her straight, and asked her what she would have
She at his apparition quakes and trembles,
Yet cunningly at present thus dissembles.
Nothing Death now: thine help I only lack,
For to heave up these Sticks upon my back.
116. Of snuffing a Lanthorn light.
A very wag went in a winter night,
From a hanged Lanthorn for to steal the light;
And reaching to it, a servant tardy caught him,
And two or three good handsome cuffs then gave him.
Quoth he, why do thou me so harshly handle,
For I meant only for to snuff the candle.
117. Of a Parisite.
Gnatho a faining fawning Parasite,
In Soothing and sly smoothing takes delight,
The sugared words his glav'ring tongue does utter,
Are smooth as oil, and soft as any butter.
When he plays with his fawning Spaniel Quail,
The Dog never cease wagging of his tail;
Seeing he and's Dog are so like each to either,
Put his Tongue and his Dogs Tail both together.
118. Of a short Cloak.
One with an old acquaintance of his met,
Who'd on a Suit he of some friend did get:
Said he, pray tell me how do like my clothes.
Exceeding well (quoth he) as these times goes.
They Are handsome, fit, and all do well consort,
Excepting only that thy Cloak's too short.
Pish, if that that be all, that fault I Will smoother,
For 'twill be long enough e're I Have another.
119. Of Bullion Pawn.
A Tenant owed his greedy Landlord Rent,
And wanting ready coin to give content,
Was glad to speak him fair, and for to pray him,
To accept of Bullin pawn, till he could pay him.
The peevish Landlord sleights his Tenants proffer,
And angerly to go away did offer:
What shall I do with Bull in pawn (he said,)
Thou know I keep no Kine, I will be paid.
120. Of a brown Bull.
There was a rustic cunning Country Clown
Turned a Bull black which was by nature brown,
Drove him unto a Fair, there fully sold him,
And (as the common custom is) there tolled him.
And that he might in nothing seem to lack,
Was entered plainly, A Bull colored black.
The Buyer drove him home, and sets to grass,
But a while after (so it came to pass)
Whilst he lay out, there fell a deal of rain,
Which brought the Bull to his own hue again.
At which the owner stormed, cursed, band and swore,
Was never so cheated in his life before.
Sends for the Seller, who soon to him came;
The Buyer told him, he was much to blame,
To serve him so, and threatened hard to sue him,
Lest he would restore his moneys back unto him.
Do your worst, said he, for I care not a straw,
You never shall get a pin of me by law.
The saying's Caveat Emptor, which (in deed)
Advises well the Buyer to take heed.
121. Of a Thief condemned to dye.
There was a Thief condemned for to dye,
And when his Execution time drew nigh,
A many came to comfort this transgressor,
Amongst the rest a Monk was his Confessor;
Who wished him not fear Death, which ends all strife,
And is the passage to a better life.
H' absolved him of his sins all, on condition
He Is sorry for them with sincere Contrition:
And as his sins were surely so forgiven.
So he that night should sup with Christ in Heaven.
Though (quoth the thief) I Have fasted all day space,
Yet you shall supt (if it please you) in my place.
122. Of another at point of death.
One on the ladder very nigh his death,
Within a minute like to lose his breath;
At's turning off (said) now have at that Dazie.
Nay short a foot (quoth th'hangman) if it please ye
123. Of another ready to dye.
A Thief being led to the Execution place,
Said unto those that thither ran apace;
What need ye make such haste (thus all and some)
For there will be no sport until I come.
124. Of a Welsh man, and an English man, who were hanged together.
An English and a Welsh man were to dye,
Who fell out in the prison constantly;
The English was condemned first, (you may gather
In that he first ascended up the ladder:
He thereon leaning makes a long narration
Of his ungodly life and conversation:
And now (quoth he) I Have nothing more to say,
But wish ye all good people for me pray;
Yet one thing troubles me: what is that one cries?
He (pointing at the Welchman) thus replies;
This to my troubled conscience is a clog,
To think that I must hang by that Welsh Dog:
Welsh dog (quoth Daffe) thou English Jobbernole
Spite of her nose, I Will hang by'er theek by shole.
125. Of a loving Wife.
A man and's wife could never well agree,
The cause whereof arose from jealousy;
The man his whorish wife had ofttimes banged,
For which she often wished to see him hanged:
It so fell out, that for some Robbery
He was clapped up, arraigned, and judged to dye;
She went with others to his Execution,
And one that knew her and her constitution,
Said to'r, you go to take leave of your friend,
Indeed (quoth she) I go to the same end;
For I often vowed, and now I Will not deceive him,
That I would see him hanged before I Would leave him.
126. Of a thirsty Thief.
A Thief main thirsty going toward the Gallows,
Called for a Gun of Ale at a by-Alehouse;
One brings it him, and fills him a full cup,
Which he receives, and straightwayes drinks it up;
Then drinks again, and offers for to pay,
Change Tapster quickly, for I cannot stay:
The Tapster wishes him to drink again,
He sighed as if his heart would burst in twain;
Ah me! the Proverb now I call to mind,
I shall be hanged, I Have left my drink behind.
127. Of a Welchman burned in the hand.
A Welchman in the hand burned grievous sore,
Did at his burning neither cry nor roar;
The Judge suspected 'cause he did not cry,
That he was used therein too fav'rably:
And charged the Jailer, burn him till he feels,
Or surely I will clap thee by the heels:
See here (quoth Hugh) why does her so command,
What would her make glass-windows in her hand.
128. Of a Cutpurse.
A Cutpurse going from the Goal to dye,
A number that went with him then, did cry,
That he with more of that accursed crew,
Deserved that death long since, had they their due.
A Glover who had lately lost his Purse,
Did at him most extremely ban and curse;
And cried, thou Cutpurse Rogue, I do abhor thee,
Hanging's a death too good and easy for thee.
Why (quoth the Cutpurse) Glover what is the matter,
That thou against me such vile words do scatter;
If that thou envy mine unhappy case,
Come now with all my heart, and take my place.
One of a Trade should not be an ill-wisher,
Nor should an Herring-man despise a Fisher.
I did it but to keep my hand in ure,
Thou make a common trade often I am sure.
For thou have cut more Purses in one day,
Then I in all my life, I Will boldly say.
129. Of a long strong Thief.
A Welsh man hearing one in deep discourse,
How every Age grew daily worse and worse;
As that Men by the common course of Nature,
In Wit are weaker, and are less in Stature:
And now mere Fools compared to ancient Sages,
Pigmies to Giants of those former Ages:
Which shows that all things sublunary tend,
TO a final dissolution, and an end.
Has her sed all (quoth Shone) pre hear her than,
Her knew a Comro, her none Countryman,
That was kin to her, for was her none Cousin,
Was able for her strength to beat a Dozen.
And for her length none with her durst compare,
From Tyburn to the Coast of Gibraltar.
For when was hanged, her foots did reach so low,
Her co'd ha touched the ground with her great toe.
130. Of one would have his Wife no longer argued between the Good man, and a
Neighbor.
A man was often used to threat his Bride,
That she with him no longer should abide.
A Neighbor knowing well her conversation,
Asked him, to say so, what was his occasion?
I Have many reasons to my self best known.
Let some of them I pray ye now be shown.
First, she all day o're-tops me every way,
Then you by night o're-top her (I dare say.)
Next she her head does carry very high,
And so she may, yet show humility:
Besides, in all things she does overreach me;
Why, that is but more wisdom for to teach ye.
Nay more, in Bed she longer lies then I;
So is she longer up, you will not deny.
I Am too short for her, do I what I can;
So for his Wife is every other man.
The truth is she is the taller and the stronger,
And therefore I Will not have her any longer.
131. Of a Chyrurgeon Doctor, and an old Woman.
A Doctor for to cure an old wives eyes,
Her to be three days hood-winkt did advise;
Mean while at times her Brass and Pewter clear,
He stole from her, and what he else could bear:
At last she unhoodwinkt, looking round about,
Perceived her household Goods all carried out:
What must you have (quoth she) it might have been,
That by your help I might have better seen;
But I see now less then before, a many
Of Goods I saw, but now I see not any.
132. Of a Bear-bait.
There was a Bear-bait near to a steep hill,
Fight Dog, fight bear, come freely all that will;
And after some loose courses had been past
Betwixt them fair, the Bear brake loose at last;
When he was loose, he ran as he were wood
To the hill-top, where then a Tinker stood:
The Tinker being very far in drink,
Caught fast the Bear, and did not budge nor shrink
Both struggled there a while, at last these twain
Did fall down headlong, over and over again;
And all the time these up and down thus tumbled,
The Bear he roared, the Tinkers budget rumbled:
Had you been there, and seen them act their part,
You almost would with laughter broke your heart.
The Bear at bottom loose did run away,
The Tinker puffed and blowed, at last did say;
Which of the stout'st of all the company
Dare venture now to do again as I.
133. Of an ungrateful Debtor.
Tardus before I did thee money lend,
I when I would enjoyed thee as a friend;
But now if any where by chance thou spy me,
As if I were a snake thou sneakest by me:
My moneys to demand I did not mean,
And yet I rather will then lose thee clean;
I Would lose my moneys, not thee, both together
I will not lose, enough for to lose either:
Then send my moneys, or come thou (if loath)
Either should come alone, ye may come both)
If that thou like of neither, yet my due
I look for, but if thou never come, adieu.
134. Of Thraso, who sold some Lands for sumptuous Apparel.
With thy clothes weight thou well may sweat amain,
Of Lands four acres in them they contain;
Such store of mould on dead Corpse never was cast,
As thou upon thy back now living have.
135. Of one that escaped Shipwreck and dyed on shore.
One shipwrackt on the seas escaped to ground,
Yet he the land as sea as dangerous found;
For whilst he wet and weary fell asleep
On shore, but a small distance from the deep,
A Viper with her venenosity
There bit him, that he died immediately.
The Fates are firm, he but in vain does fly
The Seas, who is destined on the Land to dye.
136. Of a Trage. Comedy, entitled, Argulus and Parthenia.
This Trage. Comedy does represent
The fervent fancies of two Lovers bent
In firm affection faithful each to either,
And so continued all their lives together;
These looked not on the fawns or frowns of friends,
Nor matched they for some by-sinister ends:
These did not love at door, and leave at hatch,
Nor did these either for advantage match.
The Groom to's Bride did not himself engage
For great Estate, high-birth, or Parentage;
Nor did the Bride expect the Groom to pour
(as Jove in Danae's lap) a golden shower:
Mere love was the first motive that did move
This loving pair to sympathize in love.
The Bride did love the Groom, the Groom the Bride,
Thus both did loving live, both loving died.
Of diverse loving pairs I Have read strange stories,
But none like these, I speak to both their glories.
137. Of a Physician and a Gold-finder.
A Doctor and Gold-finder fell at words,
And all (Sir reverence) was not worth two --
The Doctor said, he was a shitten slave,
A sordid fellow, and base stinking knave.
Doctor (quoth he) forbear those words unmeet,
You know the smell of gain is very sweet
Of any thing; nor be you a forgetter
Of your own practice which then mine is no better:
I smell your meaning out, you plain bewray it,
Your trade's as loathsome, you cannot gainsay it;
For your often poting into -- and piss.
To get gold thence, and so our stirring is.
138. Of a Doctor and a Husbandman.
A Husbandman who had been long time sickly,
At last brought very weak, wished his wife quickly
Unto some Doctor for to bring his water;
Who by inspection knowing not the matter
Of his disease, asked of her like a Nody,
The state and disposition of his body;
As whether he were costative or no?
He does not cost me much (quoth she) all know:
He asked her then, if laxative he was?
She said he lacks for nothing that he has.
The Doctor as displeased did fling about him,
And asked her if she did not come to flout him?
Quoth she, I know not, Sir, your words of Arts,
He belches, neezes, pisses, shits, and farts.
This good (quoth he) but tell me how does shite?
That, Sir, indeed would anger you downright;
Sometimes he shites so hard, that for your life
You Will hardly, Doctor, cut it with a knife;
Another time he shits so thin again,
That you may suck it with a quill amain:
Nay more (Quoth he) I pre thee hold thy tongue,
Like enough so, I Have heard thee prate too long;
I Will make no further privy inquisition,
I's never so fitted since I was Physician.
139. Of a Tenement, and a House of Office situate next together.
A Landlord held a Tenement which lay
Close to an House of Office on the high way;
The Message in Fee simple he of old,
And the House of Office in Fee tail did hold:
The Tenement being not repaired long,
Was weak, but the house of office was main strong.
The Message of a Tenant lying void,
A friend to write Inscriptions being employed,
Over the one door writ, here are some rooms to set,
Over the other thus, here are some farts to let.
140. Of Open-arces or Medlers.
A Country Huswife her maidservant sent
With Open-tails a Lady to present;
Though Open-tails and Medlars with them are
At Court as common as their Lady-ware.)
The Maid plain, downright blunt, and homely bred
Dropping some curtsies to the Lady sed;
My Dame by me her service does present you,
And in this basket has (Sir Reverence) sent you
Some Open-arces, which though (by your favor)
They Have a foul name, yet have no filthy savor:
These Medlars taken raw (she wished me tell ye)
Will cause you pained at bottom of your belly,
As she has found; at which the Lady smiled,
Calling to mind when she was last with child,
How longing for some, she sustein'd great harms,
Never well until the pain came in her arms:
Lady (quoth she) you laugh, yet if but raw
You eat these Medlars, the^^ not worth a straw;
Nor are they worth a fart, (take it on my word)
Until they are all as rotten as a --
The maid's talk caused the Ladies hearty laughter,
And pleased her better then the fruit she brought her.
141. Of a disputation between Mr. Hugh Peter's, and a Country Bumkin.
A Bumkin came to Peter's, and him told
He came to expute with him if he would;
Peter's looked strange, and wondered what he meant,
Yet told him if he would he was content;
How much then shall it be for (Peter's says)
For five pounds, (quoth the Bumkin) if you please:
The match is firmly bound on either side;
Whereat some of the standers by replied.
But who shall first begin? the Clown said than,
You Mr. Peter's, you are the better man;
Peter's then asked him straight, who was Christ's father,
Quoth he, you pose me now main hard I gather;
So pausing on the same a pretty space,
At last he briefly thus resolves the case:
Joseph for's earthly Father's held by most,
But's heavenly Father was the Holy Ghost;
Now did I rightly answer, (pray you tell)
You did (indeed) quoth Peter's) very well:
Then quoth the Clown, my question I Will propose,
Who was my father, Sir, can you disclose?
Quoth he, thy father, how the Devilish should I
E're know, whom I never saw with mortal eye?
I know him not, nor thee I tell thee true;
Then, quoth the Bumkin, you have lost good Sir Hugh
The moneys all are mine, I cannot stay,
So soops the moneys up, and goes his way.
142. Of carving up of a Woodcock.
A Scholar in a stormy winters night
Riding late homewards, was constrained to light
At a friends house in's way, where he often came,
And still was very welcome at the same;
The Gentleman being sat at supper, he
Was wished to sit down with the Company;
And being sat, and merry there, at last
The Gentleman a Woodcock on him cast,
And wished him carve it up, but he refused,
And wittily desired to be excused;
Saying, that woodcocks were wirh Scholars dainty,
Though in the country they would of them such plenty.
And therefore he would not touched by his good will,
And told the Gentleman he would better skill:
Then reached here (said the Gentleman) and see
If I not carve't up artificially;
Quoth Scholar, Sir, you have don't (indeed) so neatly,
So rarely, exquisitely, and completely;
That sure hereafter, wheresoev'r I do
But see a Woodcock, I shall think on you.
143. Of a Dish of Samsons.
A Widow did a friend or two invite
To eat a dish of Samsons toward night;
Who being come, she wishes them fall too,
And says they are welcome without more ado:
And putting the fish heads and tails at once
Into her mouth, never caring for the bones;
One noting it, and smiling, asked her why
She ate the fishes so confusedly?
Quoth she, (since my dear Husband's dead) I vow
I do not care which end goes forwards now.
144. Of a Woddower and Widow.
A Widdower who seven wives had matched,
And all by his unlawful blade dispatched;
A Suitor to a wanton Widow went,
For to obtain her favor and consent:
But her maidservant hearing that he would killed
So many, did persuade her not to yield
By any means to be his wedded wife,
Unless she were a weary of her life:
Away (quoth she) thou prates thou know not what,
Be his blade what it will, I fear it not.
If he do thrust me in, I care not, I
(The world's so hard) am willing for to dye.
145. Of one Lowrie, who altered her Name to Rose.
A Welsh maidservant, Lowrie called by name,
Unto a Shropshire Carrier lately came,
And said, she is for a London service bent,
And for her carriage he should have content.
He asked her name, as they they went on the way,
Lowrie (quoth she) but why do you ask I pray.
Lowrie (said he) those nice Dames never will brook
You, when they do but on thee Lowrie look.
Why, what will you then have me called, she said.
Rose, and that is a sweet Name for any maid;
For when thou there art under thy Dame's nose,
(As thou wilt be often) she will delight in Rose.
Rose too, may give thy Master sweet content.
Quoth she, so I fain would, where ever I went.
Rose then is my name, and you must call me so;
For Lowrie henceforth I Will no longer go.
I know not what between them further past,
But she by's means in London was well placed:
Who did not there above a month abide,
But it came to her course, with more beside,
For to be Catechized (as is the fashion)
In view of a great public Congregation:
And standing up, the Parson as'd her name;
She answered, Rose. (Quoth he) who gave the same?
She said, one Will the Carrier, on a day,
When we went to a Coppice by the high way.
But my first and right proper Name before.
Was Lowrye at least these eighteen years and more.
Whereat a many there burst out with laughter,
And so continued for a long while after.
146. Of one Bull and Heifer, yoaked together in Wedlock.
Reader (perchance (you will think that I do take
These two as feigned Names, for my jeast's sake:
But if you think so, you do think amiss,
How ever be pleased to take it as it is.
A Bull an Heifer matched, I Am of opinion,
Of the same lineage as was Samsons minion:
For he with his Riddles all his guests out-cow'd,
Till some of them had with his Heifer plowed.
She whom he there calls Heifer was his wife,
Which made him (of times) weary of his life;
For she did make strong Samson wear the horns,
And drew his foes to make of him mere scorns.
And Bull's wife like a beast let others ride her,
Which made Bull horn-mad, he could not abide her
And he her scores requited to the full,
Which made her dog him, and often bait the Bull.
Thus both being a like faulty each to either,
They both wore a large pair of Horns together.
Now when Bull's wife was pretty round and full,
Was It proper for to say, she would taken the Bull.
Or was it handsome (she being Bull's wife styled)
To say she was with Calf, then, or with Child.
So that to know (kind Reader) I Would be glad.
What may we rightly call the race these had.
147. Of the Emperor Augustus Caesar and a Country Fellow.
A Courtier who was very intimate
With great Augustus Caesar, did relate,
That he a Villager did lately see,
Was very like unto his Majesty.
Augustus bade the Courtier fetch him thither,
That he might view him face to face together.
The man being a mere Clown, and homely bred,
And fearing left he would somewhat done, or said,
Might have offended his Imperial Grace,
Was long time very loath to come in place.
The Courtier bade him nothing for to fear,
And told him he would make him welcome there.
Where being come, he falls on's bended knee,
And says, long live great Caesar's Majesty.
Caesar straight brought him to a Glass, did show.
Its Representative from top to toe.
So noting him exactly face to face,
And finding him so like in every place;
He as'd him, if his Mother used to come
In his old royal Father's time to Rome.
(Implying by those words, as one may gather,
The man might be a Bastard to his Father)
But the young man not knowing what he meant,
Told the Emperor that his Mother never went
To Rome at all: But that his Father came
Thither a many times, as he could name.
Whereat Augustus laughing, said, I vow
This Clown in mine own coin has paid me now.
148. Of a saucy Thief.
A peremptory Thief atraign'd at Bar,
For the grave Judge's speeches did not care;
Which the Judge well observing, in mind bore him,
And said, were he not hanged, he would hang for him
The thief his Honor thanked: and said, I pray,
When you I need, be not out of the way.
149. Of a Debtor dying in Prison, and buried by night.
A Debtor long time lay in Prison fast,
Resolved to pay no debts at all, at last
Inexorable Death with fury bent,
The King of kings great Pursuivant was sent,
With special Warrant him to take away,
And perforce make him Nature's debt to pay:
He being from hunger, cold, and misery,
Thence quitt, enlarged, and set at liberty;
And all his Links knoc't off he used to have,
Yet he with Links was carried to his grave.
150. Of a Cuckolds Etimology.
One asked a witty Scholar whence the name
Of Cuckold, and of wearing Horns first came;
Quoth he, thereof the reason I never read,
But with the Horns pray trouble not your head:
As for the name of Cuckold some do hold
It came from a Welsh old Cook that's Cookold.
For's Currow da, and not da Currow they,
In Cumroe Ale good, not good Ale do say,
And as Pen mello and not mello Pen,
Head drunk, not drunken heads called by Welchmen.
Even so the name of Cuckold first was born
By a Welsh old Cook that lived at Sign of the Horn.
So that e're since two Cuckolds Horns fell pat,
Yet tell some so, they will be horn-mad thereat.
151. Of one Master Gun, and Goodwife Merrimouth.
One Master Gun took for his recreation,
A Piece on's back, as was his wonted fashion;
And raising of some Ducks, he in their flight,
Some of them lamed, and others killed outright.
The Ducks were Goodwife Merrimouth it proved,
And Gun and she never one another loved:
Who lighting of him, she no whit forbore,
But called him Knave an hundred times and more.
Gun you are an hollow Knave I tell thee roundly,
And now Gun I intend to charge thee soundly:
If I to take thee but in hand desire,
Gun, I shall surely set thee soon on fire.
Gun, thou'st an open mouth, a brazen face,
Still proling up and down in every place.
Gun, you are a cruel murderer, all devouring,
A stinking Knave that long have escaped a scouring.
I care not Merrimouth for all thy talk,
I shall light on thee, if abroad thou walk.
Well, well, Gun, for thy threats a course I Will take,
Though Gun thou now but a false fire do make.
Gun thou'st been often burned in the breech cock sure
The very sight of thee few can endure.
Whilst she thus scold a Constable past by,
Whom she did charge with Gun immediately.
Come Constable bring with you along Gun,
And I will make him smoke for what he is done.
Who being before a Justice brought, he told,
That Merrimouth was such an arrant scold,
None could live by her; for she used to prattle
Louder then many Guns in a set battle.
But she after a curtsie dropr, or twain,
Did fall a fresh of charging Gun again.
Sir, Gun did kill my Duck, that so often laid,
Murdered my Mallard, that so often did tread.
This Gun has often been stocked, and then has burst,
And hurt a many who him heav'ly cursed.
Gun, thou shall have no rest I tell thee troth,
Till thou have given me good content for both;
If thou think'ft I Will put up such wrongs as this,
I tell thee Gun thou take thy aim amiss:
And if thou think me in my words to catch,
You Are out, for Gun has met now with thy match.
Quoth Justice, Huswife best you hold your tongue,
And you Gun must content her for the wrong.
Content a Nunquam satis, sure there is no man,
Can ever suffice such an insatiate woman.
Gun, you o're-shot your self in a strange sort,
Henceforth Gun give of her a good report.
Your carriage Gun, is bad in all men's sight,
For you do miss the mark you aim at quite.
Know you before whom now you are? why then,
Show more respect, we are not as other men.
We Are higher by the head, you cannot tell us,
Our horns exalted are above our fellows.
Gun, you must give'r content, for you did wrong her,
I charge you do it straight, defer't no longer.
And for the future, Gun, I tell you plain,
You never must carry Piece abroad again.
Good master Justas, sure you do but flout me,
For whilst I live I will bear Gun about me.
152. Of certain ingenious Arts, and rare Inventions of former Ages.
A touch of some ingenious Acts I Will give,
Of some rare Artists that you will scarce believe.
One curiously contrived (as stories tell)
All Homers Iliads in a small Nut shell.
Mermicedes composed a Coach so small,
A Fly could cover Horses, Coach and all.
Callicrates did frame an Ant by art,
So small, one could discern thereof no part
Without help of a Multiplying Glass,
Which showed each lineament, and what it was.
One Archimedes framed most cunningly,
A Dove by art, which over the Seas did fly;
He made a Myrrhor too, was much admired,
Wherewith Ships a great distance off he fired.
One Paphos a great store of Birds had caught,
And long time closely in a Cage had taught
For to speak plain, when they were let abroad,
Paphos est Deus, Paphos is a God.
One taught a Crow to salute Caesar plain
In Greek, whom Caesar pleased well for his pain.
A Cobbler who the Crow in Greek heard chat in,
And's owner so well paid, taught one in Latin:
At length with Salve Caesar to salute;
But finding the Crow very dull unto't,
As in despair would often to it cry,
Oleum, and operam heu perdidi;
Which is, I Have lost my labor, and my pain:
Which the Bird hearing over and over again,
At last learnt both: The Cobbler who heard talk
That Caesar forthwith was that way to walk,
Held out the Crow as Caesar past that way,
And salve Caesar straight the Crow did say:
Which Caesar noting, said it did but chat,
And that he would better Birds at home then that;
Whereat the Crow again did plainly cry,
Oleum and operam heu perdidi:
Caesar his speech that fell so pat regarded,
And so the Cobbler too he well rewarded.
Aristus being invited as a Guest
With others to a solemn sumptuous Feast,
Did cause an artificial Bird to fly
To each one then at board respectively;
And when from one to one it so had past,
It came to his own hand again at last.
Another made an Eagle for to soar
Over an Emperors Coach six miles and more;
Which afterward with his Imperial train
Attending on the Coach fled back again.
The Watch-maker as curious skill imparts
In his, as any other in their Arts;
For he is his Fusee, Wheels, and Gardegat,
Portants, Spring, Barrel, and I know not what;
His Cock, his Balance, Arrow, and his Rochets,
With other pretty gimbals and neat Crochets.
The Art of Stenography late devised,
By which a deal's in a small room comprised,
Is very rare; for by it I did note
A large whole Sermon in Octavo wrote.
One made a Golden Chain with lock and key,
And four and twenty links drawn by a flea;
The which a Countess in a box kept warm,
And fed it daily on her milk-white arm.
One Giges did compose a curious Ring,
Through which he (himself unseen) saw every thing.
Some hold Minerva was the first that brought
Weaving in use, and it to others taught:
And others hold that fair Arachne Queen
Of Colophonia, was the first was seen
This Art to exercise, by whom was drawn
A twine more fine then any Cobweb Lawn:
But I hold (let what others will report)
We Are first beholding to the Spider for it;
And though of manual Arts there is a great many,
Yet in the world like this there is not any.
And Printing was at first a rare Invention,
But being so common, I Will make often no mention.
The Invention first of Guns (as stories tell)
From Almain came, I rather think from Hell;
For there is a filthy smoke, and a foul smother,
And spittitg flames of fire at one another;
And men with Guns, incensed with rage and ire,
Like Dev'ls at one another spit forth fire:
So that it is very like at first it came
From Hell, or from the Devil or his Dam.
Albertus Magnus who once Tutor was
To that renowned profound Pythagoras,
Made the Idea of a man in mould,
So vive to the Spectators to behold;
With active iron gimbals to it so meet,
That it could move the head, eyes, hands, and feet:
And which was more to be admired at,
It some words plainly could articulate.
I of this sort could insert many more,
Which I Will omit, and purposely pass over;
Being loath the Readers patience to offend,
For they were rather for his pleasure penned:
These show what rare things may be done by Art,
Whilst God does guide the Artists hand and heart.
Certain pleasant Propositions and Questions, with their merry Solutions and
Answers.
Question 1.
HOw does this Earths vast ball so firmly stand
Often self, without some main supporting hand
Ans. Because each Element when it is fixed right
In's one place, neither heavy is nor light.
2.
Q. Why did God take and make Eve Adams bride
Of an hard crooked rib from his left side?
A. Shows Wives are so inflexible, hard, crooked,
For some sinister ends, few men can brook it.
3.
Q. Why wooes the man the woman, and not she
The man, though her desire more eager be?
A. Eve came first out of Adam, which shows plain
What the man lost, he seeks for to regain.
4.
Q. Tell me I pray what kind of Apple was it
In Eden Eve gave Adam for to taste?
A. A Bitter-sweet we truly it may call,
For it proved so to them, and to us all;
'Twas pleasant to the sight, sweet to the taste,
But bitter when from Eden they were cast:
And so that bitter sweet proves unto all,
Redeemed by faith in Christ from Satan's thrall.
5.
Q. Why did God say, each creature that he named
Was very good, until that Eve was framed?
A. God in his secret wisdom did foreknow
Eva would be Auae, woman man's woe.
6.
Q. Why did God say, let us make an Helper meet
For man, in that socrety is sweet?
A. She proved indeed no less, for in a trice
She helped poor Adam out of paradise.
7.
Q. Why are most Women much enamoured
Of such as had at first their Maidenhead?
A. Their Maidenhead did long time vex and grieve them,
Then they should love them best that ease did give them.
8.
Q. Why are folks fox'd said to be far in drink,
When drink's far in them rather one would think?
A. This an improper speech, though it be common
Applied to any drunken man or woman;
But of Rats in an Ale-fat drunk, I think
One may say truly they were far in drink.
9.
Q. When man and woman both by chance do drown,
Why rises he with his face up, and she down?
A. Shows they will never gen'rate more, for both still lay
At Venus sports the clean contrary way.
10.
Q At board why sits a woman highest still,
And yet in bed lies lowest by her good will?
A. She loves her choice fat sweet bits night and day,
Which gaping fall pat in her mouth that way.
11.
Q. Which is the only way to tame a shrew?
A. With kindness kill her, and you will still her so.
12.
Q. Why do some Venus Goddess. like adore,
Though a base Prostitute, collapsed Whore?
A. Because so many for her favor woe her.
Which gained, they fall upon their knees unto her
13.
Q. Why did light Venus suffer Mars to enter,
Having a lawful Husband to content her?
A. Because that limping Vulcan was too lame
To stand, or take good footing at the game.
14.
Q. What is it that God did never make, tell me, can ye?
A. A Cuckold, for he sure never yet made any.
15.
Q. Why are the horns upon the Husband hung,
When as the whore his wife does all the wrong?
A. All beasts who have horns, upon their heads do bear 'em,
He Is his wife's head, then fittest he should wear 'em.
16.
Q. Who was the meerest Wittal ever was born,
The veriest Cuckold that ever wore a horn,
The arrant'st whoremaster that ever did piss?
A. King Solomon who'd (as the story is)
Seven hundred wives, and concubines 3. hundred;
Which if he were not, it is to be much wondered.
17.
Q. Why do some Cuckolds love their wives more dear,
Then others their chaste wives (as't does appear?)
A. 'Cause none alive could give their wives their due yet,
They like their letting others help to do it.
18.
Q. Why've Bastards often more ingenious pates,
And manly valor then Legitimates?
A. Legitimates are gotten commonly
In fatigated and spent Venery;
But the other with a more courageous cheer,
As Mars kissed Venus with a full career.
19.
Q. And what is the cause some bastards look a squint,
For all may think that there was somewhat in it?
A. At the act the parents round about 'em spied
For fear, and so the child became squint-eyed.
20.
Q Who were the wickedst Judges e're were known?
A. Pilate and Bradshaw, who to hell are gone;
The One judged to death the guiltless King of glory,
The Other King Charles, for whom all is friends are sorry.
21.
Q. Who was the greatest Br'wer this land ere bred?
A. Cromwell, who our late King decapited;
He brewed more mischief, and debate set forth
Throughout 3 Kingdoms then his neck was worth
Now hell his stinking cask has out of doubt,
Where he may long time hoop e're he get out.
22.
Q What are those female wantons like that wear
Their loose, light, black hoods almost every where?
A. Methinks they look in those black hoods and veils
Like gentles who have black heads and wagging tails.
23.
Q. Why do most wear two pair of hose, whereof
Th'one's for the most part red above the calf?
A. It shows that they from the red-shanks first came
And wear them so, in memory of the same;
And wearing of such double wrinkled hose,
They make themselves great Calves, as I suppose.
24.
Q. Why do some wear like cuffs about their feet,
Which to be worn about the wrists more meet?
A. This fashion shows, though it be base and scurvy,
That now the world is turned clean topside turvy.
25.
Q. How is it that there is so many Ribbons wore
Of diverse colors all men's bodies over;
About their hats, their wastes, and at their knees,
But 'specially about their Codpeeces?
A. Their Codpeeces contain their Lady-ware,
To show fair Ladies where their standings are;
Wherein they have giggombobs, and fain would vent 'em,
To please their sweet-hearts fancies, and content'em
26.
Q. Why did the Usurper and his mates conjoin
To make the shape of Breeches on their Coin;
When as the Slead, the Barrel, and the Sling
Were for a Brewer a far fitter thing?
A. A Royallist (observing these late jars
By women caused) called them the women's wars:
So Cromwell for their sakes on that stamp pitches,
Because that Joan his wife did wear the breeches.
-- Cunus deterrima belli
Hujus causa fuit. --
27.
Q. Who brought up first wide breeches at the knees?
A. Cromwell with other his Accomplices.
Q. And what do they in that strange mode imply?
A. A Coat of Arms reversed in Heraughtry;
Which does a Traitor properly display,
And Cromwell was an arch one, so were they.
28.
Q. Who brought up shoes with noses then the feet
Broader, and longer, and each way unmeet?
A. This foolish fashion too from Noll first rose,
Who'd a great toting, huge large, main long nose.
29.
Q. Why wear fair Ladies fans of Ostridge plumes,
Whose able stomach iron soon consumes?
A. For lightness only they do wear his feather,
For like with like delights altogether;
And though their stomachs are but queasie ones
To digest Iron, yet they can the Stones.
30.
Q. Which do ye hold (pray tell me if ye can)
To be the direct middle age of man?
A. There Is no one living punctually can say,
That this or that is till his dying day.
31.
Q. Which is the longest day do you suppose?
A. That wherein one endures most pain and woes.
Q. What is the shortest do ye apprehend?
A. One's last, for that is nighest to an end.
32.
Q. How can it be by wit imagined,
One day should serve to judge both quick and dead?
A. The Conscience (whereof none can be refuser)
Shall then be's own judge, witness, and accuser.
33.
Q. Who (Miller-like) first brought up poldring hair,
which makes young men look old, and black seem fair?
A. Nol when he did frequent his old Malt-mill,
Came out thence in that manner poldred still;
'Twas fit they poldred such a stinking knave,
And so it is well for him he is in his grave:
For had he lived till now, (the whole world says)
He Would late been poldred to some tune In Faith.
34.
Q. When that the Soul is from the body fled,
Is It not fit the Corpse should be buried?
A. No, rather make much often, and giv't such meat
As in that case is fit of A woman newly brought to bed.
one to eat.
35.
Q. How long is it best for one to have a wife,
For certain years or else for term of life?
A. Two days are full enough a wife to have,
The One warm in bed, and the other cold in grave.
36.
Q. Why do some Blacksmiths, and most of their fellows
Set horns upon the ends of their great bellows?
A. They took that use from Vulcan, I conceive,
Whose wife Mars kissed, and him the horns did leave
37.
Q. What are those females like, who on their faces
Wear small black patches sixth in diverse places?
A. They Are like to spotted she Pards who are great rangers,
Which wrong their males by coupling often with strangers.
38.
Q. Why wore Noll's Soldiers lately altogether
Hangers, more then swords, tucks, or rapier either?
A. Their wearing Hangers plainly did bewray,
That they were hangers on the State for pay;
Which proved true: for the State did but delay them
Till good King Charles took a wise course to pay them.
39.
Q. Of a fat roasted Pig through the midst cleft,
Which of the sides is best, the right or left?
A. When one of them is eaten (out of jest)
I for my own part hold the left's the best.
40.
Q. When is the Goose with the most feathers laden?
A. Its like then when she is by the gander trodden.
41.
Q. Did not Geese save the Capitol of Rome?
A. Yes, when the Gauls against the same did come;
But therein they did show themselves mere Geese,
Who by such silly Creatures it did leese.
42.
Q. What is it that is born of's mother without pain
Which its own mother soon begets again?
A. Congealed Ice begotten first of water,
Which being dissolved returns to the same matter.
43.
Q. Who was it that was born (now let me hear)
Before that either of his Parents were:
And had his Grandmothers virginity,
This though it seem very strange yet is no lie?
A. Adam and Eve were formed of comely stature
By God, and so not born by course of nature;
But Abel was: who had the maidenhead
Of the Earth his grandmother, when he was dead.
44.
Q. In Versifying, of all sorts of feet,
Which for the loving Females is most meet?
A. The Dactyle best with women does consort,
Consisting of a long one, and two short.
45.
Q. Why does Gold look so pale unto the eye?
A. Because that all in wait for it do lie.
And caught its kept close with such cares and fears,
That very seldom it abroad appears.
46.
Q. Of the five Tenses, or the Times, expressed
In Lilly's Grammar, which do you hold the best?
A. The Present Tense, or Time, for its in vain
To call the Preterperfect Tense again.
And of the Tense, or Time, termed the Future,
We of a day or minute, are not sure.
47.
Q. Of these three evils, which for best do you grant one,
A crooked Saint, rich Fool, or witty Wanton?
A. A crooked Saint is fittest for the Lord,
For who can fancy her, at bed or board.
A rich Fool, though of wealth she have great store
Yet will her talk but vex you evermore.
A witty Wanton when she is done you wrong,
Will put it quaintly off with a neat tongue.
Then of these Evils, if you choose the least,
You Will find the witty Wanton is the best.
48.
Q. How differed Noll and's son Dick in condition,
For both a while swayed with the like ambition?
A. The father was more knave then fool a deal,
The son more fool then knave, its since known well
49.
Q. Who first wore boots which came up to his twiss
So high, that he could for them hardly piss?
A. One Mounsier Stradler, who came with Commission
From France to make with Cromwell composition.
Which soon agreed, for both pist in one quill;
For the one did stride, the other straddled still:
Wherein did sure consist a Paradox,
For It seems they could not help it with a Pox.
50.
Q. What is the cause there lately did appear
So many strong delusions every where;
Such Heresies, Sects, Schisms, and Alterations,
In Church and Commonwealth in these three nations
A. Those Schismatics had then the sole command
And all power (though usurped) in their own hand;
Then who could quash the same, or it prevent,
Whilst there was wanting Regal government:
For when the Jews had no King, all did rise,
And did what seemed best in their own eyes.
51.
Q. Who late revived those Perriwigs and borders?
A. Some of Noll's Soldiers by their lewd disorders,
Who marching by command to France over seas,
Some Insurrections there for to appease,
Brought with them thence the Frenchified fashion
And since bestowed it on some of this Nation;
That made their fronts so high, fair, smooth and even
That there was scarce an hair 'twixt them and heaven.
And though this seem but a bald jest in view,
I think you will not dislike't, for its too true.
And some of the Cromwellians yet do cry,
A pox of all true jeasts, for that is no lie.
52.
Q Why are folks drunk said to be fox'd, pray show,
For there are few the cause thereof do know?
A. Foxes are very red, and Drunkards most,
Look mighty flushed when they the Cans have tossed
2. Foxes do live by stealth, and so do they
Often steal a Cup too much, then steal away.
3. Foxes love desert, and close lurking holes;
So have these by-nooks where they quaff their bowls.
4. Foxes use ranging for their prey by night;
And these in late night walking much delight.
5. Foxes lie closely sleeping all the day,
So these in lurking pass the time away.
6. Foxes themselves do' from the Hunters hide,
And these their followers never can abide.
7. Foxes do live of others pains and toil;
And Drunkards wholly live upon the spoil.
8. And lastly, Foxes have a filthy stink,
So've most foul Drunkards when they are far in drink.
Then seeing one Drunk's so like a Fox each way,
Those that are Drunk are Fox'd, one well may say.
53.
Q. Each morning when friends and acquaintance meet.
Why does each other with Good morrow greet?
It Is an improper speech, for who does know?
A. Whether he shall live a day, or hour, or no.
Therefore the Welsh men do more proper say,
When they salute with Dudddawch, that is good day.
54.
Q Which of all things should be the most respected,
Yet for the most part, is the most neglected?
A. Time, which most pass away in pastimes vain,
Yet none one minute past can call again.
55.
Q When one with his own wife (unknown) does lie,
Taking her sure, for's neighbors wife hard by;
What do ye think of that child so begot?
Is it legitimate or is it not?
A. If for the Will the actual deed you take,
A Bastard of it then you needs must make.
56.
Q. What Is the fulfilling of the Law I pray?
A. To love thy neigbour as thy self each way:
So who to's neighbors wife bears as good will,
As to's own wife, he does the Law fulfill.
57.
Q. When is it best for one to fall on board?
A. The Cynick tells us bluntly in a word;
A rich man when he is stomach to his meat,
A poor man when he is somewhat for to eat.
58.
Q What think ye of such women that are so
Ushered by help of men where ever they go?
A. It Is fit such should be helped by some ones hand
That of themselves can neither go nor stand.
59.
Q Who first found out The Italian strange Padlock?
A. Mounsier Zelotipus who'd the French P --
He Would a choice piece to do, but could not do it,
And locked it up so close none could come to it.
60.
Q. What evils to most Houses do pertain?
A. A foul offensive smoke, a shower of rain;
Young hungry children from their meat kept long
And a shrowed wife, who has a scolding tongue.
61.
Q. How many sorts of Cuckolds may there be?
A. There Is chiefly sev'n, as you may plainly see.
The first's a creeping Sneak that is cuckolded,
Though snail-like he, his house keeps over his head.
The second Goat-like wears his horns behind,
Which being out of sight, are out of mind.
The Third, Ram-like, has a large pair of horns,
And sees them, yet to bear them never scorns.
The fourth, Bull-like, bears on his front before,
A border for a Bush-board, lest he gore.
The fifth, Stag-like, trips with a fair attire,
Which standing he does gaze at, and admire.
Yet many Gallants put him in great fear,
When they come in his Park to hunt his deer.
The sixth resembles the Rhinoceros,
Who though his horns grow not as others grows
Yet finds no fault with their Deformity,
So he may reap some benefit thereby.
The seventh, Unicorn like, bears his horn
Main high, in that himself is nobly born;
So like the Unicorn (as stories tell us)
His horn's exalted far above his fellows.
62.
Q. What vermin's that (though it be small in stature,
Which so degenerates from the course of nature,
That it corrodes the matrix of its dam
Which bred it, fed it, e're to light it came?
A. The Viper which Christ upon just occasion,
Did paralize unto the Jewish Nation;
VVho'th teeth hid in the gums vile sharp and keen,
Wherewith (when time serves) it does reak and teen.
63.
Q. What beast is that which his own sire never knows,
For at the engendring he his life does lose?
A. The Bitch Wolf when she is proud with dogs do go,
Raving and raging ever too and fro.
Where they a filthy coil about her keep,
Till wearied out, at last they fall asleep,
She wakes one, which her lines, and when each misses
His prey, they tear him limmally in pieces.
64.
Q. What creature weaves a web to her own woe
And twists a twine to her own overthrow?
A. The subtle Spider, who is an Emblem right
Of envy, hatred, malice, and of spite:
She her own lean spare entrails does not spare,
With webs thence drawn, poor flies for to ensnare.
65.
Q. What Creature's that which kindles, and beside
Has a new breed of young at the same time?
A. This of the Hare (though very strange) is true,
Who at once is Parient and Pregnant too.
66.
Q. What fowl is it which with angels plumes do fly
That has a thievish gate, a devilish cry?
A. The Peacock Juno's Bird, with his proud flail,
Who'th Argos hundred eyes about his tail.
76.
Q. And what fowl is it, that boil it, roast it, bake it,
As thoroughly and as well as fire can make it;
Yet will it before few days are past over
Become as raw as ever it was before;
And being kept never so long (let who will try)
It will not stink, nor taint, nor putrify?
A. It is the self-same Bird, which his food makes
Of poisonous Askers, Adders, and of Snakes.
68.
Q. What things to a Chyrurgeon's requisite?
A. Three chiefly, which I Will briefly here recite.
1. First he must in his Patients ulcers pry
With an acute sharp piercing Eagles eye.
2. Next he must have a Lions heart, not swound
Nor faint at sight of any mortal wound.
3. And he must have a Lady's hand to apply
Salves to all sores exceeding tenderly.
69.
Q. What strange Tomb's that, and where may it be found,
which touches neither heaven, nor sea, nor ground
A God Mah'mets Iron Chest in Mecha fair,
Drawn up by Load-stones hanging in the Air.
70.
Q. Why has sad Night her sable weed still on?
A. She Bride-like mourns for Day, as dead and gone.
If the Stars did not comfort her so mourning,
With grief she would break her heart e're Day's returning.
71.
Q. How is it two Elements by Natures cunning,
The Earth standing still, the Water always running,
Make one Terrestrial perfect Globe and Ball?
A. The God of Nature nothing framed at all
In vain, but to some special use and end,
So both being heavy, naturally tend
To the same center, where they bear and feed,
All creatures that do spring of mortal feed.
72.
Q. Why do men for light Errants women blame,
When they are themselves as fantly in the same:
For amongst the wandering Planets they may find
Five males, for but two of the female kind?
A. Poor women still do bear the blame of all,
Because the weak'st is thrust unto the wall:
For when with Venus Mars conjoined is caught,
Venus bears all the burden of the fault.
73.
Q. Why do most a wild wench a wanton call?
A. 'Cause she does still want one to sport withal:
Yet when she to her consorts suit consents,
These wantons have no wants to their contents.
74.
Q. How many Worlds may there be, tell me pray?
For there are more then one (as many say.)
And Aristotle Alexander told,
That there were many worlds, when that he could
Not conquer one, for all his toil and pain,
Which made proud Alexander weep amain?
A. If you Man for a little World confess,
As (in himself considered) he is no less,
In regard of his exquisite Perfection,
Then there is a world of Worlds without exception.
But Gods word plainly shows (this all and some)
There Is but two; this world, and the world to come.
75.
Q. What creature's that which weakly creeps on four,
Then goes upright of only two, no more;
Within few years to go of three is fain,
And at last feebly creeps on four again?
A. A little Infant first of four does craul,
In manhood walks of two, being then grown tall:
After grown weak, he is with a Staff comforted;
And in old Age with crutches he is supported.
76.
Q. Whether is it better if one match at all
To choose a wife main big, or very small?
A. Herein one asked a Cynick his advice
Who wished him take one of the smallest size.
For (quoth he) in my judgment it is best,
Of Evils, ever for to choose the least.
77.
Q. If there were a good wager to be laid,
Of one to his full weight for to be weighed;
Whether do you think will such an one weigh more
Fasting, or when he is freely fed before?
A. When one has fasted long he will heavier be,
Then when he has eaten to satietie;
Because his spirits by fasting are abated,
Which are by eating food exhillerated.
78.
Q Wherein's fair England far more beautified,
Then any Kingdom in the World beside?
A. In fair and sumptuous Temples it excels,
In stately Tombs, and well tuned Cords of Bells.
In Rivers, Bridges, and in pleasant Fountains,
In fruitful Valleys, and high towering Mountains.
In wool, in flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle,
In Marshal-men, and horses trained to battle.
And in the store of Ladies fair, for there
Are proper women common every where.
79.
Q. Do women live in worse or better cases
In England, or in many other places?
A. In other Nations wives are light set by,
'Cause they allow of lewd Polygamy;
But England is a Paradise for Wives,
For there their Husbands love them as their lives;
For Servants it is a Purgatory sure,
For there a deal of sorrow they endure.
And its an Hell for Horses, being fain
Under the Whip to take a world of pain.
80.
In what form do you think a woman would
Seem fairest for the Spectators to behold?
A. If she were Dutch from foot t'above her thigh,
Wherein consists a modest mystery;
From thence, if she were French to her neck's height,
For they of body commonly are straight;
And thereon if an English head were placed,
For of all others they are handsom'st faced:
Who Is thus by Nature formed from top to toe.
For an accomplished Lady needs must go.
81.
Q In Spain why's a maid an Infantess styled,
Which signifies an infant, or young child?
A. Because that there are none, (the word shows plain)
But only Infants that are Maids in Spain.
82.
Q. What Is best for Barber-surgeons, wars or peace?
A. All Is one to them, their trade does never cease,
They Have Salve for every sore within some box,
In wars for wounds, in peace to cure the P --
83.
Q From whence came first the Cyprian foul disease,
Which does so many pleasingly displease?
A. From the Low Countries, as some do report,
Near Gelderland, or from thence not much short.
Some think from the Venetians it proceeded,
And others hold the Italians first did breed it;
But it is most like, it from the French first came,
In that from them it still retains the name.
84.
Q. Is it for truth, whereof the Irish boasts,
There lives no pois nous Creatures in their Coasts?
A. It Is sure, and has long since for truth been tried,
For such being thither brought have straight ways died.
Yet they with Lice a loathsome plague are cursed,
Of all the ten Egyptian Plagues the worst,
And though their fingers itch to be about them,
Do what they can, they cannot live without them
85.
Q. Whence do the Scots derive their name I pray,
A. From Scotos a Greek word, (as Authors say)
Which Darkness signifies, in that they quite
Live Northward more remote from Phoebus light;
If then they are so dark, it is strange of late
They should presume for to illuminate
Those two transcendent and resplendent eyes
Of Englands famous Universities.
Those inexhaust pure founts of life eternal,
And raise such Locusts from the Abiss infernal,
To muddifie, and to disturb the same,
To Gods dishonor, and to their own shame:
Yet they pretend, (but we to God refer it)
What they did was by the infusion of the Spirit;
But if it were by a sp'rit, it was a mad one,
Or as St. John the Devil calls Abadon:
86.
Q. And whence did the perfidious Scots descend?
A. From the Jews lineage (as I apprehend.)
For as the Jews by their strange laws (we read)
Where e're they came Sedition still did breed;
Even so the Scottish Clergy by their factions
Bred in our English Church these late distractions.
And as the Jews of Concubines kept store,
So every Scot keeps commonly an whore:
And as the Jews all swines flesh held impure,
So can the Jewish Scots no Pork endure.
And as the Jews did treacherous Judas pay,
Our Christ, their Lord and Master to betray,
And to reign over them would not abide him,
But (guiltless) with great fury crucified him;
Even so the Scots our good first Charlemain,
Their native King would not permit to reign;
But Judas-like, when they had him in hold,
(And might have saved) delivered up for Gold:
Nay worse then Judas, they would never restore,
The perditorious hire they had before;
Nor do repent that execrable deed,
A stigmatized shame to all their seed:
No, they will be hanged first, yet for cursed pelf
They Will hang themselves, as Judas hanged himself.
God bless our King from those perfidious Scots,
And from all Traitors perditorious Plots;
And send him long propitiously to Reign
Over his Dominions all of Great Britain.
Amen.
A merry May Song for this Year of our Lord, 1662. To a pleasant Tune.
1.
LEt us fing and rejoice
With a cheerful voice,
And unto the Lord let us pray,
That the heavenly Powers
Would send down sweet showers,
To gather the Flowers in the May.
2.
Come now fresh Aurora,
And fair Goddess Flora,
Clear Phoebus to shine on the earth:
Come Cynthia bright,
Play thy Midwife's part right,
And be aiding all to this new birth.
3.
For Tellus it seems
Once every year teems
About this month of May;
She brings forth her birth
With great joy and mirth,
And is decked with most Royal Array.
4.
Of all times in the Year
It plain does appear,
That May is the chief and the prime:
The Fawns now are tripping,
The Lambs and Kids skipping,
And making all merry pastime.
5.
In the pleasant Spring
The pretty Birds sing,
Making a sweet Melody;
They hop, and they fly
From tree unto tree,
Delightful to eye and to eye.
6.
Let us walk in the Fields,
And see what May yields,
Most pleasant and sweet is the Air;
The Meadows are green,
And the Leasows are seen
All over neat, decent, and fair.
7.
The fruiful grounds
With blossoms abounds,
And fresh colors manifold;
And are for delight,
For sent and for sight,
Most pleasant to behold.
8.
The Primrose meet,
And the Cowslip so sweet,
The Harebel, the Crows-foot, and Dasie;
The Bolt upright,
And the Lady smock-white,
You may there take up if it please ye.
9.
Now true Lovers may
In the fields sport and play,
And give their sweet-hearts a green Gown;
And who can come to it,
And Yet will not do it,
I count him an absolute Clown.
10.
In troops now out-flies
The laboring Bees,
And abroad in the fields they do strive;
From blossoms and buds
To gather their Goods,
And Honey bring home to their Hive.
11.
The Philomel sings,
And the VVoods and Groves rings
With her notes so shrill, pleasant, and pretty;
And the Cuckoo is glad,
Though some be horn-mad
For to hear him in Town or in City.
12.
And now let us pray
To the Lord, that he may
Bless our good King Charlemain,
From Plots and Conspiracies,
That free from all Heresies
He may the true Gospel maintain.
Amen.
FINIS.
These Books (with many others) are Printed for M. Wright, at the Kings Head in
the Old Bailey.
NAtural Magic, in twenty Books, wherein is set forth all the riches and
delights of the Natural Sciences, by John Baptista Porta. in fol.

The Old Couple, a Comedy, by Tho. May, Esquire.

The History of Dorastus and Faunia.

The seven Wise Masters.

Caroll on Job, the ninth Volume.

Astrological Institutions, being a perfect Isagogue to the whole Art of
Astrology.

17. Sermons preached at the University and at Court, by Rich. Gardener, D. D.
and Chaplain to King Charles the I.

Christ alone exalted, in fourteen Sermons by Tobias Crispe, D. D. being his
first Vol.

The Plain Man's pathway to Heaven, by Arthur Dent.

Man's Masterpiece, or Meditations, by Sir Peter Temple, Knight.

The Saints desire, or Divine Consolation, by Sam. Richardson.

Erasmus de copia verborum.

The English Improver improved, Or, the Survey of Husbandry surveyed, by Wa.
Blithe, etc.


