THE Righteous Man's HOPE AT DEATH: Considered and Improved for the Comfort of
Dying Christians; and the Support of Surviving Relations.

To which is Added Deathbed Reflections, etc.

Proper for a Righteous Man in his Last Sickness.

By Samuel Doolittle.

This was the first Sermon the Author Preached after the Death of his Mother
Mrs. Mary Doolittle; who deceased December. 16. 1692. and is since enlarged.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cockerill, at the Three Legs in the Poultrey, over
against Stocks-Market. 1693.

TO His Loving Sisters, Mrs. Mary Sheafe, Mrs. Tabitha Hearne, Mrs. Susanna
Pool, Mrs. Sarah Dawson, Mrs. Martha Doolittle.

Dear Sisters,
THAT Infinitely Wise God, who does what he will, and gives not account of any
of his Matters, Job. 33. 13.
has made a breach upon us. That God who gave at first, and for many years
continued, has now removed from us a dear and tender Mother. This Arrow that
killed one, wounded all; that Stroke that took away Life from her, took away an
excellent Wife from our honored Father, and a dear Mother from you and me. At
once (fatal hour!) she was left a breathless Corpse; he a solitary Widdower; and
we Motherless Children. What a sad and sudden change is made in Persons, and
Families, when Death knocks at the door and enters in! The Root now is dead,
and dry; though the many Branches are yet spared. For many years, God continued
us an entire Family: The Destroying Angel that knocked at many doors, visited
many houses, passed by ours: When the Ax has been laid at the Root of many
Families, when many Branches have been lopt off, and many Trees hewn and cut
down; we stood in the Vineyard untoucht: But Death will come, and a parting
time will come. Will come! alas! it is come. The sweetness of her Temper, the
greatness of her Love, the tenderness of her Affection, the Grace of God in
her; whatever might endear a Mother, rendered her company delightful, and her
presence a great part of our earthly happiness: But God would have her home,
and would not that the Mansion designed for her should stand any longer empty.
That Body which had many Infirmities, and which a-while-a-go with grief and
tears we beheld pined and wasted; consumed and worn with languishing sickness,
is now at rest: And the more noble Soul is now among the Spirits of Just men
made perfect: Thus has Heb. 12. 23.
her heavenly Father disposed of her; and is it not time to think what is our
work and duty? is it to weep and mourn? While she lived she was worthy to be
loved; and now she is dead she is worthy to be lamented; and silent Tears will,
and may speak what words must not. Has Death removed, and the Grave buried her
out of our sight? did she take leave of us with her cold, and dying Lips; and
is she gone, and must we see her no more? Sad thought! may we not weep and
mourn? we may, we ought; but yet there is something of greater importance that
such Providence call for, and should be the employment of surviving Relations.

The Red has been speaking, and yet speaks; Lord! grant we may hear the Voice,
and understand the Language, know the meaning, and obey the Call of it. Death
has been speaking, the Grave with open mouth has been speaking, her last
Sickness, Decease, and Funeral have been speaking: O that I, and you may have
an Ear to hear what this Providence says! While she was with us she spent that
little time, and the less breath she had in speaking for God's Glory, and the
good of others. Oh! never forget that Affectionate Exclamation, Oh love the
Lord, all ye my Children! And being dead she yet speaks; and with Heb. 11. 4.
a louder Voice too. She had no greater Joy than to see her Children walking in
the Truth. No doubt you are Children of many Prayers and Tears; she travailed
with you again, and longed to see Christ formed in you; and I doubt not but it
was a comfort to see such probable grounds to hope you were born again: That
you were not only born of her, but born of Water and the Holy Spirit; and I
will venture to say she loved none so much for bearing John. 3. 5.
her Likeness, as for having the Image of God. Her highest ambition was to see
you good, holy, and living in the Fear of God; and when you were to change your
condition, and enter into a Married state, her earnest desire was, you might
Marry in the Lord, and be disposed of to such as might further, not hinder you
in the way 1 Cor. 7. 39.
to Heaven; it did delight her, to my knowledge, in her last Sickness, that
some of you have such.

Her early Instructions, serious Counsels, seasonable Reproofs, holy Example,
fervent Prayers, and many Tears spoke Love to your precious and Immortal Souls:
What but this was the Language of all? Lord! save me, and mine too; let me go
to Heaven, and let my dear Children follow after: Be thou a God, Friend, and
Father to me and them; bind up my 1 Samuel 25. 29.
Soul, and the Souls of mine in the bundle of Life. And now blessed be God all
of this kind has not been in vain. She lived to see the fruit of her labor,
and her Prayers in part answered; and what is given, I hope, and I pray God it
may be but the first fruits, earnest, and pledge of what is yet behind. Have
you begun well, and are you set out in your Journey to Heaven? Go on, and hold
out. Has the Spirit enlightened, renewed, and changed you? Have you the
Likeness of God, and the Image of Christ? Have you given up your selves in a
serious and solemn manner to the Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit?
Is sin your grief and burden; the object of your sorrow and hatred? do you
oppose, resist, and fight against it? persevere to the end, and the Crown is
yours. Let nothing discourage you; if the way be rugged, and your Journey
tedious; if you are threatened with Storms and Tempests; if you find it hard to
watch, and pray, to wrestle, and conflict, to deny your selves, live by Faith,
and perform many duties, which are contrary to corrupt Nature, don't faint,
tire, and give out; Heaven is at the end of your Journey, and Heaven (oh
believe and think often on it!) will make amends for all: When once you are
there, with an overflowing Joy will you think of these Afflictions, Crosses,
and Disappointments; for then you shall see, know, and be fully convinced that
Infinite Wisdom made them all serviceable to your Eternal Welfare. Though the
flesh is pained and smarts, yet a time will come, when you shall praise your
heavenly Father for seasonable Chastisements, and the Discipline of his Rod.
Though the flesh may be uneasy, and the burden may pinch you; though the Rod may
make you groan, and weep; though Satan may tempt, and your own hearts may be
ready to question your Relation to, and Covenant Interest in God; his Love to
you, or yours to him, because it is so, and so with you; yet don't say, nay,
don't so much as think there are any more bitter Ingredients in your Cup than
are necessary; than both the Wisdom, and Bowels of a Father advise.

Is Satan busy to fill you with doubts and fears; needless suspicions, and
groundless jealousies? does he draw a Curtain before, or cast a Veil upon your
faces? does he labor to magnify your Sins, blot your Evidences, and
extinguish your Hope; and are you cast down, and go mourning all the day long
because of this? why should you? is it not an Argument Satan has lost his game,
and you are none of his Slaves, because he thus disquiets you? Do you mourn
after God, and pant, and breathe for him? is it nothing but the light of his
Countenance, the smiles of his Face, and a sense of his Love can content you?
Are you looking to see the Image of God upon your hearts; and is it your grief,
and trouble you cannot see it so plain, and legible as you should, and would,
and desire? and hereupon do you conclude you have no Grace? What! when even
these tears and groans tell you you have. Though you may walk in darkness, as
many Children of Light have, and do; yet stay your selves on God, and wait for
him. Oh how easily, and quickly can the breath of God scatter all these Clouds
which darken your Souls, and the Light of his Countenance make a bright and a
joyful day!

Having this opportunity to testify my Love to you, especially to your Souls;
I shall beg, and presume on my Readers patience, while upon this occasion I
give you some counsels, which I pray God may be useful to you, and many more in
the like circumstances.

I. Bless God it was your Lot and Happiness, to be born of such holy Parents;
whereof one is taken, and the other is yet left. To be the Offspring of them
who are the Children of God; to be the Postcrity of those who themselves are
born from, and have an Alliance to Heaven; to descend from them who are the
Dear and Ancient Friends of God; to be born of them who have a
Convenant-Interest in God, and can lay claim to the Covenant both for
themselves, and theirs; how great a mercy! what an invaluable Privilege is it!
I am far from saying, that Grace runs in a Blood, that Children are Heirs to
the Graces, as they are to the Riches of their Parents; but yet it is a
Privilege to be born of such. I do, and I would have you heartily bless God
for it! How sad a thought is it! I am born of them who are Enemies to God,
Slaves to these Lusts, and Servants to the Devil. What a sad Example do such
set before their poor Children in case they live; and what a dreadful Legacy,
how many Woes, and Curses do they bequeath to 'em in case they die before 'em!
I know sometimes sovereign Grace ( that even of Stones can Matthew. 3. 9.
raise up Children to Abraham) cuts off the Entail: But more frequently they
tread in their Fathers steps, and bear their Iniquities.

But how comfortable is it to sit down and think! God a long time before my
Birth, ordered I should be born of such, and such, who were his familiar
Friends, and dear Servants. I have a Father, a Mother in whom I can see the
Image of God; who are united to Christ; and sanctified by the Holy Spirit. Is
it not a mercy to be the Children of such? Are not they more likely in a
serious, conscientious, and sober manner to devote, and dedicate their newborn
Infants in Baptism to God? when others only complement with God, and bring them
to the Laver of Regeneration out of Custom, Ceremony, and for Fashion sake;
they will do it with a deep sense of God's Goodness and Mercy: And great may be
the benefit of this solemn Transaction, and early Dedication. Will not such
Parents when they look upon their own act and deed, and remember what they
promised in the Name and stead of their Children, be put upon performing
consequent Duties; as earnest and servent Prayer to God for them, a timely
instructing them in the Christian Religion, setting before 'em an holy Example,
and watching over their first, early, and ungoverned years? and how beneficial
may all this be! are not such Children like to have the benefit of an holy,
Religious Education which very often God blesses to Conversion? however may they
not be kept from many open, scandalous, and conscience-wounding sins which in
Youth They are inclined to, and Others commit? may not, and has not God blessed
such for their Father's sake? These are (does the great God as it were say) the
Children of my Covenant-servants; they were born in my Family, entered into my
Service, and I will be their God as I was the God of their Father, and Mother;
their Holy Parents devoted them to me, and I accepted, set my mark upon them;
they are mine, and they shall be mine, and know what it is to be born of those
who were my Friends and Favorites. What is the peculiar privilege of such!

Truly the Children of such Parents owe more thanks to God, upon this account
than usually they are aware of. How few on their Knees, heartily acknowledge
God's Goodness, and mercy to 'em in this respect! while others pride
themselves, in the greatness of their Family, the nobleness of their descent,
and that they have more pure and refined blood running in their Veins than
others; Bless the Lord, O my Soul! that I had a Father who was a Son; and a
Mother who was a Daughter of God. This Children should do, not only while
Parents are alive; but when dead: a deep sense, and a thankful acknowledgement
of God's goodness should survive their Funeral; render their memory very very
precious, and force lively praises from us, when they are fallen asleep. Let me
add, that this duty is most reasonable, and the neglect of it most culpable if
God has blessed all, or any of their endeavors to our Conversion. Were they
under God, the means of our first, and second birth? the instruments of
conveying Natural, and Spiritual Life? Is it owing to them that we are Men, and
Women; and to their Prayers and Tears; instructions and counsels that we are
Christians? Did God bless our Education, and was it the means of an early and
lasting Piety? Our Debt is increased, and a double Tribute of Praise is owing
to God.

II. Learn how to make use of, urge, and plead this privilege with your
selves; and with God. With your selves, that you may live and act as Children
of such Parents: with God, that you may have the Blessings and Mercies which
belong to such. Urge it upon and plead it with your own Souls that you may
suppress Sin, resist Temptation, and live in the constant and lively
performance of Holy Duties. Israel makes use of this Argument: He is my God,
and I will prepare Exodus 15. 2.
him an Habitation: he is my Father's God, and I will exalt him. Lord! (may
such an one say) thou art my God, I have been devoted and dedicated to thee;
and therefore I will love, and fear; serve, and honor; trust in, and depend on
thee: more*over, thou art my Fathers God, and my Mothers God, and as this
strengthens my obligation to, so the remembrance of it shall keep me from
departing from thee: my own God, and my Fathers God I will never forsake.

Do I (should such an one often say) live, walk and act; deport, and carry my
self as one descended from Godly Parents; and becoming my Hereditary Relation
to God? Do I frame my Life, and Conversation as becomes the Child, the Son, the
Daughter of such a Father, and such a Mother! oh, how may such a reflection
confound, shame, and put us to the blush! fill us with grief, sorrow, and
repentance for what is past; and be in slead of many arguments to persuade to
more holy strictness, circumspection, and accuracy for the time to come!

Further, urge and plead this with God; when you come to beg Blessings,
Spiritual, or Temporal. I know you are not strangers to secret, and closet
Prayer: you do not, dare not, cannot live without it: when you go take this
argument along with you. The Argument is strong, when I can say, My God, it is
stronger, when I can go on, and say my Father's God. David was moved to do
kindness for Mephibosheth, for his Father Jonathan's sake; and can we think the
Heart and Hand of God will not be opened, to give Mercy to the Posterity of his
old Friends? How frequently did the Saints of old put God in mind of their holy
Ancestors? saying, remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Jehosaphat goes to
Prayer with this Title in his Mouth; O God, the God of our Fathers. David
pleads this, O Lord 2 Chr. 20. 6.
I am thy Servant, truly I am thy Servant, Psalm. 116. 16.
and the Son of thine handmaid. Oh, how comfortable, argumentative, and
enforcing is it to mind God who we are; when we come to his Door for an Alms!
to say, with humble and holy reverence, Lord! do thou ask who I am? I am thy
Servant, and a Child too of a dear friend of thine: my Father and Mother were
thine ancient acquaintance; Lord, don't deny me, don't send me away empty for
their sake; but show mercy to me: My holy Parents were thine, thy domestic
servants, they were brought up and lived in thy family; Lord! remember I am the
Child of such, and give me an alms. Oh, pity and pardon; sanctify, and save
me! oh, let not one descended of holy and believing Parents be a castaway! let
not me, Lord, let not me have my portion with hypocrites; when Mat. 24. 51.
my Holy Father and Godly Mother shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
in Mat. 8. 11.
the Kingdom of God! I am thine Lord. Save me! and to enforce my plea for
mercy, I humbly remember thee, my Father was thine, and my Mother was thine,
Lord, let me find the benefit of being the off spring of such.

III. Earnestly sue for the full answer, and return of those Prayers they sent
up to God for you. It Is one great, and unspeakable advantage the Children of
holy Parents have, that they often recommend them and their case to God. Such
Prayers may do them good after their decease; and that they may, their Children
should beg a return. This now should be your work, and mine: Many of these
Prayers are filed up in the Court above, as appears by that saying of my dear
Mother to me, Oh, pray for me! for when my Children were young, and could not
pray for themselves, I prayed for them. Thanks be to God, for a praying Mother.
Now send New Prayers after the Old; Yours after Hers* Oh! suffer not so many
warm, and earnest Prayers; so many speaking tears, and pleading groans to be
lost for want of suing to Heaven, for a rich, and speedy return. May not each
go to a Throne of Grace and say? Lord, my holy Mother, who is now fallen
asleep, was given to Prayer; she was a Friend of thine, and had an interest in
thee, and improved it not only for her self, but for me: How often I was in her
mind, and upon her heart, in her secret addresses to thee, Lord, thou know.
Did she not again, and again, recommend me to thy mercy, through the merit of
thy dear Son, and her Savior, and I hope mine too; the Lord Jesus? are these
Prayers all answered? have I all the Grace, and Holiness, Joy, Peace, and
Comfort she prayed for? are not many of these Prayers yet to be answered? Are
not many of her requests for me yet with God? oh, now for a quick, speedy, and
full return! though she be dead, let none of her Prayers for me be lost! Lord,
that I could hear thee saying, I remember thy Mother, a good friend of mine; I
remember whose Child thou art, and I am resolved to be kind to thee: lo! here
is the Grace, Pardon, Peace, and Comfort thy Mother prayed for: she wrestled,
pleaded with me, and would not let me alone, be it unto thee according to her
Faith, and Prayers.

Lord, (may such an one say,) my Holy Parents spoke to thee on my behalf,
before I was able to speak for my self; how many Prayers did my Holy Father,
and Godly Mother make for me, in my Infancy, Childhood, and Youth? Lord, read
over, and grant those Petitions which are of an ancient Date. Though Death has
tied their Tongues, the Grave stopped their Mouths, and they can pray no more;
yet, nay the rather let those Prayers be answered that are upon the File, and
are committed to the Hands, and Care of the Blessed Jesus, the great Master of
Requests! Lord Jesus! do thou see that none of these be lost; but answered in
the best time.

IV. Exercise a serious, solemn, and hearty Repentance for all sin. When I
consider our dear, and excellent Mother was not taken away by a sudden, and
surprising stroke; but a long, and pining sickness prepared the way: that she
was not taken off in the midst of her days; but lent to us for a considerable
number of years: that she lived, till she saw many of her Children's Children,
and did not fall asleep, nor go to Bed till toward the Evening; I would hope,
there was no particular sin of ours provoked God to remove her at this time.
But alas! we all have many sins, and should not such a Providence awaken our
Repentance? It should; it tends that way; and I pray God it may. Let us search
our ways, examine our hearts, consider what sin, or sins have been too much
allowed, and winked at. Sin is the cause of Death to our selves, and to those
whom we dearly love: these, these are the murderers of our friends, and
relations; let us send an hue and cry after them; and when we have found them
out, let us Crucify them. Oh, that no sin, though never so dear, pleasant, or
secret may survive this funeral! our departed Relations have no need of our
groans and tears: oh! let us labor to consecrate our sorrow, by turning the
flowing streams into the Channel of Repentance, that that, which was natural,
may commence Divine.

How proper is the Death of Relations to excite, and quicken Repentance! how
much may the remembrance of their sickbed Discourses; their dying speeches;
their farewell counsels; and the great change one moment made contribute, to
soften, break, and humble our hearts! to make us serious, and solevin in
renewing our Repentance! at such a time, how easily is the passion of sorrow
moved! do you weep for her? methinks I hear her (having no need of pity and
tears! saying, weep not Luke 23. 28.
for me. Do you weep for sin? precious tears! comfortable sorrow! oh! weep on;
and weep more. Every Corpse, Funeral, and Grave tells us what an evil sin is;
and should provoke us to Repent: but when Death comes into the very House where
we live, takes away one of our own number, strikes, and kills a dear Relation;
when it is a Father, a Mother, a Husband, a Wife, a Child that is carried to
the House appointed for all the living; Job 30. 23.
the call to Repentance is more solemn, loud, plain, and particular; and ought
to be more awakening.

After the Death and Funeral of such, Repentance is a very seasonable duty. Now
is the proper time, to offer to God the Sacrifice Psa. 51. 17.
of a broken Heart, and contrite Spirit. Can I see Death closing the Eyes of
such near Relations, parting them and me; nay, one part of themselves from the
other? Can I behold their pale, wan, and ghastly Countenances; the Soul being
gone? Can I see them wrapped up in a Shroud, and nailed up in a Cossin? Can I
attend their Funeral, look into the dark, and deep Grave where I must leave a
-- to Worms and Rottenness and not think hardly of sin; and not resolve by the
Grace of God to kill, and mortify it? at such a time who does not cry out? ah
cruel death! ah cruel death! but has not every one much more cause to cry out?
ah cursed sin! ah cursed sin! the death of this friend, of this Relation, this
Funeral, and all others O cursed sin, is owing to thee; and henceforward I will
endeavor thy destruction and ruin.

V. Be very careful to keep God among you. Do, what in you lies that God may
be the God of your Posterity after you: that they under you may lay claim to
the Covenant, and the Blessings of it. Endeavor that Religion in the Life, and
Power of it may flourish, not only in your own Hearts; but in your families.
Let not FAMILY PRAYER be thrust out; nor adjourned to those hours in which you
are least of all fit for this awful, and important duty. May we all strive to
keep up the friendship begun between God and our Family! Since God has made
all of you (except one) Mothers: reckon it is your duty to bring up your
Children for God: teach them to know your God, and your Fathers God, and that
God, to whom in Baptism you have devoted them; that when you shall be dead,
cold, and rotting in the Grave; they may be serving and honoring God in your
place and stead. That Religion, and the fear of God may not die out of your
Families, when you shall. It Is true you cannot give them Grace; but you can
instruct, teach counsel, advise, exhort, and persuade, etc. you can set a good
example, you can pray to God for them, and plead that Covenant, you entered
them into almost as soon as God gave them to you: and all this you ought; and I
hope you will be careful to do.

Though the presence, awe, and fear of living Parents may restrain Children from
some sins and vices; though their examples, and counsels may influence them so
far, as to persuade them to take up a form of Godliness; yet (oh, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
what Tears are sufficient to bewail this fatal degeneracy!) what a dead,
spiritless, and lifeless thing is the Religion of many such, as soon as their
godly Parents are Dead, and cold in their Graves! how often does that ground that
was manured, and cultivated, plowed and sown; ay, and watered with many showers
of Tears, bring forth a sad crop of Briars and Thorns! Some Children are a
grief and heart breaking to their Parents while they live; and many more, are a
reproach, and disgrace to them when dead and gone: how many Children of such
Parents, notwithstanding the benefit of a good education, seasonable
instructions, wise reproofs, and timely counsels, live at that rate, that they
are a blot to their family, and a disgrace to their name! If any such shall
chance to read these lines I charge them in the name of God, to consider what a
sad case they are in; and I pray God to convince them of their sin and folly;
and how near they are to a sudden, and final ruin. Would to God, such would
consider how greatly they will be ashamed; and how little they will have to say
for themselves when the Prayers and Tears of their Living; and the Dust of
their Dead Parents shall rise up in Judgment against, and condemn them. But I
hope better Heb. 6. 9.
things of you and things that accompany Salvation though I thus speak. Oh, let
it still be your study and care; and let it be more and more so every day to
promote piety, and holiness in your own Souls, and to propagate it to others
who are descended from you! that so long as any branch of this Family remains,
the fear of God, and a care of Religion might slourish. To conclude, there is
one thing very amiable, and which your Relation peculiarly calls for; and that
is LOVE: this I think I should hardly have mentioned, because I hope you are
taught of God to 1 These. 4. 9.
love one another, if I had not received it among the last Commands of a
Mother, who had so much of this Grace her self, to be your Monitor in this
particular. Now the Lord sit you, and me to follow; that at the Resurrection of
the Just we may meet our Dear Mother, who now sleeps in Jesus; and our Honored
Father, who is yet with us, and whom God long preserve, for ours and his
Churches sake; with Joy and Triumph. That they may say, lo, here are we, and
all the Children thou did graciously give us. Amen.

Reading, Feb. 28. 1692/3. Thus Prays in all sincerity your truly loving, and
very affectionate Brother Samuel Doo-little,

THE Righteous Man's Hope AT DEATH; Considered, and Improved; For the Comfort
of Dying Christians, and the Support of Surviving Relations.
Proverbs 14. 32. -- But the Righteous has hope in his Death.
DEath! with what a grim countenance, and terrible aspect does it look upon the
Children of Men! What a sharp, and startling word is this! what a doleful sound
does it make in the Ears of those who are yet alive! Death! the more we muse
and meditate upon it, the more does it amaze and scare: A short glance, a
fleeting thought makes poor mortals tremble; a fixed and solemn, a deep, and
serious meditation fills with shivering horror. Death! how do the thoughts, and
prospect of it damp our Joys, spoil our Mirth, imbitter our Life, and infuse
Wormwood and Gall into our sweetest Cup! How do the near approaches of it cast
us into cold clammy sweats and mortal tremblings! How does every day (when we
give our selves the liberty of thinking,) partake of the horror of our last!
Death! what a serious, useful, and awakening Argument is this; and yet how
seldom do busy mortals entertain themselves with the thoughts of it! Every
Corpse that is carried along the streets; every Coffin, and Death's Head we
behold; every Funeral we attend; every Grave that is dug, with open mouth
tells us we must die: We may read our own fate, on every Tombstone. Oh! how
many, and what powerful Preachers have the Living; and how many Lectures of
Mortality are daily read, and yet is there not need, that almost every
Preacher, and every Sermon should mind us of what is sure, and near at hand; a
dying hour? Death! what a mournful word! what a melancholy Theme is this! Dead!
unwelcome message! sad news! heavy tidings to the surviving Relations! is he,
or she dead? What! an old Friend, a loving Father, a tender Mother dead!
doleful hour! dismal spectacle! Dead! what do you now see? their charming
Beauty marred; their Eyes closed, their Teeth set, their Countenance changed,
and the Man turned into a lifeless, breathless Corpse: Anon, you see him nailed
up in a narrow, scanty Coffin, and after a few days, (when we have fed the
sorrow of our hearts with the sight of our eyes;) we lodge them in a cold, and
deep, dark, and silent Grave: And must we leave the delight of our hearts, the
desire of our eyes, those whom Nature and Grace made dear to us, those whom we
loved even as our own Souls; among an Army of crawling Worms, and among the
cold Clods of the Valley? Must we see their faces, enjoy their company, and
converse with them no more? no more! sad thought! no more! killing word! O
Death! Death! what a cruel Enemy art thou to Mankind!

What dark and gloomy, what sad and melancholy thoughts are these; especially,
when Death has set a pattern of Mortality before our eyes, and we are but
lately come from the HOUSE of MOURNING! upon such an occasion David burst out
into tears, and spoke in all the figures of a sorrowful Rhetoric; O my Son
Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; ^ Sam 11. 33
would God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Son! These Arrows of
Death that kill one, wound the many, that are left behind, and the wound is so
deep, that many times it proves mortal: They only live to weep, sigh, and
groan, to bury their dead; and then they come home, and die too; and those that
lived, are content to die together. Life! how sweet, pleasant, and delightful
is it! Life! how amiable and desirable is it! with what earnestness, and
passion is it courted by most! how willing are poor Mortals, to tear out their
Bowels with Vomits; to punish the flesh, with fasting, and abstinence, and tie
themselves up to the tedious, and troublesome prescriptions of Physicians! how
willing are they to take the bitter Potion they loath; and how patient under
the cutting of the Lance, and teeth of the ragged, and torturing Saw! how
willing are they to lose a dear Member, that Life might be preserved! Men stick
at nothing to preserve this dear thing we call LIFE. How cheerfully do men die
daily; that they may not die once for good and all! Life! how excessively fond
are most of it! Life gives us the opportunity of enjoying those pleasures, that
are soft, and charming; but Death renders us incapable of any, and who almost,
does not live in bondage through fear of it?

But though there are many great, and terrible evils in this one frightful thing,
DEATH; (yet thanks be to God) we Christians, are not left without something to
mitigate, and allay our sorrow for the death of our godly Friends, and holy
Relations, who are gone the way of all the Earth before us; and to fortify,
and arm us against a tormenting, and slavish fear of our own; who in a little
time must fall asleep too. With a design to help my self, and others against
both these; I have chosen these words to insist on; But the Righteous has hope
in his death.

In handling of this Argument, which may contribute very much to the support of
living, and comfort of dying Saints; I intend to proceed in this Method: I
shall,

First, Open, and explain the Character of the person here spoken of; and who
is to be the Subject of our present discourse.

Secondly, Consider what is here supposed, and taken for granted with reference
to this Righteous man; and that is, he must die.

Thirdly, Consider and amplify the privilege of such an one; as having hope
in his death.

Fourthly, Make some practical improvement of the whole; in applying all to our
selves; who are yet alive, but must certainly, and quickly, die.

First, I shall consider, and explain the character of the Person, who is
intended in these words, and who has some privilege beyond the rest of
mankind. Here, is mention made of a very great benefit: and that none might
think, it promiscuously belongs to all, the Holy Ghost gives us the character
of the Person concerned in it, [the Righteous] for opening and explaining the
character I have not time, neither is it necessary to give an account of the
several acceptations of the word, it is sufficient to take notice that this
word [Righteousness] which peculiarly qualifies, and distinguishes the subject
of our discourse, is frequently used in a twofold sense.

First; In a more limited and restrained sense: and so it is no more than a
particular Virtue, which inclines and disposes a man to give to every one his
right. When a man does not by any little tricks, or cunning artifices, which
the Wits of our Age call mysteries of Trade; go beyond, defraud, overreach, or
wrong another he is Righteous: this is a considerable branch of morality, a
duty belonging to the Law of Nature, and has its proper place among the duties
of the second Table. Were this Virtue more common we might deal with our fellow
Creatures, with more openness and freedom, with more plainness and less fear:
we might trust another without surmise, suspicion, and jealousy. This virtue
is famous and renowned, and that justly too, among Heathens; and would God
there were more of it in the Christian World! Were all men just and upright,
honest, sincere, and plain hearted in their commerce; as unwilling to impose
upon, and wrong another, as they are loath to be deceived and cheated
themselves; did they manage their affairs without that Wisdom, or rather
cunning Sophistry which is from beneath, Jam. 3. 15.
and therefore is not only earthly and sensual; but Hellish and Devilish too,
what a blessed World, and what an happy reformation should we see! But though
this be good and laudable, and more of it is to be wished for; yet it is but a
particular Virtue, and though it adorn the man, it will not make, nor denominate
him a Christian. It is only like the painting and garnishing of a Sepulcher,
that makes it indeed more specious, and beautiful; but leaves it as full of
stench, and rottenness as it was before. This is a Flower that grows in the
Garden of Nature, and may spring up and flourish in that Heart, which is wholly
barren as to any of the saving fruits of the Holy Spirit. There may be this
fruit in the Life, when there is a root of bitterness in the Heart: such an Heb
12. 15.
one is like an embalmed Carcass, that is as really dead, as a putrified one
though not so loathsome and offensive to the Living.

This particular Righteousness will not legitimate our hopes, not justify our
claim to Heaven. Many of these Righteous Men will be excluded the Kingdom
above: though they shine as Stars in this World, they shall set in everlasting
darkness in the next.

They serve at present like Salt, to keep the World from putrefying and
corrupting; but at length like Salt which has lost its savor, they shall be
cast unto the Dunghill. Indeed this falls in with the character of a good man;
but it does not make up the whole of it. This Righteousness that is at present
under our consideration, is more extensive and large, of a more Universal and
comprehensive nature: and that it must be so, appears by what it stands in a
just, and direct opposition to in this verse [the Wicked:] this word does not
denote a Man guilty of one particular crime, or some sinful act; but a man that
is habitually and statedly bad. Nothing more common and frequent in the Sacred
Writings, than the opposition of righteous, and wicked, and both these terms,
here, and in many other places must be taken in a large and comprehensive; and
not in a limited and restrained sense. This Righteousness which is but a
single, particular Virtue, is a part, and member of the new Creature, without
which let men pretend what they will it is but a deformed Monster. Good God!
how does Satan impose upon, and our own Hearts deceive us, when we can conceit
our selves to be good Christians, when we are not honest men! Though this be
necessary, yet there must be something more to constitute the nature, and
complete the character of a Righteous Man; and this single and solitary Virtue,
is not sufficient to qualify any for so high a privilege, as this in the
Text. Therefore,

Secondly, Righteousness must be taken in a more large and extensive sense;
comprehensive of much more than has been spoken of under the former head. Now
there is a threefold righteousness, which we may take notice of, that we may
find out what is essential to characterize the Person here spoken of.

I. A Person may be denominated righteous, from an exact and entire conformity
to the Law of Works. Righteousness is a relative term, and does arise from a
conformity to that Law to which it has a respect; and if it have relation, and
be adaequately correspondent to the law of works, made for innocent man it is a
legal righteousness. When a man is inwardly and outwardly, in the frame of his
Heart and actions of his Life; in his deportment toward God, and in his
carriage toward men, such as the Law requires, he is righteous: when every
thought, motion, and passion, every glance of the Eye, every word of the mouth,
and every step he takes, is such as the Law requires; when the Divine Law in
every point and punctilio of it, is written in the Heart and fairly, without
any blots, and blurs, transcribed in the Life; when every precept is obeyed,
and every commandment observed in the whole latitude and extent of it; when
obedience is entire without any defect; perfect without any flaw; Universal
without breaking the least command; Persevering without any Apostasy; when all
duties, personal and relative, public and private, to God and Man, are
performed; and no one circumstance, though never so minute is omitted, then is
the man righteous: he is so in himself, in the Eye of the Law, and in the
Account of God. This Righteousness is nothing but a perfect and sinless
obedience. This was the righteousness of Innocent Adam. This is the
righteousness of confirmed Angels; those elder Brethren of ours who have always
been with our Father, and never offended him, they can lift up their faces
without spot; though Job. 11. 15.
to signify how they are awed by, and reverence Divine Majesty, they are said
to cover them with their Wings. This is Isa. 6. 2.
the righteousness of our Redeemer; he is styled emphatically the Holy one of
God; and the Holy Child Jesus; and Jesus Christ 1 John 2. 1.
the Righteous.

But this is not the righteousness of any of Adams wretched posterity. Behold
We are all of us as an unclean thing: our blood was stained in the first
fountain of Isa. 64. 6.
it; and we derive (sad thought!) guilt and pollution with the humane Nature.
We are guilty before we are born, and sinners as soon as we are men; for by the
disobedience of one Man many were made sinners. Rom 5. 19
Now (deplorable state!) the whole World is become guilty before God: the Law
Romans 3. 19.
convinces all of sin; among all the Children of Apostate Adam in this sense,
there is none righteous, no not one. Our original Romans 3 10.
sin, were we guilty of no actual transgressions; one spark of Lust glowing in
our Hearts, did no smoke or flame break forth at our Mouths, renders us
unrighteous in the account of the Law; nay having once sinned, it can never be
possible to be denominated righteous by this Law, which condemns for one single
crime, as well as for a thousand. Our whitest Garments have some spots and
stains; and the fairest Christian many blemishes and wrinkles; our best duties
have many failings, as to principle, manner, and end; our purest gold much
dross, and our strongest Graces many defects; having a corrupt nature within,
every thing that comes from us, like pure Water out of a musty Cask, is
tainted: our persons, duties, and graces, want the blood of Christ to wash; and
the Mercy of God to pardon them. If the holiest man upon Earth (Lord what will
become of the ungodly and the sinner!) should be tried by the Law, in the
Court, and at the Bar of Rigorous Justice, he would be cast as unrighteous: He
even he must say with Holy David, Lord enter not into judgment with Psalm. 143.
2.
thy Servant.

II. A man is Righteous as interested in the perfect Righteousness of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Christ's Righteousness was not only for himself, but for his
members; though this be inherent in the Person of the Mediator, yet we have as
much benefit by it, as if it were Subjectively in us. The Sufferings and Death
of Christ were not for his own Sin but ours: He was made Sin 2 Cor. 5. 21
for us, i. e. our Propitiatory Sacrifice, and We are made the righteousness of
God in him; we have the fruit of his bitter sufferings and cruel death. He
fulfilled the Law, satisfied Justice, and paid our Debt, and for his sake God
looks upon, and deals with believers as righteous persons. As the disobedience
of the first Adam makes us Sinners; so the perfect and sinless obedience of
Christ the second, makes us Righteous: As our sins were laid upon Christ, in
order to his bearing the punishment; so his righteousness by a gracious and
favorable act of God, our Supreme Judge, is made ours, in order to
justification. Our own righteousness is both a filthy and ragged garment,
through this God our final Judge, will spy the deformity, and nakedness of our
Souls; and Christ our Elder Brother (infinite grace!) covers us with the
unspotted robe of his own. Christ took our sins, and gives us his
righteousness; blessed Exchange! From Adam, our natural Root and Father, we
derive Guilt, Weakness and Death; from Christ our Spiritual Head, we have
Righteousness, Strength and Life; Isa. 45. 24.
and therefore he is styled, THE LORD Jer. 23. 6.
OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. This is the only Righteousness we must make mention of,
when judged according to the Law given to Adam in innocence: A Penitent and
believing Sinner, that receives Christ Jesus, the Lord, is for Christ's sake
esteemed, reckoned, accounted, and dealt with as a righteous Person. Though
this righteousness be of a peculiar consideration, and cannot be thought to be
meant in all those places, where this word righteous occurreth, yet it is
absolutely necessary; for Christ, and what he has suffered, and done is the
Spring, Cause, and Foundation of our hope. The immediate and doleful consequent
of being without Christ, is to be Ephesians. 2. 12.
without hope in the World: This fruit grows no where but upon Christ's Cross;
it is his Death that made Heaven possible to a fallen and Apostate creature,
and it is the sprinkling of this Blood, that revives our languishing,
withering, and dying Hopes Oh! Blessed are they who having no righteousness, or
at least, but a maimed, defective and imperfect one of their own, are
interested in the Righteousness of Christ, in the Righteousness of God!

III. A man is Righteous, and may be denominated so from that personal
Evangelical righteousness, that is inherent in himself. We must not only be
interested in the Righteousness of another without us; but have one that is
really subjected in our selves: Or, which is all one, we must not only have
Righteousness imputed, but Holiness imparted. Christ does not only cover our
running sores, and ulcers; but undertakes as our Physician to cure them. All
Righteousness, as has been already hinted, consists in a relation to some Law;
and that we might truly State what this Evangelical Righteousness is, that has
so great a Privilege entailed upon it, as this in the Text; I hope none will be
offended, if we distinguish (as we find the Apostle Paul does,) of the Law of
Works, and the Romans 3. 25.
Law of Faith; the one framed to the State of an Innocent; the other adapted to
the condition of an Apostate Creature. According to this latter it is, that
those who have once been Sinners may be made, and denominated Righteous. That
part of the Gospel revelation which contains and discovers our Duty, what we
are to be and do in order to our Blessedness, being as to the matter of it, the
whole Moral Law, before appertaining to the Covenant of Works, attempered to
the State of fallen Sinners, by Evangelical mitigations and indulgence, by the
Super-added Precepts of Repentance and Faith in a Mediator, with all the other
duties respecting the Mediator as such; and clothed with a new form as it is
now taken into the Mr. How Is Blessedness of the Righteous, p. 26.
constitution of the Covenant of Grace is the rule of this righteousness.

He that solemnly repents of his wretched Apostasy from God, and all the sins
that have followed thereupon; he that is united to Christ by Faith, and yields
sincere, though imperfect obedience, from an active and living principle
within; he that is renewed and changed, turned from the love of sin in his
heart, and the practice of it in his Life; he that has solemnly and
deliberately, sincerely and unfeignedly, covenanted with God, and dedicated
himself to the Sacred, and Glorious Trinity; Father, Son, and Spirit and lives
suitably to such a devoted State; He that is born of God, bears his Image,
lives in communion with, and walks in conformity to him, is righteous: Though
his bloody issue may not be wholly dried up; though there be indwelling sin in
the heart, and some sins and falls in the Life, though no grace be perfect as
to degree, yet if there be SINCERITY and UPRIGHTNESS (Oh! look after that) he
is a righteous man. The Law calls for perfection, but the Gospel (Oh! thanks be
to God, we are under such a merciful, favorable. and gentle dispensation,)
accepts sincerity. This righteousness is not mere morality, a being just and
honest in our dealings; this is the righteousness of an Heathen: It is not an
external observation of the Letter of the Law; this is the righteousness of a
Pharisee; and ours must exceed his, or we cannot Enter into the Kingdom Mat. 5.
30.
of Heaven. It is not a single act, but a stated temper; it is not an obedience
that Proceeds from rotten, but what flows from sincere and gracious Principles,
denominates a man Righteous. A wicked man may do some acts of Devotion and
Piety, Charity, and Justice, Sobriety and Temporence, but because the settled
bent and inclination of his will is another way, he is not righteous: And
though a good man may be guilty of some Errors and miscarriages in his Life;
yet while this living Principle remains, and is not extinct we may, and if we
will speak in the Language of the Gospel, we must call him a righteous Man.
This Righteousness is nothing but a transcript of the blessed Gospel; a
conformity in the inward, and outward man, in spirit, and practice to the
Divine Revelation made by Jesus Christ: A renewed and vital principle in the
heart exerting its self in suitable deportments to God, and man. In sum,
Repentance from dead Works, and new Obedience, impregnated by Faith, and Love,
are the two essentiating and constitutive parts of this Gospel Righteousness.

For the establishing of this notion, it is not necessary to insist on any
laborious Proof; when a great part of the Bible speaks to this purpose: Hear
once for all what the Apostle says: He that does 1 John 3. 7.
Righteousness is righteous. What can be the meaning, what can be the import,
what sense can with any tolerable show of reason be assigned; but what suiteth
with our present notion? He that does Righteousness i. e. He that perfectly
obeys, fulfils the whole Law is righteous: Is this the meaning? Then God help
and pity us, where shall we find a righteous man? Is it, He that does
righteousness, that is, he that being in a State of grace lives up to the rules
of the Gospel; is guilty of nothing but what is consistent with sincerity; and
is continually laboring after perfection is righteos? Is this the import, and
gennine sense of this phrase? Then thanks be to God some such are to be found.
And thus much for the first General, the Character of the person here spoken of.

Secondly; We are to consider what is here supposed and taken for granted, with
reference to this righteous man; and that is, he must die. It may be you may
think such an one as I have described should have a Protection; be privileged
from that which is the common lot of others; be wafted over to Heaven, from one
World to the other and not see Death; be caught up to Paradise and not be put to
the pain of dying: But it is supposed, and taken for granted in the Text, that
the righteous man must die.

It Is true indeed our Lord Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation has perfumed
the grave; conquered death; and destroyed him that had the power of it: He
encountered this enemy, conquered, and triumphed over it, and every righteous
man shares in that victory, and triumph. Christ has destroyed the power,
changed the nature, plucked out the sting of death; and disarmed it of its
terrors; and the righteous may boldly challenge it, and with an exuberant joy
triumph over it in the words of the Apostle: O Death, where 1 Cor. 15. 55.
is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Sin, and
the strength of sin is the Law. But thanks be to God, v. 57.
which gives us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Thus (O happy men!)
may they triumph over death: But yet their righteousness cannot, shall not
deliver them from the stroke of it: No, no, Saints, and Sinners; Good, and Bad;
the Holy, and Profane; the Righteous, and the wicked are under the same
uncontrollable necessity of dying: Though they shall not be damned; yet they
must die: Though they shall not be sent to Hell; yet they must go to the Grave:
Though they shall be saved from that hot, fiery furnace; yet not from the cold,
dark, and silent Pit: Though their Souls shall not become a Prey to Devils; yet
their Bodies must become a Banquet for Worms: Though the Soul shall not be
rackt, and tortured in the dismal Regions below; yet the flesh must see
Corruption: Though they have Mansions in Heaven; yet Sickness will shake;
shake! Alas! Death will pull down the Walls, and tear up the very Foundations
of their Earthly Tabernacle: Though they shall go to Heaven; yet death will
carry them thither in its cold Arms. Because Christ who is their Head, and
Husband Lives they shall Live also. Live! Where Joh. 14. 19
shall they live? In Yonder glorious Heavens; in Yonder blessed abodes; in
Mansions of light, far above Yonder shining Sun; there, there it is these
righteous ones shall live: But alas! They must die first. Death has been, is,
and will be the passage to eternal Life: And the Grave is in our way to Heaven.
As Death spares none for their tenderness and Beauty; honors none for their
wealth and grandeur; fears none for their strength and power; reverences none
for their Gray Hairs and Hoary Heads; reprieves none for their flowing tears,
and passionate entreaties: So neither will it pass by any for their Piety,
Religion, and Righteousness: With death there is no respect of Persons; all
must become a sacrifice to, and lie Wounded, Bleeding, and Slain at the foot of
it. Holy Job cries, I know, thou will bring me to Death, and to Job 30. 23.
the House appointed for all the Living. And David, I go the way of all the
Earth. This 1 King. 2. ^.
is among the Decretals of Heaven: For Heb. 9. 27.
it is appointed for men once to die. Righteousness is no Armor against the
arrows of Death: No they will strike through, and through, and stick in our
Hearts.

What is become of the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles of our Lord
Jesus? Where are they? Where! Dead and Gone. Where are they? Their Souls are
praising God in Heaven; and their bodies sleeping in the dust of the Earth.
Your holy ancestors and progenitors, that were the friends of God, where are
they? Where! Alas! They are dead and gone, and their Sepulchers are with us to
this day: A^t. 2. 19.
they served the Will of God in their Generation, and then died; and after the
experience of many Ages, may we not ask and easily answer that Question of the
Psalmist? What man is he that lives; and Psa. 39. 48.
shall not see death? Had we the meekness of Moses, the Faith of Abraham, the
Integrity of Caleb, the Patience of Job, the Piety of David, the Wisdom of
Solomon, yet we must die; for lo these Men of God are gone before us: for how
many Ages, have these righteous ones been sleeping in the bosom of the Earth;
our first, and common Mother! When we read in the Sacred History of the Holy
Lives, eminent Graces of Gods dear Saints; how useful and serviceable they were
in their time and place; where, and how long they lived; do not we find, and
then he (...). 5. ^
died, concludes the History, and makes up the Period? Oh! how vast are the
Dominions, how extensive is the Empire of the King of Terrors!

In the Sacred Story we read but of two only, viz. Enoch, and Elias, who by an
especial grant, and privilege were exempted from this Law of Death: they went
immediately from Earth to Heaven; when all others (except those who shall be
found alive at the end of the World) must take the Grave in their way: they
were like living plants, transplanted to the Heavenly Soil; when our Bodies
like Corn that is Sown, must first rot, and dye, and then spring up again.

Death (as things now stand) is a debt that we all owe to Nature; and will not
be remitted, no not to the Friends of God themselves. The Saints are originally
out of the same dust; they as well as others dwell in Houses of Clay, and
Earthly Tabernacles; and though they may be repaired by Food, and Physic; yet at
last they will tumble: the Body of a Saint is not made of more lasting Dust,
and durable Clay than the Body of a Sinner. I grant that Sinners may impair
their health, and weaken nature, by gluttony, and drunkenness, and other acts
of intemperance; how many unclean persons, who have frequented the House of the
strange Woman; have found that her House inclines Prove. 2. 18.
to death, and her path unto the Dead! Ah wretched men! sottish sinners! What
do they do, but violently break the thread of Life; When it might have been spun
out to a further length by sinning against God, they murder their Bodies; as
well as damn their Souls: send one to the Grave, and the other to Hell before
the time. Infinite folly! But yet the most holy, and righteous have the seeds
of corruption in them, and are mortal: as the Garment breeds the Moth which
frets it; So we the Diseases which sooner, or later will send us to our long
home. The righteous Eccles. 12. 5
are subject to the same sicknesses and diseases as others are; to burning
Fevers, pining Consumptions, and to Old Age, which is attended with 100 and
100 infirmities; and is of all diseases the most incurable. Life is a Candle
which if no Stormy, and ill-natured Winds blow out; when it is burnt down into
the socket, will go out of its self; a thread which if no scorching Fever burn,
time will wear, and old age will fret asunder. This body, though there be an Holy
Soul inhabiting in it; is such an house, that if it be not pulled, will tumble
down of it self. Though Wisdom has length of days in her right hand, Prove. 3. 16:
and many of her Children go to Bed late yet an immortality here is not in her
power to confer upon any: they may hope for it in another World, but they
cannot have it in this; this is a privilege peculiarly belonging to the future
State. Now righteous men undergo Death upon a double account.

1. As the fruit and consequent of sin, Immortality was the privilege of
Innocent; Death is become the punishment of fallen man. If we search the Sacred
Records, we may easily find from what, and whence to derive Death's Pedigree:
sin (ah cursed evil!) ushered Death into the World. That threatening, In the day
thou eatest thereof, Genesis 2. 17.
thou shall surely dye; upon the Apostasy of our first Parents, was turned into
a standing sentence; involving them and their whole Posterity: for by one man
sin Romans 5. 12.
entered into the World, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, in
that all have sinned. Death is not owing to an irresistible Fate; to the
weakness of our primary constitution; but to Sin as the deserving cause: it was
sin set Death upon its Pale Horse, and nothing now can dismount him; as the
Tree brings forth fruit, as the seed sown brings forth Corn, so sin when Isa.
1. 17.
it is finished brings forth death, Sin opened the Door, and then Mortal
Sicknesses, Deadly Distempers, Killing Diseases, and Death it self entered in:
Sin draws Death after it as the Needle does the Thread; and attends on it as the
Shadow does upon the Body. Could all Graves be opened, could we stand in some
convenient place, and at one view behold the many thousands Death has
captivated, and slain; could we see all the Carcasses that have dropped into, and
are now rotting in dust; we might say, Lo! all these were first the spoils of
sin; and then the Trophies and Triumphs of Death. This is the account Scripture
gives of Deaths Universal Empire: Sin, cursed Sin, (oh what Fools are we to be
fond of it! oh what infinite and unaccountable madness is it to lay, and hug
that hissing Serpent in our Bosoms, which will sting us to Death!) is the cause
of all those Funerals, which have been, are, or shall be in the World. Now,
though the Righteous are renewed, and sanctified, they are so but in part: they
have sin in them, the meritorious, and deserving Cause of Death; and therefore
that Sentence, that carries Death in it; DUST thou art, and to Genesis 3. 19.
DUST THOU SHALL RETURN must be executed even upon them. Though they are
pardoned, yet their Pardon runs with an exception of Death: It Is true for
Christ's sake, upon the score of that painful, shameful death he in their
place, and stead underwent upon the Cross; the SECOND Death, which is Death
with an Emphasis, shall have no power over them: but notwithstanding all he
has done, and suffered, because they are sinners the FIRST must, and will. How
far death to good men is a penal evil, and yet retains the nature of a
punishment; I shall not in this wrangling age, offend any by attempting to
determine. It may suffice that sin brought death into the World, and furnished
it with those Weapons wherewith it wounds and kills all. If any say since the
death of Christ, and the effusion of his blood upon the Cross, Death is rather
an advantage to his followers: I grant (and thanks be to God) it is so: but may
not death be the Wages of sin, though a good, and kind God makes it the path to
Heaven? and this leads me

2. To consider the death of the righteous, as a Means of their deliverance
from sin; and the appointed way to the glorious Mansions which are above. It Is
true, God could make us perfectly holy, take away the life, and destroy the
very being of sin, the first moment of our conversion: when we have done his
will, served the purposes of his Grace, and attained the end of our being born;
by an happy, pleasant, and easy translation he could take us up, Body and Soul
to Heaven: but he has otherwise determined, and made Death necessary in order
to both. According to the Divine Constitution they must first dye, and then be
perfectly holy, and finally happy.

Do you ask why the righteous die? why! that sin might be destroyed, as Sin
brought Death into the World; so Death shall (excellent contrivance of Infinite
Wisdom!) for ever abolish Sin: though death had its sting, strength, power, nay
its very being from sin; yet it proves by the ordination of God the destruction
of it. Those Arrows of Death which kill the Christian, strike through the very
Heart of his Sins, and Lusts, and they both die together. A Saint puts off the
Garments of Mortality, and his filthy Raiment at once: the sin that was born
with them, and lived with them, and accompany them from place to place; in
their last moments takes leave of them for ever. The Christian dies, that Sin
may do so too. To this more will be said hereafter.

Moreover the Righteous here, are Strangers and Pilgrims, this is their
Character and it is expressive of their Frame and Temper: While they live they
are in a strange place; among a strange People; and at a distance from their
own: Oh! How do they wish, long, pant, desire, and groan to be elsewhere! They
are born from Heaven, belong to it, and wish to be there: They are Citizens of
the new Jerusalem; in it are Mansions designed, purchased, prepared, and
standing empty for them; but they must dip there feet in the cold fatal stream
that runs beween this World, and that, before they can get thither. Faith may,
and very often does give them a refreshing, ravishing, and transporting
prospect of Heaven; Oh! How often after such a view, does the Soul flutter in the
Christi^ans breast; clap its wings, and would ^in be gone! But Death only can
wast us over to, and give us the possession of it. In short, Gods Children die;
that they may go home.

I might further add, there seems some necessity of dying upon the account of
the Body: What should this terrene, dull, and heavy Body do in Heaven? How
unsuitable is it, as it is now, to that Place, and State; to that Company and
Work; and to be the Instrument of a glorified Soul! It must undergo a change
that it may be capacitated for this. We must be Unclothed of this Earthly;
that we may 1 Cor. 5. 4.
Be clothed upon, with a Spiritual Body: And we must die; that Mortality may
be swallowed up of Life. These Old Houses that are ever and anon tottering, and
shaking, must be pulled down by the hands of Death; that we may have new and
better. This Body must be sown in the dust; that it may Spring up more
Beautiful, Fresh, and Comely, our Bodies, like foul Waters, by running through
the Earth, are Purged, and Purified. God will not put his New Wine into these
Old Mat. 9. 17.
Bottles: And indeed if he should they would quickly burst; and therefore he
suffers Death to break; that he might have an opportunity to new make them. It
is to no purpose to say, that God can make what alteration and change he
pleases, and is necessary, in the very instant of Translation; and what need is
there the Body should Die, lie in the Grave so long, Rot, and Putrify in the
Dust? For though God can do it in this way; he wills to do it in the other;
and Who art thou O MAN, that thou reply Romans 9. 20.
against God? Upon these accounts Death seems necessary to Good Men: And that
we might not live in continual Fear, in Slavish Bondage, and a perpetual
Torment because of this necessity: I now proceed;

Thirdly; To consider what, and how great the Privilege of the Righteous is,
when he comes to the last Scene of his Life; and Death is about to turn him off
the Stage. We have seen the dark side of the Cloud; The Righteous die: Let us
now turn our Eye, and view the bright side; The Righteous has hope in his
death: Sweet words! comfortable thought! glorious privilege! with this hope,
Lord, how Psa. 23. 4.
comfortably may they walk through the Valley, of the shadow of death, and fear
no evil! You have heard; heard! You have seen; seen! Oh how often have you seen
that the Righteous die as well as the Wicked! that Death preys upon, and the
Grave swallows up one as well as the other! Have you not many, and many a time
visited them, when sickness had lodged them in their Chambers, and confined
them to their Beds? Have you not heard their last sobs, and groans, seen their
dying pangs, and agonies? Have you not closed their Eyes, laid them in their
Cossins; and often attended their Funeral; followed them to their long Home,
and lest them in dust and darkness? Behold the Righteous die; but how dies the
Righteous? as the Wicked? no verily, as they do not live, so neither do they
die as the Wicked. A righteous man may have the same disease; be exercised with
the same pains; and feel the same pangs in a dying hour: But upon a spiritual
account the difference is vastly wide, and great; he has hope in his death.
Before I distinctly consider, what is the Object of this Hope; to prevent any
mistake, it is necessary to premise these two things:

1. Every righteous person, every man that falls within the already-mentioned
Character; i. e. every sincere and upright Christian; has ground of hope in
his death. This does not only belong to some special favorites; but is common
to all who have God for their Father: The Promises, which are the foundation of
a Christian Hope; are not made only to Apostles, and eminent Saints, to men of
renown in the Church; but they belong to, nay, are the Birthright of even
those, who are but Babes in Christ. All that are born again, though all are not
of the same growth, stature, and strength, are Children; Rom 8. 17.
and therefore Heirs: They have right Col. 1. 12.
to, and may live, and die in hope of the Inheritance of the Saints in light.
Heaven is sure to them, by the Promise of the Father; the Purchase of the Son;
and the In-dwelling of the Holy Spirit; who is the Earnest, and Pledge of it:
And the weakest Believer, the least of Saints, has ground to hope. The Gospel
is so ordered; the Covenant is so methodiz'd; God has made such ample
Provision; that every one may have good hope through 1 These. 2. 16
Grace; and all that bear this Character are allowed, encouraged, nay commanded
to hope: Their hoping is as mighty a pleasure to God; as it is a comfort to
themselves. Has the blessed Jesus poured out prayers, and tears, and blood;
did he groan, and die on the Cross, that they might have a Mansion above? Has
the Holy Spirit in pursuance of the same blessed design; been at the pains to
renew, convert, and change them? Has he restored them to the image, and
likeness of God; that they might be capable of the enjoyment of him? Is he
daily forming and attempering their spirits more, and more for the heavenly
state, and employment? Has God the Father, in his Eternal Counsels designed
Heaven for them? Has he made them many express, and plain Promises of it; and
can he take it ill they live and die in hope? Lord! how infinitely unreasonable
are we; and how do we discourage the Death of the Son; the work of the Spirit,
and the Promises of the Father; nay, not only naked Promises, but Promises
repeated over, and over, sealed, and confirmed with an Oath, by encouraging our
doubts and fears! all these may, and ought to hope.

May I (says many a doubting Christian) hope? I am but weak in Grace, and but a
Babe in Christ; I have done but little for God, and Christ; I have but few
Talents, and them I have not employed and improved as I should and might; I was
the chiefest of Sinners, and now am the least of Saints; the very meanest among
my spiritual Brethren; there are none but love God more, and serve him better,
and bring a greater Revenue of Glory to him than I either do, or can, or shall;
while others shine as the Sun in the Firmament of the Church; I am but as a
poor small and twinkling Star; and may I hope to be saved? is not Heaven, and
the happiness thereof too great, too glorious a Reward for me? Oh! had I the
Grace, the Faith, and Love, the Humility, and Meekness, the Selfdenial, and
Patience, the Zeal, and Courage* etc. of such a Christian; had I been as useful
in the World, and as serviceable in the Church as others; then I could hope:
But poor doubting Christian, why may thou not hope for all this? Must all the
Trees in God's Vineyard be equally fruitful? Must all his Children be of the
same size? Must all that have true Grace have the same measure, and degree of
it? thou can not think so, and why then may not such a one as thou art, hope?
have thou sincerity, and uprightness? then thou may; for the Promise, that
is the 1 Pet. 1. 3.
formal reason of hope, is made to Grace as true, not as strong. All who are
born of God; are begotten again to a lively hope; by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead: Though I must add;

2. As to actual hope all that fall within this Character; have it not either
living or dying in the same degree. The hope of some Christians is so firmly
settled, so deeply rooted, it has been so often tried, and proved, and found of
the right stamp; that come what will, they will hold fast their confidence to
the end: It is well-grounded, and like an house founded on a Rock: Mat. 7. 25
it stands fast; though the Winds blow, the Floods come, and the Rain descend:
Satan, as cunning, and subtle a Sophister as he is, cannot argue them out of
their hope of Heaven. But on the contrary, the hope of another Christian is so
weak, wavering, and staggering, that the least breath of a Temptation miserably
shakes it: and a few secret whispers of the malicious one make them call all
into question. Oh! how soon does the poisonous breath, of this hissing Serpent
damp, and kill all their hopes!

Oh! how many sincere Christians have a right to Heaven, but do not know it!
how many are there, who cannot get their doubts resolved, their fears expelled,
whose Sun sets in a Cloud, and Luke 10. 20.
whose Evening is very dark! their names are written in Heaven, but they do
not, cannot rejoice, because they do not know it is so -- Death lands them safe
on the Shore of a Blessed Eternity; through God's Infinite Mercy they get well
into Harbor; (but *poor Souls!) how do they go off with weeping eyes, sad
thoughts, and great fears of shipwreck, and drowning! It is not every Christian
that in a dying hour can say; God is my Father, Christ my Savior, Heaven my
home, and in yonder, yonder blessed World, there is a Mansion for me. How many
after a long profession, many tears, prayers, and holy duties; both public,
and private; through the weakness of their knowledge, unacquaintedness with
themselves, the temptations of Satan, a melancholy temper, and an unaccountable
timerousness of spirit; are not able to read their Evidences?

Others die with a full assurance of hope; go to their Fathers house with joy,
and triumph; and are able to give a reason of that hope that is in them, both 1
Pet. 3. 15.
to themselves, and others. How confidently does the blessed Apostle Paul
assert this hope! We know if our earthly 2 Cor. 5. 1.
house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands eternal in the Heavens. How expressive of a strong,
unshaken, and lively hope are those words of the same Apostle; even when death
was within sight! I am now ready to be offered, 2 Timothy 4. 6. v. 7.
and the time of my departure is at hand; I have sought a good fight; I have
finished my I have kept the Faith: henceforth there is (...).
^ad up for ^^e a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge
shall give (...) day. What an unshaken confi^^^ce (...)! is such an hope
peculiar to an Apostle? are such expressions only fit for the mouth of a Paul;
who had the privilege to be caught up into Paradise? No verily, others have
had the same lively hope. Oh what strong assurance; what clear evidences; what
blessed forecasts, and what lively hopes, is God pleased to give to some in a
dying hour; when their Souls stand upon the threshold of time, and at the door
of Eternity! insomuch that they have been able to bid farewell to their dearest
Relations, submit to the stroke, and kiss the cold hand of Death with a
wonderful, and triumphant Joy; with a Joy too great for themselves to express,
and others to behold. This has made many a Christian say; My work is done, and
blessed be God I have hope of the Reward: The hour of my departure is at hand,
Oh my (...)! I must leave you, and go unto my Father; Death is welcome, indeed
it is welcome, for I have hope of an Immortal, and better (...) know (...)
thanks be to God I can; how long! Lord, how long! come Lord Jesus, come
quickly. I have hope of Heaven, and Lord! I long, I long to be there. What
sweet! what reviving Language is this! how pleasing is the meditation of it! is
it not enough almost to put a man upon coursing Death, that he might experience
what it is to be in such a blessed frame? Lord! grant when ever I, or my Reader
come to die, it might be thus with us. This is my prayer for thee, whoever thou
art who read these Lines, the like prayer put up for me, with a warm heart,
a fervent Soul, and a lively Spirit; and God for Jesus sake say Amen to both.
This caution premised. I shall now consider what is the Object of this hope;
what good men may, and do look for, and expect at Death. This shall be
dispatched in these following particulars.

First, The Righteous at Death has hope of a full, and perfect freedom from
all those evils, they are liable to, and must conflict withal in this present
state. In this valley of Tears, and shadow of Death, to how many, and what
great evils are we exposed! Man Job 14. ^
that is born of a Woman is of few days, and full of trouble. Man is born (oh
Cap ^^
what a fine World is this to be fond of!) to trouble as the sparks flies
upwards. We come into the World with cries, and tears; we dwell in it, in pain,
and sorrow. We go out of it with sighs, and groans. How many tears do we shed,
how many groans do we utter, how many complaints do we make, upon the account
of those evils which befall our selves, or others, for whose welfare we are,
and cannot but be as much concerned as for our own! This World is a place of
sorrow, and tears, and nothing can wipe away all tears from our Eyes till the
hand of Death does. The evils which befall us are so many, and great; so
painful, and afflictive; the memory of what is past is so bitter; the weight of
what is present is so heavy; the fear of what is future so vexing; that we
cannot be at rest till we close our Eyes and die; and Death lays us fast asleep
in the bosom of our Mother Earth: Here we are encompassed with evil, every one
has his share of the bitter Cup, though some drink deeper, and larger draughts
than others: But the righteous man, when Death comes* has hope of a perfect
freedom from those many evils he himself had been struggling; and those who
survive his Death, and Funeral, must conflict with. He hopes that Death will be
the Funeral of all his sorrows, and of those evils which were the cause of
them. Here I will mention some of these evils.

First, He hopes at Death to be delivered from all bodily afflictions, and
outward sufferings. So long as we are here we shall need the corrections of
Heavens, and must be under the Discipline of our Father's Rod: Our good God
sees that some afflictions are necessary for us; and in the best and fittest
season he sends them: And by our own sin, and wickedness, indiscretion and
folly, obstinacy and peevishness, we create many more to our selves. What
crosses, and disappointments; what hatred from Enemies, and unkindness from
Friends; what disdain, and contempt from Superiors; what slander and reproach
from Inferiors, do we meet withal in this wretched World?

To how many weaknesses, and lingering sicknesses; to what acute diseases, and
corroding pains, are we subject, insomuch that Life is often loathed, and Death
desired! every vein, and membrane; every nerve, and fiber; every muscle, and
artery; every part, and member may be afflicted with pain, and be the
instrument of our sorrow. Oh! what wearisome hours, restless days, and
sleepless nights have the afflicted! Whose heart does not bleed within him, to
hear them in the morning crying out, Would God it Deuteronomy. ^8 67.
were evening; and in the evening, disappointed of the rest they expected;
would God it were morning? What is this World, but an Hospital, where many are
sick, weak, pained, and dying? What is it but a Golgotha, a place of Graves,
dead men's Skulls, and Bones? Go to the darkened and silent Chambers of the
sick, and you may hear one crying out, O my head! my head! another, Oh my
bowels! my bowels! and some, Oh that God would take away my life! Some you may
see shivering with Agues; and some shaking with Palsies; some benumbed with
Lethargies, and others rackt with Gout, or tortured with the Stone; some
scorcht with burning Fevers, and others deluged with the waters of a Dropsy;
some stopped with Phlegm, crying out, Oh for air, and breath! and others pining
away with Consumptions; and many so weakened, and bowed down to the Earth with
the manifold infirmities of OLD AGE; that the Eye is dim, the Ear deaf, the
Hands shake, the Legs, the Pillars of this Earthly Tabernacle tremble; insomuch
that a poor Grasshopper is too heavy a burden for them: See how they are stopped
up with Catarrhs, and Coughs, and have not strength to get rid of that Phlegm
which is ready to strangle them. These, these are the sights (oh what a
diseased World! what a dying Life is this!) you may see in the Chambers of the
sick. But besides these evils that are common to men, to how many more, and
greater are we exposed as Christians! as poverty, and want, disgrace, reproach,
and shame, imprisonment, and banishment, a violent, torturing, and lingering
death, upon the account of which, a man feels, and undergoes the pains of many
deaths in one; and only lives to be the laughter of his Enemies, the sport of
Death, and a terror to his Friends.

But the Righteous man at death, has hope to be delivered from all evil of
this kind: And his Language on his Deathbed may be to this purpose; though I was
born to trouble, and have had my share of it; though I have long wept, sighed,
and groaned under my own personal afflictions; and have been a sorrowful
spectator of those calamities which have befaln the public; though now I am a
sick, weak, pained, and languishing man, and every part of me is rackt, and
tortured; though my pulse be weak, my breath short, my strength wasted, and my
spirits fail, and I am no more able to conflict with my disease; it is but
dying and I shall be perfectly well: Death can, and will cure what my Physician
cannot; after a few more struglings, and mortal pangs, all my pains and sorrows
will be over; after the Agony (O my weeping Friends!) that you will shortly see
me in, is over, I shall feel none of these racking, grinding, and torturing
pains any more for ever: Heaven is a healthful place, there, oh! there none are
sick, or weak, but all are perfectly well; I cannot be well while I live; but
when I die, I hope, I know, I shall. Lo this is one branch of a Righteous man's
hope: But have not wicked men this hope too? It Is true, they have; Death puts
an end to the miseries of this Life; but Lord! what a sorry support is it to go
from less, to greater; from temporal to eternal pains; from Friends, who are
ready to Pity, Assist, and Comfort; to Devils that will Scorn, Insult, and
Triumph over them; from a sick and uneasy Bed, to a lodging among infernal
fiends: from the Flames of a Fever, to the more Scorching, Burning, and
Lasting Flames of Hell! Good God! What a sad, what a wretched Exchange is this!

2. He hopes for Deliverance from Sin. Good men are already freed from the
power and guilt of Sin; it has not Dominion over, and it shall not Condemn
them: But they are not, neither can they be freed, in this Mortal State, from
the residence of Sin, and remainders of Corruption. Sin may be mortified,
subdued and brought under: Glorious conquest! but it will not give up the ghost
and die till we do: tho sin does not rule, and govern the believer as a Lord;
yet oh how does it vex, torment him as a Tyrant! Though he has given the Body of
Sin many a Wound, and Stab, with the Sword of the Ephesians. 6. 17.
Spirit; though he has dragged it to the Cross of Christ, and has driven nail,
after nail into it; yet he always finds it alive, and sometimes very active and
strong: He finds himself very often bafled, worsted, and conquered in some
particular conflicts; he finds by sad and woeful experience that indwelling sin
indisposes, and unfits him for Spiritual duties; damps his Spirit, cools his
Zeal, and abates the fervor of his Soul in the most Heavenly exercises; this
is a certain truth, and what Christian does not find it to be so? How often with
tears in his eyes and sorrow in his heart is he forced to groan forth this sad
complaint; Woe is me! I have a wicked Heart, a filthy Nature, unruly Thoughts,
and ungoverned Passions; my Flesh is so weak, the Spirit so frail, Indwelling
Corruption so strong, and the Snares of the World so many that I often fall: I
thank God I don't wallow like a Swine in the Mire; but I must, and do own I too
frequently defile my garments; I Sin, and Repent, Repent and Sin, there is sin
in my Heart, and Life; Sin in my Duties, in my Praying, Hearing, ay in my
Sacramental Communions; and Sin is mixed (Oh that I had Tears to bewail it!)
with all my graces; I do not Love God, and Christ so much as I ought, and do
desire; my Faith is weak, my Love declined, my Zeal abated, my Heart cool, my
Affections chilled; Oh wretched man that I Romans 7. 24.
am! Who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? These have been, are,
and will be the complaints of Holy men in this present State: But the righteous
man hopes the time will come, and when sickness has laid him upon a Deathbed
he knows the time is near at hand, when he and sin shall for ever part; and in
that hour such a one may say; now I am dying, I am going to a sinless State;
all my Prayers, and Tears, Watching, and Fasting, Wrestling, and Striving could
not root sin out; but Death will now come in to my assistance, give me a final
and perfect Victory, and carry me a conqueror out of the Field: When I die
this War will end in Victory; this conflict in a perfect Conquest. None of my
sins shall follow me to Heaven, I shall not have so much as a wandering, dull,
or cold thought for ever; but with Life and Vigor, Heat and Rapture, a Flaming
Zeal, and Fiered Affection sing Hallelujah to God, and to the Lamb. A good man
is so disturbed with the Life of his Lust, that were it not for breaking of one
commandment, that he might be for ever beyond all possibility of breaking any
of the rest, he would even with his own hands, pull down this Earthly House on
the Head of these uncircumcised Philistines; though he himself be crushed with
the fall: But he patiently expects the time when God will give Death a
commission to do it; and this is his hope in his last, and sorrowful moments.

3. The righteous man at Death has hope of a full, and final deliverance from
Satan, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
and all his temptations. The Devil is styled Ephesians. 2. 2
The God of this World: The Prince of the Powers of the Air; which words imply,
he has no power in the Blissful Regions beyond. Is not this World the Devils
Circuit, and does not this Roaring Lion walk up, and down, seeking whom he may
devour? 1 Pet. 5* 8.
Are not the best buffeted and solicited to sin; tempted, molested and
disquieted by him? Oh how often does he shake us in his Teeth; though a good God,
and a merciful Jesus will not suffer him to rend and tear us in pieces! though
Satan has been bafled, and conquered by the Captain of our Salvation; yet does
he not ever and anon enter the List, and give a Challenge to the Followers of
the Lamb? Have we not a War to manage with these insernal Spirits, and powers
of darkness; and must we not always stand upon our Guard, maintain our
Spiritual Watch, keep on our Armor, have our Weapons always in readiness, that
if we get the better to day, we may be prepared for a fresh, and more violent
assault to morrow? Does not Satan one while transform himself into an Angel of
Light, that he might deceive? At another time appear in his onw proper hue as
Black as Hell; I mean in some horrid, and blasphemous suggestions that he might
affright, and scare us? Has he not 2 Cor. 2. 11.
his cunning Artifices, and subtle Methods to beguile; and his Fiery Darts, and
Ephesians. 6. 16.
Flaming Arrows to Wound; and in whatsoever shape he appears, whatsoever course
he takes, is he not a very troublesome and dangerous enemy?

This is our condition at present, and Oh how uneasy, and tedious is it to a
Child of God to be assaulted with Legions of sins within; and an whole Army of
Devils without! If the temptation does not prevail, it is a torment to be
tempted; and there cannot but be some fear lest it should: In what Agony does
the Christian cry? Oh what if this temptation should prevail; or if I have
Grace to resist, and overcome this, what if the next Temptation should be more
fierce, the second assault more violent; what if at last I should yield,
constant, and be overcome? How do such Storms drive them to their Knees, and
make them with earnestness, and affection pray Lord lead us not into
Temptation! M^^ 6. 13
This World in which we live is haunted with these unclean, and ugly Spirits;
and don't the best of us at one time or other find it so? But the dying
Believer hopes for Deliverance: if we can keep our integrity, maintain our
Post, stand our Ground, defend our selves while we Live; we shall be Conquerors
(take heart Christians) we shall be more than Conquerors when we dye? It Is true
the assaults of Satan may be most violent in a Dying hour: The last Onset most
furious, and the concluding Battle most bloody; but Death will decide the
controversy, end the Combat, and give us the Victory.

Methinks I hear the dying Christian thus encouraging himself, ever since the
strong man has been turned out, by the Holy Spirit and Victorious Grace of my
Redeemer, I have (...) little, or no peace; this Enemy, this adversary of my
God, my Redeemer and my Soul, has been ever and anon beating up my quarters;
many and many a time in the name, and strength of the Living God; under the
conduct of my blessed, and victorious Jesus have I accepted the challenge, and
given battle to these Legions of Darkness; and though I have been foiled,
(blessed be God) I am not conquered: though I have received some wounds, thanks
be to God none of them are Mortal; I yet live, or rather Christ lives in me;
and now methinks G^^. 2. 2^.
I have (and oh how delightful is it!) the prospect of a final, and entire
victory: Satan has now almost done his worst, he may rage because now his time
is short, and he knows it to be so; but hold out O my Soul! stand thy ground,
resist a little longer, play the man, act thy part well in this last Combat;
and the God of Ro^ 10. 2^.
Peace shall tread Satan under thy Feet shortly. In Heaven, (and oh how near am
I to that blessed place!) there is no Tempter, no Temptation, no, no, when I am
lodged in Abraham's Bosom, or rather in the Arms of my blessed Jesus, I am out
of Satan's reach for ever; when I shall be Dead the Devils Game will be over;
this Evil One has followed me from my Closet to the Church, from my Table to my
Bed, he has ever stood at my Right Hand to resist me; but he shall not dog my
Soul to Heaven: no, no, the purity, and holiness of that place cannot admit the
Presence, of any of these impure, filthy, and unclean Spirits.

4. Dying Christians hope to be delivered from all Spiritual desertions; and
those doubts, and fears which are consequent thereupon. How often by too, too
wilful falls, and sins; by allowing our selves in sloth, and negligence; by our
omissions of duty, or trifling in it, by too great a conformity to the World,
and too easy a compliance with the men, fashions, and customs of it; by
listening to Temptations, and running upon the occasions of sin; by the
immoderate use of things lawful, or venturing upon what is unlawful really in
its self, or at least so to us because doubtful; how often by going contrary to
the light of our Minds, the checks of Conscience, the Motions of the Holy
Spirit, the Directions of the Word, and the rebukes of Providence, do we, even
the best of us displease God, grieve his Spirit, break our peace, disquiet our
Minds, and wound our own Consciences; and how soon does God by frowns, and
rebukes, by withdrawing himself, hiding his face, denying a sense of his love,
and suspending in part or in whole the witnessing, and comforting presence of
his Spirit tell us he is displeased; and make us sensibly know, find, and feel
he is so! are we not hereupon on a sudden, left in darkness to be scared with
our own melancholy, guilty thoughts, and the blacker suggestions of Satan, the
accuser of the Brethren? Are we not bowed down greatly, and our Souls not only
Rev. 12 1^.
disquieted but cast down within us? Is not the day gloomy, the cloud thick,
the night very dark; and does not the poor deserted Soul with warm affection,
and passionate longing cry out, Oh! that I could see him! Don't we at such a
time mourn, and complain, and cry out of the sadness of our Case, to God, and
Man? Are we not forced in the bitterness of our Souls, and anguish of our
Spirits to say, Oh! that it were with me as in months past; when the Light of
Gods Countenance was bright, and shining, and I conversed with the Majesty of
Heaven as a Man with his friend! but it is not (woe is me!) It is not so now; oh
that it were* Lord when shall it be!

How often do the Children of Light walk in darkness; question their Adoption,
and Sonship; their Covenant Interest in, and Relation unto God! How often is
there a Curtain drawn between Them and Heaven, the Face of God Veiled and the
Light of his Countenance Eclipsed! How often does he withdraw and they cannot
find; wrap himself up in Clouds, and Darkness, and they cannot see him! with
what a pained heart, grieved Soul, with what an accent of sorrow does such an
one cry out, My God, My God, (...) have thou forsaken me! I was (...).
wonted to have Communion with God in Prayer; to see him at a Sacrament, I have
had that enjoyment of God, which (...) would not have been without for all the
(...); Time was the Sabbath was my best day, I longed for the dawning of it,
and with joy welcomed the Morning Light: (...) Ordinances where my delight,
(...) has often said, how amiable are (...).
(...) O Lord of Hosts! My Soul (...) yea even faints for the Courts of (...)
Heart and my Flesh dries out (...) God: but now (O my Soul! what a change is
this?) I pray, but he gives (...) answer; I go to his Table, with this Wish;
Let him kiss me with the (...)
kisses of his Mouth! but even there month after month I do not see the King's
Face: if he be my God, my Father, and Friend why is it thus with me? from how
many may we hear such bitter complaints as these!

But the Righteous at Death has hope of deliverance from these inward,
spiritual, and therefore most afflictive evils; and such an ^^e in the Evening
of Life may say; after a ^^^tle while and I shall no more offend, grieve, or
displease my heavenly Father: and he will always look upon me with a smiling
Face, a favorable Eye, and a pleased Countenance. I shall no^ see him as I now
do in a Glass 1 Co. 13. 1^.
dar^ly; but Face to Face: I shall dwell in his Presence, stand before his
Throne, and enjoy his Favor which is better than Life: I shall love God, and
feel that I love him; God shall love me and make me know it, and though I have
often questioned both, yet then I shall dou^t of neither. I have had many
cloudy days, disconsolate hours, and dark nights, many sad thoughts, perplexing
doubts, and tormenting fears as to my spiritual and eternal state; O ETERNITY,
ETERNITY! how have the thoughts of it amaz*d, troubled me, and sometimes made
me even tremble! but in this sickness I am better satisfied than ever, now my
fears are gone, my doubts in great part resolved, Now Evening is come, and it
is neither day nor night, the light of Gods Countenance ^^ch. 14. 7.
shines upon me; (Bless the Lord, O my Soul: and all that is within me, bless
his Psalm. 103. 1.
Holy Name,) this is but the pledge of those more full, and lasting Beams which
shall scatter all my Clouds: what I now feel is but a little, a very little to
what I shall. Are the shadows of the Evening stretched out upon me? Is night
coming? It is day, the light of Gods Countenance makes it day; and blessed be
God this is but the dawning of that everlasting day which now is near hand; and
which will perfectly and for ever scatter all my fears. Thus the Righteous has
hope in his death of an absolute freedom, and final deliverance from these
great, and almost insupp^rtable evils we wretched mortals; we who yet dwell in
flesh are exposed to; he can, and he does hope that after a few hours he shall
be afflicted, pestered with sin, buffeted by Satan, deserted by God no more for
ever: though he cannot see his Lusts actually giving up the Ghost, and dying; yet
he hopes he and his sins shall dye together: though Satan may Dog him to the
utmost borders of time; yet he hopes he shall not follow him into Eternity:
that though some scruples may remain, and his afflictions, and pains will not be
over 'till death has done its work; yet he hopes death will put an end to all.

Secondly, The Righteous has hope in his Death; (what has he then hope of!)
of a Convoy of blessed and holy Angels, to secure his passage to the other
World. Man consists of a Body and Soul; when he dies a separation is made: the
body is left, the Soul is gone; friends take care of the Body that it may have,
a decent Burial: and truly some respect and honor is due to the Corpse; to the
very dust of them who sleep in Jesus, and even after death remain united to
him: as to this the dying Christian is not much concerned, for he knows his
Lord will find it at his coming wherever it be laid: but the Soul being more
noble, his great care is for that, and he hopes Angels will be ready to conduct
in to the glorious and eternal Mansions above. Holy and confirmed Angels who
have as much good nature in them, as they have strength, and power are very
serviceable to us men, especially to such as are Heirs of Salvation: we are
(under God) Heb. 1. 14.
very much beholden to those kind, loving, and generous spirits for those
innumerable, and unknown offices of kindness, and good turns they have done us.
They are our Lifeguard from the Cradle to the Grave, a whole body of these
invisible Beings encamp round about us. How carefully do they watch over us;
how diligently do they observe us; how constantly do they bear us up in their
Arms; and by what unaccountable, and to us, unknown methods do they prevent
imminent d^ng^rs; and save us from the Snares l^id for us! how ready are they
to encourage, assist, and help us in any Spiritual work; in any great and
difficult undertakings! how do they long for our Repent^n^e, rejoice at our
Conversion, and what haste do they make to carry the happy tidings of it to
Heaven; that others (...) rejoice with them! with what a ^i^^ty concern do they
drive and chase a^ay evil ^^irits; with what courage do they (...) ^s from the
r^ge and fury (...) ^illing, are (...) in thi^ dangerous (...) we have been
foiled, (...) how seasonably have (...); what (...) have they made to espouse
our quarrel, and fight out the remaining battle for us. How off have they kept
us from being hurt by those Apostate, and Malignant Spirit* which in vast
numbers rove about in the Air, and wander up and down in this lower World; upon
no other errand than to do mischief, and prey upon immortal Souls! These good
Angels are further beneficial to holy men at death; in that they immediately
take the Souls of such into their custody, and guard them in their Journey from
one World to the other, and never leave them, till they come safe thither.

How unacquainted are we, with the way to yonder invi^^^le World! it is a p^th
we have never ^one, a r^^d we have never yet travelld; neither can we discover
any footsteps of those who are gone before us: How hard is it for Souls that
have been so long embodied in flesh, to find which is the right (...), and
tract in those vast, wide, an^ u^known Regi^^^ of Air! how imposs^b^^ is this
but by the direction of son (...) ^^perienced (...); and who can (...) ^ore, or
b^^^er experience than (...) Mess^nger of Heaven, who h^^e (...) velled a
thousand and a thousand, nay innumerable times, from that World to this, and
from this back again to that! Moreover, what a melancholy and frightful thought
is it! that my separated Soul must pass through the lower Regions of the Air,
which are the Dominions of Apostate Spirits; the Devil's Camp, and Satan's
Headquarters; and this lonely, and solitary, having none either to accompany,
or defend it! But that this might not amaze departing Saints, they shall have
as many Angels as are necessary to guard, and defend them. That holy Soul may
pass safely through the Territories of their Enemies; that they might not be
scared, terrified, or daunted by those swarms of unclean spirits which lie up
and down in the Air, a good God has appointed a Convoy of Angels to attend
them: and no doubt a convenient number of them stand round about the Deathbed
of every good man, and immediately receive his Soul when it is expired. Some
think that the fiery Chariot and Horses in which Elijah mounted up to Heaven
was a Convoy of Angels; however for this they have a commission; and those
good, and kind spirits do not disdain to perform this last act and office of
love to the meanest Saint: for the Beggar died; and the sacred Story tells us,
he was carried by Angels into Luke 16. 22.
Abraham 's bosom. How comfortable is it to study the Commission given to
Angels, in this particular; and how supporting to hope! nay, to be assured they
will act according to it! Lo this is the hope of the Righteous at death:
Gloririous Privilege!

Thirdly; The Righteous have hope of deliverance from Hell, and the torments of
the Damned. The afflictions of time are nothing to the miseries of Eternity:
The distress, and anguish of a poor creature stretched on the Wheel, rackt, and
tortured in every limb, part, and member, is but a weak, and faint resemblance
of the horrous, and agonies of despairing Souls in Hell. The pains of the
first, are nothing to the pangs of the second and Eternal Death: There is a
fire kindled that shall never go out; flames burning which shall never be
quenched; a Worm to gnaw that shall never die; and Devils to torment, who shall
never be weary of that bloody, and hellish work: There impenitent sinners (oh
how terrible and dreadful a place is Hell!) must feel the strokes of Revenging
Justice; the ^^^^es of their own Enraged Consciences; drink of the Cup of the
Wine of the Wrath of God; and be scared with the sight of ten thousand ugly
Devils They must burn, and not be consumed; be tortured, and never die; have
pain, and no case; trouble, and no rest; sorrow, and no joy: though they go
laughing to Hell, they shall never laugh more; they shall have an eternal
night, and no day; be filled with despair, and have no hope. Hell! what an
amazing word is it? Hell! how extremely melancholy are the thoughts of it?
Hell! whose heart does no^ tremble at the hearing of it? Hell! what unknown
miseries are wrapped up in it? Hell! Hell! how many wretched sinners have
voluntarily run into it, to escape the beginnings of it in their own
Consciences! but yet all we ^^n imagine, and fancy in this World, is
infinitely short of what this single, this little word, Hell, imports; and must
be felt in the next.

But a Righteous man (Lord! what must be the joy of his departing Soul!) has
hope in his death, he shall be delivered from all this. I must die (may he say)
but I shall not be damned; I must go to a cold, dark, silent, and solitary
Grave: my Glass is run, the number of my years, months, hours, and moments is
now finished; I am going to my long home: but I shall not be sent to an hot,
burning, and flaming Hell. My flesh, this Body of mine must ror in dust; but my
Soul shall not burn in that fiery Oven. the way which leads to those Chambers
of horror, and darkness, is broad, exceeding broad; the Gate that leads to
Hell is wide, and stands open day, and night, and thousands go in th^reat;
but I hope I shall take another path. It Is true, I, sinful I, have deserved
Hell again, and again, and I might have been in it long ago; but I do hope
(thanks be to God) I do hope, and will hope my blessed Jesus will snatch me, as
a firebrand out of those everlasting burnings; Amen, Amen.

Fourthly; The Righteous at death has hope of being immediately received into
Heaven; and welcomed by all that are there. The Souls of Believers being
separated, do not wander up and down in yonder vast, large, and capacious
Regions; much less are they (according to the Roman Fable) to suffer in
Purgatory, pains equal in degree to those of Hell; though not so lasting; but
they immediately go to Heaven. This day (says our Savior, to the penitent
Thief; the Companion Luke 23. 43.
of his Cross) shall thou be with me in Paradise. And the reason of Paul's
earnest, and vehement desire to depart, was, that Phil. 1. 23.
he might be with Christ. The Gates of Heaven are opened, they enter in, and
they (happy Souls!) are welcomed by God, Christ, Angels, and all their Elder
Brethren who died in the Lord, and went to Heaven before them. With what joy
does God the Father receive those Souls for whom he designed Heaven from all
Eternity? With what joy does the blessed Jesus welcome those Souls to Glory,
for whom, and whose Salvation he wept, and sweat, bled and died! Oh what a joy
is it to the heart of Jesus, to see them past all the dangers and hazards of a
troublesome Voyage; and safely arrived at his Fathers house! With what a
triumphant joy are they welcomed by Angels, and the whole Assembly of the
spirits of just men made perfect! Oh how glad are all those kind, and loving
spirits, to see others come to Heaven, who shall be sharers with them in one
and the same undivided happiness, and parners with them in singing Hallelujahs
to God, and to the Lamb! It is no small joy to them that more Voices are added
to the heavenly Quire.

I (may the dying Christian say) must leave Earth, the house in which I have
lived so long; death is about to open a door for my immortal Spirit to go out
at; and methinks I see my God, my Jesus opening the Gate of Heaven: I hope when
death has turned it out of this frail, and earthly Tabernacle, God and Christ
will receive it into Everlasting Habitations: I shall not want a Lodging, for
God has prepared, and Christ has purchased a glorious Mansion for me. Go out,
O my Soul! with holy joy, and triumph; hasten, be gone, for lo thy Throne is
prepared, and yet stands empty. When I am dead, my surviving Friends will weep
for me, with sighs, and groans lament my departure; but God, Christ, Angels,
and Saints will welcome my Soul to Heaven. Surely those holy Spirits who
rejoiced when I was converted, and born again; will sing a new Song, a peculiar
Psalm of Praise to their God, and my God, when I am born into Eternity. A
thought that when I shall knock at the Gate of Heaven, and say, Lord, Lord,
open to me; I should hear that sad word, I Luke 13. 2^.
know thee not; would even break my heart, trouble me more than the pains, and
agonies of a thousand deaths: But I hope for a free admission, a speedy
entrance, and a joyful welcome: And oh that I were there!

Fifthly; They hope to go to better Friends, better Company, and have that
Vision of God, and Christ, which cannot be had on this side the Grave. In this
World good and bad, Saints and Sinners, the Righteous and the Wicked live
together; and what a grief, and torment is the very presence, and company of
these Devils in flesh to those who really intend, and in good earnest design
Heaven! Here they enjoy the company of holy Relations, and godly Friends, who
are many ways useful and helpful to them; and no doubt they very often, and
heartily bless God for the ^ommunion of Saints: But the best here are
imperfect; there is something in the best, that their conversation is not so
taking and suitable, so sweet and endearing, as we could with. How often do they
prove a scandal, and stumbling block to us; or we an offense and grief to them!
but at death they go to better; to such as love them more, and wish better to
them than their dearest Relations here can do: To Friends, who love each other
as themselves: To Friends, in whose Conversation there is nothing but what is
peculiarly delightful, and pleasant, sweet, and amiable, charming, and
endearing, most highly grateful, and obliging: To Friends, who are utter and
perfect strangers to that four and peevish, morose and selfish temper, which
prevails too much in this wretched, and degenerate World of ours: To Friends,
who partake of, and share in one another joys, and are as much pleased with
the happiness of others, as with their own: To Friends, whose tempers will be
agreeable, whose looks will be pleasant, whose hearts will be free and open;
whose speeches will be ravishing, and all whose discourses will be seraphick
and sublime; and yet set off with all the graceful Airs of a Charming Rhetoric.

Further, while we dwell in flesh, and sojourn here below we see God but through
a glass, and that very darkly too: To day we enjoy and are ravished with some
views of him; and perhaps to morrow, nay, it may be before night the Curtain is
drawn, or a cloud interposes and we cannot see him. But after death we (if we
fall under the Character of the Text) shall see him Face to Face, by a light
which is more clear, constant and lasting. Now we delight in, believe on,
desire after, and love that blessed Jesus, whom we have not yet seen: But after
Death we shall see him as he is; and will not every view of Jesus be
transporting; will 1 John 3. 2.
not every glance be the Spring of a new, and fresh joy! What is the language
of Death to a Holy Soul but this? Come, see and enjoy that God whom thou have
long waited for, and looked after: Come, and see that Jesus, who out of a deep
pity, and compassion, wept, and groaned, bled, and died for thee: Come, take
thy place in Heaven, where thou may glut, and satisfy the greedy eye with
these ravishing sights; do thou long (Holy Soul! do thou long for the
vision of God, and a sight of Christ? Come and have it; though my looks are
Grim, my hands cold, Don't draw back for none but I can wast thee over to
Heaven, where God, and Christ are to be fully, and for ever enjoyed.

Is this the language of Death? Then what may be the language of the dying
Christian? Hearken, don't you hear him saying? The day is dawned, the time is
come, the hour is now hastening, that I must be gone; my Physicians neglecting
any further prescriptions, your passionate weeping, and silent tears, (O my
sorrowful Friends?) The sensible decays I find in my self; in those parts which
live the longest, and die the last, all tell me my end is near: Here, I have
Relations who are Loving, Careful, and Tender; many Friends has God raised up
to me, and made them instrumental for my good, but I can willingly, cheerfully,
bid farewell to all; for I hope to go to an Assembly of better Friends, and
more perfect Lovers: I have had those sights of God in the Sanctuary that have
been sweeter to me than all the pleasures of this vain World; but I hope for a
fuller view, and a more ravishing sight of that glorious being. Cannot I see God
and live? Oh let me die, for then I hope, I know I shall! I have heard of
Christ; I have talked of Christ, and (blessed be God) I have met with Christ in
Prayer; Sermons, and at a Sacrament. But now I am going to see this dear, and
blessed Jesus: This, this, Oh! This is my hope; and now O DEATH, DEATH, I
challenge I dare thee to do thy worst.

Sixthly; The Righteous man at Death has hope of the Resurrection of the Body,
and of a Body a thousand times more glorious; than that which is put off at
Death, and laid in the Dust. The Kesurrection of the dead is a main Article of
our Christian Faith; and without this Hope we Christians ^ Co. 15. 19.
should be of all most miserable. Christ's Resurrrection is the Reason, Pattern,
Proof, and Pledge of ours: As sure as he is risen, so sure is it we shall; the
Lord will come, the Trumpet sound; Arise ye dead, shall be spoken with that
Power, Majesty, and Authority that all shall obey that Summons: the bands of
death shall be loosed, the doors of the grave opened, the dead raised, and then
shall death be fully conquered, and mortality be swallowed up of Life. Christ
sees where every member of his is laid, ^ Col. ^ 4
watches over their dust, and w^ll quicken, and raise them. Put do thou say,
with what body shall they rise? What body! A very glorious body, the glory of
the latter I^ay. 2. ^.
House, shall be greater than the glory of the first: That Body which now is
like a dull, dark clod of Earth shall then shine, sparkle, and glitter, with a
brightness like to that of yonder Sun at noonday: That Body that now is weak,
shall then be perfectly well, strong, and healthful: That Body that now is sown
in corruption, 1 Co. 15. 4^.
shall then be raised in incorruption; live and die no more for ever. The
Resurrection is an Article of a Christians Faith; and that he in particular
shall rise to a blessed Immortality is the object of his hope: It Is true to
quicken, and raise a dead body, a body that for many Ages has been rotting in
the grave; a body which has been devoured by an Army of Crawling, and ^^ngry
Worms; a body which has been dissolved into a thousand particles, and infinite
Atoms of Dust, requires an Almighty power; but yet notwithstanding the laughter
of an Atheistical Sadducee, and the little objections which now and then may be
mustered up, though carnal reason be ready to say, how can these things be? Yet
Joh. 3. 9.
he believes and hopes it shall be so.

Holy Job, when the morning was but newly dawned had the knowledge, and hope of
this. I know (says he) that my Job 19 25.
Redeemer ^iveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day on the Earth, and
though after v. 26.
my Skin, Worms destroy this Body; yet in my Flesh shall I see God: Whom I
shall see v. 27.
for my self, and mine Eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be
consumed within me. The Righteous sleep securely in a bed of dust, in the bosom
of the Earth; they are not terrified with Dreams, nor scared with any frightful
Visions of the night; and after a sweet repose, and a long sleep a powerful and
Almighty Jesus will awake, and raise them, and give them a Body like to his own
most Glorious Body; in exchange for that Weak, Vile, and Contemptible Body
Death laid in the grave. This is a fundamental Article of our Faith: And why
should it seem to any a thing incredible Acts 26. 8.
that God (whose power is unlimited) should raise the Dead?

I go (may the dying believer say) the way of all Flesh, Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob are gone before me; and though I shall return to my House no more, yet my
dust shall be quickened revived and raised. The sound of the last Trumpet, the
voice of the Arch Angel, and the louder and shriller voice, of my powerful
Savior will awake me out of my dead sleep: I see the shadows of the evening
are stretched out, and night is coming; but I believe, and hope the morning
will also come; and the day of my redemption quickly dawn. I fall asleep with
hope that when day breaks my Lord will give me a call, and bid me rise: Though
this Flesh of mine must moulder into dust; yet it shall be quickened, and spring
up again at the resurrection of the just. My dead Body shall live again; those
dry Bones of mine, which may be tumbled up and down, and looked upon with
contempt, and scorn shall again be clothed with Flesh, and a Spirit of Life
shall enter into me. O Death now is thy time, thou will conquer and captivate
me; this Body must be thy Prisoner; but my time will come, in the morning I,
and all that sleep in Jesus, shall Psalm 49. 14.
have Dominion over thee: After I have lain a while bound, and fettered in a
dark, and silent Grave; my Lord, my Victorious Jesus will rescue me and all the
Prisoners of hope: Christ is the Resurrection, and Joh. 11. 25.
the Life, and believing in him I shall live: methinks with sensible joy, I
hope, I know I shall live, though I die. Lo! (O my Christian friends) this is my
hope in a dying hour; and thanks be to God it is unshaken.

Seventhly, The Righteous has hope of a public Absolution, and a sentence of
life at the day of the last, and general judgment. The Resurrection of the
Dead is in order to Judgment; Men must leave their Graves to come to the Bar:
Christ shall sit down on the Judgment Seat, and a Universal Summons being
given, all the Children of Adam shall be gathered before him; for we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that ever^ one may receive the
things done in hi^ ^ody, according ^ Cor. 5 10.
to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. This Judgment will be solemn
and awful; dreadful and terrible; impartial and righteous; final and decisive;
for after a fair trial, that sentence shall be past which will determine our
everlasting state. Then shall the Righteous be owned, and acknowledged, be
acquitted, and absolved, be sentenced, and adjudged to Eternal Life in the face
of that vast, and awful assembly of Angels and Men: and when that reviving
sentence; Well done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord, shall be prononc'd by (...).
Christ, with an audible voice, a smiling countenance, in the hearing of the
whole Court; Lord what a triumphant, and transporting joy will they be filled
with! methinks, I see their cheerful looks, their smiling Countenances, and a
pleasant Air in every Face: with what a mighty nimbleness, and sprightful
vigor does the newly restored blood dance along their veins! how do the
Heavens Echo with their Acclamation of Joy! methinks. I hear them saying with
a loud, and cheerful voice, AMEN, HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH.

I believe a future, final, and general judgment; but I hope (may the departing
Saint say) things will go very well with me in that day: I have often prayed.
God grant that I may find mercy of the Lord 2 Timothy 1. 18.
in that Day; and I hope I shall, I hope that mercy, and not rigorous justice
will pronounce my sentence; that I shall find a friend in Court; that the judge
himself will be so: that blessed Jesus who is nay Advocate, and elder Brother,
who died for me, and washed me in his Blood; who Sanctified me by his Spirit,
and reconciled me to God is to be my Judge; and therefore I hope when I am
judged I shall not be condemned. The sentence of absolution stands upon record,
Mat. 25. 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you
before the Foundation of the World. This, this, Oh! this is the blessed
sentence that belongs to me: I have read it again, and again, I have meditated
upon it till I have been ravished and transported with joy. What sweet, what
reviving words are these! how worthy is each of them of a particular remark!
Come, glorious invitation! Ye blessed of my Father; endearing title! Inherit
the Kingdom; No less! still more joy. Prepared for you, for me Lord! for Worms,
for Men, for Sinners? Sovereign Grace! Before the Foundation of the World: what
so long ago! so early designed! was my name written upon a Mansion above, long
before any of my members were written in thy Book? Grace! Grace! Lord! I
admire, and adore that love, that free, and generous, and early love of thine I
cannot comprehend, if the reading, and meditating upon these words be so
delightful; what will it be to hear them spoken, and spoken to ME? I hope (now
I am a dying man) I hope to hear this Sentence from the Mouth of my Savior;
and when these words of Life, and Joy shall drop from those sweet, and blessed
Lips, Lord what Joy shall I feel! a joy which now I can neither comprehend nor
bear. Is this the Sentence I expect to hear? O my weeping friends, stop your
flowing tears, silence your groans, hush those sobs, and sighs, and let us sing
Psalms of praise to God: oh! begin, and help me to praise him, and with my
latest breath I will say, Amen, Hallelujah.

Eighthly, The Righteous has hope in his Death (what has he hope of!) what!
of the full, entire, and eternal happiness of the whole man; when the final
judgment is past and over. Sentence being past, judgment being over, and the
Court broken up all pass to their Eternal abodes: some ay, and the greatest
part too of that vast assembly; to the Regions of horror, and darkness
beneath! others, viz. the Righteous to the Mansions of Bliss, and Light above.
Now (oh joyful day!) Christ and all his friends immediately march in triumph to
Heaven: those everlasting Gates are opened, they all enter into those
peaceable, quiet, and undisturbed Regions, and so shall they be for ever with
the Lord. 1 These. 4. 17
Before one part was praising God in Heaven, and the other silent in the Grave:
the Soul was the Companion of Angels, the Body the Food of Worms: the one as
distant from the other as yonder Heaven is from the Bowels of this Earth: but
after the great, and solemn transactions of that day the WHOLE MAN; the WHOLE
CHRISTIAN shall be admitted into the Heavenly State* Christ their head, and
husband shall bring them to Heaven with a lo, O my Father, here are the Men
thou gave unto me; here are the Men for whom I suffered, and died; while they
were in the World I kept them; and have now ransomed them from the Power of
Death, and the Grave: I have brought them safe to glory; I present them to thee
without spot, or wrinkle, and Father, I will they be where I am; that they may
behold, and partake of my Glory* Joh. 17. 24.


This perfect happiness of the whole man, the Righteous has hope of: he looks
beyond Death to the Resurrection; beyond that to judgment; and beyond judgment
to Heaven; and Heaven is the sum of his desires. Heaven! it is the center of
all his hopes, and wishes: and such an one in his last hours may say, methinks
I foresee the time when my Lord, and the judge of all will come; methinks I
hear the Trumpet sound, and see the dead raised; from my deathbed I have a
prospect of the transac^ious of the last day; I see, by faith, I see what shall
then be done to the men whom the King of Heaven delights to honor: methinks I
see the redeemed, and ransomed of the Lord marching in triumph to the City
above, and the glorious, blessed Jesus leading the way: I shall not be left
asleep, or stay behind, but accompany them to the everlasting Kingdom; and this
Flesh of mine which now must see corruption, this body of mine that now must
rot in darkness shall then be united to my Soul; and not only my Soul, but my
Body shall have the happiness it is capable of. This is my Faith, and this is
my Hope: Come Lord Rev. 22. 20.
Jesus, come quickly; and accomplish what thou have promised, and I and all thy
Followers live, and die in the hope of.

Thus we have finished the Doctrinal part; and now proceed.

Fourthly, and Lastly; To make application of what has been said upon this
argument to our selves. The most serious and weighty; the most plain and
searching; the most important and awakening truths have little, or no influence
upon our hearts, and lives, for want of a close, warm, home, and particular
application. Shall I apply what has been said? Would to God I might come to
the quick; reach the heart, alarm the Conscience of every one that shall read
these lines! where shall I sharpen my Arrows; that they may pierce and wound?
what words shall I use that drowsy sinners may be startled? Lord help me! Lord
help the reader! Lord help us both! and that I might not lose my Labor, and
you your Souls, I solemnly charge, and in the name of the Eternal God I
Sub-poena thee, O CONSCIENCE; closely and impartially to apply to the Heart,
what the man shall read with his Eye.

Conscience! Now Is thy time to speak, hereafter it may be too late for ever:
when once the man is dead and damned thou may torture and torment him; but
it will be impossible to fright him into Repentance. Is the man drowsy? O
Conscience, Conscience, thunder in his Ears: is he asleep? jog, and awake him:
is he unconcerned as to any preparation for death, judgment, and an Eternal
world? tell him of this misery; forewarn him of his danger; call, cry in his
Ears till he is startled: what shall be said in general do thou according to
thine office, as thou will answer the neglect of it to God thy Judge hereafter;
apply in particular: if any thing be said suitable to the case of the man,
whose Conscience thou art; be not mealy-mouthed, don't mince the matter; but
plainly, and roundly say, THOU ART THE MAN, rebuke, reprove, exhort, persuade,
comfort, cheer as the state of the Man requires. O Conscience, Conscience, I
call upon thee again to give them warning from God; be serious, particular, and
impartial, lest they die in their sins; and the blood of their Souls Ezekiel, 3 18.
be required at thine hands: as the man turns over these pages, read thou over
those records thou have in thine own keeping, and witness for, or against;
chide, or smile; accuse, or condemn, as thou see occasion: if he be a wicked
man be thou a Boanerges; a son of Thunder: if he be a righteous Person; be thou
a Barnabas, a son of consolation. Could I but awaken Conscience, I should hope
these plain lines would be read with some success; Lord! jog Conscience, that
Conscience may jog the Man; that this word of thine may be thy Power unto
Salvation. In hope Romans 1. 16.
that Conscience will assist, and second me; and the great God will help both,
I shall attempt the application of what has been said; in these following
Inferences.

Inference 1. How terrible must Death be to the wicked; who have no ground to
hope for any of these great, blessed, and glorious things! However sports and
pastimes; Carnal mirth and worldly Business; charming pleasures and frothy
company may keep out, and banish the thoughts of their departure; yet when the
fatal hour is coming, when grim Death is mounted on its Pale Horse, and is
posting toward them; how suddenly are they struck with horror! how concerned
at the heavy tidings that they must dye! After many pleasant years, behold, the
man is seize^ by some mortal sickness; his decayin^ strength, and languishing
Spirits, his wear Pulse, and short Breath, his cold an^ faint sweats tell him
death is coming, an^ his end is near, his Physicians after many troublesome
prescriptions, and vain attempts leave him: his mourning, an^ weeping friends
are expecting when ^^ will send forth his last breath; are waitin^ to close his
dying Eyes; and yet (miserable man!) he has no hope. Has h^ no hope; and yet
must he die? doles^ consideration!

Hope of Heaven is very common; as the Drunkard, and Swearer, the most
Rebellious and Stubborn, Perverse and Obstinate sinner, what he thinks will
become of him after Death; and he will either by a scornful silence show his
disdain; or readily answer he hopes to be saved. How fashionable is this form
of speech; as I hope to be saved! but alas! most of that hope which is the
World's is vain, and groundless; false, and spurious; begotten by a flattering
Heart, and subtle Devil; it is like common Metal without the Royal Stamp,
which none will take for Current Coin; and how often Does it appear so when
Death, and the Grave, Judgment, and Eternity come in view! you have hope; but
in the name of God, Man, tell me what kind of hope is it? Is it accompanied
with any sweet, pleasant, and delightful thoughts; with any hearty groans,
earnest longings, passionate desires after possession? Does it withdraw your
Hearts, and affections from Earth to Heaven; and render you patient under all
the sufferings, and afflictions of this present state? In a word, does it put
you on to get more purity and holiness? A genuine hope will, as appears by the
Apostles words he that has this hope in him, 1 John 3. 3.
will purify himself even as he is pure. He that hopes to see the infinitely
Holy God, will not stain his Garments, and defile his Soul, by wallowing in filth
and mire: he that hopes to be like God in Glory, will endeavor to be like him
in purity: he that hopes to resemble the best of Beings, God, will not make
himself like the worst of Creatures, the Devil, by open, and known, wilful, and
presumptuous violations of the Divine Laws. This hope will put him upon
endeavoring after a purity like that of God in Nature and Kind; though it cannot
be so in Degree, and Measure.

Do you hope for Heaven; and doa^ upon Earth, hug your Riches, and make the
World your God? Do you look for a Kingdom, and Crown, Immortality, and Life,
for an happiness beyond all you^ thoughts, and bigger than your hopes; and do
you do nothing, or next to nothing to obtain it? Do you hope for a Mansion in
yonder Heaven at the end of your Journey; and walk in the broad Road that leads
to Hell? Do you hop^ to be like blessed, and Holy Angels; and do you now
sometimes play the Beast, and sometimes act the Devil? Do yo^ hope for the
reward; and do none of tha^ work God has appointed, or do it in a lazy,
slothful, and careless manner.

Do you hope to hear, Well done, good and faithful Servant: and wrap up your
Talents in a Napkin, or bury them in the Earth? Do you hope to be happy, and
take no care to be holy? Do you hope Christ will save you; and do you make
nothing of running over the tears, wounds, and blood of the blessed Jesus, to
get at the forbidden Fruit? Do you hope to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, with the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, in the Kingdom of Heaven;
and do you now sit with Publicans and Sinners? Is this your hope? poor men!
what kind of hope is it; and what little service will it do you?

This hope is slight, and superficial; it is the fruit of ignorance, and want
of consideration: perhaps an awakening Sermon of Death, and Judgment, Hell, and
God's Eternal wrath; some cross Providence, and smart affliction may miserably
shake it. While the Sun shines, and the day of Prosperity lasts, thy hope may
seem fresh, and flourishing; but when the Night of Affliction comes thou may
be wrapped up in Clouds, and Darkness, and thy hope will languish, wither and
die. Dreadful thought!

This hope is vain and groundless; God's Promise is the only Ground, and solid
Foundation to build our hope upon: to hope for what God has never promised or
upon other terms, and conditions that are annexed to the promise is ignorant,
and blind, and bold, and daring presumption.

This hope is wicked; and foolish* It is wicked; is it not a dis-believi^^ Gods
peremptory threatening; an affronting Divine truth; and imputing falshoo^ to his
comminations? Has the Just* True, Holy, and Eternal God said, tho^ shall not
be saved and do thou secretl^ say, I hope I shall; what is this but a^ the
same time to hope God will be a li^^ It is also foolish; is it not folly to
hope against Reason, Scripture, and all Go^ has said? Is it not folly to think
a poo^ Worm can snatch Salvation out of the hands of mercy, when God is
resolve^ he shall never have it? To think a sinfu^ wretch can force his way
through a thousand threatenings, and the peremptory Sentence of the Law to the
Blissful Regions above?

This hope (what shall I say of it?) is perishing; it will end in confusion,
disappointment, and shame, and at last die in horror, and despair. Sickness and
Death, O vain man! will shake thy hopes: The Sentence of thy Judge, and and the
Flames of Hell will dash them. Hope may accompany thee while thou live; go
with thee to the very borders of the Eternal World; and then at farthest it
will bid farewell to thy amazed, and trembling Soul. The time will come (believe
it Sirs) the time will come, when you shall hope no more, no more, no more for
ever. This hope is worse than none, for it hinders Men's repentance; and all the
kindness it does them is first to hood-wink, and then damn them. How fatal is
this hope! A wicked man can have no good hope either living or dying; and that
false hope he maintains, and cherishes in health, when sickness comes many
times takes the wings of the morning and flies away. In an hour he must remove
out of one World into another; but he has no hope it shall be into a better:
He bequeaths his body to the dust; his Estate, and Goods to his surviving
friends; but he can not (Lord what an Agony must the departing Soul be in!)
with confidence commend his Spirit into the hands of Jesus: He may hope his
Friends will give his body a decent burial; but he has no hope, alas! he has no
hope Angels will conduct his Soul to glory. Oh Death, Death, how terrible is it
when there is no hope of a better life

To awaken such let me add; to die without good hope, though it be bad, is not
all: For the wicked (as it is in the former part of this verse) is driven away
in his wickedness. Sad words, miserable ends! Prove. 14. 32.
Ere long (Sinners) Death will grasp thee in its cold Arms; ere long Pale Death
will sit in that face of thine that now is Fair, and Ruddy, and the seat of a
Charming Beauty; ere long Death will shackle those feet which brought thee to
this assembly; shut those eyes which are a window to let in vanity into thy
mind; stop those ears which have been delighted with filthy, and unsavory
discourse; ere long, Death will drive thee out of the World; thou must be
conf^^ed to a narrow Coffin; sleep in a Bed of dust, under a coverlet of
crawling Worms; but this is not all, no, nor the greatest part of thy misery;
for thou shall be driven away in thy wickedness: Go out of the World guilty,
and accompanied with the sins of thy whole Life; Death unties the knot, and thy
Soul is gone; gone! Whither is it gone? Into the invisible World, to the
illightned Tribunal of a Just, Impartial, and Inexorable Judge: Death sets open
the Door, and thy immortal Spirit immediately flies away; and all thy sins like
so many black, and frightful Devils, hasten, and post after: Thy Sins, O man,
thy sins mount, and ascend as fast as thy Spirit, and will be at the
Judgment Seat as soon as it. Methinks a thought of this should make thine heart
ache, thy lips quiver, rottenness enter into thy bones, and force thee to cry
out; Good God! Whatever becomes of me let me not die, in my sins. An impenitent
sinner goes into Eternity dogged by Devils, and his own impure Lusts: When he
dies, that hope which with artifice, and cunning he maintained in his
lifetime, forsakes his wretched, and trembling Soul: In one instant, it is
gone, and gone for ever: follow him from one World to to'ther; from his
sickbed to the Bar of God. Doleful Hour!

Infer II. Do, and must the righteous die? Then how does it concern us to make
a good use of them while they live! The righteous are the lights of the World;
like the S^^ in the Firmament profitable and beneficial to all: Though
hereafter these wise Virgins cannot supply us with Oil out of their Vessels, to
recruit our Lamps, and maintain the expiring Flame; yet at present they may
like the Sun communicate of their light, and heat to us. How much Spiritual
good may we receive by them; and how careful should all be to make a wise
improvement!

Have you an Holy Father a Godly Mother, who pray for, weep over and daily
instruct you? Hearken to their instructions, follow their example, take their
counsel for they must die. That Holy Father of thine, who with compassion, and
tenderness begs of thee to remember God, and thine own Soul; that Godly Mother
of thine, who brought thee forth with pain, and sorrow, and is in travel with
thee again, till Christ be formed in Gal. 4. 19.
thee; must die: And if thou do not hearken to, and improve their serious
reproofs, godly counsels, and wholesome advice; what a torment may the thought
of it be when they are dead, and gone! Methinks I hear a negligent and careless
Son being lately come from the grave of his holy Father, or godly Mother, in
bitterness crying out: God in giving me such holy Parents gave me a great
mercy; but I (Oh wretched man that I am!) neither valued, nor thankfully
improved so great a blessing as should, and might have done: My Father, my
Mother that is now dead, very often, and that with tears told me of my sin, and
danger; with abundance of kindness, in the Spirit of meekness reproved me for
my youthful follies, and vanities; with much Plainness, and Holy Zeal, they
instructed, and counseled, informed and directed me; they brought me to the
Solemn Assembly, and taught me at home; they wept over me, and prayed to God
for me, and put me upon secret Prayer, and reading the Holy Scriptures; but all
this labor in whole, or at least in great part has been lost as to me: Might I
not have been much better, might I not have had more grace, and holiness had I
improved this blessing? I had the same advantage (may the wicked and
disobedient Son say) but I slighted the instructions of my holy Father, and
contemned the counse^^ of my godly Mother; and now they are dead, and gone, how
likely am I to die in my sins; having not the same helps and advantages as I
had when they were with me? Such reflections (Conscience being awakned by the
hand, and rod of God) may be made when such holy Relations are taken away; to
prevent which; let all especially the Children of Holy Parents improve the
lives and company of such. The like might be said as to Husbands and Wives;
Masters and Servants, etc. Labor to get as much good as you can by holy
Relations, Christian Friends, and Acquaintance for these you shall not have
always with you.

Infer. III. How great is the mercy, and goodness of God to his People though
they are not exempted from Death! Death sounds harsh, the Grave is very
frightful: When we think the Friends of God, the Members of Christ, the
Favorites of Heaven, and the Followers of the Lamb must die; are we not
sometime posed, and almost at a stand? Are we not puzzled to reconcile the
Death of such men with the goodness, and love of God; and those tender bowels
he has toward such? Are we not ready to say How, and why is it that such must
die? Since their door-posts are sprinkled with the Blood of the Lamb; why may,
why does not the destroying Angel pass over them? Since God has such a love
to, delight in, and wishes so well to them, why must they Taste Death before
they can drink of those Rivers of Heb. 2 9.
pleasure which are at Gods right hand forevermore? Psalm. 16. 11.
Why does not such love, and mercy pleasure them with an easy, and
instantaneous Translation? These may be the arguings of carnal reason; but to
consider with what great, and vast, blessed, and glorious hopes they die may
help us to silence every thing of this kind. Why should we entertain any hard
thoughts of God, or think him in the least unkind, because we must first die;
before we can be happy: When he has given us such sure and certain hopes to
carry us through the Pains, and Conflicts, Agonies and Terrors of that hour!
When you hear or see that the Righteous must die, do you cry out? How severe,
and inflexible is Divine Justice! Then remember they die in hope and cry out;
How tender is Divine Mercy! How great is the Mercy of God that he sweetens this
Cup with some fore-tasts of Heaven!

When sickness shall Summon me to die; when I shall lie weak, and pained on my
last bed, Lord! Let me have a strong and unshaken; a vigorous and lively hope:
Give me in that dark and gloomy hour but a prospect of Heaven; and an assurance
it shall be mine: While with one eye I look into the Grave with the other let
me look to Heaven, and be able to say, Yonder is a Mansion for me. And I will
never think much that I must die: O my God, I will not think thy justice is too
severe, but adore, and Bless, Love, and Praise thee while I have Strength, and
Breathe that I have hope to comfort me in my Passage.

Infer. IV. How evident is it that serious Religion, and practical holiness is
not a vain thing! To mourn for our sins, and repent of our past wickedness; to
watch our Hearts, which have so often, so easily, and fatally betrayed us; to
resist the Temptations of Satan, who waits for an opportunity to destroy us; to
abstain from fleshly, and sensual pleasures, which have drowned thousands in
Perdition, and may ensnare and defile us; to be strict, and accurate in all our
ways; to follow the Directions of the Word, the Conduct of the Holy Spirit, and
the light of a well-informed Conscience in all we do; to be warm, fervent, and
frequent in Prayer, both in our Families and Closets; to be serious, and
reverent when ever we have to do with God, and meddle with sacred things; to
love our Enemies, and do good to all, and hurt to none; to deny self, take up
the Cross, and suffer rather than sin; to be humble, meek, and condescending;
to govern our thoughts, make a Covenant with our Eyes; and to set a Watch on
the Door of our Lips, and Bridle our Passions; to contemn the World, and the
three grand Idols of it; RICHES, HONORS, and PLEASURES; to be contented with
little, and thankful to God for any thing; to obey the commanding, and submit
to the Providential Will of God is accounted by some men (and those who think
themselves Wits too) ridiculous and vain. What profit is there in serving ^^e
Almighty? Job. 21. 15.
Is the Language of some Men's Tongues and more Men's Hearts: but Lord what mad
and foolish talk is this! is that vain which ends so well, and has such an
happy issue at last?

The whole Life of a sinner is but one continued vanity, but one entire piece
of a more solemn folly: your carking and caring for, your pampering a dying
Body, while you neglect an Immortal Spirit; your thoughtfulness for Earth,
while you forget Heaven; your heaping up Riches, while you lay up no treasures
for your selves in another World; your purchasing Lands, and Houses, while you
do not seek a Title to a Mansion above; your sinful Laughter, and carnal Mirth;
your ridiculing Religion, and making a scorn of the Righteous, your beastly
pleasures, and brutish delights are all vain, of these we may say, Vanity of
Vanities, all is Vanity. Should I come to you when you lie sick, cold, and
trembling on a Deathbed, and ask, Sir, what fruit have you of your former
sinful Life? would you not shake your head, and with an heavy Heart say? Fruit!
alas! no fruit, nothing but shame and sorrow, dreadful fears of an after
reckoning, and frightful thoughts of Hell, and Judgment to come.

But Righteousness and Powerful Religion is no vain, or unprofitable thing;
suspend thy judgment a little while, stay till the Righteous man comes to the
end of his Journey; behold him weak and languishing, and yet full of hope and
joy. See him looking grim Death in the Face with courage, and going out of the
World in triumph; hear him saying with a pleasant voice, Oh that Death would
come! I long, I long to dye, and then judge if righteousness be vain. This
Doctrine exemplified in the triumphant and joyful Death of a Righteous Man is
enough to convince the most sottish, and stupid sinner that serious religion is
no vain, and empty thing.

Infer. V. How industriously, and diligently should all labor after this
righteousness! That Death is certain and unavoidable, near at hand and will
quickly come; I suppose you take for granted. You are dying, verily my friends
you are dying men, and women: the time is coming, and how quickly will it be
here? when you must breath your last, when neither the tears of Relations, the
pity of Friends, the skill of Physicians, nor any virtue there is in Medicines
can prolong Life or keep off Death. Lo this is thy Motto, DUST thou art and to
the Dust shall thou return; and should not you labor to be such persons while
you live that you may have hope in your Death? To be a stranger upon Earth is
your character; to get an hope of an abiding City should be your endeavor: and
this cannot be had without Gospel-righteousness. It is not a superficial
sorrow, and slight repentance for your past sins; a few good thoughts or
wishes, a few cold and lifeless Prayers in the Church, or Closet; it is not an
escaping the gross pollutions of the flesh; or doing some acts of Charity, and
Justice, Sobriety, and Temperance that will be a sufficient ground of hope in a
dying hour: it is nothing short of a through, Universal change of Heart and
Life; nothing short of a supernatural principle in the Heart, exerting its self
in suitable actions in the life will warrant, and legitimate your hope: and oh
how speedily, and diligently should every one labor after it!

If you would have hope in your Death, you must solemnly repent of all your
sins: that Heart of thine which is as hard as a Rock must be softened and
broken; you must renounce the Infernal Trinity the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; your old Hearts, and Natures must be changed; love to God must be your
governing principle; the characters of the H. Gospel must be impressed upon your
Hearts; and there must be a sincere, constant, and universal obedience to all
its commands in your lives: you must have Faith in the Heart which works by
Love, and there must Gal. 5. 6.
be obedience in the life, the fruit, evidence, and proof of that Faith: and
what argument, and motive can be more cogent to persuade you to endeavor after
this complete righteousness than this in the text? Sirs when you are sick and
ready to die, you send for us and then you cry out for comfort; oh Sir (says
many an one on his Deathbed) have you no comfort for a dying man? Can you give
me no hope it will be well with me after Death? Oh that I had some hope of
Heaven! you that know to whom Heaven belongs tell me, oh! tell me if there be
any ground for me to hope it will be mine: and will you not labor after that
righteousness without which all your hope is vain and will end in eternal
desperation? Shall the profits of the World, or the pleasures of sin keep you
from being Religious indeed? infinite folly!

Were I now upon my Deathbed, panting for Breath, struggling for life, beyond
the hope, and possibility of recovery; were I now expecting which hour and
moment, which pulse and breath would be my last, oh what would hope of a
blessed Immortality be worth! hope of Heaven would stand me in more stead than
the riches of ten thousand Worlds. Lord! quicken my resolutions and endeavors,
awaken my drowsy Soul, inspire my dead, and slothful Heart with light and
life, with warmth and zeal: let me trifle and dally no longer, but mind, and
mind it as the main business of my life to get that righteousness which may add
spirit, and life to my hopes in a dying hour! I resolve and purpose to do so;
Lord! maintain and strengthen these holy purposes, and grant me this hope at my
death!

Infer. VI. How unaccountable and blameworthy is fear of death, especially that
which is tormenting, and slavish in those who are truly righteous! It Is true in
Death upon the slightest view, we may behold something ^elancholy and
startling, frightful and gloomy; something that puts Nature into a fright, and
makes it recoil and start back at the thoughts of it: but if we consider it
more distinctly in its antecedents, languishing sicknesses, acute pains, and
terrible pangs; in its consequent what becomes of the young* strong, and
honorable when death has turned the man into a pale, wan and ghastly corpse it
appears more formidable: but if we farther consider it, as the effect of our
primitive Apostasy, and the fruit of the Divine Curse; as it transmits the Soul
to a righteous and impartial Tribunal, and as it is attended with Hell; it may
justly (whenever we think of it) surprise us with horror. But how unreasonable
is it for good men who have such great, and glorious hopes to be kept in
Bondage all their life-long through fears of Death! and yet how Heb. 2. 15.
loath are the best of us to admit the thought of dying! how loath to suppose
that the next year, week, or day we may be laid in the Grave! when sickness
shakes, how loath are we death should pull down this Earthly Tabernacle?

But how greatly are we to be blamed for this; when God has provided such an
antidote as hope of Heaven; What is it we are afraid of? What is it makes us
start, and draw back when Death is marching toward us, and we hear the sound
of its feet at our chamber doors? do we fear the pains, and pangs which usually
usher in the King of Terrors? Cannot God make our passage speedy, and easy,
and have we not hope that when these pains are over we shall feel no more? Are
we loath to die, because we must leave our Relations, and Friends, and have we
not hope of going to better* Are we afraid to die because after Death our
separated, and naked Souls must pass through the Devils Dominions and
Territories? And have we not hope of a Convoy of mighty, and powerful Angels;
who dare fight those unclean Spirits in their own Quarters, to conduct them
safe to the blessed abodes above? Are we afraid to die because after Death
comes Judgment? And have we not hope the Judge is our friend, and that our
trial will have a good, and happy Issue? Finally are we loath to die because
these Bodies, and this Flesh of ours must rot in dust and darkness and our eyes
must no more behold this sweet, and pleasant light and have we not hope towake
and rise; after a quiet and undisturbed sleep? Oh how abundantly has our good
God provided for our comfortable passage to Eternity! Let as many then as have
this hope, banish these unreasonable, and slavish fears, which are a pleasure
to Satan, a dishonor to God, a reproach to our profession, a disgrace to our
hopes, and a torment to our selves.

Infer. VII. Hence we see the reason of the willing and cheerful, joyful and
triumphant departure of some believers at the hour of Death. The Souls of some
men are violently rent and torn from them, fain would they live longer, but
must not; some die with a quiet and silent submission: and some die with
abundance of joy and triumph. As old Jacob's heart was revived and cheared when
he saw the Wagons which were sent to fetch him to his beloved Joseph; so the
hearts of some Christians have even leapt for joy, when they have seen Death
coming to carry them to their beloved Jesus; Death dressed up in the most
terrible shape has not been able to fright them. With what courage and
resolution; boldness and magnanimity; composedness and cheerfulness; with what
joy and triumph did the Martyrs of old suffer and die! The angry frowns, the
sour looks, the threatening words of their enemies have not daunted them; the
passing sentence of Death upon them, and appointing the time for their
execution has neither startled, nor troubled them: No, no, they have rejoiced
in their Dungeons, and gone to the Flames with Psalms of Praise in their
mouths. With what an unshaken mind, transport, and joy have they passed from
their Prisons to a Stake; not in the least concerned at the sight of the
executioner, the instruments of Death, and all the bloody Pomp that was carried
before them! How have these noble confessors endured the torture of the Rack,
the burning of the Flames, not only with patience, and submission; but with
thankfulness, and access of joy, and exultancy of Spirit, though I confess
there was somewhat peculiar in this case; yet was not all this owing to the
liveliness of their hope, and strength of their assurance Faith made them
Martyrs, and Hope made them Triumphant.

How many other Christians who were never called out to endure the Fiery Trial;
who never had the honor of Pet. 4 12.
Martyrdom conferred on them; have been filled with the greatest joy in their
last moments! how many have discoursed of their death, given command concerning
their Burial, and taken their leave of this World with joyful hearts, pleasant
looks, and cheerful countenance: how many have gone to Heaven not only with
quiet, still, and silent affection; but with acclamations of Joy, and with
verbal Praises of God in their mouths! have not their comforts been strongest
when Nature has been weakest? Have not their Deathbed Joys exceeded all that
they ever felt before; and has not their last breath been employed in praising
God? Did you never hear a dying Christian express himself to this purpose? I
thank God I am as willing to die as others are to live; the thoughts of my
Coffin, and Grave don't trouble me; trouble me! They are as sweet as the
thoughts of my Bed wont to be after the Toil, and Labor of the day. Is my end
drawing on? Must I now die? Welcome News! Joyful Tidings! Weep (O my dear
Friends) weep no more for me; for nothing troubles me but your excessive grief
and sorrow: I am willing to die; and do you be willing I should: I am willing
to wait with patience till Gods time is come, but I could be very well
contented now, even now, this hour, this moment to be gone. I see nothing in
this Vain, Sinful, and Wretched World that should make a wise man fond of it;
but on the other side the grave what great, what blessed, Lord! What glorious
things do I see? See so much that I am willing to die that I might see and
enjoy more: The blessed, and loving Jesus has purchased and prepared a mansion
for me, and now he calls me to come to it; and shall I be loath, backward, and
unwilling? If I should, would not my Savior take it ill? Unwilling to die!
What Is that but to be unwilling to be happy? There will be joy in Heaven when I
am there, and I would there should be joy on Earth now I am going thither.
Though all cannot thus Triumph over Death, and the Grave, yet thanks be to God
some can; and what is the ground of all this, but that lively hope their
departing Souls are inspired with? Without hope how impossible were any thing
of this kind? Hope attends them in their last sickness, hope shoots the gulf
with them, carries them to the gates of Heaven, and never leaves them till they
take possession of the immortal, and undefiled inheritance; and this hope is
the reason of that peculiar joy other men are strangers to in a dying hour.
What great things can hope do!

Infer. VIII. How carefully should every righteous man endeavor that his hope
may be strong, vigorous, and lively in a dying hour! Ere long God in whose
hands is our time, our Life, and Breath will grant Death a commission: Ere long
Death, inexorable Death, impartial Death, Death that has conquered all who
lived before us, will enter our Chamber, lay close seige to our hearts the
secret spring of Life; rend, and tear us from the embraces of our dearest
Friends; who shall have nothing to do but to behold, and lament the victory.
And what shall we then do if we have no hope, or but a weak one? There is a
very great difference in the Death even of righteous men themselves: Some go
weeping, others triumphing through the dark valley: Some excellent Christians
have many doubts, and fears in that hour; Death terrifies though it cannot hurt
them: They have only some secret support; but have not the joy of hope. Since
the righteous may have hope, and such hope to be a cordial to them in their
last, and most sorrowful moments; Oh how greatly does it concern us to look to
our selves, and use our utmost endeavors that we may have hope, and not only
so; but that our hope may be strongest when Nature is weakest, and lively in
our dying Agony; and that our best, richest, and sweetest Wine may be reserved
to the Last!

Hope! how can we live without it? Hope! what shift can we make to die without
it? Hope! how insipid are the pleasures of Life! Hope how uncomfortable are
afflictions, how overwhelming are the terrors of Death without it! Hope! how
does it lighten every Burden, sweeten every Cup, and make every Cross the more
easy Hope! what safety may we have from it in every conflict, as it is our
Helmet; what security in every storm 1 These. 5. 8. Heb. 6. 19.
as it is our Anchor! Hope! how does it raise our Spirits, warm our Affections,
invigorate our Endeavors, increase our Love, inflame our Zeal! Hope! how does
it enable men to contemn, flight, and despise all the admired and adored
vanities of an empty, and perishing World! Hope what a pleasing relish does it
give of every promise! What a sprightful accent to all our praises; and what a
captivating power to every thought, and prospect of Heaven! Hope! how does it
make us more moderate in our desires, more modest in our requests, and more
indifferent in our endeavors after these mean, and little things here below!
Of what use, and benefit is this hope to us? A strong and confirmed hope will
be of great use; when a weak and wavering one will do us but little service:
And how careful should you Righteous one's be to get, and keep, cherish, and
maintain a good hope! How industriously should you endeavor to live in Hope;
and above all, to die in hope! That you may have this hope, and the comfort of
it too, when your Sun is going down, and night is coming. You should labor
after this lively hope.

1. For God's sake. The infinite doubts, fears, and jealousies which many
sincere Christians cherish; their drooping and desponding complaints; their
melancholy walking; and uncomfortable lives reflect on that God they serve as
if he were unkind; and disgrace that best of Religions, which they have
espoused as if it were good for nothing but to make men dull, sad, and mopish.
Men see so little pleasure in Religion, because they see so little comfort in
the lives of its Votaries: and if an uncomfortable Life do so much; will not an
uncomfortable Death do much more? For such men to be dejected, and cast down in
sickness; to shiver, and tremble when death approaches; to question their
right, and title to Heaven when they are going to it, may very much dishonor
God, reflect upon Religion; and prejudice the Wicked: should any of these men
be in the Chamber of such a dying Christian, how would they at least, secretly
pity him for his easiness, and credulity; deride Religion, and scorn an holy
life! with what disdain would they be ready to say? See what all his Religion
is come to; what is the fruit of his praying and hearing; his precise and
circumspect walking; Death is as terrible to him as it would be to us: he talked
of Heaven all his Life-long but now where is his hope? what is become of his
confidence? When he had heated his brain and fancy with some religious
exercises; how pleasantly could he talk of Heaven? But now Death is approaching
what little support has he from those thoughts? Thus may your doubts, and fears
strengthen the hands, and harden the Hearts of the wicked: and tell me
Christian, is it not a trouble to thee to think, thou should dishonor God,
and discredit Religion, and that Religion which should be dearer to thee than
thy Life; in the very last part, and concluding act of it? Can the thought of
it be tolerable to thee? Therefore for God's sake, and Religions sake get HOPE:
for if you be comfortable and joyful then, (and if your hope be lively you may,
and will be so;) you may convince, however you will silence These foolish men,
and perhaps after your decease they may bethink themselves, and say, surely
Religion is no vain thing; there is more in it than we know of, for how ^as
this man filled with joy when grim death stared him full in the face? Such a
death commends Religion more than an hundred Panegyricks written in the praise
of it: having this hope, by your deathbed carriage and dying speeches you may
bring more glory to God, honor to Christ, and credit to Religion at your
death; than you did in your Life.

2. For your own sake. Is not death tertible, and do you want nothing to arm
and fortify you against it? but what will or can, if you have no hope? Death!
how cold do the thoughts of it strike to our Hearts; especially when we see the
departing pangs, hollow eyes, pale looks, ghastly countenances, short breath,
trembling limbs, and clammy sweats of our dying friends: and then think one day
this will be our own ^aie! when we walk through Churchyards, and see rotten
Skulls, scattered Bones, what a frightful thought is it to think ere-long it
will be so with us! but when death really comes to act all this over upon us;
what a difference shall we find between seeing another die, and dying our
selves? will you need no support at such a time, will you want no cordial in
such an hour? will you need no refreshment, when Heart, Flesh, and strength,
and all does fail? Will you want nothing to help you when you come to grapple
with this huge Goliath, this mighty Conqueror, DEATH? verily you will; and what
can succor, support, and help you in that hour but a lively hope? Would you
not have your Hearts sink, and die within you? Would you be able to receive the
Sentence of Death in your selves with a quiet, and calm submission to God's
Will? Would you die in peace, and go off with triumph? then get, and maintain a
lively hope.

3. For the sake of those Relations you shall leave behind. Whenever you die,
you will leave them in Tears; it will trouble them to think that you are dead:
but they will sorrow most of all to remember you did not die in hope. Out of
respect, and pity to them get this lively hope; that they may have this to
comfort and support them when you are dead and gone. That they may be able to
say, my Husband, my Wife, my Father, my Mother, my Son, my Daughter is Dead;
but thanks be to God they died with a living with a lively hope. If they have
any love for you, any sense of Religion, any belief of another World, nothing
will be so serviceable as this to check their immoderate sorrow. If you have no
hope, or but little, though it is not their place to sit as judges upon you; yet
may they not fear the worst? may they not take up a bitter lamentation at the
Mouth of your Grave, and say, My loving Father, my dear Mother, my Son, my
Child is dead: alas! here is the breathless Carcass that is left behind; but
woe is me! woe is me! what is become of the Immortal Soul? Oh! get this hope,
that you your selves, and others too may know where death will Land you: why
should you be ambitious of going to Heaven incognito; and as it were by
stealth? Why should you not let all know, that that is the blessed Port you are
bound for before you go off from Land? That when you are praising God in
Heaven; your surviving Friends may be giving Thanks to God on Earth for your
safe arrival.

Now, that you who are Righteous may have a lively hope in your Death; I shall
lay down, and do you practice these following directions.

First, Get, and maintain a firm, and settled belief of a future happiness.
Content not your selves with the guesses, and conjectures of an Heathen; with a
cold, and naked opinion that is easily shaken with the breath of the next
Temptation; with a Faith, which is the fruit of a Religious, and Virtuous
Education; and is only the consequent of having been born, and brought up among
a sort of men called Christians, an avowed Article of whose Creed is, the Life
everlasting: but let your Faith be built upon sure Grounds, Divine Revelation;
and let it be quickened, and raised to that degree that it may presentiate the
future glory to you; that it may stand as a Rock unmovable in the midst of
Storms; and like a brazen Wall blunt, and beat back all those Arrows of
Temptation, which are shot against it. Faith lays the Groundwork, and
Foundation for hope: the Creed of a Sadducee and the hopes of a Christian are
not reconcilable; if I believe there is no other World but this, how can I
have hope of any thing beyond the Grave? and if my Faith be weak and wavering a
dead, and lifeless thing; will not my hope be so too? As the Lamp goes out
unless there be Oil to feed it, so hope will wither, languish, and die except
Faith maintain it. Hope springs from Faith, is nourished by, and is in
proportion to it. In order to a lively hope, it is necessary we conquer our
infidelity, and watch, strive, and pray against an evil Heart of Unbelief. Hope
Heb. 3. 12.
will not, indeed none of the Fruits of the Holy Spirit can thrive, or flourish
while this root of bitterness is in the Heart. Let us then use all the means
appointed that we may be strong in Faith, the life of our Romans 4. 20.
hopes, nay the life of all our Religion depend's upon the certainty of a
future state: blot this Article out of our Creed, and you stab Religion to the
Heart: the whole of Religion in a manner, depends on the truth of this one,
single Article; a life to come, and thanks be God we are not left without
plain, abundant and sufficient proof of it: and they who are Insidels in this
age, and in this part of the World, they are so not out of necessity; but
rather out of choice. Let us then with the greatest seriousness of Spirit,
intention of mind apply our selves to consider the many, and clear evidences
there are of a future state; and though Satan may raise Batteries against our
Faith; yet let us defend it, and pray to God it may never fail. Let Faith often
travel into yonder Eternal World: send it as a Spy to take a view of the
Heavenly Canaan; and firmly believe the report it brings back: for our Faith
must be steadfast, if ever we would have our hope unshaken.

Secondly; Walk closely with God, and take heed of all known, willful, and
presumptuous Sins. Having solemnly dedicated your selves to the glory, and
service of the Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit, walk according to that
dedication: Watch against every thing that may give a wound to your sincerity,
or cause you to question it. If you would have hope in your Death live
according to your Character, Righteous persons, What is the fruit of your sloth
and negligence; the consequent of your harkening to sin, and complying with
temptation, but perplexing jealousies, and tormenting suspicions, blotted
evidences, and languishing hopes; want of assurance, and the Heavenly joy that
flows from thence? Am I in a state of Grace, and do I belong to God? Will God
reward such poor, and mean performances with Heaven? Is not my hope vain, and
only the counterfeit of that which is in true Christians? Shall I ever be
happy, or may I venture to hope I shall? Are the disconsolate reasonings of the
careless Christian upon the neglect of duty, and commission of sin: It is thus;
and have not some of you found it so? Willful, and presumptuous sins will raise
black, and dark clouds between you and Heaven: These clouds may eclipse the
light of Gods countenance at present; and break, and fall down in terrible
storms, and tempests in the evening. What a dreadful change did holy David find
in himself after his unhappy, and scandalous fall? How did it damp his joy,
blot his evidences, and stab his hopes? Poor man! he is wrapped up in clouds, and
darkness, and in great distress, and agonies of Soul cries to God; Lord!
restore to me the joy of thy Salvation Psalm. 51. 12.
and uphold me with thy free Spirit.

On the contrary, an holy obedient life; a strict, and circumspect walking with
God will both warrant, and confirm our hope. Heaven is promised to the
obedient; or in the language of the the Text to the righteous: And every act of
sincere obedience will enable me to see my right to the promise, and apply it
to my self; and a constant, and persevering obedience will be accompanied with
a full assurance of hope unto the end. Holiness ^e^. 6. 11.
of heart, and life will furnish me with an answer to all my doubts, and fears;
afford me comfort amidst all my sad jealousies, and perplexities of Spirit;
strengthen me to look as far as Heaven, and enable me to read my name written
there. Our Hope as well as our Faith without works will be dead: But a strong
and lively; a certain and confirmed hope will be the issue of an holy, and
obedient life. It will entitle us to the promise, and warrant our hope of the
reward. Would you then have hope in your Death? Mortify sin, subdue
corruptions, and crucify the old man; keep up the Government of Grace, and the
Authority of Christ in your Souls; watch against snares and temptations; keep
your garments undefiled and your selves unspottep: Remember every willful sin
wounds your hope.

Thirdly; If through the strength of corruption, and violence of temptation you
chance to miscarry, and fall; endeavor to rise again by a solemn, serious, and
speedy repentance We (thanks be to God) are not under the Law, which requires a
sinless, spotless obedience as the condition of Life: But under the Gospel of
the meek, and merciful Jesus, which requires and admits of repentance: And
whenever we have wounded our selves by sin; it is our interest, and wisdom to
betake our selves to this remedy. Though you cannot keep your selves innocent,
yet be sure you do not live impenitent: If you do defile your garments in one
instant, be sure you wash them with a flood of penitential tears the next: Keep
Conscience wakeful, and tender that it may sharply reprove you when you do
amiss; and when Conscience looks upon you, as Christ did upon Peter do you also
go out Mat. 26. 75.
and weep bitterly. Let your repentance be serious and solemn; with blushing
and shame; confusion and sorrow; with hearty sighs and groans; with a broken
heart and contrite Spirit; with a bleeding soul and melting affections: With
all the signs of a Gospel-repentance, and unfeigned remorse, confess and bewail
your late sin, or sins before God: Let your confession be free, and not forced;
particular, and not general, and the more to affect, melt, and humble you,
aggravate your sin with the several circumstances which did attend the
commission of it: And then beg of God to pardon you. Plead, Christian, plead as
for thy life, that that sin might not eclipse the light of his countenance;
deprive thee of the comforting, and witnessing presence of his Spirit; that it
might not prove either the damnation of thy soul; or the destruction of thy
hopes: And do all this speedily while the wound is fresh and green; before it
rankle and putrify. While you delay your repentance your hearts will grow more
hard; your conscience more insensible; and the neglected bruise which you got
by your fall will grow worse, and worse; and if it be not timely looked after
may prove the death of all your hopes. After the heat and hurry of the day,
does conscience in the cool of the evening cite thee to make thy appearance in
its Court? Summon thee by some sudden rebuke, and surprising terror to hold up
thy guilty hands at its Tribunal? As soon as ever this Domestic Judge reads
the Bill of Indictment, and brings the bloody charge against thee; betake thy
self to a serious repentance, revoke, retract, and wipe out thy sins by an
immediate act of repentance. It Is true, it is infinitely better to be righteous
persons who need no repentance; i. e. to be guilty of as few sinful Luke 15. 7.
miscarriages! as we can: But in case we do fall we have this remedy at hand,
and we must use it. If I sin in the day, I ought to go and be reconciled to
God, and my own Conscience before night. If we take this course our hope which
was withering, languishing, and dying, like grass scorcht with the heat of the
burning Sun; being watered with these showers of penitential tears, may revive,
sprout forth, and flourish again; and be fresh in the very evening, This is the
way to have great peace in Life and at Death.

Fourthly, Daily exercise Faith in Christ; especially as Crucified, and Risen
from the Dead. Christ by his Bloodshed and Death; by his passion, and the
Sacrifice of himself on the Cross has bore the Curse of the Law, satisfied
Divine Justice, and quenched those Flames of Wrath we had kindled: he has
expiated our sins, conquered the Devil, and disarmed Death: he paid our Ransom,
Redeemed us from Hell, which we can hardly think of without horror, and
trembling; and purchased Heaven, where we long and desire to be: he has opened
the Gates of Heaven, and invites and beckons us to enter in; and oh how
powerful are the thoughts of a weeping, bleeding, groaning, and dying Jesus to
revive, and recover the dying hopes of poor Sinners! Do I stand amazed at the
thoughts of my guilt; overwhelmed with the sight of my sins; terrified with
apprehensions of Divine Severity and Justice? Do I in the depths of a
melancholy grief cry out, my hope is gone; woe is me! my hope is gone; can
there be any happiness, any Heaven for such a wretch as I am? how can I, how
dare I hope! oh that I could hope! but alas! the Law Curses and Condemns me;
and I (O miserable man!) have little or no hope: I would think of Christ our
Passover 1 ^or. 5. 7.
Sacrificed for us. In this case what is to be done? Shall I sink under the
burden; abandon all hope; indulge my sorrow and fear, and give way to a
self-tormenting despair? No, I would go to mount Calvary, and set my self at
the foot of my Redeemers Cross: I would often look up to a bleeding and dying
Jesus; think what he suffered, for whom, and for what end; and then I would
embrace this dying Jesus in the Arms of my Faith: and after this how soon would
hope begin to stir? Christ dying on the Cross, and Christ living in the Heart
is the foundation of our hope; and thanks be to God, it is such a Foundation as
cannot be shaken.

I add further, it is infinitely useful to consider, and act Faith in Christ as
risen from the Dead. Had our Lord Jesus only died, and not risen again; had he
been yet sleeping in the Grave as Death's Eternal Prisoner; had he not after a
little time revived, and rose, and l^v'd again all our hope must have been
buried with him in the same Grave: but though he was Dead, he is Alive, and lives
for evermore, Rev. 1. 18.
and to Eye him as risen is very serviceable to quicken our hope: how fully,
even beyond all possibility of doubting, does the Resurrection of Christ assure
us that his Death was valid; his Sacrifice accepted, our debt paid, and justice
satisfied: that he did all that was necessary to expiate our sins; and finished
the work of our Redemption before he gave up the Ghost and Died on the Cross!
with his last, with his dying Breath he cried out, It is finished; and is not
his Resurrection Joh. 19. 30.
a full, convincing, and undeniable evidence of the truth of that saying, did
Justice release, and Divine Power bring him out of Prison? Did God give him an
open, and public acquittance? And is there any ground to suspect the payment
of what we owed, and he undertook to satisfy for? may we not from hence
conclude to our unspeakable comfort, encouragement, and joy the efficacy of his
Death; the validity of his sufferings; and the perfection of his sacrifice?

Moreover, does not the Resurrection of Christ discover the possibility of
ours? nay is it not the cause, and reason, the earnest, and pledge of it? Did
he roll away the Stone from his own Sepulcher; and can he want power to roll it
away from the Graves of his People? Is the Head Risen, and now in Heaven; and
shall the Members always be the Prisoners of Death? is he Risen as the First 1
Co. 15. 23.
Fruits; and shall there not be an Harvest at the end of the World? Oh what
influence has the Resurrection of Christ upon our hope, as we are Christians!
therefore we are said, to be begotten again 1 Pet. 1. 2.
to a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the Dead, and God
raised him 21.
up from the Dead, that our Faith, and Hope might be in God. A daily and lively
exercise of Faith in Christ as Crucified, and Risen would contribute very much
to the Strength, Life, and Vigor of our Hope.

Fifthly, Beg of God to fill you with, and give you his Holy Spirit to beget
and nourish it in you. We can have no good and solid, well-grounded and lasting
Hope except it be given us from above: we cannot get it our selves; we must be
begotten to it: it does not grow and spring up of it self, but must be planted
in us by a Divine Hand; and if it be not watered too by the same Hand, how soon
will it wither and die! if we have good 2 Those. ^. 16.
Hope we have it through Grace; and as God's gift. It is nothing but the Breath
of God can scatter those Fogs and Mists which darken our Souls, and cloud our
Hopes. If we are without Hope let us look up to God for it: if our Hope
decline, and wither, if that which remains, be ready Rev. 3. 2.
to die, let us beg of him his Holy Spirit to quicken, and recover it. The
Spirit of God Works Grace, and then enables the Soul to see it; and then helps
him to rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. Oh Romans 5 2.
how soon can he scatter those fears that torment us; answer those doubts which
for many years have been unresolved; and fill that Heart with Hope which was
almost swallowed up of Despair! How necessary is frequent, fervent Prayer to
keep our Hope alive! If you want go to God for it; fall on thy Knees and say, I
have heard, and Lord! I believe there is an Heaven; and through Grace it is
possible to me, even to me; I see many of my fellow Christians with whom I
pray, hear, and daily converse, living in the joyful hope, and expectation of
it: but I am full of doubts and fears, Lord I have little, or no hope; and if
Death should come while matters are thus with me; how should I ever be able to
die! it is bad to live; but Lord! it is worse to die without hope; oh for hope!
oh for a lively hope of Heaven! oh that on my Deathbed, when I shall have no
hope of Life; I may have hope of Glory! oh give me thy holy Spirit to scatter
my fears, resolve my doubts, calm my Conscience, and enliven my hope! whatever
I am denied while I live, Lord! let me have hope at last: let this Prayer be
heard now, and fully answered when a dying hour comes.

Sixthly, Frequently, and seriously examine the gro^^^, and reason of your
Hope. Many take up their Hope upon very slight, and insufficient grounds; and
the least blast of affliction blows down these Castles they build in the Air:
many times their hope is like Jonah's Gourd, which Jo^ 4^. (...).
sprung up at night, and withered the next Morning. A sound hope is the fruit
of many Prayers and Tears; much watchfulness and holy walking; and we have
reason to suspect that hope we come easily and quickly by. Such an hope may a
little comfort us in the Sunshine of the Day; but not when the dark Night of
Death is coming.

If you would have your hope to be lively at Death, examine carefully the
grounds, and reasons of it; what footing there is for thy hope in the
Scripture. That hope, and no other which has been often brought to the
Touchstone, and tried is like to last when grim, and frightful Death shall
look us in the Face. Ask your own Consciences a reason of that hope that is in
you, and take not up with the first answer; but let this weighty and momentous
question be often repeated, and as often answered; and by this means you will be
less apt to suspect it hereafter: it will then be strong, and lively when
Nature is weak, and feeble; and afford you joy, and ravishment when the Shadows
of Death shall sit on your Eyelids; and your Immortal Spirits are taking Wing,
and flying to the other World. An hope that is taken up no body knows how, or
why will certainly fail, when there is most need of it.

Retire then (Christian) from the World, and set some hours apart for this
great Work, and speak to thy self in some such manner as this: Death, O my
Soul! is coming, and after that men go to Heaven, or to Hell; in which of these
must I be, and dwell for ever? whither must I go when I die? where will death
land me? Shall I go to God, or Devils? Be reeeived up into a Mansion of light
above; or be cast down to a Dungeon of Darkness below? When I shall knock at
the Gate of Heaven, and say Lord, Lord open to me; am I like to be admitted, or
denied? When thou O my Soul! shall leave this Body, shall thou under the
conduct of Holy Angels, go to the joyful assembly above; or be dragged by
Infernal Spirits, who lie watching for their Prey, to the Congregations of
Devils beneath? Thou art going, O my Soul! thou art going to an ETERNAL World:
but is it to an happy, or a miserable one? to ETERNAL Joys, or to ETERNAL
Sorrows? to Heaven, where is an ETERNAL Day; or to Hell, where will be an
ETERNAL Night? It is well with me at present, I am full, and at ease, I want
nothing this World can afford; The lines are fallen to me in a pleasant Psalm.
16. 6.
place; I have a goodly Heritage: but how is it like to go with me hereafter?
Will it be well, or ill with me for ever? O my Soul! ought I not, shall I not
be concerned to know how it will fare with me for ever.

Hope of Heaven is very common; who almost among the sons of men does not hope
for it? But how many are mistaken now; and disappointed hereafter! How many
have lived in hope, and dyed in hope, and after all been for ever shut out! Oh
how many have been imposed upon by Satan, cheated, and deceived by their own
hearts; and am not I in danger of being so too? Is not Satan as cunning and
subtle now as he was then? Is not my heart as base, false, deceitful, and
treacherous as theirs; and am not I as likely to be blinded by self-love as
they were? How much hope is vain, false, and groundless, serving only to delude
men at present, and shame them for ever! How many have been buoyed up, and
flusht with hope on a Deathbed; and in a little time (Doleful moment)
swallowed up of total, final, and remediless despair! What if this should be my
case? What if it should be so with me?

Do I hope for Heaven? O my Soul! of what kind is my hope? What was the Spring?
What is the Nature? What are the Effects? What Stamp is it of? Whose
Superscription does it bear? Is it any better; is it any thing more than the
hope of the Hypocrite which shall perish? Job 8. 13.
Will it endure a trial at the Bar of Conscience; and at the Bar of God too?
Have I any one promise in all the book of God to countenance my hope; and
warrant my expectation? This question is weighty, and important, and to mistake
here may be very fatal, and is infinitely dangerous: Therefore tell me O my
Soul! what manner of hope is thine? Thus, and thus I find it is with them who
have a good hope; Is it so with me or no? I am loath to be deceived, afraid of
being mistaken, therefore O my Soul! deal plainly, and truly with me. O my
Conscience! take the candle of the Lord, and search me, and faithfully tell me
(as thou will answer the neglect another day) whether my hope be sound, and
good or no.

If you would take this course what a confirmed hope might you have in Life,
and what a lively hope in Death? An hope that would mitigate the terrors, abate
the horror, assuage the pangs, and sweeten the agonies of a dying hour. With
such a hope you may die not only safely, but comfortably too: go to your Graves
not only in peace but with triumph. While other men's Chambers are filled with
disconsolate sighs, and groans, yours may ring with acclamations of victory,
and songs of praise: While the awakned, and despairing sinner is crying out;
must I die! must I die! O my weeping friends! must I die! your looks may be
pleasant, your countenances cheerful, and your hearts transported with joy: You
may be able to welcome Death, and triumph over the Grave; you may have such a
glorious prospect of the happiness above, that you may praise God with your
last, with your dying breath; and Hallelujah may be your last word in this
World as well as your first in the next.

Infer. IX. Hence we may learn how to carry it with reference to those
Righteous, and Holy Relations of ours who had such hope in their Death. Are any
of our holy relations dead; and did they die in hope; and is there no duty
incumbent on us who are left behind? Have we nothing to do, but to provide for
their funeral, and follow them to the grave? Alas! as to them when we have done
this we have done all we can for them. When we have got them a Coffin,
purchased a Grave for, and laid them in it, we can do no more for them* But at
such a time is there nothing to be done by us for our selves? Does not the
Death of an Husband, a Wife, a Father, a Mother call upon surviving Relations
to improve it? At such a time God calls, Providence calls, and Death calls upon
us to mind our duty. I shall not largely treat on this Head, but only show what
is to be done by us, with reference to them as they died in HOPE.

First We should take notice of, and remark their happy, and comfortable end.
We should observe, register, and remember Gods kindness, and love to; his
gracious and merciful dealings with them in their last sickness, and on a
Deathbed. It cannot but be useful to take notice of the miserable end of many
wicked men. Is Conscience awakned, and all their sins set in order before them?
Are they filled with horror, and anguish? Is some of the everlasting fire
flasht in their Faces? Does the Devil begin to torment them before the time? Is
God a terror to Mat. 8. 29.
them and they a terror to themselves? Are they weary of Life; and yet afraid
of Death? Are they rackt and tortured; and do they speak nothing but the
language of Hell before they come there? Are they cast at the Bar of
Conscience, before they are condemned at the Tribunal of their Supreme Judge?
Do they sensibly feel what horror attends the final doom? Depart from me ye
cursed: Mat 25 41.
Do they cry out, and tremble as if they now heard it pronounced by their
eternal Judge? Does a righteous God commission Conscience to witness against,
Judge and Condemn them; to sting, and lash them in their last hours for the
sins of their past Life? And ought we not to take notice of, and improve all
this? May not such a sight; the remembrance of what we saw, and heard in that
hour awaken our Consciences, startle our Spirits, affect, and warm our hearts?
May it not tend ^^ show us the Justice of God, the evil of (...) and the
infinite danger of neglectin^ to hearken to the voice of God while it is c^^led
to day? May it not excite our diligence, quicken our repentance, and assist our
preparations for Death, and judgment? May it not Arm us against the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil; and make us more resolved to hearken to the voice of the
Spirit; the checks of our own Conscience, and the compassionate calls of mercy?
Would it not make us know the worth of time, and put us upon husbanding,
redeeming and improving it to the best ends; the Glory of God, and Salvation of
our Souls? Would it not make us love Christ, prize his sacrifice, and value his
blood more? Would it not put us upon reviewing our lives, searching our hearts,
and examining our state, and amending what has been amiss? Oh how much good may
we get by the death of poor awakned sinners; and how great is our folly, and
sin in case we don't!

And can it be unprofitable, and useless to mark, observe, and remember the
more happy, and comfortable end of the Righteous? Shall we take no notice, what
is the end, issue, and conclusion of an Holy Life? We should remember how they
lived, and how they died.

Did God in their sickness furnish them with patience, and calmness,
submission, and resignation to his Holy Will? Were their Thoughts composed,
Minds settled, Spirits calm, their peace undisturbed, their Joy great, and their
Hope lively? Was there a willingness to die, and a desire to depart that they
might be with Christ? did God resolve their Doubts; scatter the Clouds, and
help them to overcome their fears? Has such an one been enabled to say? Lord! I
am thine, I lie at thy Foot, here I am, do to me, dispose of me, remove, or
continue my pains, as thou will; let me be well or sick; live or die; be
recovered or removed as thou please. Lord! if thou have any more Work for me
to do, I am willing to live, and content my happiness should yet be deferred;
and I Will acknowledge thy Grace if thou will yet use me, and make me an
Instrument of thy Glory: but if my work be done, and the number of my years be
accomplished, I am willing Lord! I am willing now to die: if it be thy pleasure
now to remove me, if this sickness must be my last, and end in death; if to die
now be really best for me, and most for thy glory; I will not draw back, I am
ready at thy call, command, and pleasure to lay down this Body: and thanks be
to God I can heartily say the Will of the Lord be done. Have any of your
Christian Friends, or Holy Relations died thus? Heavenly frame! Blessed end!
Glorious triumph over Death, and the Grave! Ought we not, and may it not be
infinitely useful to mark and remember this? How much may it contribute to
maintain the Life of Religion, and the Power of Godliness in us! may not the
memory of what we observed, and saw at such a time confirm us in our holy
Choice; strengthen our Faith, and thoroughly convince us Religion is not a vain
thing? Will it not recommend the Holy Ways of God, set off Religion, and make
all holy exercises more sweet, and pleasant to us? but in particular, may not
an observing how they died afford matter of encouragement, and support to us
when we have sad, and melancholy Thoughts as to our own departure? how often does
many a poor, sincere Christian in bitterness cry out? How shall I with a
Christian Patience, an humble submission, and an entire resignation bear long,
painful, and tedious sickness? how shall I be able to conquer the fear, and
submit to the stroke of Death? How shall I be able to grapple with that Enemy,
and encounter the King of Terrors? How shall I be able with joy, and
cheerfulness; without murmuring, and repining to obey my Summons to Death and
Judgment? When I do but suppose my self sick, weak, and full of pain; when I
seriously think of my Coffin, and Grave I tremble: but Lord! what shall I do
when it comes to the trial! thus it is with many, and has it not been so with
you at one time, or other; and may it not be so again? and if it should, how
may the memory of the happy end of holy friends, and relations administer to
your support! when thou have the Death of such an one fresh in thy thoughts
thou may say; why art thou cast down O my ^sal. 42. 5.
Soul? and why art thou thus disquieted within me? Is it because this body must
die? How many holy ones are dead before me? They were weak, frail, and
imperfect as I am, but God furnished them with patience, courage, and strength;
quieted their Mind; calmed their Spirits, and hushed their ruffling passions,
and when my hour comes I hope God will help me to die too. Have not I the same
God to depend upon; the same promises to encourage me; the same Jesus to stand
by me; and the same Holy Spirit to assist me? I remember my holy Father died
with comfort; my holy Mother made an happy, and peaceable End; and why may not
I? Death is conquered, it is conquered. And the fear of it may be overcome, I
have seen it may; and why should the fear of it keep me in a perpetual bondage?
How serviceable may it be to remember how other holy Men, and Women have died
before us!

Secondly, Another duty with reference to those who died in hope; is to give
thanks to God for those assistances, and that Grace which was vouchsafed to
them ^^ a dying hour. Surviving Relations, who were Eyewitnesses of God's
goodness to them who are departed should own, acknowledge, and praise God for
it when they are dead, and gone. The dead cannot Isal. 38 19.
praise God; but the living, the living they should. When they were sick you
did (I am sure you should) pray for them; and being dead, and having died in
hope you should give thanks to the Father of Mercies for his Mercy to them; for
his goodness to them in the close, in the evening, in the concluding act of
their lives. Though (thanks be to God) we know nothing of praying for the Dead;
yet we may, and ought to praise God for his Grace to them; and especially for
that Grace which enabled them to go off, and die so well. Did God in the
evening visit their Souls, speak peace to their Consciences, publish their
Pardon, and carry them beyond the fear of Death, and the Grave? Did the
Comforter come, and did they find, and feel he was; before death did? did God
open the Eyes of the Soul to read their Evidences for Heaven, before death
closed those of the Body? did God shine in upon their Souls, and in the
eveningtime was it light? did you hear them speak Zech 14. 7.
of their departure without Tears, and Groans; nay, with Joy, and Triumph? did
you see a Calm upon their Spirits? did you see them compose themselves to die
in the same manner they were wont to do when they went to sleep; with little,
or no difference, only an unusual coldness? and did they thus die? Lord what
praise is due to Free Grace! Is it not the duty, and interest of the Husband to
bless God for his mercy to his departed Wife? Is it not the duty of Children to
offer up a Sacrifice of praise to their God, and their Fathers God, for the
seasonable help, the gracious supports, and the suitable comforts afforded to a
Father, to a Mother in a dying hour? should not as many praises be given to God
for his mercy to their Souls as Tears shed over their Coffins, and Graves? what
praises! oh what hearty praises are due to God; that they set sail with a fair
Wind, an happy Tide, and got safe to Shore! is it not melancholy, and sad to
see such near Relations full of doubts, and fears crying out, I cannot die; I
dare not die; and did God prevent all this by giving them hope and the joy of
hope too, before they left us to go to him? and should not God have the Glory
that is due unto his name? Our sacrifices of praise should mount up to Heaven
in a pure, and bright flame, and there meet the Souls of our deceased Relatives
Thanksgiving and Praise is a debt which holy persons, who were thus priviledg'd
in their last moments; would have their surviving Relations pay to God in their
name, and stead.

Thirdly, Another Duty, is a careful imitation of their holy Lives. This is a
special branch of that Communion we have with departed Saints: and the nearer
they were to us in the flesh, the more careful we should be to imitate them.
How does it concern Children who are left behind to follow the example, tread
in the steps of an holy Father, or a godly Mother! oh how should they endeavor
to be the living Images of their deceased Parents gone from them to God! how
greatly does it concern such to labor after the same Virtues, and Graces; to
accustom themselves to the same holy practices, and religious exercises; to
keep up the old friendship there has been between God and their Family; that
the Covenant Relation might not be broken in them!

Were they humble and meek; quiet and patient; holy and heavenly? were they
devoted to God, and to the service of the Redeemer, and did they live, walk,
and act as such? did they slight the World, and all the gay and charming
vanities of it; and fill up every Relation with duty? were they given to secret
Prayer, did they keep up Communion with God, adorn their holy profession, and
live suitably to it at all times? did they carefully husband, and redeem their
Time, wisely employ, and improve all their Talents? were they kind, and
merciful, liberal and charitable; and did they live as Heirs of the Grac of
God; and Candidates for Immortality; and the expectants 1 Pet. 3. 7.
of a future Glory? were they burning and shining lights? an honor to their
Profession, a credit to Religion and a peculiar Grace, and Ornament to the
particular Churches they were Members of? did they carry it toward God, and
Man according to the rules of their holy Religion? did they converse with God,
live in Heaven, and prepare for Death and Judgment? oh how worthy is this the
imitation of them who are left behind!

How often is wickedness and vice; profaneness and irreligion transmitted from
Father to Son? and how do their Children act as if they were only born to
perpetuate the War against Heaven; and were only left to fill up the measure of
their Father's iniquities! how often do some particular Vices, or Vice run in a
blood, and are propagated from generation to generation till the whole family
of these accursed Sinners is extinct! and oh what a shame, and pity is it, that
Piety and Religion which are the honor and glory of a Family; which make a man
excellent while he lives, and render his memory precious when he is dead; which
render us dear to God and useful to others; should not outlive the present
Generation!

See more of this in the Epistle.

To stir us up to a careful imitation of such holy relations; what argument can
be more prevalent than this before us? To consider what is the happy conclusion
of an holy life, viz. hope in Death. At such a time every one is ready to cry
out with Balaam, Oh that I might die the death Numb. 23. 10.
of the righteous: and my latter end might be like to his! but what a vain wish
is this, if our lives be unlike to theirs? the Children of holy Parents more
especially should strive to be followers of them, and keep God among them. Was
God (should such an one say) my Fathers God, and my Mothers God, and shall I
forsake or cast him off? Oh what a sin, and shame is this! have I such a fair
Copy to write after, and will it not greatly reflect on me if mine be full of
blots and blurs? When you are tempted, remember you are the offspring of them
who were the friends, and lovers of God: that you are come of an holy stock;
and then say, would my holy Father, my godly Mother who are now with God have
done thus, and thus? Are they acting the part of holy Angels in Heaven; and
shall I, the Son, the Daughter of such Religious Parents be acting the Devil
upon Earth? Will not the very dust of these holy Relations rise up in Judgment
against, and condemn me? O my Soul! let me remember with what comfort they
lived; with with hope they died; and with what joy they shall rise again: what
foretasts of Heaven, how much of their reward they hadon a deathbed, and let
me charge it upon my self in a solemn manner, to be a follower of them, so far
as they were followers of Christ

When an holy Father, or Mother dies methinks this is the farewell language: I
have resigned, and devoted my self to God, and by his grace I have been enabled
in some measure to live suitably to such a state. It Is true I have had my
imperfections, and failings, many infirmities have attended me which I heartily
bewail, and unfeignedly lament; but I have (thanks be to God) I have the
testimony of my Conscience, I have been sincere, and upright; and now at last
God is beginning to give me the rewards of a holy Life. I have had in this
sickness much from God, and I hope for more: I am full, I am full of joy; I
long, I long to be gone; would God my work were done and I were gone: Religion
is not a vain thing, and now I find it is not; I have served a good Master, I
have been his, I have lived as his and now upon a Deathbed he treats me as his
own, as a Friend; as a Servant, nay even as a Child: I do not repent of my
Prayers, and Tears, my Watching against, and Wrestling with sin, my Circumspect
walking, and my Holy Life, of any of the pains I took, the endeavors I used to
be truly Religious. Repent! no, no, I do not, I thank God for h^s grace
bestowed on me, and that his grace was not altogether in vain. Though I rely
only on the merits of Christ, and desire to be found and accepted in him; yet I
do, and can rejoice that my works prove my Faith to be more than a dead one: My
fears are gone, my doubts are answered, my peace is settled, my Conscience is
quiet, my joy full, and I can die; and now by these my last comforts, by these
my dying hopes, I beseech, beg of, charge and conjure you O my dear Children!
Whom I shall leave in a wicked World to Serve, Please, and Honor God. What
Errata's there have been in my Life let them be corrected, and amended in
yours: And wherein grace has enabled me to be a follower of Christ, do you be
followers of me; I now leave you to go to the Father; but this do, and God be
with you, Amen.

When Holy Relations are snatched away, dead, and gone what does more nearly
concern them who are left than to study and imitate their Holy Lives; to tread
in their steps, follow their example, and write after their Copy? Oh what a
laudable ambition is it, to strive who shall come nearest to the Original, and
whose Copy shall be fairest!

Fourthly, Another duty incumbent on us, Is to be more speedy, serious and
solemn in making preparation for our own departure. Thoughts of Death should be
serious, lively, and affecting, and it is our sin, and folly if any of them be
cold, flat, dull, and ineffectual. Death carries that awful sound, it is of
that infinite concern, and importance that every view, thought, and glance
should be improved by us. We should neither think, nor speak of this solemn,
and weighty thing, Death, without concern. But alas! while we only entertain
our selves with mere contontem^^ation, and naked speculation, how little do the
best of us advance in real piety! How seldom is it that these thoughts make any
deep, through, and lasting impressions upon our hearts! perhaps they scare and
terrify us at present, and produce some short-lived pangs of a gasping
devotion; but how few are the better for walking among graves, and Tombs!

By reason of a crowd of worldly business, secular affairs, present prosperity
and flattering hopes of its continuance; through vain sports, and foolish
pastimes; carnal mirth, and sensual joy; the crafty insinuations of a subtle
Devil, and the fly suggestions of a deceitful heart most of these thoughts come
short of that end they are proper to attain. How few alas! how few in this
dying World of ours, which every day, and hour is changing its inhabitants, are
reformed, amended, and made better! don't they love the World, pursue vanity,
follow their pleasures, neglect duty, forget God, and themselves; have they not
as strong an appetite after the little things of time, and are not their
affections to the great things of Eternity as cold, and flat as ever?

But if it be so when we think of Death; should it be so after we have seen it,
and God has been holding the frightful picture of it before our Eyes? If this
will not affect, and awaken (the Lord pity us) what will? When a near and dear
Relation is gone, the living should prepare to follow: And if such an one died
in hope, it should add Life and Vigor to our endeavors; for in them we see
that to be prepared is no impossible thing. After such a Providence it is
seasonable, advisable, and may be very profitable, and useful to make this
ensuing Reflection.

I am but poor Dust, a crawling Worm, breathing Clay, a sinful Creature; I must
certainly, and I may quickly die: After a few more moments, and hours I may;
after a few more weeks, and years I must. Ere long alas! in a little, little
time it will be with me as it now is with this near, and dear Relation of mine.
My breath will fail, my pulse be low, my tongue faulter, my countenance change,
my visage will be marred, my looks will be frightful and my body cold, and
stiff: It is his, or her turn to die now, ere long it will be mine. May not I
be the next person that falls sick; the next time this grave is opened may it
not be to receive me? The next Funeral out of this Family, may it not be mine?
The next Arrow that is shot may it not glance by others, strike me, and leave
me dead on the spot? Do I think of living many years, that it will be a long
time before my present Lease be expired? Vain thought! do I talk of another
year, or day? This may be my last, and for ought I know it will be so: And is
it not, O my Soul! my grand duty, my great concern, and ought it not to be my
chief care to make my peace with God, to obtain the pardon of my sin, and an
interest in Christ, to get grace wrought, and the evidence of it that I may Die
in Hope? That on a Deathbed I may firmly depend on the mercy of God; in my
sorrowful moments trust in the Merits of Christ; and with my last breath commit
my Soul to the care of my Redeemer; with Faith, and Confidence, saying, as some
of the last words I shall ever speak in this World: Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit? Act. 7. 59.


Is one dead, and another dead? is my Father, or my Mother, my Husband, or my
Wife dead? and shall not I prepare for the evil day that is coming apace, and
will be quickly here? in that day, in that moment I, and my dearest friends
must part: in that moment, my Soul and Body must be Divorced; in that moment
(awful thought!) my Soul must go to judgment, stand at the Bar of that God
whose purity is untainted; whose holiness is unspotted; whose justice is
impartial; whose power is irresistible; whose truth is invariable; whose anger
is as a flaming Fire; whose glory is amazing; whose Majesty is tremendous; and
whose sentence will be righteous, final, and irreversible; and shall I be vain
and worldly, slothful, and negligent; careless, and secure; merry and sportive
when I may have such a speedy summons? Shall I dare to be so, with the last
groans of my dying Father, or Mother in mine Ears; when the language thereof
was O my Children, prepare to follow me?

When Ienter'd the dark, and silent Chamber; stood by the Bedside of my dying
Father, of my departing Mother; when I saw the last breath, and what a change
one minute made, when I heard the last sob, and groan; the sight of mine Eyes
and the hearing of my Ears did affect my Heart: every thing I then saw, and
heard made some impression upon me; my thoughts of Death, Eternity, and a World
to come were more serious, affecting, and moving than at other times, when I
saw with what peace, and comfort, hope, and joy they died, then thought I with
my self, Lord! what is Grace, Christ, and Pardon of sin, thy favor, love, and
hope of Heaven worth; oh that I might thus die! and shall these thoughts die,
and come to nothing, when my dead are buried out of my sight? shall I forget
their hopes, and my own wish, purpose, and resolution? when their Funeral is
over, shall my care to provide for my own be over too? Lord! revive these
thoughts, and let them not wear off; having seen the happy death, the
comfortable end of so near, and dear a Relation; I hope I shall wisely improve
this Memento of my own Mortality, be more speedy, and solemn in making
preparation for my own Change: assist, and help me Lord!

Fifthly, Another duty is to moderate sorrow for the death of such holy
Relations, and Friends who died in Hope. Mourning for the dead is neither
uncomely, nor unlawful: Nature commands, and Religion allows us to pay this
Tribute at the Grave of deceased Relatives. Religion only corrects, it does not
root out natural affections: it is only a Pruning Knife to cut off the
luxuriant Branches; not an Axe to cut down this Tree at the Root. Religion is a
Bridle to curb, and restrain; but not an Opiate to stupifie. We are not
required to cease to be Men when we become Christians; Grace and good Nature
are not such Enemies that they cannot dwell together; nay, usually the former
thrives and flourishes best where there is most of the latter. We may lawfully
shed some Tears over the Grave of deceased Friends, upon such occasions have
not holy men had their set and appointed days of mourning? To die unlamented;
to be thrown into a disconsolate hole of the Earth without the solemnity of a
sigh, groan, or tear is it not a sign there was but little worth in the dead,
or a great deal of ill nature in the living? nay, is it not threatened as a
punishment? Therefore thus says the Lord concerning Jehojakim the Son of
Josiah King of Judah, they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my ^rother! or
ah my Sister! they shall not lament for him, saying, Ah Lord, or ah his glory!
Jer. 22. 18. Holy Job mourned for his Children when Dead: he met with many
trials, and afflictions before, the Sabeans and Chaldeans had robbed, and
plundered him: Fire from Heaven had destroyed his substance; and yet he bore
this with an heroic patience, and a noble greatness of mind; we don't find he
uttered a groan, or dropped a tear upon this account: but when he received the
heavy tidings that his Sons and D^^^hters were dead then he arose, and ren^ his
Mantle, and shaved his head; the usual signs of a solemn mourning; in this he
was not guilty: for God himself bore him ^itness that in all this he sinned
not, Job 1. 20, 22.

To cry out at such a time, Alas! my Father, alas! my Mother, alas! my
Brother! is but to speak in the language of a Prophet, 1 Kin. 13. 30.

A Father dead! a Mother dead! and may we not be sensible of such a stroke, and
mourn for such a breach? Are they dead who under God were the Authors of life
to us, and ought we not to mourn? mourning at the Funeral of such Relations was
permitted even to the Priests, Lev. 21. 1. David when he would express the
greatness of his sorrow sets it out by this; I bowed down heavily, as one that
mourns for his MOTHER. All funeral Psalm. 35. 14.
sorrow is not unlawful.

Shall death, pale, cold, grim, and frightful death knock at our door, enter
our house, come into our family, captivate, and snatch away a principal member
of it? shall death turn the desire of our Eyes into a breathless corpse, spoil
the beauty, the the Tongue, close the Eyes, stop the Ears, Fetter the Hands,
and shackle the Feet of a dear Relation? is their life gone, and breath stopped,
and are they turned into cold, clammy Earth? must we see their faces, hear
their voices, enjoy their company which many, and many a time we have with so
much delight, and pleasure, no more? must we have the benefit of their
instructions, and counsels, prayers, and tears no more? are they who a while
ago were many ways useful to us now, in one single moment, become like to the
Heathen Idols; which have Eyes, and See not; Ears and Hear not, Noses, and
Smell not; a mouth, and Taste not; Hands, and Handle not; Feet, and Walk not;
and have we not cause to mourn? what! can we see our dear friends, those whom
we laid in our Bosoms, and Loved as our selves become the spoil, and triumph of
our common Enemy, Death, and not weep! what! can we thrust a Wife, a Mother
into a scanty Coffin; crowd them into a narrow Grave without a Tear! Solomon
tells us there is a time to weep and a time to mourn: is not such a time as
this the season for Ecles. 3. 4.
both?

But though we may and ought to mourn; yet we Christians who are acquainted with
that life, and immortality which is brought 2 Timothy 1. 10.
to light by the Gospel, should bound our grief, and moderate our funeral
sorrows; especially with reference to such as died in Hope. How many with
Rachel mourn for their Children, and will not be comforted, because they are
not! how many upon such sad occasions abandon themselves to an obstinate
sorrow; lay the reins loose upon the neck of their headstrong passions, and
then foolishly, cry out they cannot bridle them! how many have weakened Nature,
destroyed their Health, and hastened their own Death by excessive grief for
that of another! when these Waters swell too high, overflow the Bank, and
threaten to Deluge us it is time to sink them. Now to check an immoderate
sorrow what can be more useful and serviceable, more proper or powerful than to
consider they died in hope? may we not more easily, with more submission, and
less reluctance commit the Body to the Dust when we have ground to hope the
Soul (which is by far the better part, and to which certainly we owe most love)
is in Heaven? may not Gods Grace, and Mercy to them before their departure;
abundantly comfort us after their dissolution! we have more, infinitely more
reason to groan, and weep (Lord! forgive us we do not) over a wicked Relation
that is dead while he lives; than 1 Timothy 5. 6.
over a godly Relation that lives though he dies. That wicked, profane son of
thine who lives to thy shame, and Gods dishonor calls for more Tears; than thy
godly, and religious Son who is dead, i. e. gone from his Earthly to his
Heavenly Father. Lug^s Corpus a quo rec^ssit anima? Luge animam a qua recessit
Deus. A^g. De Sanct. 13.
Do thou weep over the Body from which the Soul is gone? weep over that Soul
from which God is departed. (...). Chrysostom. in Phil. Hom. 3.
Let us (says another) lament sinners not only when they die; but while they
live: but let us rejoice over the righteous not only while they live; but when
they are dead.

If we would not offend while we sorrow; if we would weep as if we wept not; 1
Cor. 8. 30.
let us seriously consider with what great, blessed and glorious hopes our Holy
Relations died; and that now they are receiving the end of their Faith and Hope
the Salvation of their Souls. Cannot we 1 Pet. 1. 9.
behold the Pale, Wan, Ghastly, and Breathless Corpse they have left behind,
without wetting it with an immoderate shower of Tears? Cannot we follow them to
their long home; look into the deep, and dark, frightful and lonesome grave in
which we must leave them, without an excess of sorrow? Let us look up and
consider whither they are gone; what they now are, enjoy, and do; what
employment, and society they have what rivers of pleasure they are drinking of,
and what angelical joys they are now filled with. Is their Pilgrimage over, are
they got to the end of their Journey? Are they gone home; and are they now with
God? After many threatening storms, and tempests, many fears of shipwreck, and
drowning, has Death safely landed them, and are they got well into Harbor?
Have they done their work, finished their course, and are they now receiving
the reward? The reward they long prayed, and waited for? Is their warfare
accomplished, their conflict with sin, and all the legions of darkness now over,
and the crown obtained? Are they gone from this to a better World, to a World
more holy, and happy, more quiet, and peaceable? Are they gone from Earth to
Heaven? To Heaven where they longed, wished, and groaned to be? To Heaven where
their treasure, hearts, and hopes were long ago? To Heaven where there is all
good and no evil; all that can be thought of, wished, and desired to make up a
complete and entire happiness? Is their trial over, and their account delivered
up with joy, and has God said, Well done good and faithful Servants? Have they
exchanged Earth for Heaven; Sickness for Health; Sorrow for Joy; pain for Ease;
Trouble for Rest; Groans for Songs; Tears for Triumph, a State of Sin for a
State of perfect Holiness? Are they past, for ever past those difficulties, and
dangers, snares and temptations which we are liable to, and must encounter?
Have they done wrestling and fighting; watching and striving; complaining and
weeping? Are they gone to the true land of the living; and are they beyond the
pain, the fear, the possibility of dying any more for ever? Are they gone from
a Sickbed, a Crazy Body, an house of Clay, a Tabernacle of the Flesh that was
always shaking, and tottering to a mansion in their Fathers house, to a City
that has foundations, whose Builder and maker is God? Are they gone to their
own country, and their own People? To God the Judge of all, to Christ the
Mediator of the new Covenant; to an innumerable company of Angels, and the
Spirits of just men made perfect. Have they the Beatifical vision, the
ravishing fight of the Man Christ Jesus in all his glory? Are they in Heaven,
and are they glad they are? Without the least thought, wish, or desire to
return to this wretched Earth of ours again? Did they run their Christian race
with holy patience, and constancy, and have they won the prize? Are they
reaping the fruit of all their prayers, and tears, religious duties, and holy
endeavors? Are our departed Relations who the other day were weeping, sinning,
and suffering with us; now sat down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Confessors, and Martyrs in the Kingdom of God
above? Did they live in the fear, die in the favor of God, and shall they rise
in his love? Did they live in comfort, and at last die in peace? Are their
Souls gone to Heaven, and does their Flesh rest in hope? And is not this
enough, and more than enough to check an intemperate sorrow? Can we as it were
hear the separated Soul of one whom we loved, knew and conversed with a while
ago; or of one who was related to us in the flesh, upon its first arrival at
yonder blessed World, with wonder and admiration crying out; Glorious Sight!
Blessed Company! Happy Place! Where am I? What a change is this? What Music do
I hear? Is this Heaven Incomparable place! Is this glorious Mansion for me?
Admirable grace! Must I be with God, and Christ; and be with them for ever?
Unspeakable Happiness! Must I O ye Holy Angels; and glorified Spirits, be one
of your Number? Excellent Company! But is this Heaven? Is this the Heaven I
heard of so often? What I was told (Alas! poor mortals do not know what Heaven
is) was not one half of what I now find. Is this Heaven? Am I in it? must I be
here for ever? Glory to thee O God the Father for preparing it: Glory to thee O
God the Son for purchasing it: Glory to thee O God the Holy Ghost for preparing
me for Heaven. And yet immoderately weep at the thoughts of his departure?

Had they hope on a deathbed, and are they now in possession of all they hoped
for, and have not we more cause to weep for our selves who are left behind,
than for them who are gone? have not we more reason to wish? Lord! that my work
were done, my Soul prepared, and my Account ready that I might be gone! than
wish oh that I had my Wife! my Father, my Mother again! we that are Christians
design Heaven; Heaven is the blessed Port we are bound for, and shall we repine
and grieve that our holy Relations are safely Landed before us? Is this our
love to 'em? oh what abundant provision has God made for the support of his
people under such afflictive Providence? And what relief might we have during
the days of our mourning from these and the like considerations? And Thanks be
to God we upon whom Death has lately made a breach, have this to comfort us.
Concerning this Relation of ours, and Servant of God I will not say any thing:
the secrecy she always affected, and my relation to her forbids me to blow the
Trumpet at the mouth of her Grave. She is Dead; dead! She is fallen asleep in
Jesus; the Will of the Lord is done: God grant that I in particular, and the
rest she has left behind, who a while ago had a loving, careful, and tender
Mother, but now have none may SO Live, and SO Die. For blessed Rev. 14. 13.
are the Dead which die in the Lord: they rest from their Labors; and their
Works do follow them.

THE END.
DEATHBED Reflections.

DEATHBED Reflections: Suitable to the preceding DISCOURSE, And Proper for a
RIGHTEOUS MAN in his Last Sickness.
I. This World, and all in it is changeable; Man in particular is so. Death is
certain, and unavoidable. What is to be done by a Righteous Man in his
Sickness, supposing it to be his last.
ALL things under the Sun are subject to change; and what is so, sooner, or
later will have an end. THIS World, and the fashion thereof; 1 Cor. 7. 31.
and all that is in it, is passing away. God is the same yesterday, to day, and
for Heb 13. 7.
ever: but nothing else is, or can be so. Nothing here below is like a
Mountain, which cannot be moved by those mighty, and sportive Waves which beat
and dash against it; but like a Feather, which is driven hither, and thither,
with the smallest Breath. This World of ours (though vain Mortals are foolishly
fond of, and excessively dote upon it:) as it had a BIRTH; so it shall have a
FUNERAL day: the World's Morning and Noon is past; and the Evening is at hand.
All these things shall be dissolved, Nature groan, 2 Pet. 3. 11.
die, and give up the Ghost: Lord! how quickly shall the Angel lift up his
hand, and swear by him that lives for ever, and ever, that time shall be no
more! the old World was drowned with Water: this v. 6. v. 7.
shall be destroyed, or resined by Fire; though according to his promise, we look
for New Heavens v. 13.
and a new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

In this mutable World nothing is more sickle, and inconstant; frail and
uncertain; vain, and changeable than Man, and what belongs to, and makes up his
Earthly happiness. How uncertain are Prove. 23. 5
Riches! may they not make themselves Wings, and fly away; and have they not
often done so? may not what we have been toiling, laboring, and sweating for,
many years, be gone from us in a few hours?

Though Riches and Wealth Descend from Father to Son; yet how often does Providence
cut off the entail; and he never enjoy what he was born to? though a careful and
provident Father may leave his Son a fair Estate, and a good Inheritance; he
may live in want, and die a Beggar, and not leave enough to buy a Cossin, and
purchase a Grave: some unhappy accident or other may strip him naked, before
death does.

How uncertain is health, and strength without which all other comforts are
insipid! if I am strong one day; may I not be weak the next? if I am well in
the morning; may I not be sick before evening? if I am at ease to day; may I
not be rackt, tortured, and pained to morrow? Lord! when thou with rebukes
correctest Psalm. 39. 11.
man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume away like a moth: surely
every man is vanity. All these changes are but melancholy presages of, and
preparatory to our great, and last: when we shall be changed from living Dust,
into breathless Clay. There is a time to die.

Since the first Age; the first Man Adam, Eccl. 3. 2.
death has been reigning, and yet death is not satisfied; nor the Grave yet
glutted with Carcasses. This Earth often changes its Inhabitants: one Generation
comes, and Eccle. 1. 4.
another goes: our Ancestors moulder into Dust, crowd closer together, and at
length become Graves to bury us. LIFE! what is it? A shadow which quickly
vanishes; a Vapor which suddenly disappears; a Flower that fades; and Grass
which quickly withers and dies. LIFE! what is it? a Candle that lies at the
mercy of every stormy and blustering Wind; a Lamp that burns a while, but will
go out for want of Oil, to maintain the languishing and expiring flame. If we
search the Records of the Grave we shall find as many proofs, and witnesses of
our mortality, as there are rotten Bones and Skulls. How many Infants are only
born, live, weep, and die! So that even out of the Mouths Psalm. 8. 2.
of these Babes, and Sucklings we may learn this sad, and certain truth; a time
to die. How many young Men has Death mowed down in the Morning! how many of
these has the cold hand of Death undrest before Evening; and laid them to sleep
in a Bed of Dust even at Noonday, and do not they cry in the Ears of the
living; there is a time to die? Does not every Fever that scorches us; every
fit of the Stone, Gout, and Cholick that puts us on the Rack; every Ague that
shakes the Walls, and loosens the Pins of this Earthly Tabernacle; every
Dropsy that threatens to Drown us; every Palsy that benum's; every Lethargy
that lulls us asleep repeat over this melancholy, and awakening truth; There is
a time to die? verily O my Soul! every Man in his best estate is altogether
vanity.

What is true concerning all, and every one of Adam's Posterity; Lord! help me
to apply to my self in particular: to believe, consider, weigh, and work upon
my Heart this common truth; I must die. Let me not only have some general,
notional, and speculative knowledge; but a particular, serious, warm, and
practical one; a knowledge that may be useful, and serviceable to the best
purposes; a knowledge that may awe my Conscience, warm my Soul, and powerfully
influence my Heart and Life. It is impossible to be ignorant of this: but Lord!
how cold, unactive, dull, and ineffectual were all thoughts of this kind when I
was well, and strong! oh that they may make more powerful, and abiding
impressions upon my Heart, now I am sick, and weak!

These very pains I now feel; this disease, this present affliction which makes
me sigh, and groan; this sickness which I suppose will be my last tell me, I
must die; and call upon me to prepare for such a time that now cannot be far
off. Lord, help me in this my great, and last work! oh that sense and feeling
might help my Faith! this fire warm my Heart; and what I now feel, prepare me
for my last pains, pangs, and conflicts, which are like to be much sharper! I
have visited others, some of them my near and dear Relations in their sickness;
I have seen them sick, weak, and full of pain, I have seen their cold sweats,
their mortal tremblings, and heard their last and dying groans; and now it is my
turn to be sick, and my time to die. Die! how hard, and difficult a work is
this! of what great concern, and everlasting importance! Die! who does, or can
know what it imports but those who are dead, and gone? I thought it hard to see
my Friend, my Father, my Mother dye; but shall I not find it more difficult now
I am to dye my self? the Messenger of Death has laid hold on me; I believe this
sickness will be my last; I have no hope of recovery: I have been sick, and God
has recovered me; at the Mouth of the Grave, and God has brought me back; I
have gone from my Sickbed and Chamber to my Shop and Trade; but now I verily
believe I shall do so no more: my Sun is setting; my Glass is run, there are
but a few remaining Sands; the Grave with open mouth is waiting for me, and in
a little time I shall drop into it. Most Holy Lord, assist me now, and leave me
not; through thy Grace I have lived; help me, Lord, help me now to dye as a
Christian: in these hours, and moments prepare me more and better for my last.
I have lived Romans 14. 8. Rev. 14. 13.
to, oh that now I might die in the Lord; and fall asleep in Jesus!

Preparation for Death, Judgment, and an Eternal World (thanks be to God) I
have not neglected: I did not in health adjourn this work to a time of
sickness; in order to this I have made many a Prayer, shed many a Tear,
abstained from sin, and crucified the Flesh: I spent much of my time in trying
my self, searching my Heart, and examining my State; in repenting of, and
amending what I found amiss: I was convinced a few deathbed Tears, and
languishing Prayers extorted by fears of Death, and Hell would not make amends;
or be a sufficient compensation for the sins of a wicked Life, and therefore
through the Grace of God assisting me, I made it the business of my Life to
prepare to dye. But something more is to be done, that I may glorify God in my
Death; and be for ever happy after it: what remains, and is now to be done in
this my last sickness, instruct me Lord! and help me to do it. I now stand at
the Mouth of the Grave, upon the Threshold of Time, and at the Door of
Eternity; Lord! increase, strengthen, and quicken all those Graces which are
proper to be acted in a time of sickness, and on a deathbed. Oh! that now I am
a sick; oh! that now I am a dying man, my Faith, Love, and Hope; my Repentance,
Humiliation, and Sorrow; my desires, and breathings after God; my joy, and
delight in him may be more lively and active than ever? oh that this last work
of my Life may be done best! my sick bed joys may be the greatest; and my dying
comforts most abundant! through these painful hours, and days; this dark, and
narrow, gloomy, and frightful passage guide, direct, and lead me Lord!

The exercise of some graces, the performance of some duties are peculiarly
seasonable in a time of health and life; and others are so in Sickness and at
Death: Thou have helped me to live, and now Lord help me to die.

If I have made any preparation for such a time, and hour as this; If I have
done any of the work of my Life, and conversed in this World as an expectant of
a better; if I have any grace, and at any time have been able to act it; if my
love has been (...), my zeal flaming, my heart softened, ^umbled, broken, and
melted, and mine eyes a fountain of tears to bewail the slips, and falls I have
been guilty of; if I have delighted in God, through Christ as my reconciled
Father, Portion, Happiness, and End; if I have exercised self-denial, in
keeping under the flesh, restraining its appetites, and denying its cravings;
in contemning the World, and slighting those adored vanities which bewitch,
charm and entangle so many; if at any time my hope of Heaven has been lively,
my longing, panting, and breathing after it strong, and warm; if I have
mortified any sin, resisted any temptation, performed any duty with success, so
as to profit my self and please God; if I have done any thing whereby the
glory, honor, and interest of God and Christ has been advanced; if I have
employed, improved my talents, and gained more; if I have brought forth fruit,
done any work, and service in my generation, and place, Lord! it is owing to
thee; to the assistances of thy grace, and the influences of thy Holy Spirit,
and I desire to acknowledge it is so; saying with thy holy Apostle, by the
grace of God I am what I am: Not I but the 1 Co. 15. 10.
grace of God which was with me. Oh for the same grace, and mercy; aid, and
help now I am a sick, and dying man! Oh that God would help me in these painful
days, and sorrowful hours to glorify him yet more, by doing the work which is
proper to such a time; that my present sickness, and death may be for the glory
of God, the honor of Religion, the good of my self, and others!

Particularly, help me Lord, to be truly thankful for all thy mercies; for
those innumerable favors conferred on such a worm, such a wretch as I am; bring
them to my remembrance, and enable me unseignedly to bless thee, help me, O my
God, to exercise a serious, solemn, and particular repentance for my past sins:
Let, Oh! let this heart of mine be more humble, broken, and penitent than ever.
Finally, help me Lord, with patience and calmness; submission, and resignation
to submit to thy holy will; to be willing to die now: with faith, and hope,
trust, and confidence to commit my Soul to the care of my dear, and blessed
Jesus. And to these ends Lord! bless the following meditations to me; and let
neither my Eye, nor Tongue outrun, or leave my Heart behind.

II. God's goodness is to be acknowledged, though he afflicts us at present. An
enumeration of past mercies, temporal and Spiritual: And solemn thanksgiving
for both.
God is good, and does good, freely, constantly, and unweariedly; and I am
fully convinced of both: My faith, and reason prove the former; my very sense,
and long experience the latter: And though now I am sick, and weak, afflicted,
and pained, though I feel the weight of his hand, and the smarting of his rod,
neither Flesh nor Devil shall persuade me to think otherwise. Though he
afflicts me now, yet has he not done me good all my days; and shall not I
bless him for his mercies? Mercies, that are more than I can number; greater
than I can value; and far beyond my deserts. Shall the afflictions of a few
days, the pains of a few hours make me, O my Soul! forget, slight, or be
unthankful for the mercies of many? For the mercies of my whole life? Oh how
evil, and criminal would this be! my flesh is pained, my affliction great, my
sickbed uneasy, and the hand of God presses me sore; my tears, and sorrows;
my innocent groans, which I hope are only the voice of oppressed nature pierce
the hearts, and draw tears from the eyes of my dear Relations; but yet O my
Soul! I charge thee by all that is solemn, and sacred, let there not be a
murmuring thought, a repining word, or any peevish carriage, Remember, remember
the days of Old; the mercies of former times, and be thankful: Thy God has
been good, is, and will be so, and be thou ALL LOVE and PRAISE.

Was it not God who formed, and fashioned me in the Womb; and brought me forth
into the light, with an entire, and perfect body? Were not all my members Ps.
139. 16.
written in his book, and did not he watch over my substance, while it was yet
imperfect, and did not he take care I should not be be born out of due time?
Was it not 1 Cor. 15. 8.
he who appointed when, where, and of whom I should be born; and did not he
order all the circumstances of my birth in the best manner? When I was a poor
helpless infant, when I hung on my Mothers breast, and lay in my cradle did not
he take the care of me? Did not his providence watch over me in my Childhood,
and prevent many unknown, and unseen dangers; Did no^ he in my youth keep me
from the many evils, which in that ungoverned age I was exposed to, and might
have brought upon my self? Has not his careful eye been upon me, from my first
moments even until now; how precious are thy thoughts unto me O Ps. 139 17.
God! How great is the sum of them!

Was it not of God I had the happiness to be born of Religious Parents, who set
before me a good example, wept over, and prayed for me? That I had seasonable
instructions, wholesome counsels, and the benefit of a virtuous education in my
first, and early years? Was it not he, that restrained, and withheld me from
those sins, and lusts which many are overtaken withal, and I my self was in
danger of in that age of folly and vanity? Has not he fed, and clothed,
provided for, and defended me? Been my refuge in a storm; my sanctuary in a
time of danger; my deliverer in an evil day; and my Physician in sickness? How
often has he brought me out of the fiery furnace; raised me from a sick bed,
renewed my strength and saved me from going down to the pit, when in my own,
and others apprehension I was at the mouth of, and ready to drop into it! has
not he supplied my wants, increased my substance, blessed my endeavors, and
given me a considerable portion of this Worlds goods? Is it not of him I have
Friends, and Relations to be a comfort to me; while others have none, or such
as are worse than none; even a cross, and a scourge to them? Has not his Arm
upheld; his power defended; his mercy succored; his bounty supplied; his
treasuries enricht me? Has not his providence been ever watchful over me; and
his holy Angels my constant, and perpetual lifeguard? When in my affliction,
and pain I have cried to him; has he not heard my groans, regarded my tears,
answered my prayers in the fittest season, and best manner; eased or supported
me; removed my burden, or given me strength; and so ordered the affliction from
first to last, that I have been forced to say, Lord, it is good for me I have
been afflicted? Psalm. 119. ^1.


I have not only had the mercies of the left hand, but those of the right; not
only temporal, but Spiritual; not only for a perishing body, but more, and
greater for an immortal Soul. Thanks be to God, that he quickened, and raised
me when I was dead in Trespasses, and Sins; Ephesians. 2. 1.
that he brought me to hear his Holy word, and made it effectual for my
conviction, and conversion; that the same word which was to others the savor
of Death unto Death; to me, was the savor 2 Cor. 2. 16.
of Life to Life: That the same Word, the same Blessed Gospel which blinded
them, enlightened me; which left them in their sins, and under the power of
Satan, brought me home to God; for this thy special grace, and mercy to my
Soul, Lord! I do, I will, and hope, I shall for ever bless thee. Who or what am
I? What have I done, or what can I do? That I should be chosen and effectually
called, when others are not! Lord! Why did thou call, and convert me, and not
another, me, and not my Neighbor, me, and not him who sat in the same pew,
heard the same Sermon, and for many years attended upon the same ministry? Free
grace! distinguishing mercy! differencing love!

Am I converted, changed, sanctified and pardoned? Lord, I do, I will admire,
and adore thy powerful, and victorious grace. Awake, O my Soul! awake, prepare
a song; Oh love and bless, and praise thy God.

I was an Apostate wretch, a stubborn enemy, a disloyal Rebel, and it was a
long time before I would lay down my weapons, return to my duty, and yield;
patience waited, mercy invited, ministers exhorted, the Spirit pleaded,
conscience urged, God expostulated with yearning bowels, the Blessed Jesus
called to me from Heaven, and beseeched me by his wounds, and tears,
bloodshed, passion, and death to be reconciled to God, but I (vile wretch that
I was!) did not hear. How many reproofs, and counsels; warnings, and
exhortations; earnest pleadings, and pathetick Sermons were lost upon me? And
blessed be God all were not; that one did the work. Did God convert me after
many Sabbaths enjoyed, and many Sermons heard in vain? Infinite kindness! Lord!
I bow, and worship before thee, and with all the powers of my immortal Spirit
bless, and praise thee. Was it not God pityed me, when I did not pity my self?
Who called after, and stopped me when I was running headlong to Hell? Who loosed
my chains, broke my bonds, knocked off my setters, and brought me out of the
House of bondage? Was it not he who with a mighty power, and stretched-out arm
delivered, and rescued me; when sin ruled, and governed, and Satan led me in
triumph as his vassal, and captive? And shall not I though a sick, and pained
man adore, and bless him? Bless him! I do, I will. Bless the Lord, O my Soul:
Ps. 103. 2.
And all that is withim me, bless his Holy Name.

Since my Conversion, and becoming a new man; since God took me into his
family, adopted, and made me his Son how much, and what great things have been
done for me! what sweet, and ravishing Communion have I had in holy duties,
public, and private; in the assembly of Saints, and in my Closet! what large,
speedy, and remarkable answers of Prayer! what a ravishing sense of Divine
Love, and Favor! what holy motions, and breathings; what enlivening,
quickening, and comforting influences of the Holy Spirit have I had? how often
has God supported my drooping, and revived my dying Spirits; answered my
doubts, expelled my fears, and treated me as a Friend, nay, more, as a Son! how
has God in mercy restrained the Tempter, or wisely ordered the Temptation; as
to the nature, strength, and continuance of it! what succor, and support; what
strength, and assistance have I experienced at such a time; and how often through
Grace have I been more than a Conqueror! when I sinned and fell God did not
cast me off, banish me his family, and null the former Relation; but pitied me
a fallen Christian: when he heard my groans, and saw my penitential Tears; his
Bowels yearned, he took me up, and embraced me in the Arms of his Mercy; wiped
my weeping Eyes, comforted my sorrowful Heart, and said, Son, be of good cheer,
thy sins are forgiven Mat. 9. 2.
thee. Oh! the joy, oh! the unspeakable joy of that hour! methinks, I yet
sensibly feel what lively, and warm impressions those words made upon my Heart;
upon my Heart, that the moment before was ready to sink, and dye within me:
when I was covered with Tears, Blushing, and Shame; when I lay sighing,
sobbing, and groaning at his Footstool; crying out in the bitterness of my
Soul, I have sinned, I have sinned; before I rose from my knees, before I said
Amen, my God came, and said, I have pardoned, I have pardoned, and now go in
peace. For the mercy, and kindness of that hour, Lord! I bless thee now.

When through the weakness of my Grace, the strength of my Corruptions, and the
power of Temptation I have wandered, and gone astray; when my zeal has abated,
my affections been cooled, when I have been remiss, negligent, and careless,
backsliding, and on the declining hand, he sent some affliction, or other to
call me back, to awaken, warm, quicken, and recover me. When I have loved the
World too much, and my God too little; when my affection to Earth has been too
warm, and to Heaven too cold; when duties have been neglected, or performed
without life, vigor, and zeal; when I begun to be too Worldly, Earthly, and
Sensual he suffered me to meet with disappointments, took away part of my
Estate, snatched away a bosom Friend, a dear Relation, filled my Body with pain,
shook me over the Grave, and threatened to cast me into it; and all this with a
merciful design to reform, and make me better. And Lord, I thank thee any
afflictions have been sanctified to such an end; that the voice of the Rod has
been accompanied with that of thy Spirit, and both were effectual to reclaim
me; that at any time I came out of the fire more refined, and purged; and that
those Waters of Affliction washed away my filthiness. Lord I can, do, and will
bless thee for seasonable corrections, and the discipline of thy Rod.

So good, and kind; so liberal, and bountiful; so merciful, and gracious has
God been to me: I have had so much for Body, and Soul; for time, and eternity
that I am filled with wonder, and must cry out, Oh the height, and depth,
length, and breadth, of the love of God! my mercies have been more than my
moments; and every single mercy deserves, and calls for a Psalm of Praise.
Lord, when I am dead, and in a silent Grave I cannot praise thee; and therefore
now I will: blessed be God, I lived till I was born again; that ever I heard of
that sweet, that blessed that charming name JESUS; and that I was enabled to
believe on him; for all the Mercies I have had in this World, and for the hope,
and prospect of more, and better in the next. Blessed be God for Pardoning
Mercy, Sanctifying Grace, and the Blood of Jesus to wash, and cleanse me, a
sinner. Blessed be God for the supports, and comforts I have in this sickness;
that Satan is restrained, and my own corruptions curbed; Blessed be God I am
made meet for Heaven, and that I know I am: Lord! what Grace is thine? how
free, and sovereign! What love is thine? how constant, and matchless! how
sweet, how exceeding sweet is the thought, that God has loved, does love me,
and will do so unto the End! I Will bless thee, Lord, while I live; thank thee,
with my last Breath; and O my God, through Christ, thy Son, and my Savior
accept my dying praises. Bless the Lord O my Soul, bless the Lord for me O my
Friends: bless the Lord O ye his Holy Angels: my single voice is not
sufficient, may every Tongue, all breath praise his holy name! Amen, HALLELUJAH.

III. After Death comes Judgment: what an awakening Thought this is, and ought
to be. How this Thought may, and should be improved by us in our last Sickness,
particularly, to put us upon Confession, the exercise of Repentance, and
earnest Prayer to God for Pardoning Mercy.
SICKNESS Summons Men to die; Death Summons them to Judgment. May this Sickness
be my last, and do I suppose it will? hearken O my Soul! and thou may hear
Deaths Voice: Come unto the Bar, come give an account of thy Self to God; in
the NAME of the ETERNAL GOD, whose Servant, and Messenger I am, I cite thee, O
Man, to make thine appearance before the Tribunal of thy Maker, Sovereign, and
Judge in the other World. Awful Tidings! what awakening, and startling words
are these! must I O my Soul! quickly Dye, and after that be judged? go from my
Deathbed to the Bar of an Infinitely Holy, Just, and Jealous God? must my Life
be examined? all my Actions scanned? and my everlasting state in that moment,
be determined? must a Righteous, and Irreversible Doom pass upon me? must I Dye
in one moment, and in the next be Judged? and shall not I search my ways,
examine my state, take a survey of my Heart and Life, before I pass to that
final and irreversible Judgment; and hold up these guilty hands of mine at
God's Tribunal? shall I not endeavor to know what has been amiss, that I may
confess, be humbled for, repent of it, and beg pardon? Lord* help me a sick,
Lord, for Jesus sake, help me a dying man in this serious, solemn work: help me
to find out my sins, to repent; and implore thy mercy through the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is my only hope in Life, at Death, and after Death.

I was born a sinner, and came into the World guilty and polluted: behold, I
was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my Mother Psalm. 51. 5.
conceive me. As I am a Child of Apostate Adam (dreadful thought!) I am unlike
to the Holy and Blessed God, and resemble the Devil, the worst of Beings; and
had I no other sin, this were enough to shame, confound, silence, and condemn
me. But alas! have I not found this original sin active in my Heart, and
fruitful in my Life? with what force, and violence has it hurried me to the
commission of sin! oh, what cursed streams has this bitter Fountain been
sending forth! how much, how often, and how greatly have I offended God! what
one Commandment is there, I have not broken in thought, word, or deed! my sins
are more than can be numbered; and how many Legions of Lusts are quartered in my
Heart! oh, that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Jer. 9. 1.
Fountain of Tears, that I might weep day, and night!

Did I not once O my Soul! live as without God in the World! how many, and
great were the sins of my unregenerate state! what a sinner! Lord, what a vile
sinner was I then! were not all the faculties of my Soul, and Members of my
Body the Instruments of Unrighteousness unto sin? Did not sin sit in the
Throne, sway the Scepter? and had it not the entire, quiet, and peaceable
possession of my Heart? Was not I a willing Slave, an obedient Servant, and a
Volunteer in any wicked service, was I not at the beck of every Lust, the will
of every Temptation, and did not Satan carry me captive at his pleasure? during
that wretched state, how did I forget God, and my self; Eternity, and another
World; thwart the design of my Creation; and cross the end of my being made a
Man? Was I not sensual, carnal, and earthly; a stranger to an Holy, Heavenly
Life; without any delight in God, desire after, or care to please him? did I
not run into Sin, as the Horse rushes into the Battle without any fear? how
long? O my Soul! how long was I a grief to that blessed Jesus, who wept, and
swet, bled, groaned, and died for me! how did I despise his Grace, slight his
Love, his dying Love; spurn at his Bowels, and trample on his Blood? with what
sweet, and endearing; melting, and charming language, did he plead with me! he
called, but I did not answer; he pleaded, but I was not moved; his Bowels
yearned, but my Heart did not relent, how often did the Holy Spirit move and work
upon my Heart? and how often did I resist, vex, quench, and grieve him! how often
was my Conscience awakened? and how soon did it fall asleep again! Holy Lord, I
blush, I am ashamed, and confounded to look back upon this part of my life: I
weep, Lord, I weep, I desire to weep bitterly for the sins of my unconverted
state: I wish again, Oh, that my Head were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of
Tears, that I might weep day and night!

How many, and great have been my sins since my Conversion to, and acquaintance
with God? How often have I fallen, to the dishonor of God, the discredit of
Religion, the wounding of my self, and grieving of others! how many duties have
been neglected; and how many carelessly performed? in a cold, lazy, and trifling
manner! how many of my Talents, which might have been improved for the Glory of
God, my own comfort, and the good of others, have been wrapped up in a Napkin,
and buried in the Earth! how weak is every Grace? and how much evil is mixed
with all my good! how often, letting down my Spiritual Watch, has Satan surpised
me, and Temptation prevailed! how much have I conformed to the World, complied
with the sinful customs, and fashions of it! how much have I lived contrary to
my Profession; and below my hopes as a Christian! what a slow progress have I
made in the ways of Holiness, how many younger Christians have outstript, got
the start of, and are gone before me! nay, have I not shamefully declined, and
backsliden, and lost much of my first love, zeal, and tenderness? how frequent,
and strong have been the workings of Spiritual Sins; as unbelief, pride,
passion, envy, and uncharitableness, etc. Lord! how many have been the sins of
this state? and how are they aggravated by all that love, and mercy thou have
shown to me; and the long experience I have had of thy bounty and goodness? Art
thou my God, and have I affronted? my Father, and have I displeased thee? have
I by these sins wounded that Redeemer who died for me? grieved that Holy Spirit
who has comforted me? ah sinful, silly Soul! what have thou been doing? what an
hearty sorrow, and unfeigned grief do these sins call for? I mourn, Lord, help
me to mourn more: thou have given me the habit of Repentance; give me now in
this evening of my Life to act, and exercise it. Oh, for a broken Heart, and a
contrite Spirit! oh, for inward shame, and hearty remorse! oh for a melting
frame, and a bleeding Soul! oh, that this Rock might be broken, and this Heart
be turned more, and more into an Heart of flesh!

My time is short, my strength little, my sins many and great; Lord help me to
live repenting, and die repenting; to go to my grave weeping: Weeping not tears
of despair* but tears of Gospel-sorrow, which make way for eternal joys. I do
repent, Lord! from the bottom of my Soul I do repent; let my last repentance be
most solemn, particular, and serious, and do thou accept it! wash me in these
penitential waters, and because these muddy waters cannot cleanse; wash me,
Lord, wash me in the blood of Jesus for that can cleanse from all sin. O
pardon, pardon a dying penitent, who confesses and acknowledges his sins, and
flies to thy mercy through the merits of Christ!

My sins are gone over mine head, as a burden Psalm. 38. 4.
they are too heavy for me. Sin is an heavy burden and intolerable; but most
of all so to a dying man. Look upon mine Psalm. 25. 18.
affliction, and forgive all my sins: If I must weep with one eye, Lord let me
read my pardon with the other.

I have deserved Hell, and if God should cast me into it; I have forfeited
Heaven, and if God should eternally banish me from that blessed place; I must
say, Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright Ps. 110. 137.
is thy Judgment: But save me from the one, and bring me to the other, for thy
mercies sake. I find it is written, He that Pro. 28. 13.
confesses and forsakes his sins shall find mercy. And again, if we confess
our sins he is 1 John 1. 9.
faithful and just to forgive us our sins. This I have done, this I will do,
and shall I not obtain mercy? I am ashamed, and confounded; I loath, and abhor
my self; I repent in dust and ashes; I wish I had never done as I have; were I
to live over my life again, (Divine grace assisting) these Errata's should be
corrected; I do repent, and will not God pardon? I do heartily mourn, and will
not God forgive? Oh for a pardon for Jesus sake! mercy, mercy, Lord! mercy for
a dying sinner, who comes unto thee according to the tenor of the Gospel. The
thing I ask is great, and I, sinful I, wretched I, am altogether unworthy; but
Christ is worthy: Lord, lo, here is the blood which bought my pardon, and it
has been and is now crying in thine ears with a loud voice; Lord, pardon, and
save yonder penitent sinner, and shall my prayer backed with the pleadings of
that blood be shut out?

I have now but a little time, my glass is almost run, the day is far spent,
the shadows of the evening are stretched out, the night will quickly come;
Lord, be not angry if I renew my request, urge thee with thy promise, and lie
at thy foot till I obtain my pardon, and Conscience be enabled, and authorized
to read it. I am miserable and without thy pity must be so for ever; and Lord,
I cannot, I will not take a denial: I am thine, save me. In this sickness I
have Ps. 119 94.
been examining my heart, searching my ways, and I have done it seriously, and
impartially; what sins I have found out I heartily bewail: pardon these, and
those I have not. Who can understand his Ps. 19. 12.
Errors? Lord cleanse thou me from secret faults.

Blessed Jesus! thou great friend, and lover of Souls; from this my sick and
deathbed I look up to thee for help, and mercy; Oh stand my friend now, plead
my cause now, and let me have the pardon thy blood did purchase! thou did die
for me, thou wast crucified for me, and thy blood was shed for me, and carest
thou not if I now perish? May thy Tears, Mark 4. 38.
Wounds, and Blood speak, and plead for me; for I am sure they will be heard if
mine cannot! within a few days, within a few hours, I must appear before an
Holy, Just, and Terrible God; and I tremble, O my Savior! I tremble to think
any one unpardoned sin should meet me at that Tribunal: Oh, procure my pardon
for me before I die! if Satan meet me there to accuse me, I know thou will
answer him and plead for me: But if any one unpardoned sin meet me there, it
will condemn me, and I am lost, and lost for ever.

I am not sinless, I have not perfectly obeyed the Law; but I am not
impenitent. To exercise repentance for my sin, has been my daily work ever
since my first conversion; and it has been so particularly in this present
sickness. My heart has been turned from the love of sin, and now I loath it
more than ever; there is nothing troubles, afflicts, and grieves me so much as
sin; vile sin, cursed sin! thou have cost me more tears, sighs, and groans than
all my pains have done. I Repent, I Repent, Lord, I do repent; Oh! pity, and
spare, spare, and pardon, pardon and love, love, and save me for ever. Have
mercy upon me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies; and blot out
Psalm 51. 1.
all my sin. Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not Psalm. 32. 1, 2.
iniquity. Blessed! he, and only he is the blessed man; though he be a poor
man, a pained man, a sick man, a dying man, yet he is a blessed man: Oh, that
this blessedness might be mine! I am now sick, and I have no hope of recovery;
my body grows weaker, and weaker, and nature sensibly decays; this earthly
Tabernacle shakes, and it will quickly tumble, Death, Pale, and Grim Death is
posting toward me; I am near unto eternity; but I cannot die, I dare not step
into the other unseen Eternal World with out a pardon. Believing, O my God,
that word of thine, that word, which to me is of more worth than a thousand
Worlds; Let the wicked forsake his way; and the Psalm. 55. 7
unrighteous man his thoughts: And let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. I beg, and
through the mediation of thy Christ, and my Jesus, will expect the pardon of
all my sins. Let it be unto me according to thy word, in which thou have caused
thy Servant to hope! Amen.

IV. Of submission to the Divine will as to the time of our Death: Many reasons
to persuade to such an holy frame, and resigning temper. Objections Answered.
Suitable Petitions. The Triumph and last work of FAITH.
I am now on my last bed, this sickness for ought I do, or can understand, will
be unto Death: The warrant is issued out, the commission sealed, I am a dying
man; every moment that passes away, every clock that strikes, every breath I
draw, every pulse that beats tells me death is near at hand; and having given
thanks to God for all his mercies; having unseignedly repented of all my sin,
and begged pardon in the name, and through ^he blood of Jesus, and having now
some hope and assurance of it; what have I further to do? What becomes me as a
Christian, as a righteous man* that has hope of great and glorious things
beyond the grave, but to submit to the divine good pleasure, and saying, The
will of the Lord be done? What language becomes Acts 21. 14.
such an one but this? O Lord who art the fountain of Life to all thy
Creatures, I am thine, to live, or die, when, and as thou will; thou gave me
my Life, and it is fit thou should take it from me when thou will, and as
thou please; I submit to thy will, obey thy summons, and I would not live a
day, an hour, a moment longer than God would have me. God has ordered the
various circumstances of my Life in the best manner; things have been much
better with me, than if I had been left to my own will and choice; and I leave
it to this wise, and good God to order the circumstances of my Death. To die
now, may be better for me than to live longer, and if infinite wisdom judge it
so, I will readily comply, and cheerfully put off this Earthly Tabernacle.
Submissive language! happy frame! blessed temper! thus it ought to be with all;
but alas! how few attain to this! nay, how do the most even of Christians come
far short of it! how willing are they to live, how loath to die? how extremely
desirous to stay here, how loath to depart? how passionately desirous to have a
new lease granted, when the old one is exspiring and almost out? For one that
in good earnest says, I long, I long to die; I am willing even now to be
dissolved; how many with tears in their eyes cry, not yet, Lord, not yet, Oh
spare me, that I may recover Ps. 39. 13.
strength, before I go hence and be no more.

Thus, with shame, and sorrow must I confess it has been with me; but in this
my present sickness, Lord, help me to overcome my fears of Death; wean me from
this vain World; mortify my fond affection to this present Life; and oh! raise,
and quicken in me, holy, earnest desires after a better. Holy Paul had a desire
to depart and be with Christ; Oh that Phil. 1. 23.
now it might be so with me! let me be able to say, Lord, I accept the
punishment of my sin, I kiss the rod, lie at thy foot, submit to thy holy
pleasure, and am entirely willingly to die now, if thou think it best and most
convenient, my slavish fears of Death have been a pleasure to Satan, a torment
to my Self, a dishonor to God, a blemish to my Profession, a disgrace to my
Hopes, Lord! at last help me to overcome them. Oh! that I could passionately
long that Death would come and waft me over to yonder pure, and blessed,
undefiled, and eternal Regions! while I am so excessively fond of this vain,
sinful, and wretched life; while I stand trembling, and shivering on the
confines of time, and am loath to enter into a blessed E^ernity; how may all the
Inhabitants above wonder at my folly? Oh that my Faith, Love, and Hope might be
increased, and strengthened, that I might pant, and long, wish, desire, and
groan to be in Heaven!

What abundant reason, O my Soul! have I to be willing to dye, and dye now, if
God so please? have I not met with those, crosses, and disappointments; with
those troubles, and miseries which are sufficient to wean me? have I been
tossed on the Waves, driven by the Winds, endangered by many a Storm, and
should I not rejoice I can see Land, and am so near a quiet Harbor? how often,
upon the account of Temptations from ^atan, Afflictions from God; the Rebukes
of his Providence, the Hidings of his Face, and the withdrawings of his Spirit,
have I complained, groaned, and wept! and shall I be unwilling to have my
burdens removed, my sorrows ended, and all Tears wiped from mine Eyes? is not
the World mine Enemy, and has it not really been unkind to me? and shall I be
loath to leave it? amazing folly! if I should live longer, even till the Almond
does flourish, to extreme Eccl. 12. 5.
old Age, should I not be unprofitable to others, and a burden to my self, and
only an insignificant Cipher among my Fellow Creatures? is it not better for me
to die now; than to live till the World is weary of me, and I am weary of my
self too?

Am I not O my Soul! a Stranger, and Pilgrim upon Earth? am I not born from
above, and do I not belong to another Country? and should not my temper be
suitable to my character; that is, should I not be weary of my Pilgrimage, and
long to be at home? are not Strangers and Pilgrims wont to be so? our Journey
(say they) is long and tedious, oh that we were at home! in our own Country,
among our own People, and Kindred! a stranger that has a Journey to go, would
pass over it as soon as he can; his thoughts mind, and heart are set upon home,
and he longs to be there; notwithstanding the conveniences and accommodations
of his Inn, the pleasantness of the Country, etc. yet he longs to be at home.
And shall I desire to be a wandering Pilgrim in this World, when I might, and
God would have me be a settled Inhabitant in the other? oh! how becoming my
character is it, to send sighs, groans, and prayers, as Harbingers to Heaven to
tell my God I would fain be there. Why do I not cry out? here, Woe is me! I am
a stranger, and sojourner when shall I come to my own Country, my Eternal
Home, to my Elder Brethren, and Spiritual Kindred! many are gone before, and I
follow after, but blessed Jesus when shall I come to thee! my God, my Savior,
my Hope, my Treasure, my Happiness, my All, is in another Country, oh, that I
were there too! how should the hardships, and difficulties; the ill usage, and
sorry entertainment, I meet with in my Pilgrimage make me long for home; and
willing to go whenever my Heavenly Father sends for me!

Have I not O my Soul! been pestered with sin all my life long? has it not cost
me many a sigh, and groan, tear, and prayer? how often have I offended my God,
displeased my Father, grieved my Redeemer, wounded my Conscience, and defiled
my Heart! and if I live longer shall I not sin more? is there any hope sin will
dye, till I do? and can I bear the Thought that I should for so many years yet
to come, offend so good a God? has not this flesh been a snare to me? and this
body an instrument of much evil? and shall I be loath to put it off? is not sin
my heaviest burden, my sorest Enemy? have I not often said so, and often cried
out? O wretched man Romans 7. 23.
that I am! who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? and shall I be
unwilling to be delivered now? Criminal Hypocrisy! has not sin defiled all my
powers and faculties, wounded my Conscience, hardened my Heart, dampt my joy,
disquieted my mind, disturbed my peace, and brought many an affliction upon my
Body? has it not eclipsed the light of Gods Countenance, and caused my God and
Father; my Redeemer, and Savior to stand afar off? and shall I not be willing
to dye now, that I may sin no more?

Have not I O my Soul! been designing Heaven, and Praying for Heaven? what is
the end of all my Sacred Duties, Holy Services, and Religious Worship, but that
I may be Saved, and get to Heaven? and is God calling me to Heaven, and shall I
be loath to go; and all this because this Body must dye first? Heaven! O my
Soul! what a sweet and charming word is it, and what a pleasant sound does it
make? Heaven! what an happy, and desirable place is it? Heaven! what a
delightful and ravishing Theme is this? Heaven! is not one Thought, one single
view enough to Transport with Joy, and make a Man cry out? oh that I were
there! is God now calling me to Heaven? to Heaven, the Throne of Divine
Majesty, the Presence Chamber of the Eternal King; to Heaven, where I shall
have the Vision of God, ravishing sights of the Blessed Jesus, and the Company
of Holy Angels, and blessed Souls; to Heaven, that for Beauty, and Glory
Transcends, not only all that has been seen, but all that can be imagined,
shall I refuse and draw back? how beautiful are these lower Heavens, which are
but the Porch and outward Court to the other and how much must the Third
Heaven, the Temple of the Divine Majesty, the Habitation of Glorious Angels, in
^eauty and splendour excel these! is this the place I shall go to when I dye,
and can I, with any tolerable show of reason be unwilling to dye now? ah
sinful, silly Soul! do thou draw back, art thou unwilling to leave this body?
what! to go to Heaven. What! to go to such a glorious happy World. Art thou
indeed unwilling, and art thou not to be blamed? Blamed! thou art, for what
egregious folly is this? can I thus slight Heaven, and not blush to think I do?

Moreover, O my Soul! If I am a Christian, I have solemnly taken God for my
only Portion, my Ultimate End, and Sovereign Happiness; I love him, and my
Savior above all; more than Father, or Mother, House or Land, Estate or Life;
without this superlative, and predominant love I am, I can be no Christian. But
O my Soul! is not my lothness to die, when God calls, and would have me, an ill
sign my love is not so strong, my affection so warm, and this flame so bright
and burning as it ought to be? does a Man love God? what! and wish to be at an
eternal distance from him? what a flat contradiction is this? do I love my God,
my Savior, and the H. Spirit, my guide, and comforter, as much as I ought, and
not care how long I am absent from this Blessed Trinity? oh how weak, and
defective is my love! did I love my God, as strongly as I love my Friend, my
Relations, should I not think it long till I am with him? were the glowing
sparks blown up into a flame, did I love, and love as much as I ought, how
passionately should I cry out? My Soul thirsts for God, for the living Psalm.
42. 3.
God: when shall I come and appear before God? How long must I be at this
lamented distance? HE is my God, my Life, my Joy, my Happiness, my All; oh that
I were with him! oh blessed are they who dwell in his Presence, stand before
his Throne, and continually behold his Face! when shall it be so with me? O my
God, I love thee, and long to see thee; O my Savior, I love thee, and I long
to see thy Face and have thy company, that I may love thee more; for every view
of thee my glorious Jesus will increase the Flame. How long! how long! Lord,
how long! is the voice of love; of a strong, and burning love. Does God by this
present sickness call me to come from Earth to Heaven, from my Friends to him,
from my Relations who love me, pity me, pray for, and weep over me; to my
Savior, who loves me more, and is able to help me, and am I unwilling? do I
shrink, draw back, and wish to tarry longer? is there not some great defect in
my love? does it not want many of those degrees it ought to have? Holy Lord!
Blessed Jesus! I am troubled, I am ashamed to find so much unwillingness in my
self to die now; because I am convinced my love to thee is not so strong as it
should be. O pity and pardon me! oh help me to love thee more, and better, and
then I shall obey thy Summons, and be willing to come to thee; though Death, and
the Grave be in my Way: that I may, let me love thee more, and better Lord!

Has not God O my Soul! promised me a future Glory, and confirmed that Promise
with an Oath? Has he not revealed much of Heaven to me, that I might not be an
utter stranger to that unseen World? has he not given me many sweet foretasts
of it, in Meditation, and Prayer, in Sermons, and in my Sacramental Communions,
that I might desire, long, and thirst after more? What delightful hours! what
holy Communion, with God, Father, Son, and Spirit* what joyful views, what
ravishing prospects of Heaven have I sometimes had! have I not had those sights
of God in the Sanctuary? those discoveries of his love, and that sense of his
favor, that I have cried out. Lord it is good for Mat. 17. 4.
me to be here? Have I not had that Communion with God in my secret
retirements, and have I not been filled with those joys on my Knees, that I
have had no more mind to the little things of time, to the Vanities here below?
have not I sometimes been so refresht, revived, and comforted; so satisfied,
and transported with joy that I have longed for Heaven that I might be capable
of, and enjoy more? cannot I remember the time (though alas! it has been too
seldom so) when I would have been glad to have gone from my Closet, and from my
Knees to Heaven? and shall I be unwilling now? what did a good God vouchsafe
all this to me for, but to make me long for Heaven, and willing to die? why did
he give me these first fruits, but that I might long for the Harvest? these
Clusters of Canaan, but that I might long for the Vintage? These Tastes, but
that I might long to drink a full Draught of those Rivers of Pleasure, which
are at his Isa. 16. 11.
Right Hand for evermore? Lord, continue, and increase those joys now, and I
will readily dye.

Moreover, O my Soul! has not God continued me in Life, and being a great
while? I might have died in my Infancy, Childhood, and Youth, but I did not: I
might have died in the Morning* or at Noon, but I have lived unto the Evening.
How many are dead, and gone, while I am yet spared? how many thousands has
Death removed out of the World, since I came into it! how many Funerals have I
survived! how many younger persons have I outlived! I have sometimes been
sick; but did not God recover, restore, and raise me up again? this House of
Clay has often tottered; but has not God repaired and yet kept it standing?
the Arrows of Death have been flying about me, and many thousands have fallen
on my right hand; and many on my left, but they have had no commission to touch
me: many have been called out of the Vineyard at the first, third, and sixth
hour, and I have been continued to the ninth, nay to the eleventh. Have not I
lived thirty, forty, fifty, sixty years, when thousands have not lived so many
months, weeks, or days? and is it not shameful for me to be unwilling to dye
now? after I have lived in the World so long, shall I be as loath to dye as
those who are but newly come into it? unthankful Soul! is this the return thou
make to God for so much time and patience? the poor Infant of a few days, may
say, must I dye almost as soon as I am born? go from one Grave to another? come
upon the Stage only to look about me, take a short turn and so go off? the
young man may say, am I arrived at that period of Life, wherein Nature is
strongest, and I am most capable of relishing the pleasures of it, and must I
go now to a lonesome, and solitary Grave? must I go to Bed in the Morning, and
my Sun go down at Noonday? must my Candle be blown out by the Breath of Death,
when it might Burn much Longer? must I in my Youth, Strength, and the Flower of
my Age be thy mark and game, O heard-hearted Death, when so many old, and
decrepit ones, who in civility may be willing to retire to the Grave, and make
room for others; and of whom the World is weary, are passed by? O Death, Death,
do thou refuse the halt, the lame, and the blind, and must I, one of the best
of the Flock, be singled out, and be laid as a Sacrifice on thine Altar? If
this be the Young Man's complaint, what can be the old Man's Apology? will it not
be as weak as himself?

Have not I had a sufficient time to prepare for Death, and Judgment? Have not
I lived long enough to make an experiment of what the World can do for me? Long
enough to confirm that old maxim, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity; and is not
my unwillingness to die now Eccl. 1. 2.
inexcusable? How shameful, O my lingering Soul! is it for me, an old Disciple;
after I have been trained up in the School of Christ so many years; after I
have heard so many plain, and convincing Lectures of the vanity of the World,
the certainty of Death, the glory of Heaven, and happiness of eternity, to
shrink, and draw back, when so many younger have cheerfully submitted to the
will of God!

Do thou not, O my Soul! by this time see there is reason, why thou should
be willing now, to put off this earthly Tabernacle? Let me now hear what thou
can object against this, which is thy duty, honor, and interest.

Am I loath to die now, because I shall leave relations, who have their
dependence on me, and to whom, I have been useful? Foolish talk! cannot God who
provided for 'em by, take care of them without me? And if they are his, will he
not? Cannot God who is the Fountain, be better than I, who am but a Cistern,
and a broken Cistern too? May I not leave my solitary Widow, and Fatherless
children with God?

Am I loath to die now, because I must take my final leave of Friends, and
Relations, whom I have loved, with whom I have lived, and conversed with much
delight? Foolish Soul! loath to leave them! what, to go to God, Christ, and
company infinitely better, to enjoy which, for one hour, is much better, than
to enjoy theirs for an age.

Am I unwilling to die now, because of those pains, and pangs, those sharp
conflicts and agonies I must endure, before body and Soul do part? Fond
reasoning! must not these pains be endured at one time or other? will not Death
be Death, that is, be attended with some pains whenever it comes? Had I not
better take heart, and undergo them once, and that now, than be terrified many
years longer with the fears and melancholy prospect of them? Will not these
pains be my last; and when they are over (and in a few hours they will) shall
not I be at perfect ease and rest? Has God done, and the blessed Jesus
suffered so much for me? Is Heaven so blessed and glorious a place, that it
transcends all I can* imagine? And shall I make excuses, and frame Apologies,
resist, and struggle, be backward and unwilling to endure a little pain that I
might go to God, and Christ, and be in Heaven? Have not many endured more and
greater pain, in hope of less advantage? Have I not a Savior, who
experimentally knows what it is to be pained, and die, to stand by, succor,
support, and assist me in this terrible passage from Time to Eternity? Finally,
O my trembling Soul! may not the pains of that hour be much less, than I fear,
think, and apprehend they will be?

Am I loath to die now, because this body must go to the grave, rot, and
putrify, and lie a long time among Worms? Fond affections to a lump of Clay!
is this the reason of my unwillingness? O wretched, sinful Soul! where is thy
Faith concerning that fundamental Article, the Re^urrection of the Dead? Is not
Christ risen, and shall not they that sleep in Christ rise too? Will not the
glorious morning quickly dawn? Will not the day of redemption of the body ere
long come? And shall not this Body, this very Body of mine be quickened, raised,
and in all respects be much better than now it is? Will it not be a Beautiful,
and Comely; a Strong, and Healthful; a Powerful, and Active; a Spiritual and
Immortal Body? Will not a time come when our last enemy, DEATH, shall be
destroyed, and mortality be swallowed up of LIFE? When I shall sleep in the
dust, I shall not think the time long, and when my Lord shall come, and the
trumpet sound, and arise ye Dead shall be spoken by the mighty, and powerful
Jesus, shall I not live, and dye no more? Therefore let me be willing to die
once; and since I must once, let me be willing to die now.

What is there, O my Soul! in this vain, wretched, and sinful World, that I
should desire to stay yet longer in it? What is this Flesh, this Body, that I
should be loath to lay it in the grave? What can be frightful and terrible in
death, since Christ has conquered, disarmed it, and taken out the sting? What
is there, in the other World, I am so loath to go unto it? Have not I sinned,
and suffered, sorrow'd, and grieved, groaned, and wept long enough already?
Have I not been afflicted tempted, and buffeted long enough already? Why do I
not long for deliverance? Look O my Soul! Heaven is prepared, the gates are
open, and there is a mansion for thee. Hearken, listen, thy God, thy Jesus,
calls, saying, come Christian, come away, from a dark, and sinful, miserable,
and defiled World; to this World of Life, Light, and Love. Angels, and Saints,
O my Soul! are longing for thy arrival; with one consent they wish thee safely
landed: The former are ready to be thy convoy to yonder glorious World; the
latter with a triumphant joy will welcome thee, as soon as ever thou come
thither. Linger no longer, but go out, O my Soul! go out with Joy, and Triumph.

My God has prepared Heaven for me, an happiness beyond, infinitely beyond all
my thoughts, hopes, and wishes; an happiness that will amaze, and transport me
as soon as ever I am landed on that blessed shore; an happiness that is
perfect, without any defect; and eternal without any end. My blessed, and
loving Jesus has by his sufferings, bloodshed, and Death purchased Heaven,
and a Mansion for me. What a glorious, blessed Heaven must that be which was
the purchase of such sacred, precious, and invaluable blood! is Heaven the
purchase of my Saviors warmest blood? Excellent place! This, all this am I now
called to take possession of; but oh how loath, and unwilling am I to go! it is
my sin, my shame, and folly that I am so; pardon; pity, and help me Lord!

I have been speaking to my self, chiding, reproving, blaming, and persuading
this sinful, silly, and backward heart of mine; but to what little purpose? And
now, dear Lord; I turn my self, and speak to thee, for I shall never be willing
except thy Spirit, and Grace make me so. I see that Heaven is on the other
side; but yet how loath am I to step into a dark, cold, and solitary grave! I am
convinced that Heaven is better than Earth; that it is worth a dying to go to
God, and Christ; and yet I cannot (ah what a sinful, wretched heart have I!) I
cannot long, and wish to die: Oh pardon my lothness and backwardness; and give
me a more humble, obedient, submissive, and resigning frame! that if this Cup
must not now pass from me, I may imitate my dear Savior, in the like
circumstances, cheerfully saying, Father, not my will, but thine be done. The
arguments I have ^uk. 22. 42.
used are weighty and serious; sufficient to convince my judgment, stop my
mouth, and make me silent; but after all (O pity pardon and help me!) I find I
am backward, and loath to die now. Lord, make me content; content! that is too
little, make me desirous to die, and to die now. God forbid that after all, my
Soul should be violently rent and torn from me.

Lord! Let me have such a firm belief of a future happiness, such lively hopes,
and clear evidences of my right and title to it, such a burning and flaming
love to thee, my God, to thee, my Savior, such pleasing foretasts of Heavenly
joys, such a reviving prospect of that glorious future state that I might
overcome the fears of Death, the terrors of the Grave, and Triumph over both.
That I may long, and pant, desire, groan, and wish to be with Christ, which I
must, and do acknowledge to be far better. Lord! inspire my departing Soul,
with that Faith, Hope, and Love, that I may now glorify Thee, credit Religion,
and commend thy holy Ways; that I may strengthen the weak, and encourage the
fearful by a cheerful, and willing, comfortable and triumphant departure.
Sanctify these afflictions, and pains, and this present sickness to me, and
let them put me upon longing after Heaven, where are none: answer my doubts,
expel my fears, arm, and fortify; comfort, and encourage my weak, drooping,
and trembling Soul; and the nearer I draw to my end, the more warm and earnest
let my desires be. Oh for thy holy Spirit, to excite those Heavenly and
Spiritual desires in me, which I cannot raise in my self!

O thou almighty, and victorious Jesus, who have conquered Death and the Grave,
enable me in these my last moments to triumph over them; saying, O DEATH, where
is thy Sting? O GRAVE, where is 1 Cor. 15. 55.
thy victory? Many experiences have I had, of thy Grace and Mercy; love and
kindness, O my Savior! forsake me not now in this my last extremity: O Blessed
Jesu! who have been my support and help in Life, be my Strength, my Comfort,
and my Joy at Death.

While in this my last sickness I have been speaking, sometimes to my self, and
sometimes unto God; I have obtained the Mercy I wanted, and labored after; a
willingness to die now; my doubts are answered, my fears removed, my sins are
pardoned, God is reconciled, my Conscience pacified, my hopes are lively, my
evidences clear, my assurance strong, and my joy full; and now, thanks be to
God, how do I long to dye! shall I be afraid of Death? What! of a baffled,
vanquished, and conquered Enemy? I am not, I was, but now blessed be God, I am
not. Am I a Member of Christ, a Son of God, an Heir of Heaven? and shall I be
afraid of thee, O Death? through Grace, O mine Enemy, I am not. Methinks I am
already in the Suburbs of Heaven, and I long to enter into that holy City. I
have a prospect of yonder blessed World, and this prospect is so ravishing, and
transporting, that I wish for a present possession. No Heir ever longed more
for his Inheritance; no Captive ever longed more for Liberty; no sick and
pained man ever longed more for ease, than I now do for Heaven. When I am
there, what charming music shall I hear! what glorious sights shall I behold!
what blessed and delightful company shall I have! what joy will enter into,
possess, and fill this Soul of mine! what a Mansion of Light, and Glory shall I
enter into, when I have put off this earthly Tabernacle! how does a thought of
this make my fettered, and yet imprisoned Soul, cry out? How long! Lord, how
long! farewell, vain World, farewell; not Earth, but Heaven is my home, and I
long, groan, and wish to be there. Is the time of my departure at hand? Is the
time come that I must die? Lord, I do submit, thy holy will be done. My Body I
cheerfully bequeath unto the dust; O faithful grave, keep what I commit unto
thee, this Body till my Lord shall come, and then deliver it up: In the dust
shall this flesh of mine sleep, and rest in hope. My Soul, my precious and
immortal Soul, O my God, I resign to thee; into thine hand I commit my Spirit:
Thou Psalm. 31. 5.
have redeemed me, O Lord God of truth. Father into (...) ^ands I commit my
Spirit. Lord Luke 23. 46. Acts 7. 59.
Jesus (...). Must I die now! Lord, (...) in thy will, believing thy promise,
trusting in thy mercy, through the ALL-SUFFICIENT MERITS of thy Son, and my
Savior, I wait; wait! Lord, I long for the happy moment: And my last Petition,
and dying prayer shall be, Come Lord Jesus, come qickly; Rev. 22. 20. 1 These.
4. 17.
that I might be for ever with the Lord, come Lord Jesus, come quickly: Amen,
Amen.

FINIS

