THE Earl of Dorset HIS SPEECH FOR PROPOSITIONS OF PEACE, DELIVERED TO HIS
MAJESTY at OXFORD, on January 18.

London, printed in the year 1642.

A Speech spoken by the Earl of DORSET, unto His Majesty at OXFORD, concerning
the War now in ENGLAND.
Most gracious Sovereign:
I Am not altogether unsensible of this business, wherein I am now called to
give my advice, I know I shall suffer some disadvantage, being an Englishman by
Nation and Education, and the best blood that runs in my veins I have
extracted thence, besides, my fortunes have their situation within these
confines. What I shall now speak, is not merely ex animo, sed ex cord: some
may happily impute it as proceeding from strength of affection to that place and
people from whence I came; but I do protest, my zeal to your Majesty shall at
this time suspend the agitation of such principals, and I will set aside all
particular relations, and look upon the question as it is, and not as passion
and affection may set it forth.

The question is concerning Wars, an unknown subject, sweet to those that have
not tried it, yet the worst of war is usual in the close: And if the
conclusion of the most advantageous war that ever was waged, when all
reckonings be cast up, the Conqueror has had little whereof to glory. But
this is not a war between a King and a stranger, but between a Sovereign
and his Subjects, a near relation, and they had need to be weighty motives
that shall dissolve this knot; subjects are easily lost, we see the work is
every day, but once lost, are hardly regained. Affections are like to crystal
glasses, which broken, are hardly set together again.

But these are not subjects, as the kingly Propher speaks of, A people that I
know not are subject unto me; but your Majesty may say of them, as Adam of
Eve, that was found out of his rib, Flesh of my flesh, and bone of my bone; or
rather as David of his subjects in the day of his Inauguration, For my brethren
and companions sake; for your Majesty being theirs, and they yours by a double
tie, you are not only Rex factus, but Rex natus: And therefore the union being
so straight, the motive had need be weighty, that shall cause a man to set his
own house a fire, and to destroy the work of his own hands.

Now let us consider two things: first, the necessity of War, secondly, the
motives unto it, whether they be Tanti, and of such moment, that a King should
hazard the uncertain chance of war, and the miseries that accompany it,
rather then to forgo the same.

For the first, it is a good note of Tacitus, that Bellona should be ultimum
refugium, because it is the worst refuge. And if we consider of the wisest
Kings that ever ware Scepter in the latter times, how willing they were to
deliver the stroke of war almost upon any terms.

If your Majesty consider but the practice of King Lewis the eleventh, and
Henry the seventh, which of England and France in the large List and Catalogue
of all their Kings, cannot point forth two of more deep and profound
judgment, and better versed in the mystery of Government; yet what means they
use (or rather did use) to divert the course, if at any time it did come within
their Channel; they counted it no dishonor to yield to their Subjects
demands, though sometimes unjust and unreasonable, nay, themselves to be the
first seekers, and propounders of Peace. And so by this means, when the storm
was over, and things come to be debated upon the great Corpit, they were
masters of their own ends, and their subjects affections, and so obtained the
victory without striking a stroke.

These wise Kings considered the end of war was uncertain, and the event
various, and he that commits one Error in the war, especially when the
seat of it is in his own Kingdom, seldom times to commit a second: we need
not to go far for instances, Richard the second, and Edward the second will be
fresh presidents for any that shall endeavor to buy the experience hereof upon
such dear terms as they did. It should be in the body Politic, as it is in
the body natural. Phlebotomies should never be used, but when the humors are
so predominant, that no other course will remove them, and that unless they be
expelled, they will occasion desolation.

But blessed be God there is no such necessity in the case, there are some
rough humors in the body Politic, it cannot be denied, and some it may be
that work obstruction in some of the lesser pipes of government, but when your
Vena Basilica, and Vena Cava, are full of the royal spirits in them, have
their proper influence and motion without any opposition. What is now to be
done by force is not fit for every subject, some humors are to be expelled by
lena ^^ines, when all purgations make them malignant. There are three means to
be used that have not been tried, any of which are better then the means
prescribed. The first removes the occasion; this can be no impeachment to the
Scepter, the wisest Kings have had their oversight in government, which a wiser
day have taught them to recall.

Your Father reigned gloriously, and commanded the affections as well as the
body of the English, yet he never sought the obtruding of minimus infimis, and
yet none more zealous of a Kingly Government then he: it is an act of the
extremest folly to hazard the substance for a shadow, not worthy to be
contended for: And if your Majesty were Master of your own desires, it would
not add one cubit to your stature.

Secondly, if this like not, let time work it forth, and by this means swallow
up the hook or Induxor, the proposal of it left, recreets distastefull
things, works most at first, least afterward; by degrees your Majesty may work
them to that (which for the present) they will rather dye then embrace: We see
how by degrees the Romans brought a Royal slavery upon the world, which if
they had at first propounded upon downright terms, had hardly been
accomplished: If ever Norman William by degrees brought the English to wear
the yoke, which if he had at the first tendered, he either must have missed his
aim, or Norman no people to employ; so impatient then were the English Nation
to hear of a Conqueror, and we see it is sometimes costly.

What if your Majesty should seem to yield to the demands of the English now,
and give the advantage of a fair game, cannot your Majesty remove the objects
by degrees, turn the humors some other way for a more seasonable opportunity,
to scrue in things by instruments more fit and less subject to exception; the
proposal of the course I hold more certain, more safe, more secure, which
knows no law, but devoures all the other. And I hold that Kingdom most
miserable which is forced to make use of a remedy worse then the disease.

Thus much for the first, there is no necessity of War, Rebus sic stantibus.

Secondly, these things in agitation are not Tanti, of such consequence as
should require such a desperate adventure, as to hazard a kingdom at a cast.
Plutarch wisely compared those that know only to propose the means to such as
fish with a golden hook, the loss of which hook is of more consequence then
the fish they can take; truly to speak plainly what I think, they that advise
war in this case, know not what it is to get, nor greatly care for the loss of
a Kingdom, so they may play their own games, and fish in troubled waters; suce
counselors as these were the Bishops of Rosse to the late Queen of Scots,
and the Bishop of Brooks to that miserable King of Hungary, who was the cause
and occasion to bring the Turk into Hungary, and the French into Scotland,
both which Nations have cause to wish that they never knew the way thither
again.

Three Reasons have been given to persuade to war, I will not now Answer, but
leave to him that is better able, and instructed to such a purpose; whereof
considering nulla salus Bello, nulla necessitas Belli.

My Advice to your Majesty is not to use war, but when the end of it is a
certain or probable peace, and when there is no way left but that only to
obtain it.

FINIS.

