A SERMON Occasioned by the Late Earthquake Which happened in LONDON, And other
Places On the Eighth of September, 1692.

Preached to a CONGREGATION in READING.

By SAMUEL DOOLITTLE.

ISAIAH ii. 19. And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the
caves of the earth, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory of his majesty,
when he arises to shake terribly the earth. LONDON, Printed by J. R. for J.
Salusbury, at the Rising-Sun near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1692.

To the Reverend, and his Honored Father, Mr. THOMAS DOOLITTLE.
Honored Sir,
A Late Providence equally surprising and sad; a Providence, which they must be
great Strangers in this our Jerusalem, who have not heard of it; gave birth to
this following Discourse. To perpetuate the Memory, and assist my Neighbors in
making an improvement of it, was the design of its being first preached, and now
published. I know that a Critical Eye may observe some blemishes; and I persuade
my self an envious one will find more: But I am the less solicitous, because I
hope, I rather designed to do good to others, than gain applause to my self. I
would rather that Men would praise God, Romans 1. 9.
(whose I am, and whom I desire to serve with my Spirit, in the Gospel of his
Son) than blow the Trumpet at my door.

Though this Discourse has the ill fate, to come forth in an Age when the Love
of many is waxed cold: Yet I hope some will have that charity for it and the
Author too, which hides a multitude of faults. If some shall find fault with
the style as not being acurate, and polisht; let them know, it was preached to a
Congregation in the Country, who mind more that the form of Words delivered to
them be wholesome and sound, than gay and eloquent: And that so sad and awful a
Providence called for something more, than flourishes of wit. Perhaps some that
are got into the chair of the scornful, will deride it; Heb 5. 14
but I hope that they, who have their senses exercised, Genesis 27. 4
to discern both good and evil; will find I have prepared savoury meat for
them, ver. 20.
and that God brought it to me. To justify the making so plain a discourse,
thus public; I neither can, nor care, to use that Stale Complement; of its
being extorted from me, by the irresistible importunity of them that heard it:
Neither will I stuff this Epistle with those trifling Apologies, which are as
easily answered as they are commonly used. Matthew. 25 5.
It is a time, when not only the foolish Virgins; but the wise too slumber and
sleep. Oh what a Spirit of slumber is fallen upon most of the Protestant
Churches, at this day! And must none of the Watchmen of Israel sound the
Trumpet, and give them an Alarm!

If the abounding of Iniquity, and the frequent repetition of the same sins;
and those too, that are of a crimson color, and scarlet dye: If the general
declension of Faith, Love, Zeal, and other Christian Graces, which is too
notoriously visible among all Parties; that profess the Protestant Religion; or
which is all one, Jude ver. 3.
the faith which was once delivered to the Saints: If the ill symptoms which
are upon us at home; and our Brethren abroad: If former, and later warnings of
Providence, be not sufficient to excuse, nay, to justify my calling men to
repentance and reformation; I must, ay, and I am willing for once, to bear the
blame, of having done an unnecessary work.

These my first fruits, Sir, I offer to you; to whom I owe all I can do of this
kind. If they are not so fully ripe; yet because they bear that Character let
them find acceptance with you. I hope the discourse, together with the occasion
of it, may do good: And if it may contribute to the repentance and reformation
of the nation; or any particular Number of Sinners in it, my great end is
attained: That it may be accompanied with that divine, with that all-mighty
power, which can shake, and open the heart of the most obdurate sinner; as well
as that of the earth, let your prayers meet mine at the throne of grace.

I am, Honored Sir, Reading Sept. 29. 92. Your most dutiful, and most obedient
Son, SAMVEL DOOLITTLE.

A SERMON Preached upon the Late Earthquake, Which happened in LONDON, And
other PLACES On the Eighth of September, 1692.
ISAIAH xxix. 6. Thou shall be visited of the Lord of hosts with Thunder, and
with Earthquake, --
THough almighty God has been shooting one flaming arrow after another,
against a sinful and provoking People; his quiver is still full. Though
desolating judgments (the messengers of divine anger) have been like the waves
of the Sea; which come rolling and tumbling one upon the neck of another: The
treasuries of Gods wrath are not yet emptied. When one fire is out, how easily
and suddenly may another be kindled? Every Creature, from the highest Angel to
the lowest worm, stands ready armed with a sting to avenge its makers quarrel.
Not only Angels those Courtiers of Heaven, but all Creatures in this lower
World are ready to do the Pleasure, and execute the Will of their great and
common Lord, They need not to be pressed, for they are Volunteers in this
Service. In every part of the Elemental World, an angry God can find
instruments of his vengeance; the winds and waves, which no man hitherto could
tame; readily obey him. There is no Creature, though at first made for the use
and service of innocent Adam, but may be a rod and a sword in the hand of an
offended God to lash, wound, and kill his guilty children. If God have a mind
to drown the Old World: He can gather the Waters together; and the continually
weeping clouds; shall turn the dry land into a sea. If God have a mind to burn
Sodom and Gomorrah, he can on a sudden rain showers of fire and brimstone from
Heaven: Turn those Cities into ashes and rubbish; and they shall experience a
temporal, before they drop into an eternal Hell. If God will fight against, the
enemies of his Church: He has the whole Militia, and all the Artillery of
Heaven at his command; on a sudden, in a moment unthought of, he can discharge
the Cannon of Heaven, scare them with his Thunder, and scatter them with his
Lightning. If God will take a speedy vengeance, on Corah and his wicked
accomplices; or on any other company of rebel creatures; at his command the
closely compacted earth, shall open her mouth, swallow up, and bury them alive;
become their coffin, and grave too. What God of this kind can do, we may learn,
from the mouth of two witnesses, viz. a late Providence, and the Text I have
now read. Thou shall be visited by the Lord of hosts with thunder and
earthquake: In which words, we have these three things.

1. The Visitant, the Lord of hosts, the Lord, that is great in strength and
mighty in power. Jehovah, to whom nothing is impossible or hard: The Lord of
hosts, who is general of all the forces, in Heaven, Air, and Earth, Lo! This is
he who shall visit. Sometimes, we read of man's visiting God: Sometimes of one
man's visiting another: hers, of God's visiting man.

2. The visited, Thou. To whom is it, the Lord of hosts makes this visit? To
Jerusalem, v. 1. called Ariel, the city where David dwelt: Jerusalem though the
place, where the Temple stood, and the Worship of God was performed: Jerusalem,
the Metropolis, the head City of the Jews must be visited. Thou, even thou, O
Jerusalem, the City of David, and the City of God too, shall be visited.

3. The visitation it self; with thunder and earthquake: Sometimes, God visits
man in a way of Grace and Mercy; when he comes to make a visit, he brings
many presents and love tokens along with him: And oh! Blessed are they, upon
whom, the great God bestows such visits as these. Of such visits you read 1 Samuel 2. 21. Psalm 65. 9. and the greatest Mercy, God ever vouchsafed to this
wicked, and apostate World of ours is called by this name, Luke 1. 68. Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited, and redeemed his people.
Sometimes the Scene is changed; and God visits in a way of Judgment: Not in
Love, but in Wrath; not as a Friend, but as an Enemy, not as an Indulgent
Father, but as a Revenging Judge. In these visits, not Mercy, but Justice is
his attendant, Psalm. 89. 32. Then will I visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Jer. 5. 9. Shall I not visit for these
things? says the Lord, and shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as
this? Hos. 9. 7. The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are
come, and Israel shall know it. And in this manner must Jerusalem the holy, and
once beloved City, be visited by the Lord of hosts. God threatens them more
generally, v. 1, 2. Woe to Ariel, to Ariel, the city where David dwelt: Add ye
year to year; let them kill sacrifices. Yet I will distress Ariel, and there
shall be heaviness and sorrow, and it shall be to me as Ariel. q. d.
Notwithstanding your formal, customary worship (in which you confide so much)
both City and Temple shall be brought into great straits: Both City and Temple
shall be like the Altar, filled with the Bodies of dead men (instead of slain
beasts) sacrificed to my Justice, and the threatened evil is more particularly
expressed in the Text; thunder and earthquake. From the words, these three
Doctrines may be raised.

Doct. 1. Gods executing of Judgments on a sinful people, is his visiting of
them. A day of calamity is a day of visitation. Great Persons have their set
times for visiting: And so has the great God. Men have their time of sinning;
and the Lord of hosts will have his time of visiting, Amos 3. 13, 14. Hear ye,
and testify in the house of Jacob; says the Lord God, the God of hosts, that
in the day that I shall visit the transgression of Israel upon him, I will also
visit the altars of Beth-el; Jer. 48. 44.
the time of punishing Moab, is called the year of visitation. Men sin boldly,
and impudently affront the Majesty of Heaven and Earth: They provoke him day,
Psalm. 50. 21.
after day, year, after year, and God seems to take no notice: Nay,
notwithstanding the frequent repetition of their crimes; he gives them many
blessings, but a visiting time will come. Exodus 32. 34.
Therefore now go lead the people, unto the place of which I have spoken unto
thee. Behold mine angel, shall go before thee. Nevertheless in the day when I
visit, I will visit their sin upon them. Poor Sinner, thou go on in thy
Rebellions, addest new sins to thy old ones, and God defers his anger: Mic. ^.
4.
But I may say, the day of the visitation com^th; and when it comes, God will
make thee such a visit, as shall cause thy countenance to change, thy spirit to
sink, thy courage to fail, and thine heart to tremble. It will be a troublesome
and unwelcome visit indeed. Let me ask thee the same question holy Job asked
himself; when he visits, what shall I answer him? What will thou answer? Job
(...). 14.
When God shall visit thee for all thy oaths, and curses; for all thine
intemperance and excess; thine extravagant mirth, and drunken-bouts, for all
thine omission of duties, for all thy formality, and hypocrisy in them, for
all thine injustice, and oppression; for all thy contempt of his goodness, and
abuse of his patience; for all thy slightings of his Grace, and trampling on
the Blood and Bowels of his dear Son; for all thy resisting, grieving,
quenching, and vexing of his Holy Spirit; when God shall visit for these
things, What wilt, What can thou answer him? Answer him! Alas! Like the man
that came to the marriage feast without a wedding garment, Matthew. 22. 12.
thou will be speechless. Gods angry visits bring guilty Creatures, to a
defenseless silence. O Sinner, when the living, dreadful, and eternal God shall
dispute the matter with thee; with frowns in his brow, and a drawn Sword in his
hand, Job 40. 4.
thou will be forct, to lay thine hand upon thy mouth; and thy mouth in the
dust; for thou will neither be able to resist nor answer him.

Doct. II. Even those places, where the worship of God is fixed; even those
people, who enjoy the greatest Church Priviledges, and abound in the external
performance of holy duties; may be visited of the Lord of hosts, in a very
dreadful and terrible manner. Was Sodom and Gomorrah visited of God? Ay, so was
Jerusalem too. Church Priviledges, though of the highest kind; a multitude of
formal, and liveless Prayers, a thousand Sacrifices laid on the Altar; if our
lusts be not sacrificed too; will not keep off the day of visitation. Thou, even
thou; O Jerusalem, shall be visited. You only have I known of all the families
of the earth; Am. 3. 2.
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities. London in respect of
others, may be called the Holy City, the Religious City, in it God has much
people; in it there are many that fear and worship God; in that City there is
frequent praying, and much hearing; for Spiritual Privileges and the Worship
of God it is another Jerusalem: And yet London, (oh how impartial is the Judge
of the whole Earth!) has had its years of visitation; in the year 1665, God
visited London with a devouring Plague, insomuch that that year was called the
Visitation, and a dreadful year it was, for God, and Death visited both at
once: The next year 66 God visited London again, and when God made this visit,
a fire went before him, and a mighty flame followed after; he went through the
City in clouds of smoke. A little more than a Week ago, in the same Month of
September, God visited London a third time, he walked through the Streets of
London, and the earth shook, and trembled under him: And if two such Cities, as
Jerusalem and London have been thus visited by the Lord of hosts; what number
of Sinners can hope to escape? In the Name of God, Sirs break off your Sins by
Repentance; or you shall be visited too. If God does not visit the whole Land,
he may visit a particular Town; if not a whole Town, a particular Family; if
not a whole Family, a particular Person; God may visit thee with languishing
Sickness, torturing Pains, with an hasty Death, however sooner, or later in
this World, or in the next, if thou remain impenitent, (as the Lord lives) thou
shall be visited. If God do not visit thee on Earth, he will in Hell, and oh
what a long, as well as troublesome visit will that be!

Doct. III. As the Lord of hosts visits a sinful people with other calamities;
so sometimes with the particular one of an Earthquake.

In speaking to this Doctrine, I shall observe this Method.

I. I shall lay down some propositions concerning an Earthquake, wherewith God
sometimes visits the Children of Men. II. Enquire what are the properties of
this visit. III. Make the application, assisting you in making an improvement
of the Text, and the late startling Providence.
I. I shall lay down some propositions concerning an Earthquake wherewith God
does sometimes visit the Children of Men; and they shall be these three.

Prop. 1. An Earthquake is taken either in a metaphorical, and borrowed, or
else in a literal, and proper sense; as taken in a metaphorical sense, it
denotes those hurries and confusions, those turnings and overturnings that are
in the World: Those Commotions and Concussions that happen at any time in
Church or State. Rev. 8. 5. And the Angel took the censer, and filled it with
fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth: and there were voices and
thundrings, and lightnings, and an earthquake, Rev. 6. 12. And I beheld when he
had opened the sixth seal, and lo, there was a great earthquake, i. e. a great
change in the State of Affairs, the Public Religion of the Empire being
changed, from Paganism to Christianity by Constantine. The Kingdom of God is
from Everlasting to Everlasting, fixed and stable; but the Kingdoms of this
World are mutable, like the Moon subject to many changes; they not only shake
and totter, but tumble too. The Body Politic, as well as the Body Natural, may
be afflicted with an Ague, and dye with Convulsions. All things are turned
upside down as they are in an Earthquake; and in this sense there have been
many and great Earthquakes in the World; the four Famous and Renowned
Monarchies have felt them. But an Earthquake is taken in the litteral and
proper sense, when the Earth shakes and trembles under us, when the foundations
quake, and the Pillars of it totter, 1 Kings 19. 11. And after the wind an
earthquake. When the Earth it self, that is the Basis of this lower World, and
at other times firm and settled, moves, trembles, and shakes, like a Man in an
Ague; Is. 24. 2^.
or reels to and fro like a drunkard.

Prop. II. The sending of an earthquake is Gods act, he is the author and
efficient cause of it. This is plainly asserted in the Text. All Penal Evils
and Afflictive Calamities come from God. Am. 3. 6.
Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it? If a Famine
starve us, It is God that stops the Bottles of Heaven, and locks up the Womb of
the Earth: If a Pestilence kill at Noonday, it is God that shoots those
poisoned and flaming Arrows. If a fire burn and turn our houses into ashes, it
is the breath of an angry God that kindles, and blows up the flame, if the
Earth have its Convulsions, move, and shake, quake, and tremble under us, it is
because God touches it. That mighty God, that hangs this Earth of ours upon
nothing; with a touch of his Finger, hurles it hither and thither; he looks
on the earth, Psalm. (...)
and it trembles; he touches the hills, and they smoke. Isah. (...) 5.
The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt. Job (...)
He removes the mountains, he overturneth them in his anger; he shakes the
earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof tremble. I don't deny, but God
may make use of the Ministry of Angels, good, and had, I don't deny, (what
Natural Philosophers tell us) that Air, Vapors, and Exhalations, shut up in
the Bowels of the Earth, forcing their way out, may contribute to its shaking:
Yet the Scripture affirms it is a work of God, and though we may own and
acknowledge second Causes; there is no reason we should exclude the first: It
is my Meat that preserves my Health; my Physic that recovers me, when sick;
but yet Religion and reason too bid me own it is God that nourishes me by the
one, and restores me to health by the other. To do these things, Is. 45. 7.
God claims as his Prerogative, I form the light, and create darkness: I make
peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. If concerning the late
Calamity, it be asked, who has done this? God will answer, I shook the Earth; I
the Lord do all these things.

Prop. III. An earthquake is usually sent by God in judgment, and inflicted as
a penal evil. If sometimes, it be an Act of God, only as the God of Nature,
concurring with second Causes: Yet many times it is an Act of God, as Judge,
punishing those that rebel against him; it is not only the effect of his power,
as a God; but the fruit of his anger, as an offended Judge. Psalm. 18. 7.
The earth shook and trembled, the foundations also of the hills moved, and
were shaken, because he was wroth. It is spoken of as a judgment, inflicted for
Sin. Am. 4. 1.
Though Thunder, Lightning, and Earthquake may sometimes come in the course of
Nature, in the way of a common and general Providence: Yet sometimes we may,
and must look upon them as Messengers of Divine anger, as notices of Gods
displeasure, against us for our Sins. Men are wilfully blind, and will not see
that God is displeased; and the trembling and shaking Earth, with open mouth,
tells them he is so. Though Men who are leavened with the Principles of
Atheism, and whose Consciences are stupefied, to a wonder, with that benumming
opium, look upon such things only as fortuitous events that happen in this
mutable State, as the product of a blind, and fatal necessity: Yet Men that
have their eyes opened will acknowledge they come from God as the efficient,
from Sin as the impulsive and deserving cause, and that the Errand they come
upon is to correct and reform Sinners. And I think it is too evident, it is a
Judgment, when the Sins of a people have been many, and great, numerous, and
heinous, and when there are more than usual remarks of Terror set on the
Calamity: If a short fit of trembling, if one Minute or two's shivering, if the
shaking of the Earth in one particular place only, be not an Argument of Gods
Anger; yet when the Earth shall open her Mouth, and become the Grave of living
Men; when the Earth shall shake for many Miles together, nay in Countries at a
very great distance; when (as our Savior says) there are Earthquakes in
diverse places, Mat. 24. 7.
I know no reason why we should not conclude it has something of the Nature of
a Judgment in it. (...).


II. The Second thing proposed, is to show the properties of this visit. To
enquire what kind of visit it is God makes, when he visits with an
Earthquake. This enquiry shall be dispatched in these six following particulars.

1. When God visits with an Earthquake, it is a sudden and surprising visit.
Sometimes God is a long time in preparing his Arrows, and bending his Bow;
there is some considerable space of time, between the Sentence and the
Execution: But this Judgment of an Earthquake comes suddenly, and in a moment.
In many other judgments God sends his Heralds to proclaim his coming; in this
he comes upon a poor People, like a Thief in the Night; suddenly and
unexpectedly: Alas! They have no warning till they find themselves past help.
An Earthquake is like an Arrow secretly shot; like an Arrow flying in darkness,
that wounds and kills before it is espied. God visits before they have any
notice he is so near at hand: He enters into the City without so much as
knocking at the Gates. Oh! how sudden and surprising was the late Earthquake!
On Thursday Morning the Citizens of London little thought of such a visit in
the Afternoon: Even when some were trading in their Shops, others walking in
the Streets, some trafficking at the Exchange, others sitting at their Tables,
Ps. 78. 30.
even while the meat was in their mouths; They were visited by the Lord of host
with an Earthquake: In the midst of their worldly business, and secular
Affairs, the great God makes a visit to them. In a moment (oh what a surprising
visit was this!) their Houses tottered, their Walls of Brick and Stone
trembled, and the foundations of their City were shaken.

2. When God visits with an Earthquake, it is a dreadful and terrible visit. In
this, as well as in other Calamities the suddenness adds a sting to, and
augments the horror of it; The more surprising any evil is, the more
afflictive and frightful to Nature it is. When an Evil comes slowly, step by
step, we have some time to fortify our selves against, and prepare our selves
to encounter it: But when it comes unlookt for, it finds us unarmed and naked,
and therefore strikes with the greater dread and terror. Is not this a
terrible visit? When the surface of the Earth is rent and torn; and breaches
made in the strongest Walls: Is it not terrible, when Houses tremble like the
leaves of a Tree, shaken with a mighty Wind; and whole Towns, Villages and
Cities are swallowed up at once? Is it not a terrible visit when frighted
Creatures can run no where for shelter, when they can take Sanctury, neither in
their highest Turrets, nor in their lowest Cellars; when they can go no whither
but they run to meet Destruction and Death? Is it not a terrible visit, when
Men, Women, and Children are buried in the belly of the Earth, as Jonah was in
the Whales, before they have a time to dye? It is sad, (and we can hardly
behold it without a flood of Tears, and volleys of Groans) to see the Earth
open her bosom, to receive the Bodies of our Deceased Relatives: But oh! How
much more dreadful is it to see the Earth open her Mouth wide, and swallow up
Thousands, not of Dead, but Living Men and Women? Oh! How terrible a visit is
this! When the Earth opens her Mouth, and now sends forth a flood of Waters
to drown, and anon vomiteth up flames of Fire to burn; when the Loving Husband
cannot help his distressed and affrighted Wife, when neither Father nor Mother
can help their poor, scared, and crying Children, though willing to redeem the
Lives of their dear Children, with the loss of their own: When all that the
dearest Friends can do one for another, is to go down to the Pit together, and
accompany one another into Eternity. Good God! What a terrible visit is this!
When here one may see a Leg, and there an Arm, here a Head, and there a Trunk,
here some vomiting Blood, and yonder multitudes, with their brains dashed out.
Here some dead, and yonder some groaning forth this melancholy wish, Would God
I were dead; my Pains and Tortures are worse and more intolerable than the
pangs of Death; would to God I were dead: Here some poor Babes hanging on the
breasts of their dead Mothers, and yonder many Infants fetching their last
Breath, and giving up the Ghost in the Arms of their weeping Mothers; who with
yearning Bowels cry out; alas! For thee my poor Babe, alas! For thee my dear
Child! These are sad sights, dismal spectacles; when God visits with an
Earthquake, he makes a terrible visit indeed. This is a terrible visit,
witness, what I have now said, and what your Ears have heard concerning the
Earthquake that happened in Jamaica: And though God was more favorable when he
thus visited London, yet they found it frightful and terrible enough; their
running out of their Houses, their shutting up their Shops, their tremblings,
and fears, spoke how much dread and terror there is in such a visit.

3. It is, (especially as to us in these parts of the World) a rare and unusual
visit. Other Judgments are more common, this more rare. Judgment is said to be
Gods stange work: Is. 28. 21.
And this whereof I am now speaking, evidently bears that Character. In other
Countries Earthquakes are more frequent; in ours more seldom: God has not
visited us in England, in this manner, so often as he has others, and if there
be not the same reason in Nature for it here, as in other places; we should
take more notice of it, acknowledge the finger of God in it, and think of it
with an awful trembling: Our Sins have been many and great, our provocations
high and daring, and the Lord of hosts might have visited us year after year
with an Earthquake: Though we are more securely siituated than the rest of our
Neighbors; yet that God, who is God of the Hills, as well as of the Valleys,
of the Plains as well as of the Mountains, could have visited us with
Earthquakes, as often as he has visited others. It has not been an every
days, an every weeks, no, nor an every years visit. God has visited England
with Mercy year after year, but it has been but now and then, he has visited
this Land of ours with an Earthquake. Our Mountain has stood strong, while God
has touched others, and made them shake and tremble: The Earth in other places
has again and again opened her Mouth, and swallowed up her Inhabitants: But
God has been sparing of making such visits to us. In History you may read of
some Earthquakes that have been in England; but the Earth, for a long time has
had rest from these inward Convulsions and tremblings.

4. When God visits with an Earthquake, his visit is sometime short; and
sometimes of a longer continuance. These visits are not always of a length; as
they differ in the dread and terror: So they do in the duration, and
continuance of them. Some of them may be but for a Minute, or two, others may
last longer; sometimes the Earth does but shake and shiver, and at another
time, it is tossed, like a Ball to and fro; and these inward Convulsions in the
Bowels of the Earth hold a long time. In this respect it differs from many
other Calamities. When God visits with a Famine, a Plague, or with a Sword,
there are none, P^. ^4. 9.
no, none of our Prophets know how long: It may be a great while before the
Earth yield her increase again, and bring forth Herb, to be Meat for Man and
Beast; it may be many Months before a Plague be stopped, the infected Air be
purged, and Death give over following its prey; it may be many years before the
slaughtering Sword be sheathed, and Peace established: It is with People in
these judgments, as with Persons in Chronical Distempers; it is a long time
before they are recovered: But this Judgment of an Earthquake is as sharp, so
usually but short; like an acute Disease, from which the Patient is soon
recovered; or of which he quickly dies. The shaking of the Earth, like the
changing of those who shall be found alive at the last day, is done in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye. (...)
These tremblings of the Earth are like the sits of an Ague, quickly over,
though some hold longer than others. In this case God has done his visit in a
short time.

5. This visit is sometimes particular, sometimes more general. Sometimes God
makes this visit in one particular Country, and in one part and corner of it
only; he visits one County and not another; one City, and not another; This
Town, or that, and not the next: But sometimes God in making this visit takes a
larger compass, P^. 1^. 6.
his circuit like that of the Suns is from one end of the Earth to the other.
He visits many People, and many Countries, and those that are at a great
distance at once. Acts 16. 26.
The Earthquake that happened when Paul and Silas were in Prison, was a
particular one, reached no farther than the Confines of the Prison. But the
Earthquake that was among the solemnities that attended the Crucifixion, Marth.
27. 51.
and Death of our Blessed Lord, was more general; some think the whole Earth
was then shaken, however it is agreed, it reached a long way. The Earth for a
great way (as if it were more sensible than those Men that acted their part in
that bloody and unparalled Tragedy) trembled and shook, the Sun blushed and
would not behold: The Earth was filled with horror at the vile indignities
that were done to the Son of God, and Savior of the World. And in this that
lately happened, God visited not only the City, but the Suburbs, not only
London, but the Country, not only one or two, but many did the Lord of hosts
visit with an Earthquake; not only England, but other parts beyond the Seas: In
this visit God marched from City to Country, from Town to Town, nay, though the
Sea was in his way, he passed the mighty Ocean, and vifited them, that dwell on
the other side of it too. This Earthquake seemed to have the fame Command,
Abraham once had, Gen 13. 17.
to walk through the land in the length thereof, and in the breadth thereof.
Though it was not in all, yet it was in many places, and those very remote and
distant too. God held his visitation in Countries very distant, and in many
Countries at one and the same instant of time. Oh how far can God go, when he
has a mind to visit!

6. This is a warning, Luke 21. 9, 11.
and a presaging visit: And it ought to be a startling, and an alarmning one.
This visiting with an Earthquake is very often, (God help the drowsy
Inhabitants of England to consider and lay it to heart) the forerunner of some
dreadful calamity that is near at hand. It has been like a flaming Beacon set
on Fire, to give notice an Enemy is approaching. Mat. 24. 2, 7, 8.
Thus according to our Saviors prediction, Earthquakes were among the
forerunners of Jerusalems destruction; an Earthquake to them was like the
shooting off of a warning, before the murdering Piece is discharged. Some think
it is among those things, that presage the dissolution of the World; and shall
usher in the day of the great and final Judgment.

Though the Book of Providence be very mysterious, and dark, and cannot be
unriddled, till time be the interpreter; events are the best Comments on
Providence, as well as Prophesies: Though in these volumes of Providence, as
well as in St. Paul's Epistles, 2 Pet. 3 16. (...)
There are some things hard to be understood; yet a modest and humble
conjecture is not unlawful. If God gives us Signs in the Heavens, and Signs in
the Earth too, if God put Nature into a fright, we ought, it is our Duty and
Wisdom to take the warning these things suggest. Perhaps the Earthquake being
over, 1 Samuel 15 32.
Men are apt to say with Agag, surely the bitterness of death is past, when
these tremblings and shakings of the Earth may be but the melancholy Presages
of what is yet behind. When I consider what Sins and Impieties this Nation of
ours has been guilty of, how we are rendered worse rather than better by those
late signal Deliverances, which evidently carry the superscription of God upon
them; I think it is not rashness to say, I am afraid God has not yet done
visiting of England. Earthquakes have been the forerunners of heavy Judgments,
and extraordinary Calamities, and instead of prophesying, I pray God this that
has lately happened, do not bode some ill to us, and the Neighbor Nations.
Lord! grant it may not. Amen.

III. The third and last thing I undertook, is to make some practical
Improvement both of the Text and Providence; and that shall be done in speaking
to some Inferences, very easily deducible from both.

Inference 1. Does the Lord of Hosts sometimes visit with an Earthquake, and
has he of late done so? Then with what awful attention and heed should we take
Notice of such a visit as this! All Gods visits are worthy of our Notice, and
deserve a particular remark: Divine Providence (especially those that have
more than ordinary Signatures and Characters imprinted on them) should be
attended to, and seriously considered by us. If God visit us in Mercy, we
should take notice of the Time, Manner, Frequency, Seasonableness, and other
Circumstances. If God visit in Anger, as he has lately done, with an
Earthquake, we should regard and consider it; Luke 2. 19.
with Mary the Mother of our Lord we should keep all these things and ponder
them in our hearts. Is. 5. 11, 12.
An heavy woe is denounced against those that follow their Cups and carnal
Mirth, but regard not the works of the Lord, neither consider the operation of
his hands. God awhile ago visited Jamaica, with an Earthquake, and a Terrible
one too; we heard of it, we made it our Coffee-House Talk, we entertained our
selves with it as we do with a piece of Common News; but we did not, (ah stupid
sinners that we are!) we did not take that awful notice of it, as we ought to
have done. We heard of the Earth's opening her mouth, and swallowing up those
poor sinful wretches in great Numbers; but we did not consider it as the nature
of the Calamity did require; and when God had done visiting of them, he came
over, and visited us too; and what is the Language of such a Providence but
this? Drowfie England, sleepy England, takes no notice of what I have done,
thus have I overturned, overturned this place, and London does not regar; and
though they think their Mountain stands strong, and are ready to say it shall
not be moved, I will go over and shake England, I will visit with an Earthquake
their Me(...)opolis, their chief City, and perhaps then they will consider and
take notice. There are three things we should take notice of and remember, and
yet (the Lord pity us) we are apt to forget them all. The first is our Sins, to
keep us Humble: The second, Gods Mercies, to make us Thankful: The third is
Gods Judgments, or angry Visits, that we may be in the fear of the Lord, Prove.
23. 17.
not only all the day, but all our life long.

This, oh! this is a Visit the Citizens of London, the Inhabitants of England,
should not slightly pass over, should not forget. The Eighth of September 1692.
the day of Gods Visiting with an Earthquake, should be remembered: Write it not
in your Note-books, but in your Memories; Record it not only in your Memories,
but engrave it, on your very Hearts; 1 Cor. 3. 3.
in those fleshly Tables, let this visit of the Lord of Hosts be written.

2. How great is the Misery of wicked Men, who have their portion in this World
and no Treasure but what is laid up upon Earth! Ps 17. 14.
Oh how uncertain, how unconstant is their All! A Treasure laid up upon Earth!
Matthew. 6. 19.
How uncertain? When moth and rust may corrupt, or thioves break through and
steal: How uncertain and unconstant! Ps. 22. 2.
when God has founded the earth upon the Seas, and established it upon the
Floods? If your portion ly in Silver and Gold, Oh! how soon can your riches
make themselves Wings and fly away; Prove. 23. 5.
and you be no more able to stop them than a Bird upon the Wing, that is as
free and unconfined as the Air it flies in? If your portion lie in Houses
(though built with stone and brick) how soon can a fire make them burn as an
oven, Mal. 3. 1.
and the devouring flame feed upon them; how soon can God with his breath, I
mean some stormy Wind overturn them? If your Estate ly in Land, and though then
(silly men!) you think it is secure, oh how soon can the Lord of Hosts destroy
you and all your substance? If God does visit you in Anger, send an Earthquake,
of a few hours, Nay, of a few Minutes long your Houses Reel, Totter, and Tumble
about your ears! The Earth may open her Bosom, and you and your Possessions may
be buried and entombed together. He that has not one foot of Land, at such a
time, has as much benefit as he that has many Acres, a whole Manor, and
many Lordships; for both of them, the rich Landlord, and the toiling Tenant,
make their grave together. The Earth is a firm and solid part of the Creation,
but God in a few Minutes can shake and overturn it. Lord! what a slippery,
uncertain and shortliv'd Happiness have the Men of this World!

3. What, and how great, is the happiness of holy Persons; and how comfortable
may they be, even when God shakes the Heavens, and the Earth too! An
Earthquake, may make an Heart-quake in every impenitent Sinner: (and what a
wonder is it it does not) but the righteous may be bold as a Lion, Prove. 28. 1.
and full of Comfort; when the World is in an hurry without them, all may be
quiet and peaceable within: When there is a threatening and terrifying storm
without, there may be a sweet and blessed calm within. They who can truly say,
Psalm. 46. 1.
God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble; may boldly
say, we will not fear, though the earth be removed, Ver. 2.
and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea; Ver. 3.
though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, Si fractus illabatur orbis
impavidum serient ruinae. Hor.
though the mountains shake with the swelling thereof. The Earth is firm, and
the Mountains the most solid and steady part of it; and yet God with a Touch
can make them smoke, shake and tremble; but even then, Car.
(oh who would not be of that happy Number!) the Lord will be the hope of his
people, lib. 3.
and the strength of the Children of Israel. od. 3.
Oh! what is the happiness of Gods people, that they have something more
lasting and durable, Joel. 3. 16.
more constant and fixed than Earth it self; that they have received, Heb. 12.
28.
and are Heirs of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken. It is a Kingdom, men cannot
shake, Devils cannot shake, and God will not. This Earth of ours may be hurled
hither and thither; but heaven (and that is the place where the Believers
Happiness is laid up) is firm, Colos. 1. 5.
permanent, and remains for ever unshaken. The Walls of yonder City, the new
Jerusalem that is above cannot Totter, and the Foundations shall never be torn
up. Oh what Comfort, amidst all the Commotions and Concussions that are in this
lower World, may holy Souls derive from their Title to that Kingdom which
cannot be shaken; and at which in a little time they shall arrive!

4. How careful should all that have either heard of, or felt the late
Earthquake be, to improve to Spiritual purposes this visit of the Lord of
hosts! It is an evil not to improve the Visits of our Fellow Creatures, of
those wise, holy and good Men we converse withal; but it is doubly Criminal,
not to improve, and get advantage by God's Visits. Peradventure here you will
ask me, How should we improve it? I Answer.

1. Would you improve this late Visit of the Lord of Hosts? Then let it confirm
and strengthen you in the belief of his Power. In these Visits, God gives
evident proof of his Almighty power. It was his hand that formed, and it is his
Arm that shakes the Earth; oh how great is his power! and who has an arm like
God! when we see the Earth trembling, and Rocks rending, and Mountains shaking,
it is very seasonable to cry out with Admiration, and holy Wonder, oh what a
powerful God is this! Does God shake the earth, then what is it he cannot do?
Does he turn the World upside down, does he turn the Earth with his Finger, as
a door is turned upon its Hinges, and does this great God, this mighty Lord,
want power to crush such a worm, to destroy such a piece of warm and breathing
clay as thou art? Oh thou impenitent Sinner, how soon can this mighty Lord God
of Hosts, that shakes the Earth, lay thee on a bed of sickness, throw thee into
a cold, dark and frightful grave, and hurl thee into an hot, flaming and
eternal hell? Do thou dis-believe the power of God? Do you, even you, oh ye
Worms of the Earth think you are fit Match for God? Do you think he is not able
to destroy a whole World of such weak Creatures as you are? Oh think how
Mountains shake, the Earth trembles when he does but look upon them; and
believe he can do this, Ps. 62. 11.
and more than this. You have heard that power belongs to God; let this late
Visit persuade you to believe it, to give a more firm assent to the first
Article of your Creed, I believe in God the Father Almighty --

2. Would you improve this Visit? Then let it excite and maintain in you an
holy aw, and fear of God. This naturally follows from what has been said of
Gods power; and from this very Topic our Savior persuades men to fear God,
Mat. 10. 28.
fear him who is able to cast both body, and soul into Hell. And the
observation and memory of Gods Judgments should cherish this fear: Psalm. 119.
120.
This made Holy David cry out, my fresh trembles for fear of thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments. Shall the Earth tremble, and shall not Sinners much
more? Such Visits as these should fill us with a filial Fear, and an awful
dread, of the great God. When God shook the Earth, methinks, he said as to them
of old, Fear ye not me, Jer. 5. 22.
says the Lord, will ye not tremble at my presence? God shook the Foundations
of London, and said, Will ye not fear me O ye Citizens of London, will ye not
tremble at my presence? God has visited the World with one Earthquake after
another, and cried, O ye Children of Men will ye not fear me? Such amazing and
awful Providence as these, should excite and cherish a regular Fear of God.
Good God! how sad is it, That the Earth, Mountains, Hills and Rocks, and every
thing else should tremble at the Presence of the Lord, and Men should not! Oh
Fear God and Sin, more than ever: Fear God, for he is able to destroy; fear
Sin, for that, and only that, provokes him to do so.

3. Would you improve this late Visit of the Lord of Hosts? La. 3. 40.
Then visit your selves, in order to your Repentance and Amendment of Life. At
such a time we should Visit our own Hearts, search and try our ways; and this
should be in order to our turning to God. The Repentance and Reformation of a
sinful People, is God's design in punishing; this is his end in thus visiting
particular Persons, or whole Societies. What was the Language of the late
Earthquake but this? Repent, Repent, O England, Repent. Lord! give us Ears to
hear, and Hearts to obey, these loud, solemn, and repeated calls to Repentance.
Sin is a Burden, alas! it is a very heavy burden; God himself is pressed with and
weary to bear it: It makes the whole Creation groan; it has lately made the
Earth to tremble, and will not you cast it off? Do, for the Lords sake do, or this
burden will sink you, not only into the Belly of the Earth, but into the Bowels
of Hell too. The Earthquake prepared the Jailer for Conversion, Acts 16. 26.
ver. 30.
it made him come trembling to the Apostles, crying out, Sirs, What must I Do
to be Saved? Oh! that this late Earthquake, might put you, and many more upon
considering with your selves, and enquiring of others what you must do to be
saved; and in order to this, let it put you upon a speedy Repentance; for God's
visit is not answered, without the Sinners amendment.

Inf. V. Does the Lord of Hosts sometimes Visit with an Earthquake, and has he
of late done so? Then how heartily should we bless God, he has done so no
oftener! Oh! what thanks and praise is due to the God of Heaven, there has not
been a more frequent repetition of this Calamity? We might have had one
Earthquake upon the heels of another, shake after shake, till God had shook us
and our dwellings too into the Dust: But though God has visited England with
an Earthquake, we are bound (and O Sirs call up your Drowsy Souls, and awaken
all within you) to praise God, this Judgment has been executed no oftener.

An Earthquake is a very grievous and sore Evil; an astonishing and amazing
Calamity; an Evil against which no Resistance can be made. If a Fire take hold
on our Houses, we may use means to quench the devouring Flame: If a Pestilence
be among us, we may do something to prevent the Infection: But if an Earthquake
come, we wholly ly at the Mercy of it, and can do nothing to help our selves.
An Earthquake is a Judgment that carries all the Ensigns of Horror, and bears
all the frightful Characters of dread and Terror. Oh what a Mercy is it they
have been so rare, and what a Tribute of Thanks is due to Heaven? O England,
England! What a Sacrifice of Praise should thou lay on Gods Altar? How
heartily should we bless God he has not again and again, often and frequently
visited us with this Judgment, at the thoughts of which we may justly tremble,
as the Earth did when God shook it!

Inf. VI. How Affectionately should we praise God, this late Visit of his was
so favorable, and had such a mixture of Mercy in it! Though the Foundations of
London shook, they were not overturned; though the Earth quaked and trembled,
she did not open her Mouth to swallow up living Men and Women: Though the
Houses reeled, they did not tumble; though the Walls parted and gaped, they did
not fall. Surely our God in the midst of Judgment, remembered mercy; and we in
the midst of our Fears, and dangers should not forget to give Thanks. In this
late Dispensation of Providence, you may see both the Severity and Goodness of
God. London quaked and trembled, behold the Severity, London was not swallowed
up, behold the Goodness of God. In this Angry and Terrible Visit God has shown
much Mercy and Goodness, ay, the Riches of his Goodness; and for this do you
bless the Lord, and let all breath praise his holy Name. Now to quicken you to,
and in this seasonable Duty, I shall briefly suggest these three Considerations.

1. Consider, What God had lately done in another place; I mean in Jamaica. He
Visited them in a terrible manner indeed. His Anger was hot, it burnt like
Coals of Fire; his Arm was strong, and threw down all before him: What
Desolations did the Earthquake there make! Suppose you could with safety have
stood by, and seen the Earth moving and shaking, the Houses first reeling to
and fro and then sinking: And the frighted Inhabitants almost at their Wits
end: The distracted Wife hanging about the Neck of her dear Husband; the tender
Infants hanging on the Breasts of their Mothers, and both ready to drop into
the Pit together. Had you seen poor scared Children, running up and down,
seeking their Parents, one Friend with their last breath crying to another,
help, help, for the Lords sake, help, and all at last; after many fruitless
attempts, and vain wishes, tumbling alive into the common Grave. If you had
heard their miserable Cries, their doleful groans, and piercing Shrieks, being
half buried, and half unburied, would you not have thought Englands Mercy a
very great Mercy? I am persuaded you would have returned with your Mouths
filled with Songs of Praise: Let a Melancholy Fancy represent some of the
Terrors of that Visitation; and let a thought of this fill you with
thankfulness, and give a sprightful accent to all your Hallelujahs. Oh how
should a sober thought of this cause your Sacrifices of Praise to ascend to
Heaven in a purer, and brighter Flame!

2. Consider our sins, have deserved as great an overthrow as theirs. When I
consider those words of my Savior, being told by some of the Galileans, whose
Blood Pilate had mingled with their Sacrifices, Luke 13. 2. Suppose ye that
those Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered
such things? I can hardly persuade my self, they of Jamaica were greater
Sinners than we in England, because they drank deeper of the Cup of trembling
than we did. If our Sins are not of the same kind, I am sure they admit of more
aggravating Circumstances than theirs. Londons, Englands Sins are of a more
Crimson Color, and Scarlet Die than Jamaica's: If ours should be laid in the
balance of the Sanctuary with theirs, I am afraid the former would weigh down
the latter: Oh what a Mercy was it God should shake such a People, and not
destroy them! Oh what an instance of Divine goodness was it, that the Earth
should tremble under a Company of Atheists, and Scoffers at Religion; Men that
question the very being, and deny the Providence of God: Under a Company of
Drunkards, and Swearers, Adulterers, and filthy Harlots, Sabbath Breakers, and
Hypocritical Worshippers, and not swallow them up! Mercy that is so constant a
Friend, to the miserable Creature: And so powerful an Advocate in Gods bosom,
mitigated the stroke; and therefore Mercy ought to have the praise.

3. Consider the easiness of a total destruction. All things are alike easy to
Almighty Power. What is it omnipotence cannot effect? This God can amaze the
whole Creation, unhinge the World; shake the Heavens, and rend the Rocks, put
universal Nature into a fright; with one turn of his hand, one word of his
mouth, one frown of his brow, one glance of his angry Eye; yea, with the
smallest breath of his Nostrils; that angry, that mighty God that shook, could
with the same touch have overturned the City: By what was done God gave an
evident proof of what he could further have done. There is no Mountain stands
so strong; but God can shake it: No Foundation fo firmly laid, but God can tare
it up; no City so well built, but God can, even with the breath of his Nostrils
overturn it: It is not Brick and Lime, Walls of Stone, no, nor of Brass
neither, can either blunt, or turn back those sharp-pointed Arrows, God
shoots against a sinful people. With one shake God could have levelled all
with the Dust. Could God easily and suddenly have destroyed us, and did he not?
Could he have enlarged the Commission granted to the Earthquake, and did he
not? Were we on the very brink of destruction, and are we not destroyed? Were
we entangled in the Snare; and are we yet escaped, and should not a warm
thought of this, should not such a deliverance as this increase our
thankfulness? Ez. 9. 13.
Let all who have survived this Visitation bless the Lord; and may all praise
this good God, not only with their Lips, but in their Lives!

Inf. VII. Does the Lord of hosts sometimes visit with an Earthquake; and has
he of late done so? Then how loudly does this visit call upon men, upon the
citizens of London; upon you and all the inhabitants of England, to be more
frequent in visiting God! When God is visiting us, it is time, time alas! It is
high time for us to visit him. Had the Inhabitants of England, the Citizens of
London been more frequent in visiting God: They might not have had such a day
of Visitation as this was; my meaning is, had they prayed more, they might have
been punished less: But (oh what a shame and reproach are we to the Christian
Name!) Prayer has been cast out of many of our Families; and would to God
there were not reason to say, out of many of our Closets too: And this among
other things called upon God to visit in that terrible and unthought of manner
he has lately done. And now when God visits us with afflictions, We should
visit him with Prayer, Isa. 26. 16 Lord, in trouble have they visited thee,
they poured out a prayer when thy chastning was upon them. The Rod drove them
to a Throne of Grace, and affliction made them pray; ay, and it made them pray
errnestly too. Afflictions, fears, and dangers drive many to the Gates of
Heaven, who would never come thither before; they are like some moross and
ill-natured People, who will never visit their friends, but when they stand in
need of them. I make no doubt, but during the time of Gods visiting, the
terrors of the Earthquake forced from many, (and perhaps from such as were
wont to restrain Prayer, Job 15. 4.
) that short and usual Petition; LORD HAVE MERCY ON US: The shaking and
trembling Earth caused many to lift up their Eyes to Heaven, and implore the
Mercy of that God that dwells there. But now God has done visiting them, I
am afraid they have done visiting him: Now the Earth has done trembling, they
have done praying, Ja. 3. 10.
but my brethren these things ought not so to be: Our visits should be
frequent, and often repeated. Three things are very wonderful.

1. It is very wonderful, That the great God will visit us. God is King of the
Universe, sways the Scepter in both Worlds, and exercises an unlimited, and
uncontrollable Authority, not only over the meaner works of his hands below;
but over all the bright and Celestial Orders above too. He sits upon a Throne
that is encircled with myriads of Holy, Dan. 7. 10
Mighty, and Glorious Angels, who minister unto him, and stand before him in
the quality and humility of his Servants, ready to receive his Commands, and
fly upon Wings to execute them: And does he visit Man, who is but breathing
Dust, a lump of Clay moistened and colored with Blood? Astonishing kindness!

It is to be admired he will vouchsafe a look, a short glance of his Eye: But
that he should make stated visits, and so many of them accents the kindness,
and increases the wonder. The Royal Psalmist, David, though a King, though he
swayed a Scepter, managed a Kingdom, and wore a Crown, could not think of Gods
visiting Man without Ecstasy and Rapture: Though he sat among the Gods upon
earth; Ps. 82. 1.
yet he is swallowed up with amazement at the thought of the condescension of
the God of Heaven. Psalm. 8. 3.
Lord! (says he) When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the
moon and stars which thou have ordained; ^er. 4.
What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man that thou
visitest him! Holy David having studied the Heavens in which Volumes the Power,
Wisdom, and Majesty of God are written in Capital Letters, and Golden
Characters: Cries out with admiration, Lord what is man that thou visitest him!
How fit are all Gods visits to be the subject of a devout, and silent
admiration! Does God visit this mean, this contemptible Creature, Man?
Wonderful Grace!

2. It is wonderful that Men, sinful Men, guilty Men may visit God: That we are
allowed the liberty of making a visit to Heaven: God might scorn us, and our
visits too; he might lock up himself in Heaven, and deny access into his
Presence to such undutiful, and disloyal Creatures as we have been. This great
King, this mighty Lord might not suffer such dead dogs as we are to lie at his
door. 1 Samuel 24. 14.
But (oh condescending goodness!) He invites us to give him a visit; and the
oftener we visit him, the more welcome are we: He blames us for our seldom, but
he never upbraids us with our often visits. Oh who would not visit, and often
visit such a God as this? May Men and Sinners visit the God of Heaven, the
High, and the Holy One: Do his Gates continually stand open, and may Indigent
Creatures come daily for an Alms? Invaluable Mercy!

3. It is wonderful, that Men should be so backward to visit God. How necessary
and excellent! How sweet and comfortable! How profitable and advantageous a
Duty is this! To visit God is equally our Duty and Privilege; while we do so
we share with Glorious Angels in that which is the top of their Happiness; Mat.
18. 10.
beholding the face of our Father which is in heaven. Now, if ever, do Holy and
Devout Souls anticipate their future happiness, Ps. 16. ult.
in partaking of that fullness of joy which is in Gods Presence; and in
drinking large draughts of those rivers of pleasure that are at his right hand
for evermore. How often have Holy Men come from this Mount with their faces
shining! How often have they received support under all their burdens,
encouragement against their fears, an answer to their doubts, and a sufficiency
of strength to encounter difficulties, perform Duties, to endure the fiery
trial, and quench the fiery darts of the evil one, to conflict with their
Corruptions, and overcome the World! How often, (even in the time of their
visiting) has God wiped Tears from their weeping Eyes, refresht their drooping
and revived their fainting Spirits; cleared up their evidences for Heaven, and
enabled them to see their Names written there, spoken comfortably to their
hearts, assured them of their Covenant Relation to him, and their Interest in
his special love and favor! Oh how often have they come away with their Pardon
Sealed, their fears, ^cattered, their mournful complaints hushed and silenced,
their Consciences pacified, and those Clouds that darkened their Souls, Mat. 9.
2.
dispersed with that breath of God; Son be of good cheer, thy sins be forgiven
thee! How often, and how heartily have they been welcomed by the Holy and Blessed
Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit! Yet notwithstanding all this, Men will not
(oh! fatal degeneracy of Humane Nature) visit God.

Some are Atheistical and Profane and (hopeless Wretches!) they fall under
that black and hellish Character, God is not in all their thoughts: (...)
Some are ignorant and stupid, without any sense and feeling; and what is their
unspeakable Misery, is their voluntary choice too, to be without God in the
world. Ephesians. 2. 12
Some are voluptuous, given to pleasure: Nay, they carry that Death-mark in
their foreheads, written in such legible Characters, That he that runs may
Read, 2 Timothy 3. 4.
lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God: Pleasures charm, and vain
delights captivate their Souls; Jude 1,.
they being sensual, and having not the Spirit, are constant Guests in the
house of Feasting; but utter strangers in the house of Prayer.

Among the vast multitudes of Men and Women that crowd and throng the World;
there are some few, who from a principle of a good Education, the Remains of
Natural Light, and the urgent calls of an awakened Conscience, do something of
this kind; but it is rather out of mere complement, than real Friendship; Thus
it is with most; and is it thus indeed? Tremble thou Earth, be astonished O ye
Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid. How justly may God use that sharp
and stinging Expostulation he did of old? Jer. 2. 31.
O generation, see ye the word of the Lord; have I been a wilderness unto
England? a land of darkness? Wherefore say my people, we are lords, we will
come no more unto thee? Though Men live altogether upon the Alms of Heaven; yet
they seldom visit God, stupendous folly! This late Earthquake should put Men
upon visiting God oftener, and when you do, remember to make these two following
requests:

1. Pray that God would visit you, and all his people in mercy, this was one
notable Petition, Holy David, that Man of Prayer put up to God, Ps. 106. 4.
O visit me with thy salvation! These visits how welcome and blessed, how
refreshing and desirable are they! Oh beg of God for more of them! Go to God,
and say, Lord, Thou have visited thy People, O visit them still with thy
Salvation! Lord! Let not these visits of thine which are so much for thy Glory,
and the Creatures good; be rare and seldom, but frequent and often repeated.

2. Pray that God would visit no more in anger: And methinks when there is so
much dread, and terror in the visits of an angry God, Men should earnestly
deprecate them. If God visit with a Plague, Death becomes triumphant, Judge 15.
16.
and Men fall heaps upon heaps into the Grave. If God visit with a Famine, our
beauty fails, our strength consumes, and the Man becomes a walking Ghost
before Death turns him into a Corpse. If God visit with an Earthquake, Men are
at their Wits-end, and this beautiful World is turned into a confused Chaos. O
beg of God, England may have no more of these terrifying and desolating visits.
If you will not pray, the next shake may be your overthrow. If you will not for
all this visit God, the Lord of hosts may visit with an Earthquake a second
time; and his second visit may carry more dread and terror with it than the
first did. Turn the Text into a Prayer, and say, Oh that England, Oh that
London may no more be visited of the Lord of hosts with Thunder and Earthquake!
Lord grant it may not, Amen.

FINIS.

