Monarchia Triumphans, OR, The Super-eminency of MONARCHY OVER POLIARCHY, Or of
the Government of ONE above any FREE STATE or other kind of Sovereignty in
many.

Wherein Regal Government is compared with a Republic, and proved by many
Arguments to be the best, the most natural, and necessary for these KINGDOMS,
as it is now established in the Sacred Person of CHARLES the Second, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, etc.

Blessed art thou O Land when thy King is the Son of Nobles, Eccles. 10. 17.
Deuteronomy. 11. 27. Titus 3. 1. (...) Homer. Let Us have One Head, One King, who will
have more
Heads to his Body, may have many Score;
If to One Head thou will not faithful be,
To lose Thy Head, it is most meet for Thee.
London, Printed in the Year, 1666.

To the Reader,
IF such Essays as vindicate Protestantisme from the Calumny of its enemies,
that it does not provide so well as other Professions for the Security of
Princes, the Obedience of subjects, the prosperity of Nations, which have their
mutual dependence upon the excellency of the Government established be of
highest use and deepest concernment. Then may this Poem pass with the Universal
Applause and Acceptance of all good Subjects and knowing persons; especially in
such an Age wherein there have been and yet are Extant, so many thousand
Pamphlets against the present Government, which would possess the ignorant, and
heedless Readers with belief that a Free State, or Commonwealth, which the
wise man tells us are the curse of God for sin, were the only Diana of the
Brittans, which these Nebocadnezars would have them worship as their Idol, or
else be for ever miserable.

And in a time wherein there are so many refusers of the Oaths of Supremacy,
and Allegiance, and so many who take them with such Reservations, and
Misprizions, as have a wide gap open for their Covetousness, Ambition, Envy,
Ignorance, Discontent, and the like Hypocondriacal Passions and Frenzies, to
enter on the Stage and to steel them with Brainsick Resolutions to act their
Parts in new Combustions and Innovations, Even in such a season (horresco
referens) when Gods Visitation was amongst them, and he made so strict an
Inquisition after such incorrigible enemies to the peace of his Church some of
whose late Hollandizing Conspiracies have forced from me this Antidote against
the like Distemper, with which there are many thousands infected, in City and
Country; such as have heretefore, not only impeded the Grandeur and glory of
the British Empire, but have changed the reputation of the most famous Nation,
into the infamy of devils: and which if we may belive our English Nestors, is
now more Epidemical then Wise men imagine, and which by sad experience we find
curable only by amputation as a Gangreen, and as infectious as the Plague.

And surely the general Ignorance of the most of the sense of the fifth
Commandment, and of the Fundamentals of Religion, and the fruits thereof, their
disobedience to their Spiritual and Temporal Parents, have been the Fathers and
Mothers of the last Years Plague here, and of all Gods Judgments which are or
have been in Christendom. I hope as this Poem has been, and will be a good
(...) or eye-save to me who else had been blind with writing it out so often as
I was importuned: So the Cogent Arguments therein illustrated, will prove like
so many perspectives to all impartial Readers to behold and admire with me the
order of the Hexameron, the glory, the necessity, the excellency, the Divine
Majesty of Monarchy above all other sorts of Governments; but if there be some
of whom it maybe said, Etiamsi satisfacies non satisfeceris, Here they are
brayed in all Gods Mortars, which Solomon alludes to Prove. 27. 22. 1. Of
Precepts and Canons Divine and Humane. 2. It Points them to above 300
Presidents of Conspiracies Jewish and English. 3. Of Gods Judgments, which not
one of Millions from Adam to this present Year ever evaded. 4. Of Gods Mercies
to obedient Subjects, and injured Kings and Prelates who have lived to see
their Enemies perish, like Oreb and Zeeb at Endor; but their own Crowns and
Mytres to flourish on their Heads, as I heartily wish they may in Great
Britain, and Ireland, whilst the Sun and Moon their lively Emblems shine upon
them: And if all these Mortars will not bray them in their right Wits, there
are two or three more in your power, as well as mine, which are serious and
assiduous prayrs for them that they may be thoroughly taught their dutiess to
God and Men, and may obtain sound and saving knowledge, and obedience; and that
public and private Iustruction and Fasting may not be omitted; for Ignorance
is an (...), and Obstinacy an (...), which will not be exorcised without them.
It remains that you and I retire to the exercise of them, as becomes you and
theirs, and

Your unfeigned Votary, P. Dormer.

The Triumphs of MONARCHY OVER ANARCHY: Or the Rout of all Rebel-Republicans.
WIth Alpha and Omega to Begin,
Of Monarchs Monarch, of all kings the King;
Does he not govern all the World alone?
That Realm's like his, that ruled is by one.
The Sovereign Power is Forces union;
Monstrous, weak in many; strong, right, in one.
Pythagoras ascribes to one what is due to God,
Said it was Male, and Female, even odd;
The King of Numbers, and that unity,
Was the worlds Soul, and the souls Harmony:
The Fabric of the Grand Hexameron,
Assigned was to the Government of one:
And in that one the Understanding seen
As King, next it the Will does reign as Queen.
One Head rules Soul and Body without Schisms,
All Figures rise from one, one makes all Dismes.
Thus in the body Politic we see,
One multiplied to make a Family;
And Families makes Towns, Towns Cities make,
Both Provinces, whence Kingdoms being take.
All Powers, Force, Counsel, in Immortal Man
Called King are joined; what they cannot he can.
David must stay, not go to the Camp to fight,
His life's worth Armies, Israel loves her light.
That is the best you will grant of Governments,
Which Gospel brought, and keeps where most dissents,
But such no Major Vote or States called free,
To fix in British Isles could e're agree,
For still the Major part has proved the worse,
And would be ruled by Juda's sword, and Purse;
Betray the Truth, Religion, Innocence
To fools and slaves of Wilwispt conscience.
How was it then you will say in Holland seen?
'Twas thither brought by Nasau, and our Queen.
First Kings rejected Popes through Christendom,
Else they had ruled all till the day of Doom.
Those Raging Waves the giddy multitude,
Like to themselves, have principles most rude;
They hate sound truths, Dote upon Novelties,
Hunt for new lights, although they be old lies.
They Are fierce for Liberty of Conscience,
Satan's chief ordinance, against God, Truth, Sense*
Who e're saw Storms, Lightnings, Thunders, Legion
Of Devils, but in Aires Lowest Region?
The King-fish has no foes but the Sword-fish
And Thrasher; that good Kings had none I wish;
Then Britains bless the Lord from Pope and Sect,
Who has you freed by Princes six select.
O Europe praise Jehovah King of Kings,
Who Kings you gave, who Gods pure word you brings:
By him they rule, he gives them Crowns and Birth,
And under him they are the Atlas of the earth.
That Protestants should boast, could Foes abide,
The had Europes greatest Monarch on their side.
One o'th best works for's Church our God could do,
Let Us daily drink of Praise one cup or two.
Now he may make King Charles the Cornerstone
As ever Britain ruled, of as high Throne:
But Bankrupt States, like Brokers base were bent,
To patch their Cracked States, though three Realms they rent.
They acted were by our vvorst Foes and Rome,
To bring our King and Kingdoms to their Doom.
Where most perfections meet in one, such things
As much excells as Diamonds brass Rings.
Thus the worlds Sovereign, Angels does excel,
More then Heaven, Earth, Men, Beasts, which here do dwell.
Thus Souls the body, bodies that are mixed
Surmount the Elements in one place fixed.
All Creatures sensibles and Rational,
Surpass the senseless and mere Animal.
Ashwerus Medes and Persians their Kings call,
That Is Sovereign power in one which can do all;
So sure as their Law, Monarchy sole Heir
Of Governments; the rest but Bastards are;
Desired Accomplishments meet all in this;
All Powers, Force, Virtues, do each other kiss.
The two Estates did make so much ado,
All with Pythagorists Curse number two.
New Lords, new Laws, new Gods, new Troubles bring
As was in Layish Israel, when no King;
And in the Persians five days liberty,
Which made them love their Kings, hate Anarchy.
So when we had a thousand Kings and more,
As many Jarrs, who should be King them over,
They tired us all, and made us loudly thump,
And cry, God save the King, and hang the Rump:
Since quietly in Britain, France, and Spain,
Yea through the world Dead Kings revive again,
And one succeeds the other with much ease,
Death one Uncrowns, the other crowned in peace.
O King of Kings, whilst Sun and Moon does reign,
Let Us never want Kings to guide King Charles his Wain,
And may he live thrice over his years again.
What is a Commonwealth, but common woe,
Where each man's wealth's made common unto more?
A Commonwealth's a Common Lottery,
Where fifty Blancks for one good chance we see.
A Commonwealth's a Common Weathercock,
Which whirles about with every wind and knock.
Whilst Phoebus past twelve signs in the Zodiac,
As many changes nigh made Britains Quake.
When Lords were all cashiered, and honest men,
None left but Fools, and Slaves, and Traitors then:
What was a Commonwealth but a Fragment,
A Scrap, Fagg-end, a Rump of Parliament!
It Is a false Mirror cannot represent
The peoples understandings, wills, consent.
A Bedlam Babel; what do you call it,
Where Rowlands will is ruled by Randals wit?
And such as have nor the one, nor the other,
Are ruled by the Whimsies of another;
When many go to Feast, or Funeral,
From the vote Major, Minor carries all:
Then Commonwealth's a Common Juglers Box,
A Hoca, Poca, Major, Minor Vox.
A Commonwealth's a state Hermophradite,
Where He Is by day vote, She Is unvote by night.
Democritus laughs into a Horaclite,
To think for mastry how she-States did fight.
Nay, what is a Commonwealth, but Common Whore?
With Nobles Honors prostrates to each Boor.
Our Commonwealth it was a Common Pander,
To Sects and Factions, which about did wander.
A Commonwealth's a common Pestilence,
Where Passions vote against Reasons Common sense.
That ours was Ante-Christ who can deny,
Whose Horns gored Christ, whose Heads did him defy?
Mark what Greeks said of Greece, who saw't flourish,
When Kings Greece ruled, by many ruled perish.
When first these Fiends of Hell, you guess their names,
By Greeks we are courted like two Cyprian Dames;
The Nations round jear'd Greeks which feared their fames,
Scorned Greece, when Greece burnt Greece with civil flames.
By Fiends are meant Free-States, and Commonwealth;
Since these Greeks ruled, we Trojans had no health.
Our Rulers Bedlam Regelments by more,
Teemed with as mad Effects as e're brought woe;
Then worst of Rebels is Republican,
Though Independent, Presbyterian,
Where e're had Zimries peace against their Masters,
Who 'rose and fell not by some sad disasters?
Hence let no new Sectarian Schelies
Lead you to Traitors Dire Ends, and Follies.
The world a Chaos were of huge variety,
Were 't not to order brought by Monarchy:
Jah rules all, the Angels Michael,
Who all the Rebels cast from Heaven to Hell.
The Sun rules Stars, Spears, Spears Imperial,
All causes end in one, the cause of all.
In the Malignant Church false Heads we see,
In The Militant Triumphant, one must be;
All Arts are Handmaids to Theology,
Whose wonders men and Angels stupifie;
All Books but empty Pamphlets are to it,
Which God has spoke, and with his finger writ:
In Fire, in Air, Earth, Water, and in Hell,
The rule of one does sway and bear the Bell;
Fire above Air, Air Earth, earth waters fixed,
Gives life, and does consume all bodies mixed.
Ducks have their Drakes, Cranes have their Kings they say,
All feathered Creatures their chief Males obey,
But over them all the Eagle bears the sway.
Base Locusts, Grasshoppers, Insects, and Flies,
Who have no King, by their confusion dies.
Others live long, as the Ant and Royal Be.
A Guard who keeps, lives, dies in Majesty.
Their Hives, Walls, Combs, Cities, Holes, Houses are,
Stings are their Arms, one rules in peace and war.
Over Papers Venice, Brown, Lombard, Horn, Demi, Royal,
Cap, super Royal, Perial, Imperial.
Herds have their leaders, Rams their flocks of Sheep,
All Beasts to the Lion, like Jackals do creep.
Over Stones the Carbuncle, over Metals Gold,
Of which Kings Crowns are made, for which they are sold;
Over all the scaly Monsters in the Sea,
The Whale's the Tyrant, him they must obey.
By Nereus sons, when caught in Greenland sound,
Leviathan's prized at five hundred pound.
The Basilisk a Crown on's head does wear,
To show over Serpents he does Domineer.
Over every sort of creature Kings to fit,
Requires a Tome, their Nomenclators wit;
Each Master rules as Monarch Politic,
His Children; Servants as King Despotique.
One entire Nation in the world throughout,
Over it be Kings, if you can find without.
If you will believe Saint Hugh who pearcht in tub,
He was in Hell, there is but one Beelzebub.
Thus from the highest Heavens to the lowest pit,
The worlds Grand Monarch, Monarchy has writ
In his vast Volume of the world, that here
Men might their God, and his Vicegerent fear.
That none might Witchcraft of Rebellion draw,
From Devils presidents, and call it Law:
Since Michael down from Heaven those Rebels threw,
Show me one Rebel thrived of Rebels crew.
By all the Laws of God. our Charlemain
Is placed in's Throne, obey your Sovereign.
Mark how our Statists natures Course pervert,
When they the rule of many would assert;
Suppose more Gods than one to rule the world,
It soon to Antique Chaos would be hurled.
Were Satan, Gog, and Magog, heads oth' Kirk,
If Christ help not with Saints, they would make mad work.
Parelii shone whilst Edward Fourth did fight,
Paraselenes did the Romans fright;
But ruled so many Suns and Moons in the sky,
You wonld believe Doomsday were very nigh.
Make Pompey's Rivals in grand Cesars Thrones,
Millions they would turn to Skulls, and dead men's bones.
Priests in each Town set many Sects to preach,
The vvayes to Hell sooner then Heaven they will teach.
Of many Doctors, Patient be at cost,
Take all their Physic, sure thy life is lost.
To many Lawyers put a doubtful case,
'Tvvill look like Barred Pictures Protean face.
Who loves a rule by many let him try,
He shall have plagues enough in's family.
Set Generals over each army two or more,
They Will thrive like ours who did to Hayty go.
Three Colonels each Regiment lets loop,
Four Captains to each Company and Troop,
Five Admirals in chief one Fleet command,
Never shall Victoria light upon their hand.
Siz Pilots set over every Snip you have,
Then Port in Seas they will sooner find a Grave:
Seven Lords t'each Manor, t'each Family,
Eight Husbands to one Wife as well agree.
Nine Heads t'each body, such a comely sight,
The Devil out of's wits perchance would fright.
Ten Rams, Bulls, Bucks, to lead your Herds and Flocks,
Would Horn each others pate, with bloody knocks.
Fancy there were in each Hive eleven Kings,
A cruel Fight you would see with deadly stings;
Twelve Cocks o'th Game set free out of your pens,
They Will fight till death for Lordship over your Hens.
Thus topsie turvey they the World do turn,
And all the Creatures which at Monarchs spurn.
These wild Conceits like their mad rules the have left
Them, Skip, Bear, Steal, I Will answer for your theft.
In all the world show me one Commonwealth
Without a Sovereign Power had peace or Health,
Acted by Artificial Kings and men,
Or to a Babel all returned again.
What did our Slaves States do in twelve years space,
But Sword men's wills over those in highest Place?
Without Chymerian Kings was no conclusion,
Unless in jarring, Factions, and Confusion:
If such with Native Kings you shall compare,
You men, they Kings in cloth of Aras are;
Then are Republicans the worst of Traitors,
May Cities Gates yield unto such Heads, Quarters.
Kings but in Nonage have Superiors;
Assemblies ever are inferiors
To Consuls, Projectors, and Dictators,
To Generals, Presidents, Prolocutors;
Thus had the old Lacaedemonians
Their Ephori, Censors the Athenians,
And Cosmosses the Carthaginians,
Tribunes the Romans, Doegs the Venetians:
These ruled the roast under some feigned name,
And used more rigor, power with Kings the same:
And wheh these slav'd Estates were put to shift,
They set up Kings to help at a dead lift.
Thus Romans boast their Scipio's, Fabius,
Hated as were Camillus, Manlius,
Athenians, Thrasibulus, Pericles;
Theb's, Epaminondas, Thucydides,
With many others who have their Country
As Kings who ruled, when States had them enslaved.
States Mongrils like do run, when Wolves draw near,
But Mastiffs fight, so Kings when Foes appear.
Then needs must States yield unto Monarchy,
Which in great'st troubles is their Sanctuary.
The creatures of Assemblies were for aye,
Vast in their numbers, greedy for their prey;
To borrow all they could they licenese had,
Protected never to pay, to promote trade:
But Kings have Mordecays, Joseph's, who bring
As Kings to them, like profit to their King.
But our Grand Hydra swallowed Steeples down,
Churches, Delinquents Lands, and those o'th Crown,
To keep their Crowd of Saints Lives and Estates,
Of a full Million felt disastrous fates.
Cart loads of Coin twice more they did divide
Then David for the Temple did provide:
It Is easier, cheaper for's to maintain one
Then thousands, which brings mischief, good to none.
Slave States are but the fragments of some Nation,
Drove into Holds, and Forts for their Rebellion.
How can they Grandeur either get or keep,
Like sneaking Eunuchs which in holes do creep.
By marriage they can never as Monarchs thrive,
A wonder it is by shifts they hated live;
But Kings more Kingdoms do by Venus get,
Then all Free States by Mars in the world have yet
More Realms, Isles then the Royal house of Spain.
Or Austria by their Queens, our Kings did gain.
Some twenty Kings long cantoned British Isles,
Mars gave them not King James but Hymen's smiles,
Over Spain John of Gauuts Daughters heirs now Reign,
Our Kings by wedlock are heirs of Britain,
Normandy, Poictou, Anjou, Aquitain,
All France; in Paris shall be crowned again,
When they their Lions, Harp, and Flowers in France,
With Arms never Conquered shall through it advance.
Our Kings have on their side God and all right,
Which makes our men's like Lions in their sight:
The French like Lillies pale it does affright,
That five to one of ours they never durst fight:
Did they e're Battle win these thousand years,
Unless with Scotch, Swisse, Mountaineers,
Normans, Higlanders? and when five to one,
Small numbers often subdued their Nation;
This truth to clear we need no Tomes recite,
But Agincourt, and Cressy, Poictou Fight:
Alas poor sneaks, when e're we them assail,
We needs must conquer, now their old friends fail,
The Pope set York and Lancaster by the ears,
Which lost us France, brought Wars, and seas of tears;
Else all were ours w'had nigh five hundred years,
So long the world the Englishmen did fear,
And thought that they the bravest Nation were.
Had our King all of Kings and Queens as heir,
Most Potent Prince in all the world he were:
King Charles had with his Queen strong Towns so rare,
The next to them the names of Kingdoms bear;
Besides, her Dowre then many Queens was more,
Her Grace, Parts, Virtues, tentimes worth that over.
Thus all our Noblesi Families do rise
By Nuptial Bonds, which States to States fast ties;
True Lovers Knots tied by Gods Hand and Word,
Faster joins Crowns and Lands, then Caesar's Sword.
If we so fast as Spain and Dutch Lands take,
Our Mars and Venus soon great Realms may make
Of Mighty Princes; it is best Husbandry,
Their swarms of Poor well planted out to see;
To the body Politic more sad events,
Then natural to void no excrements.
Marriage five Crowns in one for us does blend,
And may five more if God them please to send:
Fly Capon Commonwealths, love Monarchy;
Court not gelt States, hate Bastard Polarchy.
Britain by Kings, and Queens by Kings grew great
With Kings and Kingdoms, States a Hell hatched cheat.
But since our zealous States plead Text, and Faith,
Mark what for Kings against them the Scripture says;
Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews,
And Gentiles too, as Sacred Writ you shows;
In whom were all the Prophesies made good,
Which e're were made to Judah's line and blood:
As he by Priests his Laws to men does teach,
So over the world by Kings his reign does reach.
Kings are his lively Image, his Vicegerents,
Who best his Power and Glory represents.
Since Christ's the King of Kings, of Lords the Lord,
Then Anti-Kings are Antichrists by the word.
God promised to Abraham Kings of's ^eed;
Of his svvorn truths world you make lies? take heed:
And Kings and Queens unto his Church he would raise,
Fathers and Mothers to its good, his praise;
And Kings to Judah were the greatest bliss,
Jacob foretold; That them ye hate, whence this?
Balac said Balam blessed, when Kings to Jews,
Like Agags, Unicorns, Lions he shows,
And that the shout of Kings was in their Camp,
No Foes Enchantments could them ever damp;
God vovv'd that Israel should live secure,
Meaning whilst native Monarchs did endure:
With greatest blessings he Jesuron fostered,
The chiefest was they to a Kingdom prosper'd.
When Kings had Kings their Heirs, the Jews confess,
That God did them above all people bless;
By this the Kings and Sheba's Queen did prove,
That he did them above all Nations love:
Kings strongest motives in Gods Writ Divine,
To goodness vvear? he would Crown Kings of their line:
No Princes wickedness did void Gods Oath,
Nor can absolve from our sworn Faith and Troth:
As his, so ours was sworn to the Royal Line;
We Are perjured against Heirs if we combine.
For Kings by Gods Power, Rule, live, dye; and when
He Is pleased, he has done wonders by lewd men:
Our valiant Henrys, Edwards, Richards face
Who dare, we leave their Virtues to Gods Grace.
If Crowns from wicked Kings Subjects might take,
Mad work in the world as often it did, 'tvvould make:
Why then was David unto Saul so tender,
Who for revenge true Loyalty did render?
He dare not touch the Lords Anointed;
Many Rechabs were for this disjoynted.
Unkinging Kings to Jews brought days of doom;
Such Papal Facts, like fruits to Christendom.
Of bad Kings this sharp Rock Rotation,
Though for a good, often splits a Nation:
Balam, Saul, Judas, told truth as the rest,
So have lewd Kings conqner'd and reigned best.
When God allovvs not words, bad thoughts of heart
Against his Kings, lest Angels them impart
To Subjects vvo, that they may plagued be,
Who dares resist Royal Authority?
The Jews and Gentiles Restoration,
Began with Christ his Coronation;
The Sacred Writ him sets on Kingly Throne,
As often as to the World his glories shovvn:
By Kingdom he presents his Dearest Bride,
When she in Chariot paved with love does ride.
But when his Bow against her he does bend,
He threats to uncrown her, and her Scepter rend:
And was not this of all his plagues the vvorst
To his Beloved, when of him thus cursed?
This, this to Jews stands for a lamentation,
Sign of Gods wrath, their utter desolation:
Praised be his name, Zanzummims han't their will
With vvorst of vvoes, three Kingdoms who would fill.
That our King vvears his Scepter, Sword, and Crown,
The Emblems of Power, of Empire, and Renown,
And may his Heirs till Sun and Moon go down.
You see how highly God and Scriptures Rate
Kings, Titles, Honors, Orders, Royal State,
Sets Monarchy all Governments above,
Whereby he ruled from Moses time his Dove.
Then let none dare who God or truth do love,
Against their King or Kingship Traitors prove;
But them obey for Gods and Conscience sake,
That he them blessed may, not cursed make:
But if to murmur Rebels be so bold,
Let Us in Gods word their Rise and Fall behold.
Rebellion first began in Heaven, thence fell
The Dragon and his Angels down to Hell.
All sins abridg'd in disobedience,
By which man fell from state of Innocence,
Fot which he was expelled from Paradise,
And from the tree of Life of unknown price.
The Serpent for Rebellion licks the dust,
Women in pangs brings forth men, Earth's accursed.
Cain was vagabond in the Land of Nod;
Rebels to Prince and Parents, hate of God.
The old world crowned chiefly was for this,
Five Cities burnt with Fire, which did amiss;
Aaron and Miriam smote with Leprosy,
Because their Sovereign Moses they defy.
Of Corahs company the word of truth
Shows fifteen thousands sad and direful ruth.
Five Kings did fall by Chederlaomer,
And King Hosea fell by Shalmaner;
Abimelech and Sechem with Gaal,
By mutual Treasons got their utter fall.
A Fire came from the bramble which did burn
That Rebel Town, and made of it one urne.
When Sheba's head was Joabs, then they went
From Abels Town each man unto his tent.
Did Absalom or Adonijah thrive?
They thousands spoiled, more pardon left alive.
Re^bah and Banah who their Sovereign slew,
David their hands and feet exposed to view:
Sad Fate o'retook that line, sons of Nebat,
Whose Calves for ruin soon grew Bulls full fat.
Ahab his sons and Queen came to disaster,
And had false Zimri peace, who slew his Master?
No, for he killed King Ela, felt Gods Ire,
Him Omri forced with the Kings house to Fire.
Though Jehu to his work was called by God,
Justice and Mercy kissed and burnt the Rod.
Manahem slew Shallum, Zachariah,
As Hoshea slew Peka, who killed Pekaiah,
So Ammons Servants, who their Master killed,
Were slain when good Josiah his place filled.
Queen Athaliah slew the Royal Seed,
And ruled until their Wounds made her to bleed.
Joash his slaves slew him, he Zachariah,
But they were all slain by Amaziah.
The Books of Kings, more foes to Kingly Race,
And many Traitors to sad ends do trace;
Besides their Armies which in battle fell,
Without remorse it knoles your pass to Hell,
Amend, repent, so live, and so dye well.
Though Sacred Writ we value most of all,
Each History is full of Traitors fall.
Each Age and Country show sad Presidents,
Of Rebels Fates, to force them to repent.
Two hundred thirty cursed Plots and Treasons,
Against Kings and Kingship without all reasons,
We since the Normans times and Reigns have seen,
But the authors of them still have hanged been;
And so must they who dare to show such tricks,
For they against Gods Laws and men do Kick.
What is become of those conspired the death
Of Englands Mother, called Queen Elizabeth,
And for their Countries ruin close did wait?
Let Spain and Papists think of Eighty Eight,
Of those King, Queen, Prince, States, and Parliament,
To blow up with three Kingdoms did consent.
How has this Island Reeled in her own blood,
Of troubles, twenty years over ran't a flood!
Rebellion has the Scots of glory stripped,
And Ireland strangely, for it has been whipped,
By wondrous means and by a Rebel Rout
Of Martin Markings, and Marprelates stout:
See their Heads, Quarters, over the Cities Gates,
All Rebels are destined unto such Fates.
The Sacred Trinity with one consent,
And Scriptures prove, this the best Government.
The Champions nine fought all for Monarchy,
None loved Kings more then sisters three times three.
The Jews had but confusion, nothing
In Israel, when time was there was no King.
Moses as King did in Jesuron reign,
Judges and Kings had the power Sovereign,
Till Shilo* came, who rules as King of Kings,
And under Monarchy all Nations brings;
Prophets, Apostles, taught's to love and fear,
Them to obey; pray for, not scoff, or jeer.
The Persian sages after long contest
Of Arguments proved Monarchy the best.
Mecaenas and Agrippa told Augustus,
Your wise men all, choose one, else never trust us.
For Kings our Britains who were stout and wise,
Ventred their fortunes, or have lost their lives:
So all our Statesmen could say Boh t'a Goose,
Which voge made them Leards of the other House.
Great Alexanders Master Aristotle,
Bias who carried all in's Bag and Bottle,
And all the rest of the wise men of Greece,
Said one Ruled all, as Gander ruled the Geese,
That if there were in the world one Mome or Goose,
Loved many Rulers, let him try't in's house:
And in such peace and order he should dwell
As Locusts do, worse then the Fiends in Hell.
Old Philo says as Kings over all we see,
And God over them, so Nations ruled be:
Thus stood for one the wise Pythagoras,
As for black Snow did Anaxagoras;
So all the rest as Homer, and Dion,
With Plutarch, Seneca, and Zenophon;
So did Theodoret, Basil, Cyprian,
Chrysostom, Austin, and Tertullian:
All Counsels, Fathers, Latin, Greek,
Which were most godly, learned, grave, and meek;
There Is scarce one School Boy but does know it,
How Kings are praised by every Poet;
How Homer, Virgil, and each Poet sings
The noble deeds of Mighty Queens and Kings:
Thus Armies great of Pen and Inkhorn men
I might produce to tire your sight, my Pen.
For honest knowing souls too much; for fools
They never will learn, till taught in Gate House Schools.
That Regelment's the worst which sowes the seeds
Of sects, and Factions and Seditions breeds,
Which points the way to Moles and each base lown
To creep through Heads of Factions to a crown,
That Tyrants and poor upstarts many more
Then we could bear, or keep us placed over,
Which Tigers, Wolves, and Foxes manifold
Allowed, by whom Nations were bought and sold,
Which kept us all in daily doubts and fear
What Rule and Rulers we should have each year;
Made strangers far and near refuse our trade,
Because they thought all Rebels are stark mad,
Which cried with Harlots lewd, Divide the child,
Such Mothers Britain lately did beguiled;
Which noblest men, and Minds, and Clerks despite,
And in the Scum of Sects and Folks delight:
Which of each Draggons Tail, and Hell-bred Faction,
Projects and Acts for Toleration;
Which vote free Denizons for their base ends,
Turks, Popes, and Jews, and the infernal Fiends,
Which coined Engagements, Vows, and Oaths so fast,
That millions were forsworn or first or last:
Nurses so many, mock-controwlers, sects so lewd
As filled each City, Town, and house with fewd,
Which does confound High, low, wise, fools, rich, poor,
Arms Slaves against Masters, shuts them out o'th door;
Which like to Comets poison did distill
To all below, and them with Plagues does fill;
Or like Saturnal Planets in their Sphere,
The higher still the more Malignant were,
Which lickt the Cub of Reformation,
Till Love, Faith, Truth were out of fashion;
Which kept the people in blind Ignorance
Of Fundamental Truths, as in a Trance.
O sad that one-in hundreds scarcely knew
What each one's sworn to; Church by States thus grew;
The first Imperious teacher of a lie,
By such (dark souls) was ever most set by;
That Priests and Parents all should teach an Act
Was framed by some, the most denied the fact;
'Twas Ignorance and Sects let in the Turk
To Asia, Greece; like Crimes, like Plagues will work.
Woe, woe, woe, woe, to Christians who profess
Christ's Laws, then his worst Foes yet know much less,
Which did destroy like Fiends without all fears
All Saints good works, of fifteen hundred years;
Though but half Crowns Gods portion to them yields
They sold it all to buy the Potters Fields;
Which make men covvards like the heartless Hen,
Hence all States fight by Mercenary men:
When our stout Henry's, Edwards, fought with French,
Did they not soon make foes, though millions, slinch?
An hundred times they made the Scots and France
To quake, when they began their Martial Dance;
But our States Soldates did what never was done;
Ten thousands from one troop of Negroes run,
Whereby they millions lost a golden Town,
With it worlds richest Isle, and their Renown.
Of Artificial men sans souls a crovvd
Are States, which name all Villainies does shrovvd;
For there is not one has Conscience, Reason, Faith;
All Is public, and not private each one says.
That Government without all doubts the worst,
Which is the great'st Plague for sins accursed,
Which is such ugly Monster, full of shame,
That Anomos in Scripture is its name;
Rac't out o'th Calendar all Holy days,
That Gods, Kings, Saints works none might do or praise.
Most fearful Fates surpised their rotten bones,
Who Soldiers, Cripples, Poor relieved with stones.
God makes men great for Thousands good; State Elves,
Careless o'th poor, cried, Ah, ha, ha, for selves.
Were every twig a Pen; Earth, Paper; Seas, all Ink;
Men could not write all Crimes of States I think.
That Is the Best Rule which all distempers cures
In Church and Realms, keeps them, their health secures,
Which to our sinking Ark, like Noah's Dove
Brought truth, and Peace, and the Olive Branch of love,
When both our Isles were tossed like Ship on Seas,
Charles hush't all storms, and they in calms did cease,
Which makes them like one Cornucopia,
In plenty excel Scicily, Candia,
Causes these Isles of Dogs, or Devils named,
With proudest pieces of the world be famed:
When foes would quite destroy our Nation,
Blur our high deeds and reputation;
Takes care that Neptunes sons like lacky boys
Tread on Sols heels, without all foes annoyes:
With us the Nations trade, if Charles agree,
Which Sun, or Moon, or Poles, or Stars do see,
Where Justice mixed with Mercy, does abound,
Vinegar in sweet Grapes oppressed, is found;
Where Courage mixed with Faith, and Love, not fears,
To pluck the prey out of the paws of Bears;
Where no good useful man preferment lacks,
As most of late did under Mushroom facks;
As Phoebus light imparts to every Star,
So Charles gives Honors to worth near and far,
Which purges Locusts and Caterpillars,
And such as are to Kings and Realms ill-willers,
To the body Politic as sad events,
As natural, to void no Excrements:
If fifty years Goal-birds had been sent over,
Kingdoms and Isles we'd had as many more:
Thus when the Gardener evil Plants does weed,
He finds much better grow good Plants and seed;
Which care does take the poor abroad to plant,
Lest thousands dye with hunger, cold, and want;
Which makes all people learn the Truth,
Want of such knowledge is a Kingdoms Ruth;
God and King Charles this work may bring to pass,
Do more in it b'our Kings then e're done was.
To know and to obey's pure Reformation,
This learned and done, makes glorious King and Nation.
The Spirit calls knowledge the Key of heaven,
With Grace, Obedience, it souls does leaven;
Sermons will not do it, nor Wardens much forsworn,
This work is Gods, Gods must lead the forlorn.
That rules the best which longest does endure,
All these good things performs, States faults does cure;
No Star so bright in the sky, but has its spot,
To have no fault is Gods, no Creatures lot:
And let Jehovah Thunder, or Rain, or Shine,
He cannot please all, nor Kings, though men Divine.
You Will say it is Verrue Crowns Kings Governments,
Then happy we in ours to all intents;
His comely presence, meekness, majesty,
Do Adamantine luster far out-vye;
If to be highly born it is great bliss,
What Prince for Birth may you compare with his?
If Heirs are blessed of God, Usurpers cursed,
From Brute, what King had title e're more just?
If wise men Princes Marriage much look on,
Behold his Queen, the worlds chief Paragon.
Great Charles the Second is of our Kings first
By's Queen t'each part o'th world, whose rule does thrust
Paire-Royal Nations, Indies in her meets,
More worth then in all Mines, and Golden Fleets;
For Royal Issue there is no doubt of Heirs,
God will hear theirs, and millions of our prayers:
If Crosses breed rare men, best tutors are,
With Joseph, David, him you may compare;
For Courage, Prudence, Truth, and Constancy,
Match him who can without Sycophancy?
He patiently endured heavens indignation,
Until he wrought his Restoration.
So free from pride, self ends, and false renowns,
With Kingdoms ruins he refused his Crowns;
Joy'd not to have his head crowned with your loss,
Stay*d till God crowned his head, your joys, his Cross:
Foes crying sins, their scandals, obloquy,
He hides from penance, by his Amnesty.
He grieved to see his Mother Church so torn
By Sects; so stripped, left Rachel like, forlorn,
He did for her the best he thought or could,
What modest Churchmen either wished or would.
He cannot scoff, but pity the ill behavior
Of Brainsick folk, as mad as e're was Naylor.
For Justice, Piety, Religion,
Show me his pear in any Region;
The Giddy Rabble feared less you know
State ordinance, then Juglers Jubeo.
Dead Rulers Junto Laws, were Crows to scare,
But Just Kings winged Courts of Justice are:
Hence Kings in Thrones of Justice with the eye
Are said to scatter all Iniquity.
He frequent is with God, familiar
In Prayers, not Oaths, as many thousands are;
Him for his bounty why should any blame,
Whose Thrift, and Temperance, does millions shame?
To Gentry, Commons, and Nobility,
He Is a rare Pattern of Sobriety;
To all the world he freely does declare,
Rebels to God and Laws, worst subjects are:
Debauched men though great he cannot brook,
On such as his worst Foes he e're did look:
What good of him our Senate does desire
For God or Country done, he does require.
Behold your King then thousands is more tall.
In Grace, Power, Virtues, higher then you all.
When Kingship, Persons, Virtues thus you see
All meet in one, happy's that Monarchy.
Not Solomon in's Glory may compare
With British Rose, and Lillies, they are so rare.
Caesar's best wishes. Subjects votes and Praise
His Head crown, and to the highest Heavens up raise;
Of millions Prayers as he the Subject is,
So may heavens Blessings shower on him and his.
FINIS.

