A BRIEF AND EXACT RELATION OF THE Most Material and Remarkable Passages
that happened in the late well-formed (and as valiently defended) Seige laid
before the City of GLOUCESTER.

Collected by John Dorney Esquire, Towne-clarke of the said City, who was there
resident the whole Siege, and applied himself wholly to this business.

Published by Authority, and entered into the Stationers Hall-Booke according to
Order.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill at the sign of the Bible in
Wood-streete, M. DC. XLIII.

A Brief and exact Diurnall, Containing the most material and Remarkable
passages that happened in the late well formed Siege laid before the City of
GLOUCESTER.
AFter the unexpected surrender of Bristoll, the City of Gloucester was
assaulted with several Letters, Messages, and such verbal solicitations, by
diverse in the Kings Army of no mean quality, thereby pretending our good, and
expressions of their love and care of us, but really intending their own
sinister ends and our destruction. Amongst the rest, there came a Letter on
Friday, August 4. dated August 3. from a Captain of a Troop of Horse in the
Kings Army, to Mr. Alderman Pury, one of the Burgesses of the Parliament for
this City, full of persuasive oratory for the yielding up of this City, with
great promises as heretofore of preferment, and braggs of the greatness of the
Army that was then on their march coming against us, viz. All Prince Ruperts
Forces, from Bristoll, with addition of 1500. armed Welsh, and 2000 Club-men
out of Wales, and Arms sufficient to arm them from Bristoll, 800 Foot with a
Regimenent of Horse from Worcester, and 5000 Foot with a Brigado of Horse of
the Queens Forces from Oxford, and if he would send an answer, it must be by
the Sunday-night following or not at all: But Mr. Alderman Pury (whose fidelity
is sufficiently known to be so firm to the Parliament, that it is not to be
shaken by promises or threats) thinking it not worthy of, so accordingly sent
no answer.

Saturday, August 5. We received intelligence, that about 2000 Horse from
Bristoll were advanced within 10 mile of this City, whereupon several
messengers were dispatched to the Parliament.

Sunday, August 6. General Garret faced this City with his Brigado of Horse in
Tredworth-Field, and sent a Trumpeter to the Governor for 4 Horses of his
formerly taken by a party of ours in Cotswold, for which he offered others in
exchange for them, or any other satisfaction. In the Afternoon, a small party
of Horse and Foot commanded by Captain Blunt, and assisted by Lieutenant
Colonel Matthewes, Captain White, Captain Pury the younger, and Captain
Lieutenant Harcus issued forth of the North-gate, and at Wotton took about 10
Prisoners, and sending home the Foot, the said Captains with the few Horse
they had, went along to Vpton, St. Leonards, and thence to the foot of
Painswickes-Hill, on the top of which they discovered a party of the enemies
Horse, and so going round about by Matson, they retreated without the loss or
hurt of any. This day we wrought hard in the amending and repairing of our
Bulwarks.

Monday, August 7. News came to Captain Pury the younger to Gloucester, That
the enemy was plundering at Tuffleigh, about a mile and half from Gloucester,
nowly assigned for his Quarters for the billeting of his Soldiers, who
thereupon acquainted Captain Evans therewith, resolving to take what men of
theirs they could on the sudden get to surprise the enemy; But being come
thither, assisted with Lieutenant Pierce, they understood that they were gone
away with their plunder to Mr. Woods house at Brockthroppe, about a mile and a
half further: They thereupon (having not above 40 Foot, and some few of
Captain Backhouses horse) left some few Foot to secure their retreat, and
with the rest marched forward to meet with the enemy, skirmished with them,
compelled them to take refuge in the house, killed one in the Orchard, and hurt
or killed others in the house, and took one prisoner, and 7 Horses: But
perceiving a party of Horse, that looked on on the hill all the while, to make
toward them, they were forced to retreat without any loss, only one through
his own indiscretion taken prisoner. As they were just at the Townes-end, they
met with the Governor and a party of Musketteers coming to their rescue, news
being brought to Town that they were in danger of being cut off.

Tuesday, August 8. We understood that the King with all the Foot from
Bristoll, and carriages were come to Berkeley, and that they intended to speed
their march toward us.

Wednesday, August 9. We had intelligence that provision was made for the
entertainment of his Majesty at Princknedge, in the Lady Bridgemans house,
about 3 miles off the City, and that the Foot and carriages would be there
that night: we likewise received intelligence, that the Lord Chando's that day
dined at Brockworth, at the Guises there, whereupon a party went out of the
North-gate toward Barnewood, skirmished with the enemy, and did some execution
upon them, and amongst the rest a little boy of Captain Nelmes Company, having
shot away all his Bullets, charged his musket with a pebble stone, and killed a
Commander therewith, we retreated without any loss at all.

Thursday, August 10. His Majesty with about 6000 Horse and Foot as we
conceived, the Welsh and Worcester Forces coming after, faced us in Tredworth
Field, at the foot of Ribinhoods-hill, about a quarter of a mile off the
Town; and about 2000 Horse more, faced us in Walham, within Canon-shot at
random of our works. Toward the afternoon his Majesty sent a message by 2
Heralds at Arms, whereof the one being Somerses Herald, read the message at
the Talsey as follows.

Out of our tender compassion to our City of Gloucester, and that it may net
receive prejudice by our Army, which we cannot prevent, if we be compelled to
assault it; we are personally come before it to require the same, and are
graciously pleased to let all the inhabitants of and all other persons within
that City, as well Soldiers as others know, that if they shall immediately
submit themselves and deliver this City to us, we are contented freely and
absolutely to pardon every one of them, without exception: And do assure them
in the word of a King, that they nor any of them shall receive the least damage
or prejudice by our Army in their persons or estates: But that we will appoint
such a Governor and a moderate Garrison to reside there, as shall be both for
the ease and security of that City, and that whole County. But if they shall
neglect this offer of grace and favor, and compel us by the power of our Army
to reduce that place (which by the help of God, we doubt not, we shall easily
and shortly be able to do) they must thank themselves for all the calamities
and miseries that must befall them. To this message we expect a clear and
positive answer within 2 hours after the publishing hereof, and by these
presents do give leave to any persons, safely to repair to and return from
us, whom that City shall desire to employ unto us in that business. And do
require all the Officers and Soldiers of our Army, quietly to suffer them to
pass accordingly.

The Herald mentioned the publishing of this message openly in the street, but
his Majesty by his message not requiring the same, the Governor would no ways
permit it. But the Heralds being withdrawn, after some debate in satisfying
Mr. Major scruples touching his Oath of Majoralty, an answer was drawn, and
unanimously agreed unto both by Citizens and Soldiers in these words following.

We the Inhabitants, Magistrates, Officers and Soldiers within this Garrison
of Gloucester, unto his Majesty's gracious message, return this humble answer.
That we do keep this City according to our Oaths and Allegiance, to and for
the use of his Majesty and his Royal posterity, and do accordingly conceive
our selves wholly bound to obey the commands of his Majesty, signified by both
Houses of Parliament, and are resolved by Gods help to keep this City
accordingly.

This answer was immediately sent to his Majesty, (who was by that time come to
Tredworth-Field, attended by Prince Charles, the Duke of York, Prince Rupert,
Lord General Ruthen, etc.) by Sergeant Major Pudsey, and a Citizen who
accordingly presented the same and so returned. Thereupon his Majesty's Forces
advanced forward into our suburbs, chiefly on the east-part into
Barton-streete, where we killed a Commander from the Eastgate: But the houses
proved too hot for such inhabitants, for we had after the return of our
messengers, fired all our suburbs on the North-east and South parts, as being
those that could and would have done us most harm: yet one Issolds house in
Barton-streete (by reason of a garden betwixt that and the next above) took
not fire, so that the enemy played from thence with Musket Shot against us,
till we by 5 or 6 Canon-shot from the walls, forced them to quit that place,
Our Canon likewise from the Pen upon the West-gate, discharged upon the body of
Horse in Walham, and doing some small execution there, made them go seek
better quarters. Our Women and Maids wrought all this afternoon in the
little meade out of our works in the very faces of those houses, in fetching
in Turfe for the repairing of our works: we were forced now through want of
men for the guarding of the City it self (we being not above 1400 at most) to
quit our out-guards of the Wine-yard, and the two Sconces we had formerly made
at each corner of the Isle of Alney for the securing thereof and the River of
Seaverne.

Friday, August 11. Upon break of day we discovered that the enemy had the
night before begun their entrenchments in Gaudy Green, on the South-part of
the City, and about Issolds house on the East part, both within less then
Musket Shot of our walls. They had likewise cut the Pipes that conveied our
water from Robinhoods-hill to our Conduits, and diverted the course of water
that drove our Corne-mills, so that we were forced to content our selves with
Pumpe and Seaverne water, and to grind our Corn with Horse-mills. Their
Pioneeres plied their works in their trenches, the Musketteeres on both sides
playing hard, we lost only a boy and a girl through their indiscretion gazing
over the walls. The Welsh Forces under Sr. William Vavasor advanced to the
Wine-yard, where after 2 hours solemnity, they with great valor took it, no
body being there to make a shot against them. Yet upon their entry of the
outward work, when they saw another within, they according to their known
prowess, immediately ran out, yet taking heart again, they at last to their
eternal glory took it. Upon their drawing up on the side of the hill, our
Demeculverin discharged from the Pen fell amongst them and did good execution;
we discovered them through our prospectives carrying away their dead or maimed,
and afterward diverse gazing where the Bullet grazed that durst adventure so
far to kill her nowne Cozens and Countrymen. Among this crew had that
treacherous Adams, once a Lieutenant Colonel under Sir William Waller, placed
himself. They about 2 days afterward leaving a sufficient guard at the
Wine-yard and the Sconse by Maysemore, made a Bridge of Boats there, and joined
with the Forces that had now newly come from Worcester and quartered on the
North west side of the City, at Longford and the Kingsholme, where they made
their leagure in two fields there about, less then half a mile off us. The
Lord General Ruthen had placed his leagure at some grounds behind Lanthony,
within a quarter of a mile of the Town, it being somewhat sheltered from our
shot by a rising ground that lay between, yet our shot happened sometime amongst
them and did some execution. There their Lord General pitched his Tent, and
Sir Jacob Ashley quartered at Mr. Woods house in Barton-streete: Captain
Lieutenant Harcus, assisted by Colonel Stevens Ensign, at midnight issued
forth of the South part, with a small party, beat the enemy from their
trenches, and brought away many of their Shovels and Pickaxes. The same night
the enemy making an approach in Barton-street, our Canon from the Eastgate
killed 6 of them, whereof one was a Lieutenant Colonel, and another a Captain
of the Queens black Regiment under Colonel Blackwell, Sir Jacob Ashley was
then shot in the arm. The enemy likewise advancing somewhat from Lanthony
toward the Barbican, our guards there fired upon them and killed and wounded
many of them, as we have received information by diverse confessions.

August 12. Saturday. In the forenoon a party commanded by Captain Leivetenant
Harcus sallied forth through a door we made for that purpose in a brick-house
adjoining to the town wall on the South East part over against Rignall style
(making a bridge of Ladders over the moat) and fell into the enemies trenches
in Gaudy Green, beat them out, gained some working tools, Arms and Prisoners,
and retreated without loss of any, only two wounded. This was a hot skirmish
for the space of half an hour. In the afternoon a party of about 150.
Musketteers commanded by Captain Gray sallied forth over the works at the
little Mead, and fell upon the enemies quarters at the Kingsholme, marched up
to their Main-guard, there killed Captain Rumney, and about 8. or 9. common
soldiers, took 5. prisoners, and diverse Arms, burnt their Main-guard, and
houses they quartered in, and retreated without the loss of any. These were
the Worcester Forces with whom the Welsh had not yet joined. The same afternoon
after our retreat the enemy had planted two great Culverins of between 15. and
16. pound bullet at the East side out of Musket shot point blanke, with which
they made some store of shot, intending to batter the Town-wall, but did no
harm, although many fell into the Town. They then likewise began the making of
a redoubt in a field near Lanthony toward Severn, making a breast-work from it
to Lanthony wall cross the causey. And we perceiving by their Canon Baskets
they placed in their Square redoubt in Gaudy Green that they intended a battery
there, began the lining of our Town wall from the South to the East gate,
which we shortly after perfected; That night the enemy shot several great
Grenades out of their Mortar pieces, they all brake, but did no harm; we have
since received intelligence from some that were the whole Leaguer in the Kings
Army, that their biggest Morter-piece brake at the first discharging of it,
they say the biggest in England.

Sunday, August 13. The Enemy having planted three pieces of Ordnance on their
battery at Gaudy Green of 15. and 23 lb. bullet weight, began to batter the
wall and brick-house over against Rignall style, killed one of our men (no
soldier) in the said Brick-house, as he was peeping there, but did no other
harm. This day we began the blocking up of the South port, making a damme of
earth against the draw bridge, and a breast-work Canon proof against the wall
reaching from the draw bridge to the gate, and lining the houses on each side,
and the Almes-house between the gate and drawbridge with earth.

Monday, August 14. We had some suspicion and kind of intelligence that they
were drawing Ordnance to the Kingshome; And that it lay in some grounds
undiscovered between the North gate and the Margarets; whereupon a party of
about 150. Musketteers commanded by Captain Mallery sallied forth of the North
port to surprise it, but not finding any, retreated, without loss, but killed
four of the enemies, and took two prisoners, and fired some of their quarters
at the Margarets. This day the enemy played with their Ordnance from Gaudy
Green, and battered the Town wall on the South Side of the Friars Orchard, but
we quickly made up the breach with wool-sackes and Canon Baskets. By this time
they had drawn their trench in Gaudy Green near the meat at Rignall style,
where they made a kind of Mine to drain the moat, which much sunk the water of
the moat between the South and East ports.

Tuesday, 15. August. The enemy removed their tents and carriages to their
Leaguer near Lanthony. And in the afternoon valiant James Harcus, Captain
Lieutenant to the Earl of Stamford was slain in the Friars Orchard, as he was
too venterously looking what execution a Granado had done, which he then threw
into the enemies trenches.

Wednesday, 16. August. About 150. Musketteers commanded by Captain Crispe
sallied forth at the North port, and fell upon the enemies trenches upon the
East side of the Friars Orchard, killed above 100. men (as is confessed by some
of the enemies themselves) wounded many, beat them out of their trenches, took
some Spades, Shovels, and Arms, and retreated without the loss of any, only
two wounded after an exceeding hot skirmish for the space of half an hour or
more, the Canon and Muskets on both sides playing most furiously. Amongst
others a Sergeant and Corporal of Captain Nelmes Company were observed to
behave themselves very bravely. The enemy began this day to entrench between
Barton street and the Friars Barn, within musket shot of the walls. And we
employed some time in lining of the house adjoining to the North gate with
earth, and in amending and strengthening the works about the Friars Barn.

Thursday, 17. August. The enemy shot diverse Grenades out of their battery in
Gaudy Green into the Town; whereof about four fell upon some houses and brake
into them, but (by Gods providence) did no harm, and one fell into the street
near the South gate, but a woman coming by with a payle of water, threw the
water thereon, and extinguished the phuse thereof, so that it did not break,
but was taken up whole: it weighed 60. pound weight. This night the enemy made
diverse alarmes about the City, and our Ordnance and Musketeers played hard
against them. They then likewise brought fagots and the like to the moate by
the Friars Orchard, but were beaten off by our musketteers from the walls. This
day a printed paper containing the Kings Message and our Answer thereunto was
sent out of the Kings Army, unto M. Alderman Pury, with a persuasive Letter for
the surrendering up of the City the close of which printed paper runs thus, Let
the world now judge if his Majesty could have sent a more gracious Message to
his most loyal Subjects, and whether these desperate Rebels deserve any mercy,
who after so many Offers do still refuse a pardon: but since their returning
this rebellious answer they have set their own suburbs on fire; which surely is
not to keep the City either for King or Parliament. Printed at Oxford, etc. At
the same time there was also sent unto him certain specious considerations and
reasons subtly composed, tending to satisfy Conscience in the delivering up
of the City not withstanding the late Oath and Protestation, wherewith all the
said Capt. Pury being not convinced, did not divulge the same till after the
siege was raised.

Friday, 18. August. The enemy played with their Ordnance at Gaudy Green upon
the wall on the South side of the Friars Orchard, but did small hurt thereunto.
They having likewise (after the conjunction of the Welsh with the Worcester
Forces) drawn 4. pieces of Ordnance to the Kingsholme, one whereof they planted
against the Awnyate, and the sconces thereunto adjoining. A party of about
400. Musketeers commanded by Major Pudsey, and Captain Gray assisted by
Captain Faulkner, and Captain Massy, sallied forth of the North gate, being
led by one Weaver, a stout fellow of Captain Pury the youngers Company as their
guide, and having sent Lieutenant Pincocke with about 50 Musketteers over the
works at the little meade to give them an alarm, who advancing up to their
Canon (that made but one shot against them,) in the mean while they got behind
their Canon and brestwork there, and fell upon their maine-guard, killed diverse
of their Officers, and two Canoneers, with about 100 Common Soldiers mortally
wounded, Captain Basset with diverse others, took Lieutenant Tipper and about 4
others prisoners, nailed their Canon and retreated without other loss then 2
killed, and about 4 taken prisoners.

Saturday, August 19. The enemy having planted 3 pieces of Ordinance at Gaudy
green as before said, and now 3 more on the East side of the Friars Orchard
near Rignall style, within less then Pistoll-shot of the Town-wall, and 2
more in another Battery near the Eastgate. They began a most furious battery
upon both sides of the corner of the wall next Rignall style, making above 150
great shot thereupon, wherewith they shrewdly battered the wall, but our
earth-workes stood firm; by all this shot there was only a man and a maid
hurt, and a Canon-bullet, its force being almost spent, running along the
ground struck down a pigge, which our soldiers eat, and afterward well jeered
the enemy therewith. Upon this Battery of the wall we began a brestwork from
the wall on the South side of the Friars Orchard all along the middle of the
said Orchard, and so making up all passages into the Town between that and the
East gate. This day (as has been confessed by some of the Kings Army) we
killed three of their principal Canoneers. This day and the night following
the enemy shot diverse Grenades into the Town, whereof one fell in at the top
of M. Hathwayes house into his Chamber over his Kitchen, and thence obliquely
descending through the end of the Chamber took that with it, and brake in his
Court. One piece fell in the Kitchen Chimney, where three women were sitting by
the fire, but by Gods blessing hurt neither of them. The rest did no other hurt
then to houses, and that not much neither. We expected that the enemy would
have fallen on this night, whereupon we beat up an Alarm with our Drums
round about the City. The enemy attempted to make a passage over the Moat at
the place they had battered, but being descried by our Sentinels, they were
beaten off with some loss by our musketteers.

Sunday, 20. August. This morning that Rogue Hatton, one of our Canoneers, ran
away to the enemy. The enemy followed hard their trench-work, and carrying of
Fagots. And some of ours, whilst other went to Church, as at other times, to
implore divine assistance, wrought likewise at our works within the City.

Monday, August 21. Two several parties were designed for the nailing of the
enemies Canon. The one being about 200. Musketteers, commanded by Captain
Stevenson, and assisted by Captain Moore, sallied forth at the North gate to
have fallen upon their trenches at the East gate, but their guide foolishly
mistaking the way, brought them round about to S. Jacob Ashleyes Quarters at
the Barton, where about 40. Musketeers encountered with five Colors of the
enemy, and having slain diverse of them, and taken Lieutenant Anderson, and
Lieutenant Trappes, prisoners, forced them to a retreat, then marching through
the Barton Court, they faced and fired at eight Coulors more, and so retreated.
In the retreat two troops of the enemies horse came upon the reere, but ensign
Matthewes facing about, charged them, and forcing them to retire, made good our
retreat. In this Skirmish were two killed, three hurt, and a Sergeant of
Captain Nelmes taken prisoner; This party was all of Colonel Stephens
Regiment, and some few of Colonel Devereux men. The other was of the Lord
Stamfords Regiment commanded by Captain Blunt assisted by Captain William
White, who sallied forth by boat down Severne, and marched up to the enemies
quarters at Severne street, beat the enemy out of their redoubt there, (our
Canon the mean while playing from the Barbican upon the houses there) killed
Sergeant Major Wels, Captain of the Watch, and some common soldiers, took one
prisoner, and advanced up to the Turnepike at the upper end of Severn street.
But the design failing through the misguidance of the other party, they were
called off, and by the help of our Ordnance from the Barbican made a fair
retreat without loss of any, only two wounded.

Wednesday August. 23. About 15. Musketeers sallied out of the North gate and
gave the enemies an alarm and so retreated. This day the enemy received supply
of prvision and ammunition by water from Bristoll. We employed our selves in
lyning the Friars Barn on the outside with earth for the preservation of our
Canon there, and in strengthening of our brestworks there, conceiving the enemy
had intended a Battery against it. In the evening, the enemy shot some few
grenades into the Town, which did no harm. And about 9 of the clock at night
two of ours out of a Company (all the other sallies being in like manner
Commanded men out of both Regiments) sallied out of the North-gate, and giving
the enemy an alarm retreated. The enemy thereupon after our retreat spent
good store of powder and shot against the wind.

Thursday, August 24. This day there was a conference with Mr Bell of Sanct
hurst, and Mr Hill of Tewxbury within the drawbridge at the North gate, upon
their desire thereof by a Letter sent that morning, intimating thereby that
they had something to impart unto us for our good by word of mouth, which could
not be done by Letter or otherwise. The effect of their speech was to persuade
the yielding up of the city in regard of the great power and terrible threats
of the enemy, and the small hopes, and in a manner impossibility of relief,
withal adding the heavy burdens under which the country groaned, which they
said were likely to prove heavier if we yielded not. To this speech they
received a resolute negative answer, and so departed. The enemy made diverse
shot this day with two piece of Ordance they had newly planted at Lanthony, but
did little hurt, killed none. One bullet of about 20. pound weight came through
a chamber of the Inn called the Crown, c^rried a Boulster before it into the
window, and there slept in it. This night came the only rain that happened
during the whole siege, which much annoyed the enemy in their trenches. This
night we discovered a fire upon Wain-loades hill, which gave us some
encouragement, because we had appointed a man we had formerly sent out, if he
heard of any relief, and could not come to tell us thereof, to make a fire
there, which he now did accordingly. But the enemy not willing the country
should take notice of it, or their soldiers be discouraged thereby, endeavored
to persuade them, it was their Stratageme purposely made to deceive us, and to
draw us out upon some Ambuscadoes they pretended to have laid.

Friday August 25. some few Musketteirs of ours this morning sallied forth of
the North port, and gave the enemy an Alarm, who through the suddenness of the
Alarm, and hurly burly thereupon, had a Barrel of Powder blown up In the
afternoon their Ordnance played from Gawdie Green, and they likewise from
thence shot many Grenades, two fell into the South-gate-streete, whereof one
mortally wounded a woman, but did no other harm; some others fell upon
several houses in the City, and shrewdly battered them, but did no other
hurt; one fell-downe upon the enemies works. They shot likewise great
fireballs, which did no harm. They also shot great stones out of their
morter-pieces, which did little hurt, and killed none. In the evening and night
following, they shot from their battery at Lanthony above twenty fiery melting
hot Iron Bullets, some 18 pound, others 22; pound weight in the night we
perceived them flying in the air like a star shooting, male of them fell
into houses and stables where hay was but by Gods great providence did no hurt
at all. One came through three houses, and fell into a chamber of Mr. Comelins
the Apothecary, and being perceived, many payles of water were cast upon it to
quench the same, but that little avayting, it was cast into a Cowle of water,
where after a good space it cooled. This night (it being suspected that false
rumors of our being taken might be spread abroad to hinder our relief) it was
ordered that some lights should be set up on the Colledge-Tower, to give notice
abroad of our holding our, the performance whereof was committed to the care of
Captain Pury junior, who performed it accordingly. The enemy vexed there at
levelled some shot at the Tower, one whereof came close by the said Captain
Pury, as he was looking toward Lanthony, whence their fiery Bullets came, who
for all that continued the burning of his linkes till the Moon was fully risen.

Saturday August. 26: The enemy wrought hard in filling up the moate (at the
place they had battered with fagotts and earth making a Gallery over the head
of their trench, to save themselves tromour shot: at night they made some shot
from their Battery at Gaudy Green, upon the Town wall, on the Southside of the
Friars Orchard but did no harm, only two or three hurt a little by the flying
of the stones of the wall. Diverse times during this siege some of our men would
go forth over the works and fetch hay out of Walham, which to prevent the enemy
this day, as often before, set some of the Cocks on fire, which some by reason
of our shot, I believe, dearly repented.

Sunday August 27. The enemy wrought hard in casting earth into the Moate, and
making diverse trenches (...) here. They also this day made about twenty great
shot upon the house over the East gate.

Monday August 28. We conceived that the enemy had sunk a mine under the East
gate, whereupon we began to countermine in two several places there, but
finding springs we left off, conceiving the enemy would be forced to do the
like for the same reason.

Tuesday August 29. We began to undermine on the East side of the Friars
Orchard, to make a place to put forth a piece of Ordnance at the bottom of the
wall, to batter the flank of the enemies Gallery, there we likewise made some
great shot upon the enemies trenches at the East gate from the Friars Barn.
This night two Intelligencers we had sent forth on Saturday-night last,
returned from Warwick with news of speedy relief from his Excellency and Sir
William Waller.

Wednesday August 30. Being the public fast day, there were two Sermons
preached at St. Nicholas, without any disturbance, only a Musket. Bullet fell
into the Church, but did no harm. This day we turned out our Cattle to graze
in the little meade, and so continued them afterward, guarded by some
Musketeers, taking them in at night: we made a bridge of ladders, and thereby
put them in over the works. This day and the day before, the enemy shot out of
their Canon long loggetts of wood, which did no harm.

Thursday August 31. We again turned out most of our Cattle into the little
meade, guarded by some few Musketeers, the enemy fretting thereat, sent out
some horse and straggling Musketeers, upon whom we did some small execution;
we should have done more, durst the enemy have adventured against us, but they
kept themselves still almost Musket shot at random of us: At the Barbican
three of the company of Sergeant Major Ferrer (Major of the Town, who for his
indefatigable pains, and extraordinary care and faithfulness to us, has
exceedingly deserved of us and the whole Kingdom) crept along Seavern-Bank,
and gave the enemy an Alarm, holding them play almost an hour: upon the Alarm
about an hundred of the enemies had gathered themselves under a wall at
Lanthony, upon whom we discharged a Demi-culvering, shot from the Barbican,
which lighted in the midst of them, made the stones of the wall fly about their
ears, and could not but do good execution.

Friday September 1. About three a clock in the morning, a Sergeant and four
more of Captain Whites company, with one John Barnewood, of Captain Pury the
elders Company (who went forth in all the other salies with Grenades) crept
forth of a hole made in the Dungeon at the Eastgate, and came very softly to
the mouth of the enemies mine there. The said Barnewood after he had taken
aside the board that covered it, and a pretty while viewed them, fired and cast
a Granadoe in amongst them, our four Musketeers playing at them as they ran
out of it, and so retreated without harm. We killed four and hurt others.
This put the enemy into a great fright, they crying nothing but arm, arm, for
a good while after.

Saturday September 2. Our mine in the Friars Orchard, was early this morning
perfected and a Sacre placed there. Five out of a Company were drawn out upon
the walls, and some Grenades provided ready. About eight a clock in the
morning we played thence with our great Gunne upon their Gallery, our
Musketeers fending plenty of shot into their trenches, and cast diverse
Grenades thereinto. The enemy played with their Ordnance upon the top of our
wall, with which hitting one of our Blinds, they killed one of our men, as he
was discharging his Musket against them. They played likewise with their Canon
in Gawdy-Greene upon the South gate to little purpose. We battered their
Gallery with our Bolt shot, but toward the evening the enemy had sunk a piece
against the Port-hole of our mine, so that we were forced to withdraw our Sacre
thence. About night they shot some Grenades into the Town, whereof one fell
upon a Stable in the Eastgate-street, near whereunto stood many horses, but
hurt none of them. Our men skirmished this day with some straggling men in
Walham, where they killed a Corporal that refused quarter. We discovered that
the enemy for all the Springs went on with their mine at the Eastgate,
whereupon we renewed our countermine there. The Welshmen at the Wineyard had
likewise now at last gotten the heart to advance as far as the Town Ham, where
placing themselves in a ditch, they played upon our maids and workmen that
were fetching turffes out of the little meade, but our great Gunne at the pen
speaking some harsh language to them, frighted them away, bereaving some of
their own native language.

Sunday September 3. In the forenoone the Congregation assembled at the Church
to perform holy duties, but the Minister being informed of our great danger
conceived at the Eastgate, the enemy having planted store of Canon-baskets
there, within lesle then half Musket Shot, intending a battery there, as we
conceived, upon the springing of their mine, dismissed the Congregation without
any Sermon. Whereupon we began the lining of the houses over the Eastgate, and
the making of a very strong Brestworke cross the East-gate-streete, with a
large trench before it, filled by some springs there, intending to raise it up
to the eaves of the houses, and to plant some Canon there. We also this day
finished the Sconce we began September 1. upon the Mount in the garden by the
Friars Orchard, where we could plant four pieces of Canon, to scour the
Friars Orchard, and all along the Eastgate. The enemy with some straggling horse
and foot vapoured this day in the Walham, but durst not come within the reach
of our Musketeers, upon the retreat of the horse a piece of Ordnance from
Captain Pury the elders Sconce, fired and fell in the midst of them, a white
horse was seen to fall. In the afternoon a paper was shot upon an arrow into
the Town, the contents whereof was this; These are to let you understand your
god Waller has forsaken you, and has retired himself to the Tower of London,
Essex is beaten like a dog, yield to the Kings mercy in time, otherwise, if
we enter perforce, no quarter, for such obstinate traiterly rogues. From a well
wisher.

To which presently upon another arrow was returned this answer.

Waller's no God of ours, base rogues ye lie,
Our God survives from all eternity;
Though Essex beaten be, as you do say,
Romes yoke we are resolved nere to obey:
But for our cabages which ye have eaten,
Be sure ere long ye shall be soundly beaten.
Quarter we ask you none if we fall down,
King CHARLES will lose true subjects with the Town.
So says your best friend, if you make timely use of him, Nicholas Cudgel you
well.


Monday, September 4. We perceived diverse carts laden with sick and maimed
Soldiers going from Lanthony to the water side at Sudmeade, where some boats
attended to carry them to Bristol, The enemy had taken up all their horse about
the Town, so we had some hopes of their rasing the siege. This morning early
our Miners had gotten as far as the outward part of the Eastgate, where by the
working of the enemies we perceived their mine to be sunk a great deal lower
then ours, so that we were above them, whereupon we set workmen upon the
making of great borers with which we intended to bore through our mine into
theirs and so to drown the enemies mine. We understood likewise that the enemy
had by the direction of that Jesuitticall Doctor Chillingworth provided great
store of engines after the manner of the Roman Testudines cum Pluteis with
which they intended to have assaulted the parts of the City, bbtweene the South
and West Gates. These engines ran upon cart wheels with a blind of plankes
Musket proof, and holes for four Musketeers to play out of, placed upon the
axeltree to defend the Musketeers and those that thrust it forward, and
carrying a bridge before it the wheels were to fall into the ditch, and the
end of the bridge to rest upon our Brest-workes, so making several complete
bridges to enter the City. To prevent this we intended to have made another
ditch out of our works, so that the wheels falling therein the bridge would
have fallen to short of our Brestworkes into our wet moat, and so frustrated
their intentions. After the rasing of the Seige, we took all these Engines, and
brought them into the Town. This night we discerned two Fires upon
Waynload-Hill, made by two Messengers, we had the night before sent out to give
us Intelligence if relief was coming: We answered them again with lights in
the College Tower. The enemy made about six great shot from Lanthony barn,
whereof one of 25 l. bullet weight came through some houses into Master John
Halfords kitchen, where his children were a little before, but did no hurt. We
now perfected the lining of the houses over and by the Eastgate.

Tuesday September 5. was appointed for a public fast to be kept within this
City by such as might be spared from labor In the space between the sermons
we discovered their carriages from Lanthony making up Tredworth Field and
afterward we perceived their foot and horse marching after, yet we were not
assured of their raising of their seige or that our releife was so nere at
hand, till we perceived their rere guard to fire their Hutts and their men to
be drawn out of their Trenches, which we perceiving, some of our men ventured
foroth into their Trenches, and fired their Gallery and Canon Baskets. And
presently after an honest country man came tunning into the Town, and told us
that his Excellency had beaten P. Rupert about Stow, and that the rest of the
Army rose to succor him. We thereupon perceived that God had delivered us, and
that we were now freed from the hands of those that had so long thirsted after
our blood. To him therefore be the honor and glory, dmen.

It was admirable to observe

1. The constancy of resolution in Citizens and Soldiers amidst so many
temptations by reason of promises, threats, delay of succor, and want of
intelligence even to the very end, although we had not in the whole town above
50 single barrels of powder at the beginning of the siege, and not above three
or four at the raising thereof. We kept two powder-mills going, and with them
made three barrels a week.

2. The vigilant care and unwearied endeavors of our valiant Governor, and
most worthy Sergeant Major, and the Officers and Soldiers of both Regiments,
in keeping the guards day and night without any relief, and the courage and
good success they had in their many sallies against the enemy.

3. The cheerful readiness of young and old of both sexes, as well of the
better as inferior sort of people by day and night, to labor in the further
sortification of our City. Nay, our maids and others wrought daily without the
works in the little Mead, in fetching in turse in the very faces of our enemies.

4. The little hurt done by the enemy with their Cannon, Muskets and Mortar
pieces, that sent so many terrible messengers amongst us All that we lost
(either taken or slain) amounted not to the number of above 50. men, yet we
killed of the enemy (although they never durst venture an assault against us)
above a thousand men, as has been confessed by some prisoners and renegadoes,
and is generally confirmed by the voice of the whole cuontrey, that continually
heard the muttering of their Soldiers at their return to their quarters, some
say 1500. some more: we killed likewise most of their Canoniers, so that they
were forced to send to Bristoll for more, five whereof the King valued before
500. men.

5. The liberty we had in this strait siege for holy duties, though we were
continually neecssitated to bodily labor, and that the siege was raised upon a
day of solemn humiliation.

6. How opportunely his Excellency came with relief unto us, through the
great care of the Parliament and City of London, even then when the enemy
thought themselves ready to devour us: for they had made many strong works and
Batteries within less then pistol shot of our walls, undermined our gate, and
wrought themselves quite over our Moat, and provided their Engines and Bridges
in readiness. In all these they showed and used extraordinary skill and
industry.

7. The plenty and store of provision we had in the town of all sorts, so that
we turned out even to the very last hour they stayed before us, above 200 head
of cattle over our works to graze in the very noses of them, beside others we
kept in the town upon hay.

8. How confident our enemies were of prevailing, and how often they vainly
promised to themselves victory: yet though they conceived mischief, they
brought forth a lie, their designs were blasted, and we contrary to their
expectation delivered.

Which gracious acts of divine providence do deeply engage us to praise the
Lord of Hosts with our hearts, lips and lives, who has gone out with our
Hosts, whose eye has watched over us, and whose strong hand was with us. He
made us a City of refuge to others, and has now been a refuge to us in the
time of our distress. What has been done by us in our just defense against
unlawful violence, has not proceeded from any disloyalty to our sovereign
Lord the King (whom God preserve) but out of our endeavors to defend true
Religion and Justice, the main pillars of the Kings Throne: And therefore we
far less deserve to be styled desperate rebels, then those that pretend
themselves good subjects, and are nothing less, their practices wholly tending
to the subversion of the Protestant Religion, and the destruction of the
Commonwealth.

Our cause we commit to him that judges righteously, upon whom we only depend
for our protection, and to whom we daily pray, that he would be reconciled to
Prince and people, and reconcile each to other, that there may be no more
shedding of innocent blood, nor bitter complaining heard in our streets.

Laus Deo in aeternum.

Since the siege September 12. we received intelligence, that there was some
Ammunition come from Bristoll in a Bark to Newnam (about ten miles from
Gloucester) for Hereford; whereupon we sent out a party of about 45 Foot, and a
troop of Horse, to seize upon it for the use of our garrison, who according
seized upon the same, being two tun of Match, and some store of wine, and such
other Merchandise, and brought it in wains to Gloucester. Sir John Winter sent
out some horse to prevent us, but they durst not come within a mile of us.

The Names of the Superior Officers of both Regiments that now lie in Garrison
in the City of GLOUCESTER.
Henry Earl of Stamford, Colonel, Edward Massy, Lieutenant Colonel and
Governor of Gloucester. Constance Ferrer Major of the town. and Sergeant Major
to this regiment. Henry Stephens, Colonel. Humph. Matthewes Lieutenant Colonel.
Isaac Dobson, Sergeant Major. Captains Edward Gray, Charles Blunt, Peter
Crisp, Edward Cotton, William White, Robert Malery George Massy.
John Read, Captain Lieutenant. Captains. William Singleton, Thomas Pury
senior. Luke Nurse, John Nelme, John Evans, Thomas Pury, junior,
Robert Stevenson, Capt. Lieutenant.
There was likewise a broken Regiment of Dragoones of about 100 men under the
Command of Col. Forbes, that upon the taking of Bristoll came from Berkley
Castle hither. But the other two regiments do properly belong to this Garrison.

EDWARD MASSY, Governor, Anagram, Never miss a good Reward.
He that does stand so well upon his guard.
I hope shall Never miss a good reward.
The copy of the letter mentioned to be sent to Master Alderman Pury, Sept. 4.
SIR,
THe affection which I bear you in particular, and the City in general (and
no sinister end I call God to record) extorteth these lines from me: for should
I be silent when the desolation of that place (I so dearly affect and where I
have bin so dearly beloved) is at hand; I co^ceive the very stones of that
City being ruined, will rise up against me for ingratitude: But if my advice
be not taken, and misery befall both the place and its neighborhood, the fault
shall then rest on you and the now inhabitants, and my conscience cleared. You
well know, or at least may have heard, that the City of Bristoll is taken,
twelve ships at sea yielded, two ships of Ammunition from Rochel newly come
into the Harbor seized on, one ship with great Artillery and Ammunition coming
from the Parliament for relief of that City, taken. And this I know, that
there are great preparations made for the taking of your City: All Prince
Ruperts forces from Bristoll, with addition of 1500. armed Welsh, and 2000 Club
men out of Wales, and Arms sufficient for to arm them from Bristoll, 800. foot
from Worcester, with a Regiment of Horse, 5000. Foot with a Brgade of Horse of
the Queens from Oxon. But I much fear that this will hardly sink into the
belief of some amongst you, yet when you shall hear of the particular
Randevouzes, and your Town surrounded, nay, your Houses fired over your ears;
then, when it is too late, I much fear, will be the time of repentance.
Wherefore I desire you, as you love God, and the good of your City for which
you serve, and the which is committed to your charge and protection, to take
into consideration your sad condition if the City be taken by force (most of
the Army being set against you very bitterly:) And if it be not taken, in what
condition of poverty and misery both your City and Country will fall into. Is
not your provision of corn out of Herefordshire, your commerce (wherein most of
your livelihoods and being subsisted) both up and down the River, taken quite
away? And if you will not consider your own good, yet in conscience think on
your neighbors in the country, who have always bin aiding and assisting to
you for your protection, who must expect nothing but ruin, if by no other way,
yet by the very lying of so mighty an Army amongst them; and if they be ruined,
whence can you expect future supplies, and the very laying of a siege before
your town, must necessarily produce a destruction to your corn and provision of
cattle; and who will be losers thereby but your selves, I know not: But this I
further know, that your Ammunition is not overmuch, your places of supply no
where, your enemy continually at your door, and able to retire to his own home
at pleasure, and your friends far, and utterly unable, or at least not
capable to send you present relief. I know you to be a conscientious honest
man, and one whose aims (as I have thought) have tended to the public good,
and now is the greatest time and opportunity to demonstrate your affections by
using some course for an accommodation between your City and his Majesty (who
now is here at Bristoll) and from whom I dare boldly affirm by some great
friends I have near him at Court, I can procure any favor either for the City
in general, or your self in particular: and of this you may be confident; but
if once the forces come against it, you must expect no manner of mercy, but
present ruin: wherefore if you intend any thing, let it be done with speed,
and send to my quarter at Charvild, where you may send any one to me without
suspicion. I beseech you seriously to weigh these things in your breast, and to
weigh them as coming from one that dearly loves you and your City. And God
give you all grace to do that which may most tend to your good, are the
prayers of

Your real loving friend,

FINIS.

