THE KINGS CAUSE Rationally, briefly, and plainly debated, as it stands De
facto. AGAINST The Irrational, groundless misprisions of a still deceived
sort of People.

2. SAM. 2. Shall the Sword devour for ever? Know ye not that it will be
bitterness in the end? Heu quantum potuit terrae pelagique parari,
Hoc quem civiles hauserunt sanguine dextrae?
Printed Ann. Dom. 1644.

The Kings cause rationally, and plainly debated, as it stands de Facto. etc.
COncerning the nature or quality of these unhappy distractions we have long
groaned under, and consequently by what name or title we may best decipher
them, I need not to speak much: A civil war it is, who sees not, yea
plusquam Civil, more then so; an unnatural, bloody war, wherein friend
stands engaged upon terms of defiance against his friend, brother against
brother, even father against the son, making good by this means in these
last and dreggish times of the world that inevitably true prediction of our
Savior, Luke 12. 13. what the event or issue of this war so unluckely begun,
and as obstinately still maintained, may be, (...), God he knows. The best we
can probably expect (unless the same God be pleased by a timely prevention to
make up the breach, must needs be a speedy overwhelming of this once
flouris^ing Island in the general deluge of ruin and destruction.

But enough of this; The truth herein is too notoriously apparent to our
extreme sorrow, and rather requires the help of some kind of healing salve*
then of a farther corrosive; It may be worth our consideration then in the
first place to observe, against whom namely be these warlike arms taken up;
Against the King questionless, Patrem patriae, our lawful Sovereign, the
Lords anointed: That (...), as one expresses it, that Supreme power placed in
so near a distance under God himself, that whereas we in modesty term Kings
or Rulers here upon earth, his vicegerents only, he has pleased to advance
them to an higher title, and plainly styles them Gods, I have said ye are
Gods. Ps. 82. 6. And hence further is it that we find in Scripture the seat of
Royal judicature, as usually termed the Throne of God, as the Kings Throne;
nor themselves barely the Deputies or Ministers of Men, but Gods Ministers, his
peculiar substitutes.

All power is from God, I willingly acknowledge, by some way of derivation or
other: but this for certain more immediately and in a nearer degree, as being
the Supreme, 1. Pet. 2. 15. more determinatively too in that he alone is the
disposer both of Kings and kingdoms says the Prophet, Dan. 2. 21. Dan. 4. 17.
25. even to a particular designation of the person frequently, as we find it
to have been (not to speak ought of exoticke governments) in the Jewish
commonwealth. The Heathen anciently by the very light of nature found out this
truth.

(...). (...), says the Poet, and another yet more closely

(...). The King (says he) is the truest and liveliest reflex or image of God
upon earth that may be; Humani Jove's, as the Latin Comoedian speaking of such
persons in a strain beyond them both. And surely for this reason particularly
amongst other (in my poor fancy) is that very title above mentioned of being
called Gods bestowed upon them, to wit in regard of their dominion and
soveraignetie over the rest, which they still retain as a maine Relic as it
were of that Gods image at first stamped, and engraven upon the soul of man.
Now as' I said, against this Sovereign power nevertheless be these arms
lifted up: a power so sacred, it seems, as not to be touched or but roughly
meddled with; since Touch not mine anointed (not the chief then be sure) is
the interdictive express caution of the Almighty; David thus did but touch
Saul by cutting off the skirt of his garment, and we see how his heart smote
him straight; in as much, as, who can stretch forth his hand (says he) against
the Lords anointed, and be guiltless?

For however to color and disguise the business, the King has been all along
pretended to these harsh unusual proceedings of late, as if what were done,
were not against him but for him, yet is this in truth such a strange piece of
state-Sophistry, that men, though of mean capacity cannot I suppose at last
but discern easily and see through it; Nuga and quisquiliae, unless they can
possibly show pro and con: with and against, terms so widely opposite to be
one and the same, which yet will neither good Logic admit in the former, nor
scripture phrase acknowledge in the latter: That saying of our Savior, Mar.
10. touching matrimonial union, Quos Deus iunxit nemo separet, is in a good
sense if read backwards appliable to the present divisions, Q. D. S. N. jung:
whom God in his secret displeasure, as here, has a while really divided and
set at distance, let none go about in pursuance of their close unjustifiable
designs by bare and empty terms to join together. You say you are for the
King, entitle him to every act, the King says no, disclaimes it utterly, often
and again has protested against it: who^ may we in reason rather believe?
especially considering those gross and monstrous inconsequences which follow
hereupon, as that thereby he is made to set forth Edicts, levy moneys, wage
war, and all against himself.

It is true ( I confess) in some cases, as where the Prince is a Minor and
under age; or where he is not compos sui through weakness of his
intellectualls, this may well hold, and the seeming contradiction be easily
closed up: The reason is, for that there the party is not Master of his own
actions, nor can he, in a legal consideration be reckoned amongst those (...)
whether in Art, or Nature, which move of themselves, but as one rather who is
moved from without. There both law and equity justly commit such a one to the
tuition and guidance of another. But where there rules a judicious and
discerning Prince, able to steer by the conduct of his own reason, there to
plead your being for him, and yet go cross to his commands, is such a fine
piece of artifice, as may serve perchance to ensnare the simple, but withal
occasion the wise to smile.

If it be here replied (as some have done) that this Resistance of theirs is
merely against the King his Private, not his Public, his Personal, not his
Royal commands (for as so, say they, he must be supposed always to speak in
the voice of his Parliament, or else that of the law.) A poor shift, when as
they are feign to shape on this manner their evasions at the Romish forge; for
thus deal they, laboring by a like art of Sophistry to set up Monarchical
government in the Church, as these endeavor to pull it down in the
Commonwealth. To this end have they divided (who knows not?) the Pope even
from himself, by considering him as he is a Man, and as he is Pope; As he is a
private man, say they, he may err, but as he is Pope and sitting in the
chair, he is infallible. Such cob-web thin-spun distinctions as these, I have
ever thought fitter for speculative disputes, then at any hand to be drawn
into outward practice. They carry somewhat with them, the sound, but are
altogether void of substance. Otherwise by the same rule I might slay my
brother, not apprehending him as one of Adams progeny, as my self am, but
under the common notion of some sensitive kind of creature, or say I Will rob him
of his substance, not conceiving of him as my neighbor, but as of some
professed enemy: And yet again when or where will they be able, I mervaile,
to find the King on this wise divested of a Royal influence into all commands
of state, not repugnant to the laws already being? Or moreover not alike still,
whether placed in his Throne or out of it, representative of a public person:
These are nicities that require a ray or two of further illustration from them.

Be it further urged, that notwithstanding this their resistance to his
commands, yet they love and honor his person, as in duty they are bound to
do. Not so certainly neither; I am sure our Savior, Io. 5. 15. teaches
another doctrine, If ye love me, says he, keep my Commandments. Mark the
consequence: and Iehu, 2. Kings 9. 30. about to destroy wicked Iezabel who is
on my side, says he, who? and immediately we find his commands fulfilled, V.
13. True love toward our governors ever begets an inward obedience or
subjection of the soul, and obedience straight breaks forth into outward
performances. Obedientia according to the Etymology quasi Obaudientia: The
word imports a willingness of harkening and ready submitting our selves to the
commands of our Superiors. In brief it is our duty not over hastily to
dispute, but obey their Mandates: otherwise of subjects we become Judges both
of them and their actions.

Being thus driven from either of those two former holds, they betake
themselves for refuge to a third, and that indeed the weakest. We have not
taken up arms plead they, against the King, but against the Malignants and
evil Council which is about him. Here I cannot but remember the manner of
certain Fencers or Swash-bucklers in Rome, anciently called the Retiarti,
whose fashion it was in fight, when as pressing eagerly upon the adversary, and
endeavoring to cast their net (wherewith they were fitted for the purpose)
upon him, that so they might entangle him, to cry Piscem peto, non tepeto, I
make at the fish (a fish it seems there being engraven on the others helmet)
and not at thee. So these men, they pretend a war against the Malignants, but
they pursue the King; yet does not the King write them friends whom they term
Malignants? Does he not own and uphold them in their proceedings? So as their
being against them, argues manifestly their being against him. It is a Gospel
inference, Mat. 25. 40. For in as much as ye have done it to one of these
little ones, the least of these my brethren, says our Savior speaking of his
poor distressed Saints, ye have done it unto me, so likewise; V. 45. Act. 9.
4. Howbeit they still go on, seize on his ships and Magazines, force his
Towns and Castles from him, yea shut the gates against him; unless happily,
as it befell Phaedria in the Comoedian from his kind Mistress, who pra amore
exclusit for as, as it is there, They likewise may be thought to have done
whatsoever has been acted in these affronting ways, merely out of the zeal
and tenderness of their pure affections.

This was the first consideration I made chice of to propose, concerning the
Person, namely against whom this war is undertaken, the King; next I would have
it considered that as it is the King, so he is a King interressed to his crown
by virtue of Inheritance, a King, as I may say, natus, non factus, borne so,
not made; what the difference in this ease may be, as touching the validity of
interest or right to their dominions, between an Elective and Hereditary King,
(this for certain being the more Absolute and unconditionall of the two;
moreover the conditions what ere condescended to Essential there and Necessary
constitutive to the very essence of Soveraigntie; here for the most part mere
Volun^ary and Subsequent acts of grace, and so less censurable (by man) upon
the breach and forfeiture, then there they are) I will not make it the argument
of my present discourse; nor do I produce this Topic as meaning thereby to
add any strength of supportance to his sacred title; That needs not; but only
as willing upon all true just grounds, to improve that duty and loyal respect
in the minds of reasonable men, which they owe to their Sovereign; It was
somewhat surely (at leastwise the Poet thought it so) that Agamemnon does so
boast of the antiquity and descent of his Scepter, fetching it down from
Vulcan to Jupiter, from Jupiter to Mercury, from Mercury to Pelops, and so
onwards.

(...)
(...) --
We behold with a kind of Reverence some high and lofty long grown Oak, yet
not so much for its height, as for its continuance, and as it were conquest
gained upon time; which since man himself by reason of his natural frailty
cannot attain to, we reverence it in his offspring. Thus it fares in private
families, and thus should it be much more in the line of Princes, who are
Patres familiarum, and so commended to us in Scripture under the title of being
the Heads of their Tribes. The point I drive at is this: Princes by
inheritance, as they have taken deep root, and are firmly seated in their
Throne, through virtue thereof, accordingly may they challenge a firmness of
duty and alleagiance in the hearts of their people.

In the third place let it be considered, that as he is an Heaeditarie King; so
He is a Good and Gracious KING; a Prince singularly accomplished throughout,
Malice her self, for ought I could ever hear, has not in this particular
whereon she can justly discharge her envenomed rancour; look upon him in his
own line up to the top of his ancient and long renowned pedigree, treading
through the whole series of his famous predecessors; Or look upon him in a
Collateral line, and compare him with the neighboring Princes about, and
without offense, I suppose, (take him but in all respects) I may parallel, if
not prefer him to the best. Quaeris Alcidae parem?

Nemo est nisi Ipse; what Zenophen has delivered of Princes in the Idea for
moral virtues requisitely behoofefull in them, and what Synesius with others
for Christians, we have here in some sort fulfilled in the History. But I must
be sparing in the point for fear of censure; Nor needs in truth a gemme so
resplendent and eminently apparent of it self much labor in the setting of;
It is no more then whatinteffect I have observed to drop from the pen of one of
their own party; Omni exceptione major, grants he: A Prince in his own
naturalls or proper constitution beyond all exception; Only thus much then by
way of Aphorism.

O Fortunati nimium bona si sua!
Thrice happy we of this nation, if we rightly knew how to value herein and
esteem our own happiness; which on the by might well give check to many of our
seditious pamphleters and others in their crude indigested pasquils, who
notwithstanding the scripture its so frequent Caveats in this kind against
despising dominions, speaking evil of dignities, nay but ill thinking of them,
they as it were, carried aloft in the strength of their unmannerly brainsick
zeal, make at the highest, and as the Jews once dealt by our Savior Christ,
forbear not to spit in the face of Majesty it self. Upon such as these has
the Apostle St Jude pronounced that heavy doom (which I could wish they did
seriously consider of) allotting them as a just reward of their ill demeanours
the blackness of darkness for ever Iud. 13.

Fourthly, I wish it may be considered how that He is a peaceful King: Peace
doubtless is a great blessing to a Kingdom, and so is a peaceful King: O
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, says holy David, and St Paul, follow peace*
Heb. 12. ver. 13. (...), the word implying thus much, that men should pursue
and hasten after it, like as they do for the prize in some race or game of
contention, (...), in some such sense ofttimes in Homer. Now has not the King
been thus zealous for the peace of our Jerusalem; Has not he likewise (though
in vain) thus pursued and hasted after it? Witness the many overtures or
rather entreaties for peace made by him: And all this really, unfainedly; not
dissemblingly, or under a vizard, as those of David's enemies, who^ therefore he
deservedly complained of, that whilst they spoke of peace, they had war in
their hearts, Ps. 110 7. Had others been as forward as he, to embrace terms of
peace, to tread in that via lactea, we had ere this (my conscience gives me)
all closed in a peaceful end: yet no mervaile in it, for a peaceful son to
proceed out of the loins of a peaceful father; His Motto was Pacificus;
neither does our Sovereign (I confidently believe it) desire rather to have
his brows encircled about with the laurel of victory, then of peace and
concord with his people.

The fifth consideration shall be, whether these arms so taken up, be
Offensive, or Defensive, Defensive (say they) and will not be persuaded to the
contrary; There is the maine (...) of the business with them, a special point
indeed; let us a little examine it; Civilians teach us that a Defensive
resistance is, when as the Defendant is no way the cause or occasion of the
conflict, by some kind of former provocation, and then afterward in the very
Act, he does but propulsare injuriam, stands merely upon his guard as *twere,
aiming rather at his own safety, then the others ruin; In a word neither
provokes, nor pursues his enemy. This is the nature of a true defensive
resistance, Otherwise suppose I kill a man, to say I did it in mine own
defense, having yet provoked, pursued, and then assaulted him, would prove, I
fear me, but a slender kind of plea, even at the bar of Common justice. The
case comes nearly home to our purpose, for be it examined on Gods name with an
impartial judgment, and let not Actions so apparently done in the face and
eye of the world be either grossly denied, or cunningly shifted off. Who first
ministered the occasion of this unnatural war, by tumults and seditious riots,
in the open streets? Next, who first drew sword, and gave the onset, as it
were, thus putting fire to the fuel now prepared and laid together? Who lastly
has ever since most hotly Pursued and followed the business at first so
unfortunately begun? The King all this while almost, sueing and entreating for
peace, if so peace might have been obtained upon fair and honorable terms
consistent with Majesty: what town or sort at the beginning did, or at least
needed to have feared his entrance? Nay, what Town or fort may yet justly
fear it, if as they have unwarrantably taken up arms, so in acknowledgment of
their error; they shall submit, and peaceably lay the^ down -- Civilia bella --
Vna acies patitur gerit Altera, All the offensivenesse I can descry in the King
as touching the whole matter is, that being at length enforced thereto, he
would not suffer himself and his good subjects to be overborne with a tempest,
and not make head against it: If this be it he is censured for, it calls to
mind that story of him, who having first smitten his neighbor with his fist,
afterward sueth him, because his head was hard and hurt his hand: Passion, say
Philosophers, in any subject is not without some manner of Reaction joined to
it: nor can we defend our selves but it is most likely we shall in some sort or
other offend the assaylant. But the nature (as I said) of a simply Defensive
resistance, is to be tried at the test of the premised circumstances.

Sixthly and lastly, it will be worth our consideration to examine upon what
Grounds these arms be lifted up; ^t is an axiom in state policy, and ever
has been, that better to connive at and suffer some inconveniences in a Church
or Commonwealth, then to expose either to the manifold dangers of Alteration.
And one of their own outlandish Doctors in a Tract of his upon the like
argument (though pleading for Resistance) yet lays it down for a principle or
sure Maxim without all peradventure: I must confess mine own ignorance, as
not having Lynceus his eyes about me; and therefore desire to be informed by
others, whereupon this so urgent necessity of a civil war may be thought to
have been grounded; otherwise I shall easily be induced to believe, that with
him in the history, they do but pursue their own Shadows, or shoot at a mark
which themselves through the error of their weak fancies have set up. Is it
for matter of Religion, as it was maintained in the best and purest times of a
Reformation. The King has promised it, himself does practice it, and I
heartily wish the best of his ill-affected subjects were but herein followers
of his good Example. Is it for the Liberty and freedom of our persons? The
King has likewise passed his word upon it; Is it for a Property in our goods
and estates to be enjoyed by us according to the established wholesome laws of
the kingdom? I must return the same answer. For what then? Davus sum, non
Oedipu^: I desire that some good men or other would be pleased to help me out;
where there occurres not danger of our Religion, nor of our Liberties, nor yet
of our Estates to be invaded or trenched upon (as neither can the Master
Architects of these miserable distractions, I suppose, though having
artificially persuaded others, fully persuade themselves there is) there to
take up hostile arms, you may if you please, style it a just Resistance, but
what term it deserves of right, let the world judge.

Besides then the groundles surmises, fears and jealousies of certain
Melancholy overworking heads, as may be well imagined, since, Prona est timori
semper in pejus fides. And those too many of them, it is to be thought, like
false fires, raised of purpose, by the industry of cunning projectors, only to
amuze the simpler people: no other ground or reason can I find of these
public commotions, unless what remains, it may be the distempered and
perverse ambition of some particular person; I burden none with this heavy
charge; But so it is in the general, that men of discontented humors, or
otherwise ambitiously disposed had at all times rather hazard the common peace
and safety of the whole, then fail of their proposed private designs;
Publicis incendiis patriae clarescere, as he speaks has always been more for
encouragement then a stop to the proceedings of such kind of spirits; chiefly
when need and a decayednes of fortune, help to sharpen and whet on this froward
ambitious humor of theirs; And as there; so likewise is it where men have
casually embarked themselves further, into great affairs, then that they are
able with safety to come off; There they stagger and faulter up and down, as
much uncertain what course to take, yet still make onwards, and rather then
perish alone, desperately put all into a general confusion: with Sampson
taking his last Revenge against the Philistines, they pull down the house,
though necessarily it fall upon their own heads, causing thus the guiltless
ruin of a whole Nation oftimes to wait upon the Hearse of their deserved
overthrow.

Notwithstanding all this the King, say they, for certain, has formerly
tran^gressed in the premises by declining from the manifest and known Rules of
the Law. I will not here argue the just Prerogative of Kings, what they may
happily challenge to themselves, either praeter or sup(...)a, besides or above
the law. This would be censured straight (such is the malicious wit of
jealousy) as a plea made for the establishment of an Arbitrary Government; yet
so Machiavell may teach, or his associates perchance, but not I: Thus much only
then I shall say in this matter; What ere privileges the Prince is possessed
of, whether derived unto him by custom, or as grounded upon the law it self,
favore amplianda sunt, is an authentic saying borrowed from Canonists; They
ought of right rather to be improved, then any way diminished by us; without
any curb or bounds at all imposed from law to regulate them by, did Kings (we
find) anciently and in those heroic purer times of the world (thence rightly
termed (...) with the like) govern the people subjected to them. But and this
farther: There can be no state so exactly framed and composed according to the
rule of law, but that it will require some kind of a moderating dispensative
power left in the hands of the supreme Magistrate; Since the law is general,
nor can it therefore possibly extend to a through determination of all
particulars: And in such a case I had rather (if I needs must) be under the
power and governance of one, then of many. Easier was it for Athens to suffer
the Arbitrarie dominion of one Tyrant, then as they did a while, of Thirty: and
for Rome upon emergent occasions the Dictatorship, or absolute government of a
single Magistrate, then that of the Decemviri. It is confessed that where the way
is plain and open, no obstructions or difficulties to hinder, there for the
Magistratet o walk (...), as the Philosopher prescribes, is the safest course:
But this cannot always be, I presume, in the best Commonwealth, though never
so well ordered by the square and advice of the wisest Lawgiver.

And now for their objection more particularly. Grant the King has heretofore
somewhat swerved from the known Dictates of the law (yet not to that height,
neither will themselves say, as either of Tyranny, or gross Idolatry, howbeit
the only just causes of Resistance doubtless, were there any just) what?
find we not David and Solomon, the best and wisest of Kings to have digressed
oftimes into sundry bypath of sin, and error from the law of God, even to
the highest pitch? Take in Ahab, Manasses, with others of the worser sort (nor
yet questioned thereupon by their subjects straight for their foul and truly
insufferable misdemeanors in point of Regal government; yet were they as
strictly bound by solemn covenant, both toward God and Man, entered into at
their several inaugurations, to a performance of certain conditions, as Kings
at present be; nor do we generally find Gods Priests and Prophets then, the
ordinary sole interpreters of his hidden pleasure, upon any terms what ere
freeing the people in the least degree from that indissoluble tie of their duty
and subjection to their lawful Sovereign: unless occasionally, by virtue of
some particular Express, or other from the very mouth of the Almighty, as it
happened in Jehues case rising up against Ioram. 2. Kings 9. or in that of
Jeroboam doing the like by his Liege Lord, 1. Kings 11. which with the like
extraordinary and immediate commands from God (unusual for these times) our
Enthusiastis themselves will not, I hope, in modesty offer to pretend to in
their present undertakings.

And say, must Princes then be brought upon the stage, and subjected to the
danger of being Resisted by the people, upon a supposall of every slip or petty
error committed by them? Princes (they may be pleased to know) as they are
(...), or Patres familiarum, as was said before, so have they a large family to
govern and supervise. Add hereto the many intricate and perplexed mysteries,
those Arcana imperii, which they have to deal with in the management of the
Sat; so as they see not always what they do (neither can they) but by other
men's eyes, nor hear they, but by the ears of others, but are forced to use
the subservient help and assistance of their Ministers. Can they show me
wherein the King has knowingly and willingly broken in upon the received laws
of the Land, and that without a full persuasion of what he did, to be just and
warrantable; Hic nodus vindice dignus; for as so, I am confident, he may
safely proclaim it aloud with old 1. Samuel. 22. 3. Whose Ox have I taken, or
whose Ass have I taken, or whom have I done wrong to? And with St Paul, though
in another sense, I am pure from the blood of all men, Acts. 20. 26. Errors
till now of late were not wont to be accounted crimes, not in the meanest, much
less in Princes, wholly so high, at leastwise should do, above the level and
pitch of common censure.

And yet again, has not the King long since been pleased to descend, as
twere, from his Throne of Majesty, yielding to a gracious revocation of
whatsoever but suspectedly might seem heretofore to have been carried in a
wrong course? He who by virtue of his place is, and has been always so
esteemed of in former times, not only (...) or (...), the chief framer and
withal dispenser of laws, but also (...), the very life and soul of the law:
A point therefore which Majesty uses but seldom to stoop to; Princes
accounting of none as competent Judges of them and their Actions, save God
alone; since it is a true saying, Rex est qui Regem, Maxim, non habeat, He is
truly a King who acknowledges no commanding power upon earth above himself.
Against Thee, Thee only have I sinned; we know whose submission it was, and to
whom he tendered it; Nevertheless our King He has done it, his Royal
Declarations on the one hand, and his real transactions on the other, extant
in so many Gracious bills passed for the good of his Subjects, may serve as a
sufficient pledge of this truth. Had but Rehoboam done the like,
notwithstanding his precedent so offensively gross extravagancies indeed,
mentioned. 1, Kings, 12. the revolted Tribes, (as it is imagined by the best)
had soon returned to their due obedience; even among private Persons a man's
word backed with real performances has ever been esteemed of as a sure
Testimony of his true and sincere intendments.

For all this, there be some so impudently fearful that they dare not Trust
his Majesty; And it is this Diffidence, amongst other things, which has been
a chief incentive to these public disturbances; Although a vain one, if
rightly considered of: when as men shall go about to undo a Commonwealth,
only because they fear and weakly suspect, it may be undone,

Furor est, ne moriare mori:
There being moreover provided, as there is, a most sure and sovereign remedy
against all such danger, an effectual (...), for what ere distempers casually
arising or happening in the State, that of a Trienniall Parliamentarte
Convention; But say, I beseech you, Not trust him? Not your King? So religious
and just a King? Not him whom the Lord himself has trusted? Whom God and the
law both have entrusted with the charge, of so great a people? Whence Kings
they are usually styled in Scripture, Pastors, Fathers, terms of themselves
importing much trust and affiance to be had in them: That too after such
solemn Protestations, such effectual imprecations made to this purpose, and
published by him? Lastly, after the many Acts of grace; done by him already, as
sure pawnes of his real intentions for the time to come? Yet after all, not to
afford your Sovereign so much credit, as but what either Turk, or Pagan upon
like terms might rightly challenge at your hands? Wonderously strange!
Especially that men so credulously given in matters of highest consequence,
should prove so diffident and distrustful here! So confident Godwards, and so
suspicious of his Vicegerent. Strange if not an offense, happily, (besides its
arguing further, some (...), or innate fraudulency of selfedisposition) against
the rule of common Charity, which lessoneth us to entertain a favorable
conceit of all men, 1. Cor. 13. Nay a trespass against the known Laws of
nature, that prompts us to deal with other men, as we would be dealt with our
selves, to mete out to them the same measure, we desire should be meted back to
us. The truth is, yield them so much power into their hands, whereby they may
be enabled to command if not as Masters of the kingdom, yet as the Masters
Mate, keeping the scales upright in an equal poize, ready to turn at their
own pleasure. In a word, able when they list, to bind their Kings in chains,
and their Nobles with links of iron, as the Psalm. mystically deliver it. And
then it is probable they will be induced to trust him, but not till then. I may
add it as a Corollary here: Never better Prince, upon no better grounds, so
harshly and uncivilly entreated by his subjects.

Yet some moreover there be, who stick not to complain, that he is still
misled; So runs the phrase; But for Gods love by whom, or how? Do they mean
so, as each man is drawn away and tempted, as S. James teaches, of his own
lusts and untamed desires? His known moderation and temperance in all respects
will free him, as much as may be, from this imputation; By those then in
private which are about him? If it be so, without more ado; and that the old
pernicious stratagem of galing and wounding the Prince through the sides of his
nearer attendants, be kept up; (although this exception might now at leastwise
well be spared, a greater part of the two Houses being present to assist him)
howbeit were it so, as they pretend, it seems in time it may prove a
criminal offense to be nigh his sacred person; and that which hitherto has
been accounted an honor, shall be imputed as the greatest aspersion; and so
by degrees every loyal true Subject, at what distance so'ere shall in fine
become a delinquent; Time was when disloyalty or but disaffection toward the
Sovereign was made to be crimen crimine vacantium, says the observant
Historian; a punishable fault in such that wanted faults of accusation besides:
but now we may expect and justly fear the contrary; It has already thus
befallen the Ministry in their kind, most of the conformable worthyer sort of
them in all places, being thereupon, and for no other reason commonly,
strangely Metamorphized, through a wrong interpretation, into a new shape, and
so presented to the world under the title of Popish or scandalous; But
therefore let us rather know in what? why thus, as far as my weak
apprehension will carry me. The King is not pleased to grant whatsoever is
demanded of him though never so unreasonable, ergo he is misled; Because His
Majesty will not yield to an hocksing and laming of his own Reg^ll authority
transmitted unto him entire from the hands of his illustrious predecessors: To
a new moulding of the state after the Venetian platform: To a new building of
the Church suitable to the Genevian model. In breife to the creating of a new
Heaven and a new Earth here amongst us, that is a new Church and a new
Commonwealth, he is misled, he is seduced by wicked Counsel.

This is the sum and total of the business, as far as I can understand,
or if there be more in it, I wish it may be made appear, and the minds of the
moderater sort of people thereby better satisfied; Neither yet would I be so
understood in these last passages, as if I desired that matters whether in
Church or Common wealth should altogether stand as they have done, unmoved,
unquestioned. Not so perchance, (albeit this be a point without the retch of my
decision,) since what Church or State was ever known to have long continued
free from the creeping in of sundry pernicious and destructive abuses. Like as
some garden or other, we see how it becomes overgrown with weeds straight, if
not carefully and often looked to or as the body which quickly superabounds
with noxious humors, unless now and then it be cleansed by wholesome physic.
But there is, I conceive, a wide difference to be found between a reforming of
what is amiss in either, and the absolute transforming the whole into a new
shape; betwixt pruneing or lopping off the excrescencies of some over luxuriant
vine, and a quite digging of it up by the roots; This is destructive, that
useful, the former may well be tolerated, nay is some times very requisite.
But it is this latter which sober understanding men do so abominate, whereby
not only the old and sour leavin is to be purged forth,, as Saint Paul's
counsel is, but both batch and laevin, are in danger to be done away together;

And now a little to recollect in one those short imperfect considerations,
which have hitherto been deliverd upon this argument, as 'twere gathering
together the dispersed handfulls, and making them up into one entire bundle.
Here is you see a War continued, a cruel bloody War, this too against the
King without question; yet this King an hareditary, a good, and peaceful King;
withal the arms taken up and used in this war, they are not, as it is
pretended defensive, but offensive plainly; then lastly upon what occasion or
ground arises all this; certainly upon none as yet, that has not at
leastwise been graciously retracted to the full: and as for the future there is
none imaginable, unless the bare furmises and lealousies of men, as was
formerly said, working them into a needless distrust of the Kings fidelity
toward a performance of his promises, may be held a lawful and sufficient
ground* And tell me, what soul endued but with common reason can approve of
such irregular horrid proceedings, which no age, I believe, since the times of
Christian Rule and Subjection first instituted amongst men (if taken with all
circumstances of aggravation) look over the remaining Annals, peruse the
choycest Records, can fully pattern or exemplify; what heart can choose but
bleed upon a serious consideration of these groundles intestine broils, broken
forth within the bowels of this once flourishing Common wealth, which (as that
Ignis sacer with Physicians, rageing in the bones) of all diseases and
annoyances to a State, is the most dreadful.

I have done with the first branch of my intended discourse, concerning the
King; I come next to speak somewhat of the 2d, the People; The King and his
people as Subjects, are Relatives, and so may well be comprised within the
Lists of the same Argument; now the people may be considered either disjoy
ntedly and apart, or else as they make up one entire representative body in
that highest Court: In this latter capacity or consideration I shall not say
much of them: I love not walking upon precipices, (...) things above us deserve
rather to be reverenced by us, then over boldly meddled with; But yet this I may
safely say, and without offense, I Imagine, that the wisest Assemblies in this
kind that may be, cannot amongst the rest of their privileges what ere
challenge to themselves a privilege of being altogether free from errors and
mistakes. It has been so in the gravest Counsels of the Church as hitherto;
( true Counsels indeed, and those truly and legally summoned together) one
solely accepted, and that the first, wherein the holy Ghost after a more
immediate manner did sit at stern, moderateing and directing their present
consultations. To pretend either here or there to an absolute infallibility
would ^avour too much of Popish arrogance: yet a blemish which neither the Lay
nor Ecclesiasticke part of this Kingdom will be willing I hope, in any
considerable number to acknowledge themselves much guilty of.

Again we find in Counsels how there has swayed oftimes a prevailing faction
or party: so as they deserved not so much to have been termed Concilia, as
Conciliabula, rather Conventicles then lawful assemblies, and accordingly the
result of their consultations has usually tasted strong of the prevailing
side: nay, we have heard of Counsels or Synods, that for a great part there
sitting, in the first choice or constitution of them, have not always been,
'twas thought, so impartially assigned to the place, as not consisting of the
best, the ablest, and every way fittest for the work that might be found:
witness the many examples of Counsels both ancient and modern too, which
might be called upon in attestation of these truths; I apply not the one, nor
the other: but this I may perhaps inoffensively say: what has often happen ed
to a Council, may at some time be fall a Senate: those of the short robe are
not more exempted then those of the long; Howbeit I wave the point, with a
(...) there, wishing, though no ways hoping, all to be well.

Yet one thing more, which I had almost forgotten, and it is this; what power
soever the representative body has at best, questionless it has it from the
body at large, the people; As the sunbeames contracted into the narrow concave
of some burning glass, they are the same with the beams in open air, though
some what more vigorous and active by reason of this contraction; not
boundless or uncontrouleable can such a power then be, for that were more then
the people have in themselves under any capacity, as being Subjects still. And
nihill dat quod non habet, is a maxim in Philosophy, as true, as common;
should the people pretend to the bequeathing of such an unlimited power, as our
Savior bespake the two brethren sueing for preceducy of place in Heaven, ye
ask ye know not what; the like might I say of them, ye presume to give ye know
not what: So then the power both inherent and derived from the people, is
bounded, and ought to move regularly; not beyond the scope it was intended for*
I gave my vote to the erecting of this power, not meaning it should recoyle
upon my self, to the subversion either of my estate or liberty; nor yet
against the Sovereign power whereto it is subordinate, as being absolutely the
highest, if Saint Peter mistake not. 1 Peter 2. 15. To talk of a coordination
hereof the three estates (as some have wisely done) making the King one of
them, (who yet indeed is none, but properly and truly (will the learned in Law
soon tell us) head of those three, viz. the Lords spiritual, temporell, and
Commons of this land, according to the ancient usage and contrivance heretofore
of Parliaments.) But grant it were as they would have it, to talk I say, of a
coordination of the 3 estates in this case, were in effect, besides other
absurdities following thereupon, (if the result be thoroughly looked into) to
constitute a supreme without inferiors, a King for the time not having
Subjects; the people all of them (as it must needs follow) being implicitly
involved under the other two; How much better would a soft complyable motion do
betwixt the three, and forward the dispatch of businesses most effectually: It
should be like that motion in the Prophet Ezekiels vision rota in rota; or as
of the sphaeres above, which move one within another. That cross contrariant
motion of the nether sphaeres to the first moveable, we know how it begets a
slownesse or tardity in them of their proper and natural procession; and we
see by woeful experience what a stop, if not a retrograde declination of civil
affairs, the clashing or banding of one power against the other has wrought
of late in this miserably distracted Commonwealth.

But falling down, as I was about, to a lower pin, let us next consider the
people in a disgregative sense or notion: those who hitherto upon all occasions
have so firmly every where (whether voluntarily or invited to it, I meddle
not) adhaered as a strong support to the higher powers; I mean not here to
enter the lists of a particular comparison, by poysing man with man, person
with person on either side; but as we may find diverse of good note (be it
confessed) on that part, so are there many more, let me say it, on this: If
Saul has slain his thousands, David can boast of his ten thousands: The
muster roll if looked over would better determine this Quaere, then I can; well
may they confide and rest themselves upon the affections of the vulgar sort who
(besides their natural pronenesse toward Innovations ever) as most an end
they understand but little, so are they easiliest seduced, and engaged in
preposterous undertakeings: But for those of better rank, such as be either
knowing, or otherwise of more considerable quality, here they must needs
acknowledge themselves to be upon terms of disadvantage; Some hereupon I have
heard to term this war with reference to the opposite side, as that of old,
Bellum Rusticum, the Helio^s or the Pesants war. And questionless it is some
encouragement when as it chances thus, we excel not only in the goodness of
the cause, but likewise in the worthiness of the abettors. But passing by what
ere other sorts of Men in their several ranks and stations as they might be
summoned up, let us in our passage touch at the Divine. Can they show me any
of their chief Scribes or Teachers (take him forth of the highest classis with
them) that may be thought in point of sound and deep knowledge an equal March
for diverse but of the second or third here: Yet is Resistance (the center
namely whereunto this whole discourse does bend it self) not merely a point of
State-policie, but of Conscience also, even in the highest degree: and being
so, who so fit to direct the conscience, as is the Divine, and of Divines the
learned, the best able?

Next take but into consideration the zeal, or rather the fury of many of
their chief Ministers or Agents in these affairs; Religion is pretended, but
certainly Malice acts the business: or if it be zeal, it is a zeal I fear
set on fire by a coal from beneath. Those who have felt their scourge can best
judge of it, and had rather, I believe, fall into the hands (if they needs
must) of some unbeleeving Ismaelite, then of a too too believing Zelot: No
spleen or bitterness of spirit like that of your hot Professor; none more
cruel, because he persecutes and wrongs his neighbor, yet thinks he does God
good servicein doing so; Paul was not more Paul afterward in the ways of
truth and sincerity, then he was Saul before, a fierce and eager persecuter of
the Church; Such was the bitter rage or fury of the Circumcelliones or preciser
sort of Donatists heretofore, against their dissenting, yet orthodoxe brethren
of the African Church, as sundry of the Fathers make mention, not without their
deserved censures thereupon: Although they be not all Saints neither I
conceive, who appear on that behalf. Many there are, doubtless, who do but
Denis in diem assibus vitam aestimare, as the saying is, fight for pay and no
more. And some, I understand, that are not of the Protestant Religion (object
they back what they please branding their Adversaries with the opprobrious
Nickname of Popish Army; and yet were it so, nevertheless true native
subjects they must needs confess them; enough to justify both the tender and
acceptance of their bounden service in a time of exigency) nor for it therefore
more then others.

Fourthly, observe their manner of proceeding in furthe: ance of the public
cause, what by forging, by falsifying, and then imposing their falsehoods upon
the world; The press with them of late has been so inured to this Cretian
Dialect; that there is question, when or whether happily it may hereafter
recover its ancient guise of speaking truth: News of Plots and dangerous
Conspiracies one while (those too most an end strained to a very ridiculous
height of Panick affrightments) which yet as hitherto, God be thanked, neither
we nor they have felt, nor had at first, it may be, much cause to fear; News
of some Notable victory, or other achieved every day. yet as it has proved
afterward got ofttimes (if not by Treachery) then in a dream, without a
battle. Lying wonders, I have often read of, but not of Lying Victories till
now. News of Popery and Popish Ceremonies begun of late to be set up, and
countenanced in several places. A fiction, in truth, well befitting the Popish
Legend, and thither I commend it; what may we think of these men, with their
Mountebansk-like devices, who under a masque of pretended zeal, thus
shamefully trade in falsehoods (all to cheer up their poor deluded followers,
and keep them still in heart) but that even their profession it self is but a
kind of lie or grand imposture. Nor can they therefore, if they mark it well,
so safely tax their adversaries, as they do, with those heinous crimes of
swearing and profaneness, since Lying and Swearing are sins surely near
allied, and yet lying too (it may seem) carries a more immediate relation to
Satan the author of all sin, who for this, is expressly entitled the Father
of lies. Io. 15. 44.

Unto this moreover note in the fifth place their bitter Raylings and
invectives usually against Church and State, which is another by-path they use
to tread in, thereby laboring to stick an indeleble character of disgrace upon
the present Government in either; Ere while the Bishops Miter shrewdly troubled
them, and now the nearer interest and powerfulness with the King of some our
new State Pilots. (Not the faults of either, it may be giving so much offense,
as the eminency of their places.) Now the Prelates, then the Statists. What can
I say more or less concerning this unquiet barking humor of theirs, but this,
the Lord rebuke them? Especially for some among them, and those of the
Leviticall Tribe too, the Firebrands and chief Incendiaries, to speak truth,
in these bloody disturbances. Those (...), or certain Minor Prophets of the
times, as the great Critic was wont to term such. Indeed the (...), the
Chafe and outcast of the Clergy. Those Pulpit Barraters, I mean, whose
Religion usually is Faction, and zealous Ignorance. That have turned preaching
into flat Railing, and instead of disseminating the word of saving Truth in the
ears of their hearers, do naught but sow sedition; forcing them on by their
powerfully delusive persuasions, like silly Sheep as they are (almost without
the help of a Metaphor) into daily slaughters, and unless God of his mercy
shall please to intercede, certain destruction at once) (I fear) both of
soul and body. If then what Philosophy has taught us, the end may be guessed
at by the Means conducent thereunto, for that the means and end be wontedly
Inter se commensurabilia, as they say, and do each answer one another I know
not how I may conceive or hope well of the end in this case, where I see the
means to be so foul and altogether unwarrantable.

Last of all, let it be laid to heart the many unspeakable Miseries, which
these unhappie differences instead of a redress of some former sufferings have
brought upon us; Quite contrary, as it were ex Professo, to what we had reason
to expect: the Remedy as hitherto proving much worse, then the disease was.
Loss in the Liberty of our Persons. For as now what man can be securely safe
in any place? And which is the truest Symptom (as the Orator some where tells
us) of a people or Nation, running further into slavery, we groan and
complain under the burden, as sensible of it, and yet Contend not against it
with an unanimous consent, as it were benumbed in our Resolutions. Loss in the
property of our goods. For as times are, Ius omne in ferro est, not the Law but
the Sword is made the Master of our estates. To speak nothing of the new
Egyptian burdens or taxes beyond all sufferance daily increasing upon us.
Loss in the purity of our Religion. So many brainlesse impious positions are
crept in, which like that Abomination of Desolation spoken of by the Prophet
Daniel, Dan. 9. 27. have greatly polluted the house of God. Great care of late
has there been taken for the suppression and avoidance of Popery, and it is
well, if so it end not (which yet may be feared) in making room for the
introducement of senseless Anabaptisme, or utter Libertinisme. Loss in the
beauty of our Discipline, or Liturgy; no decency of order observed now. Every
man's private spirit, or rather fancy, will needs be a rule unto it self. And
how far this irregularity may chance to proceed is hard to determine, since
Conscience not balanced with a sound judgment is commonly boundless, and
never cease till it shut up its progress in a plain frenzy; I remember to
this effect a remarkable passage in that story of those mad Anabaptists of
Munster in Germany. They began at first upon pretense of reforming somewhat
amiss in Luthers Doctrine, about certain few Articles there. Thence they go
on to an utter abolishing of the then present Liturgy. That would not serve
the turn, but ere long the written word must be th^owne by as too straight,
and concludent to the Spirit, and this moreover with a scoff by crying Bibel,
Bubel, Babel; A Scheme much like to that in the old Poet, Titi, Tute, Tati,
Tibi, etc.

Now again, as before, let us put the premises together; The Infallibility,
as has been argued of the greatest assemblies, The Partiality ofttimes
apparent in some, the bounded and circumscribed Limitednesse of all, the fuller
concurrence of able Personages on this side; the preposterous indirect ways of
proceeding by the fomenters, and other Agents on that; the inexpressible
calamities, which have and are like to fall upon us in liew of an hoped for
Reformation. Join hereto as a close of the rest, that which yet indeed fills
up the Ephath of these mischiefs full, the bringing in of a foreign power:
As if the fire of dissension our selves had kindled, were not speedy enough to
consume a State, unless Others from abroad be solemnly invited, and drawn in,
under pretense of quenching the flames, to pull down the House. And the scale
methinks seems still and still to weigh down lower: the Kings cause more
cleared, and the peoples more liable to just misprision.

Thus have I in short drawn forth, as 'twere, a true Copy of the business,
as it stands de facto between the King, and some of his people. Should I now
put from shore a little, and go on further from the Thesis to the Hypothesis,
from the History of the matter to a problem, as whether supposing the King
were truly misled, and that he did notably fail the trust reposed in him,
whether in such a case he might be lawfully resisted, would be a point as
easily argued, and Polemically concluded on the Kings part, as it has been
hitherto treated of in a plain and positive discourse; For at a word, take but
away that grand Phenomenon of theirs, that Regal power is originally from the
people, and therefore upon occasion may be reassumed by them (which yet both in
the Antecedent and Consequent is utterly false.) This principle too as it is
further backed with certain general Maxims, as Quicquid efficit tale est
majus tale, and, Totum est majus suis partibus; Again, Salus populi suprema
Lex, with the like. Axioms, as it is evident of large extent or compass,
subject to diverse and sundry Limitations, and accordingly as so, fitter for
young Sophisters to wrangle out their disputes with, then as meet engines to
overturne Monarchical Government; Take away, I say, but these and the like
supposita laid down as an unshaken foundation by them (which yet has been a
task already sufficiently performed, by the lernd industry of diverse worthy
undertakers in that kind) and the whole frame of their weak built discourses
quickly falls to ground.

What they urge concerning the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom; what
likewise touching the usage and customary manner of proceeding by general
assemblies in such like cases heretofore, both at home and abroad, trusting to
these amongst the rest, as forts of safe retirement; Briefly for the former (if
so it be not a mere Chimera of Imagination barely) it is to be wondered at that
laws of so high concernement in the present business, should lie hid so low
under ground, as not to be found out and produced all this while; whereas the
contrary, I understand, have been and many be still exhibited, without any
such labor or pains of disquisition; or grant such laws might be produced
and made appear, yet surely with me the law of man shall evermore submit to
the law of God; This is, or should be, I am sure, the Touchstone for all
laws; where the divine law and humane chance to cross and thwart each other,
my conscience directs me the safer way; and tells me I had best keep close to
the former: It is so in the Discipline or outward form of Church-governement:
I appeal to themselves for a testimony; There they cry up to a tittle verbum
Domini: still the Word, the Word. And why not so according to some proportion,
at least, if occasion require it, in the rectifying of secular and state
affairs, I see not the least show of reason, that can be yielded to the
contrary; yet now for the word of God they have so little comfort thence, such
small hopes of any express warrant for their proceedings (savouring over
strongly of Jesuitish principles) to be found there, as that they scarcely
meddle with it, unless as they be casually drawn thereto, in their replies
and unsatisfactory answers, Nothing to be heard of there, more then prayers and
patience in such cases; God as then must be entreated to incline the heart of
the Sovereign, not the people encouraged to enforce him; little mention made
of Resistance, except it be against the Devil, or so; but still of obedience
and Christian-like subjection; For the latter, that of practice and example, it
is an Anthenticke classical saying, Exempla paucorum non sunt trahenda in
Leges vniversorum: we must if we do well, not suffer our selves to be governed
altogether so much by Presidents or Examples, as by reason. And it is cheifely
true of the examples of latter times, where they recede from the fountain, the
purity of ancienter and better ages, and so grow more suspiciously corrupt: If
some before us have done amiss, we must not straight make their example the
rule or pattern for us to err by.

By resistance so often forementioned (to go no further at present) I mean an
active resistance first undertaken, and then pursued in an hostile offensive
way: for and such a resistance is this, say they what they please, both
deluding themselves and others. And yet such a resistance none of them of the
later hach (as far as I have seen yet) dare in their writings offer to
maintain with open face. Just in the method of those of Rome (whom they so
much abhor) their practice here no way keeps pace with their doctrine: For
why? neither scripture nor reason, nor yet any President of the primitive or
better times, they know could be brought with the least semblance to speak for
them: They are for the King too (if we may believe them) as well as we, and
merely stand upon their own defense; nor this neither against the King in his
own person, but against some invisible enemies of the Commonwealth about him;
so as to enter the lists of a dispute by putting the business to an ungranted
height on the Kings side; where yet the (...), or maine point in controversy,
as things do stand in themselves, is (though but for credits sake) denied on
theirs, were (as they say) to beat the air, or for want of other work to
seek out an Adversary. Let the premises be duly observed, being no otherwise
then according to the true condition of the present affairs, and the question
if rightly propounded would be this; whether or no, it may be lawful to take
up Compulsory or offensive arms, against a rightful gracious Prince,
professing to govern in all respects by the known established laws of the
land, only upon terms of mere jealousy; and distrust to his Regal promises,
thereby imbroyling broyling their native country in a bloody and miserably
destructive war. Quod restat probandum.

Besides that such Scholastic Hypotheticall velitations as these one way or
other, howbeit they right ^he King in point of due obedience, yet by reason of
the supposall they take in, malicious and captious heads may be apt to
misconstrue them to somewhat a prejudicial conceit of him in matter of his
goodness and integrity; whereas, God be thanked; Non defensoribus istis, we
need no such strained helps, having so Religious, so Just, so Understanding, so
every way Complete a Prince; Be this ground firmly and strongly still
maintained; what needs much arguing the lawfulness, or unlawfulness of
Resistance in some Dioclesian his time, when as there reigns a good and godly
Constantine? Or of clashing and banding together in set disputes, the Supreme
Sovereign power residing in the King, (a point sufficiently evidenced by the
several, and those public Acts of State extant to this purpose: as also
farther confirmed by the very title of Majesty appropriated unto him as
chief: this having been in all States evermore the peculiar badge or
cognizance of Sovereignty wheresoere it lay) with that of Parliaments; where
the Prince freely and ex mero motu denies them nothing, that either Reason,
Law, or his own just Rights may give way to? A Prince whose heart is truly in
the hands of God (not of Evil Councillors) to order and dispose of, if any
Kings upon earth be; Of whom briefly it may be said perhaps without our better
deservings, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. of some especial Saints and
Servents of the Almighty in times past, that this Island of ours, or lesser
World will prove it self unworthy.

Mean while the premised considerations, as I have committed them to paper for
mine own satisfaction, so shall they suffice me until a surer and more real
ground be offered of a disputative inquiry. And did others, I wish, whom it
may concern, propose the like to themselves, annexing them as a Labell to that
sacred oath of Allegiance they have taken; Add hereunto the late solemn
Protestation made for defense of his Royal person and dignity, either of
which how they can possibly dispense with in their proceedings so diametrally
opposed (maugre their sundry senseless Evasions) be it between God and their
own consciences: for my part I must profess, I am yet to learn; Let them
consider the Sacrilege, the Murders, the Rapines done (nay commanded,
Justifiable Legal offenses you may now call them, as far as an humane
Ordinance will carry) in these wild licentious times of Anarchy; Strange
beginnings of an intended Reformation, one would think; I have read of Religion
in the Primitive times planted, yea propagated in blood, under Pagans and
Infidells: but for Christians amongst themselves, professing one and the same
faith, to advance the supposed purity of Gods worship by such harsh means, I
have not so frequently heard of, until these later and frantic days of ours;
It is the fruit of a doctrine well becoming the Turkish Alcoron, and there
accordingly ofttimes inculcated, but no where surely to be found in the Gospel
of Christ: not taught by his Apostles, nor afterward abetted by any of the
Orthodox Fathers; (...), Prayer and Preaching were the appointed weapons of
their warfare; Notwithstand^ng more outrages, I dare say, more heinous and
crying sins in all kinds unpunishably committed under this pretext chiefly
these last two years, then have bin acted formerly, (set them altogether)
within the circuit of this our English Clime, since the first establishment of
the Protestant Religion here amongst us; As if with us now indeed were the time
when Satan that great Master of misrule and of all impiety were let loose into
the world, according to St John that his Apocalypticall prediction, Rev. 20. 7.
Consider they, I say, and that seriously, lest as our Savior speaks
concerning the Jews, Mat. 22. 34. burdening them with all the righteous blood
which was shed upon earth, frrm the blood of Abel, unto the blood of Zacharias;
So (in as much as between two parties disagreeing, the one must needs be
faulty) all the crimes forementioned may come upon them likewise, and be added
to the score of their offenses. And yet if one small transgression, in any of
the premises be, as it is, enough to sink the guilty; what will an huge
heap do? If Caines own sin alone was heavier then he could bear, what may
we think of the numerous sins of a whole Nation?

These or the like considerations then, if thoroughly and impartially weighed,
might be of great force in rectifying the praecipitate disloyal inclinations
of a still misguided sort of people; Certainly it has been want of a serious
animadversion on this behalf, which has hitherto blindly led them on: A
strong though groundless conceit with many of the justice, nay necessarinesse
of the cause, swaying them aside from the course of their bounden duty: As if
their Religion, their Laws, and Liberties, lay all at stake, (true for
certain, it is to be feared the Contrary side) which yet as here, God knows
is nothing so: When Absolon rose up in Arms against his Lord and Father David.
2. Sam. 15. no question but the Heads of the then devised conspiracy made good
use (the text insinuates as much) of some such specious pretenses, wherewith to
cozen the weak and ignorant people; so, for that causeless insurrection of
Corah with his accomplices against Moses and Aaron together, Number. 16. thereby at
once discovering their rancorous disaffection toward the established
government both in Church and State; Ye take too much upon you, cry these
discontented Reformers, ye entrench too close upon our pretended Privileges,
our Liberties, our Consciences; Never any Rebellion wanted a cloak or cover of
this kind of making. And therefore men should have done well, carefully to have
pondered aforehand, by debating over and again, a business of so high
consequence (as that whereon depends the hazard of eternal Damnation, Romans 13.
2.) before they had rashly engaged themselves in a blind and obstinate defense
of the same; Or if it has been duly perpended, as it ought, yet without
effect: then naught to be said but this, Quis furor O Cives, God, I fear, as
his usual way of proceeding is in such like cases, has strangely besotted and
infatuated the understandings of this sinful Nation, meaning to scourge us
still after a most severe manner, with the rod of our own fury; like as it
befell the Ammonites, and Moabites, in fight against the Israelites, who helped
thus to destroy one another, as we find it recorded, 2. Chron. 20. 23.

Exemploque pari ruit Anglica turba, suoque
Mart cadent coefi per mutua vulnera fratres.
I conclude the whole with that sage advice of the wisest of men next to Christ
himself, Prove. 24. 21. worthy of a deliberate poising by all, but especially
those of the disaffected party. Fear God and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change: for their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both? where it is to be observed, how you have God
and the King set a breast as 'twere, the obedience we owe to the King joined
with that Duty which we owe unto God: and sutably a neglect of our performance
in the one, threatened with certain destruction alike, as in the other. And the
reason for both holds parallel still, because as by the former we offend God
in his own person, so by the later we injure him in the Person of his
substitute or immediate Vicegerent here appointed over us.

FINIS.
Gildas de excidio Britanniae. Moris continui gentis erat, sicut and nunc est,
ut infirma esset ad retundenda hostium tela, and fortis ad civilia bella:
Infirma, inquam, ad exequenda pacis ac veritatis insignia, and fortis ad
Scelera and mendacia.
